Welcome to lecture 27, the tip of the iceberg.
In this lecture, I'll answer that question I raised in my lecture on flight about floating
of things and why icebergs float with most of their bulk below the water, and many other
questions involving the thermal behavior of materials.
What happens to materials as we add heat to them or take heat away from them?
The most obvious thing that happens, and we've already discussed this, is when you add energy
to an object, one way of adding energy is by heat, which is a flow of energy that occurs
because of a temperature difference.
The object heats up, or maybe it cools down depending on whether there's a net gain or
loss of energy.
That's how we established the temperature in that greenhouse, and then in the previous
lecture, that's how we determined Earth's climate.
But other things happen when temperature changes or when heat is added to a substance.
It may, for example, change shape.
It may change size.
More dramatically, it may change state.
Most substances, for example, when you heat them up, meaning when you raise their temperature,
they expand.
And the reason they expand is because ultimately that thing we call loosely heat, which I
argued is more correctly called internal energy, involves the rapid vibrations and collisions
of the particles making up a substance.
And if the temperature is higher, that vibration is more vigorous, and that causes the particles
to tend to stay just a little bit further apart from each other.
So that's why things tend to expand.
For solids, materials that are solid, hunks of steel, concrete, solid things, wood, whatever,
that thermal expansion, the expansion due to temperature changes, is pretty insubstantial.
It's typically about a thousandths of a percent for every degree Celsius temperature change.
Not a big effect.
Nevertheless, it's enough of an effect that sometimes it's important.
In some engineered structures, for example, bridges, if you go to cross a bridge, you'll
see two big metal plates that interlace, like your fingers do here, like my fingers
are doing, at the start of the bridge.
That's so that as the bridge expands, there's a place for it to go.
Because a bridge a mile or so long, even though it expands only a few percent maybe, or much
less than a percent, nevertheless, that's a significant distance over a mile.
Railroad tracks, especially continuously welded railroad tracks, have to be carefully
pre-stressed so that the thermal expansion doesn't cause them to warp.
In fact, there's a very famous picture.
It appears in many introductory physics texts, and here it is on the screen of a famous event
in which a very hot day caused thermal expansion of these railroad tracks.
The tracks really had nowhere to go, so they buckled sideways in the train you see in the
background derailed.
Another related disaster, not quite thermal expansion, but thermal properties and materials
is the 1986 disaster with the Space Shuttle Challenger, which exploded because the O-rings,
rubber rings, were used to seal together the different sections of the solid fuel rocket,
behaved differently at different temperatures, they became stiff at the particularly low
temperatures the morning of that launch, and that's what caused the Challenger disaster.
Sometimes this thermal expansion in precision instruments like telescopes, for example,
or optical benches for careful scientific optical measurements, that tiny, tiny change
can be a big problem, and if that happens, we often build such devices out of very special
alloys that are designed to have a very minimal amount of thermal expansion compared to more
ordinary materials.
Sometimes we'd like to exploit that property to make useful things happen.
Many thermostats, for example, old-fashioned thermostats, devices that are used to open
the vents on greenhouses automatically, many other devices that respond in a simple mechanical
way to temperature, we achieve a more significant response by bonding together two different
materials, and I have here a thin strip of metal about half an inch wide and a fraction
of a millimeter in thickness, and it really consists of two different metals that are
bonded together, and those two different metals expand at different rates when they're heated,
and when the one that expands more expands, it forces the whole structure to bend, and
that bending gives us a significant movement that can be used as either a measure of the
temperature or maybe to close an electrical switch or something like that, and I'm going
to do a quick experiment with this device.
I'm going to start by warming it over a candle, so I'll light my candle.
Notice there's right now a slight curve to what is your right.
I'll try to hold it in that same orientation.
A candle, by the way, although it produces high temperature,
doesn't put out a lot of energy.
Again, the difference between temperature and heat or temperature and energy.
Temperature is a measure of the average molecular energy,
but the number of molecules affected by this candle is pretty insignificant,
but gradually the strip is warming up,
and you can see that now it's bent substantially or a little bit in the other direction.
I'm now going to take it and plunge it into a thermos of very cold material,
and it comes out bent the other way.
By the way, that was liquid nitrogen at 77 Kelvin, very cold, and the vapors you see
streaming off are not the liquid nitrogen, but is water from the air condensing on contact
with this very cold rod and making basically a small cloud.
There's the use of materials with a so-called bimetallic strip with two different kinds
of materials that expand at different rates, and that can bend this way if it's heated,
this way if it's cooled. Again, a device like that could be used, for example,
to close an electrical switch when a certain temperature was reached,
and that's how old-fashioned thermostats worked, although many of them have been supplanted by
thermostats that use electronic temperature sensors of the type I described in the module
on semiconductors. So there's an example of a bimetallic strip. Here's a very simple example
of where a bimetallic strip might be used. This is a simple inexpensive thermometer.
You see the needle that indicates temperature, and what the needle is ultimately connected to
is simply a coiled-up spring, and that spring is made of a bimetallic material,
and as the material changes temperature, the spring either coils tighter or uncoils,
depending on which way it goes, in the same way that this strip of bimetallic material
swung one way or the other as I heated it or cooled it. So we can exploit this property of
thermal expansion of materials to cause motions that tell us something about temperature or
open or closed circuits or turn on and off furnaces or furnaces or whatever. That's the
thermal expansion of solids. Liquids and gases tend to expand more. Liquids a little bit more,
several powers of 10 more, and gases substantially more. I just want to give you some examples of
that. Here I have, by the way, a couple of glasses of ice water. Keep these in mind. They'll
occasionally appear on your screen when the cameras are pointing at them, and notice that one of
them is completely full to the brim, and it's got lots of ice floating in it, and we're still
pretty near the beginning of the lecture, and just remember that fact. I'll get back to that at the
end. The other one's only partly full, and I've got a thermometer stuck in it, and that thermometer
happens to be reading zero degrees more on that later. But the fact is that thermometer,
it's an alcohol-based thermometer. You can see the red alcohol in the bulb at the bottom.
That thermometer relies on the thermal expansion of that fairly large bulb of material, and as
it expands up the narrow hollow tube of the thermometer, a little bit of expansion in the
volume results in a fairly large change in the height of that column of alcohol. That's how a
simple thermometer like this works. But thermal expansion in liquids and in gases is more dramatic,
and I'm going to demonstrate that with this balloon, which is full of a gas at room temperature.
I've got it in a glass pan, and the glass pan is resting on a couple of pieces of styrofoam just
to insulate it from the table, and I'm going to pour liquid nitrogen on it. Now liquid nitrogen is
not intrinsically dangerous as a material because it's just air, basically, without the oxygen,
which is really the more dangerous part of air removed. Nitrogen comprises 80% of the air. So
when this stuff boils away, it's just become part of the air. However, it's extremely cold and could
freeze my tissues instantly, so I'm going to take some precautions. I'm going to put on big gloves,
and I'm going to put on this mask to protect my face if any of it should splatter. So those are
good precautions when one is handling a material this cold. By the way, your dermatologist uses
liquid nitrogen to remove warts by freezing them off. So all I'm going to do now is I'm going to
put on the face mask, put on the gloves. I've got the liquid nitrogen in a thermos bottle,
and I'm going to pour it over the balloon. Remember, the balloon is now at room temperature.
That's about 300 Kelvin. The liquid nitrogen is at 77 Kelvin. That's about a quarter of the
temperature of the balloon in absolute terms. So the balloon's volume is really going to change
substantially, and this will be a good example of thermal expansion of a gas.
Well, the balloon has certainly lost most of its volume. It's sitting there in the liquid
nitrogen. By the way, the rubber has also lost most of its flexibility. An example of what happened
in the Challenger disaster. You can see the vapors flowing over and off the table. They're
flowing downward because they're cold compared to the surrounding air. I can feel cold air on my
hands here. Again, those vapors are not the liquid nitrogen. Those vapors are the air, the
water vapor in the air, condensing on contact with the very cold air surrounding here. They are
then condensing making these clouds, and the flow of that cold, dense air is made visible by the
presence of the water vapor forming clouds. Now the liquid nitrogen, which is exposed to room
temperature, and so heat has been flowing into it because it was at 77 Kelvin, and it was surrounded
by a room and air at 300 Kelvin. The liquid nitrogen has all boiled away, and the balloon is
beginning to regain some of its flexibility, and also it's beginning to warm up, and by the end of
the lecture, it will probably have warmed back up to room temperature and look perfectly normal.
Again, so there's thermal expansion in a gas, which is quite dramatic, especially if you change
the absolute temperature by a substantial amount as we did there by dropping it down to 77 Kelvin.
By the way, you probably have systems in your house. I certainly hope you do that protect
against thermal expansion because it can be dangerous, especially in gases and fluids in
things like boilers. Early steam engines and steam boilers tended to blow up with disastrous
loss of life, and your house probably has in it a heating system, at least here if you're on a cooler
climate, that involves heating water or some other substance, and you don't want that to expand and
cause the plumbing to burst. Here's an example of the kind of thermal protection you probably have
in your house. You don't have exactly this because unfortunately you probably don't solar heat your
hot water. I do, and this is the solar collectors on the roof of my house. There are six of them,
the middle one looks different because it's a skylight, and there is a loop of material. It's
actually not water, but a kind of antifreeze, a non-toxic antifreeze because in the winter
when it's 20 below, I wouldn't want water freeze and expand and crack the pipes. So this material
circulates, but as it's heated and it gets up near the boiling point of water on a hot sunny day,
it expands and it needs to have somewhere to go. And so you'll find in your basement,
if you have a hot water heating system or a solar hot water system, as I do, you will find an
expansion tank like this whose job is to have a place for the extra volume of the heated up
liquid, in this case this fluid that circulates and collects the heat from the solar collectors and
then transfers it to a tank of water. That's what that tank is doing, and you'll have one like that
if you have a hot water heating system for the same reason. And you'll probably also see in your
basement structures that look like this. This is a relief valve. This particular one is on the
side of my solar hot water tank, and its purpose is to blow if the pressure gets above a certain
value or the temperature gets above a certain value. The pressure would get above a certain
value. In this case, it's 30 pounds per square inch because if the water in the tank got so hot
that it expanded, that would push against the valve. And if the expansion tank had failed,
particularly there'd be no place for it to go and the valve would go. And I have occasionally
gone away on very hot weekends in the late August, early September, sunny weekends,
and my solar collectors are sort of optimized for that time. And I've come back to find my
basement flooded and not much hot water in the tank because this valve has let go. So there are
plenty of devices that give us protection against thermal expansion. By the way, I talked about
global warming in the previous lecture. One possible consequence of global warming is a rise
in sea level. And most people think that will occur because the ice will melt. Well, some ice
will melt, and glacial ice, land ice, that melts will contribute to the rise in sea level.
Ice that's floating in the water will contribute nothing to the rise in sea level. And that's
what this glass jar is demonstrating. As the ice melts here, you do not see water flowing over
the sides. That ice, because it's already floating ice and its density will change when it turns
to water, will not contribute anything to sea level rise. But about half of sea level rise
due to global warming will simply be the thermal expansion of the oceans. They're acting like
a giant thermometer. Now, as I said at the beginning, most materials expand when heated.
And water is no exception, except there's a temperature range from about 0 to 4 degrees
Celsius or 32 degrees, the melting point to 39 degrees Fahrenheit at which water behaves
in a very unusual way. Water actually contracts on heating at those temperatures. It's a very
strange phenomenon. It makes water a very unique substance. I'll give you a sense a little later
about why that happens. But it has an unusual consequence for life, aquatic life particularly,
because of what it means is this. It means if water is very deep, it means water at 4 degrees
C or 39 degrees Fahrenheit is the densest water can be. So if you have water at that temperature,
it sinks to the bottom of a body of water. And any lake that's very deep, the water temperature
at the bottom is usually about 4 degrees C, 39 degrees F year round. In the summer, it's much
hotter at the surface. So let's take a look at what a lake looks like. Here's a lake in the summer.
The top might be 24 degrees Celsius, 75 degrees Fahrenheit. The bottom is 4 degrees Celsius,
39 degrees Fahrenheit. The top is warmer and less dense. So I have less dense water sitting
on top of more dense water. It's perfectly stable. It stays that way. If you dive down into a lake,
you'll find it gets colder as you go down. Usually, it's not a gradual temperature change,
by the way, but there's often a sudden layer in which the temperature changes significantly.
By the way, my balloon is almost back to normal. What happens in the winter? Well, in the winter,
there's usually a thin layer of ice on the lake. Just below the ice, the temperature is typically,
if the water is as cold as water, can get and be liquid water, and that's 0 degrees Celsius
or 32 degrees Fahrenheit. At the bottom of the lake, it's still 4 degrees Celsius. The densest
water is still at the bottom. The 0 degrees Celsius water, the water just at the freezing point,
is less dense because of this unusual behavior of water, and everybody's happy.
But twice a year, in the spring and the fall, as the water heats up in the winter,
that temperature at the surface will rise through 4 degrees. And the lake will have
essentially the same temperature throughout. And in the fall, as the surface temperature
falls from its warm summer temperatures down through 4 degrees, you'll come to another time
when the temperature in the lake is pretty much uniform throughout. And at that point,
the lake is unstable, and the water from the bottom can mix, and you get this phenomenon
called lake overturning or turnover. And that's a very important phenomenon in lakes because
it results in bringing up nutrients and things that are near the bottom of the lake and turning
them into the lake, and it kind of keeps the lake revitalized. So this phenomenon of lake
turnover, which you know about if you live near lakes, is something that occurs because of this
thermal effect. This fact that water has the unusual property that it actually
contracts when heated for the first 4 degrees Celsius of its watery liquid existence.
Now, more dramatic thermal effect involves changes of state of a substance,
turning a liquid into a vapor, turning a solid into a liquid, turning a liquid into a solid,
et cetera. And these changes require substantial amounts of energy. It takes a lot of energy.
That's why if you want to melt ice, it takes a long time to melt ice. It takes almost as
long to melt an ice cube, almost as much energy to melt an ice cube as it does to bring it up to
the boiling point. And it takes a huge amount of energy from then on to boil it. In fact,
the energy it takes to melt an ice cube is about as much energy as it takes to raise
the temperature of that water after melting to about 80 degrees Celsius, almost to the boiling
point. And here's something that people often don't understand. While a substance is changing
state, it remains at a fixed temperature. Water just melted. Is it exactly the same temperature
as the ice it came from? It has more energy, and the energy went into breaking the bonds
that hold the ice together in a solid structure. But water, just after melting, is not any warmer
than ice. This glass of ice water is at exactly 0 degrees Celsius, 32 degrees Fahrenheit. I don't
even have to look at the thermometer to tell that. Because I know that a mixture of ice and water,
that atmospheric pressure I have to add, is in fact automatically at 0 degrees Celsius. As long
as there's both ice and water together in there, the temperature of that mixture will be 0 degrees
Celsius, will be exactly the freezing point. Only after it all becomes water can it begin to rise.
Until then, any energy that goes into that from outside is not going into making it warmer,
but going into changing its state to melting ice. And if I put this in a freezer, it would stay at
0 degrees Celsius, even if the freezer were much colder, until all the water had turned solid.
And at that point, the temperature could start down. So there is energy involved in changing
the state of a substance. Water has more energy than ice. Water vapor has more energy than liquid
water. Sometimes that energy is called latent heat. And it's called latent heat because it's
sort of latent in there. You could get that energy back if you change the state back again.
And processes that require things to evaporate result in that change of state. And they require
energy. For example, if I do this simple experiment, which you're welcome to do too,
just put a little water on my hand so my hand is wet and blow on it, I've caused the water to
evaporate. I've caused the fastest moving water molecules in that water to leave my hand.
And that process takes energy away from the water and the remaining water is cooler.
And that's why my hand feels cold. That's why you can dip your hand into water or
just lick your hand, finger it, hold it up to the breeze and see which way the breeze is coming
from because the breeze evaporates the water and your hand cools down. And that's what you're
really feeling. It takes energy to change the state of something. Latent heat plays a major
role in weather and climate. It's one of the energy transfer mechanisms from the earth up
into the atmosphere because if the sun warms the waters of the ocean, water evaporates,
goes into the atmosphere and the warmed air rises and it carries with it not only the water vapor,
but it also carries the latent heat, the energy that it took to change the water from liquid
to gas. And further up, as it gets cooler, that water can recondense, form clouds, a visible
manifestation of that recondensation, just like the clouds that were formed here from around
the liquid nitrogen where it was cold. But in addition, that energy gets released. And some
of the most powerful storms, particularly hurricanes, there's an aerial photograph of a hurricane from
an orbiting satellite. You can see the curvature of the earth in the distance. You can see the big
spiral structure of the hurricane. The energy of that storm, the colossal winds of that storm,
the big swirling motion, are fed by latent heat associated with the evaporation of water
from the warm oceans. That's why hurricanes are tropical storms that form in tropical waters.
And it's also why hurricanes, as soon as they drift over land, tend to die down.
Now, we think of water as changing state at 32 degrees Fahrenheit, melting from ice to liquid,
and we think of it boiling at 212 degrees Fahrenheit. But that happens to be true because of the
particular value of the pressure of the Earth's atmosphere. Water boils at very different temperatures
in, say, a pressure cooker, more on that in the next lecture, or in the pressure chamber of a
pressurized water reactor nuclear power plant. And I want to give you a very simple, quick
demonstration of water boiling at a different temperature than its normal 212 boiling point.
This is certainly what happens on top of a mountain. You may be aware, or even if you live in
somewhere like Denver, the temperature at which water boils is lower because the atmospheric
pressure is lower. So here I have a little jar, which I can take some of the air out.
I can't boil water at room temperature with this simple apparatus. But what I am going to do
is boil some coffee, which is already hot, but not boiling. I'm a tea drinker, so I don't know
whether this coffee is any good. But let's pour a little coffee into here, not boiling, but hot.
So I have a little vial of coffee. Going to put it on this bottom of this jar. I'm going to put the
jar over it. And now with this very simple crude vacuum pump, it's not a big electrical one, so
it can't make all that much of a vacuum. But I'm going to pump out some of the air in that chamber.
And if we watch closely, after a couple of pumps with this thing, there's a one-way valve. I pull
air out and then I exhaust the air out another direction.
And there it goes, boiling vigorously. At still the temperature it was at, which was maybe 180
degrees Fahrenheit, but not the boiling point of water. So the boiling point depends on the pressure
that's applied. In general, those temperatures at which something changes state depend on pressure.
And we can summarize that relationship in what's called a phase diagram. This is getting a little
more quantitative. But I want you to see this because I want you to understand that water,
which you think of ice, liquid water, vapor, that's only one of many possibilities for a substance.
So this is a graph. On the bottom axis, we have temperature increasing to the right. On the vertical
axis, we have pressure increasing to the left. And here's a particular curve, which I'll talk
about in a minute. And here's another curve. And these two curves constitute the phase diagram
for a particular substance. By the way, it isn't water. That red curve would be sloping a different
way if it were water because of that unique property of water that I just talked about.
To the left of the red curve, the material is solid, regardless of what pressure you're at,
as long as you're above that very low pressure on that blue curve. To the right,
you're in a region where the material is definitely a liquid. Beyond that,
you're in a region where the material is a gas. And a substance like water at normal atmospheric
pressure, that might be normal atmospheric pressure if this were the graph for water,
which it isn't quite, but it could be with a slight change. As you change the temperature,
keeping something at atmospheric pressure, it goes from solid to liquid to gas. But there are
other ways to make that transition. I just made the transition from liquid to gas in that coffee
by moving vertically on this diagram and crossing the liquid gas boundary that way by
lowering the pressure while the temperature stayed the same. So the normal sequence we think
solid liquid gas with increasing temperature is only an artifact of the particular pressure we
have on earth and the particular substances we're used to. Carbon dioxide, for example,
if I had some dry ice here, the dry ice would never melt at normal atmospheric pressure.
It would simply turn directly from solid to gas, a process called subliming. So if this were
carbon dioxide I was talking about, that dot dashed line would be normal atmospheric pressure,
and at normal atmospheric pressure, carbon dioxide is not a liquid. In your fire extinguisher,
it is a liquid, but there it's under very high pressure. As soon as it comes out, it turns
into a gas and sometimes a little bit of dry ice forms around the edges as it cools rapidly
and expanding. Other things can happen. For example, at very high pressure, we have solid,
and then that curve of liquid to gas kind of ends abruptly, and it ends at a point called the
critical point. And above the critical point, there is in fact no real distinction between
liquid and gas. The material goes gradually from a very dense liquid to a lesser dense liquid and
just turns gradually without that abrupt transition into first a dense gas and then a more and more
diffuse gas. A critical point is unusual. We don't think about it because the critical point
occurs for normal substances in temperatures and pressures we don't tend to get to. For water,
for example, it's at 374 degrees Celsius and about 200 times atmospheric pressure. So that's
not a place we go frequently. Fluids that are very near their critical point exhibit some really
remarkable properties that are under active study today, and some of them are best seen,
in fact, in orbiting spacecraft. I should point out one other place on this diagram that's special.
It's right there. It's a point where those two curves meet. At that point,
liquid, solid, and gas can all coexist in equilibrium. Right here in these two containers,
I have liquid and solid coexisting. This water is at some point along the liquid to solid curve.
At any point along that curve, you can have both liquid and solid in any arbitrary amounts,
and they can happily coexist together. That's anywhere along that curve. If I changed atmospheric
pressure, the temperature in here might change, the temperature at which that transition occurs.
But there is one unique place, the triple point, where all three phases can exist together.
So if you can get a material to its triple point, you know absolutely what its temperature is.
For water, the triple point happens to be 273.16 K. And that, in fact, is used to define the
scale of temperature. We have zero at the bottom, absolute zero. And if you put water at its triple
point, that, by definition, is 273.16 K. You can't be wrong because there is only one unique
temperature, regardless of pressure, was also unique pressure. You have to have that pressure
and that temperature, and then you'll be at the triple point. But the temperature will be known,
and for water, it's 273.16 K. Once again, water is unusual. Water is unusual because its solid
phase is less dense than its liquid phase, and that means ice floats. If water were like most
substances, when winter came, ice would form and it would sink. But that doesn't happen,
and that has profound effect, obviously, for aquatic life, because the ice instead forms
an insulating layer which allows life to go on maybe at a reduced pace in the cool water below
the ice. But if ice sank, then lakes would freeze from the bottom up instead of from
over the top, and we would have a very different aquatic life. In fact, it's arguable some forms
of life might not be able to exist at all. The reason that ice is less dense is somewhat unusual.
It has to do with the crystal structure of ice. Here's a picture of the crystal structure of ice,
the molecular structure of ice. And you see in this picture pictures of the water molecule,
the H2O molecule, the two H's on either end, the bigger O in the middle forming an angle of
105 degrees. And I mentioned in the electricity module that ice and other substances are sometimes
held together by the sort of weak bonds that you see here as dashed lines between the hydrogens,
the positive hydrogen, and a neighboring oxygen in a neighboring water molecule. And that forms
this very hollow kind of structure. And it's the hollowness of that structure with a lot of empty
space that causes ice to have a lower density than water. By the way, it's the residue of that
structure, some residue of that bonding effect that still exists even after even after ice is
melted for the first few degrees that causes water to have that unusual behavior of becoming
still more dense as it warms up. It's because of that residual attractiveness. But then beyond
about 40 degrees Celsius, water begins to behave perfectly normally. By the way, you see this
sort of hexagonal structure to the ice crystal, to the crystal structure of ice. That's what
results directly in the hexagonal structure of snowflakes. No two snowflakes are the same,
but they all share this kind of hexagonality, which you can see here, the six-sidedness.
I long ago showed you a salt crystal. I poured a few pieces of salt out and then showed you a
cubicle salt crystal and showed you the structure of the NACL salt crystal underneath.
And it's the same with water, except water's hexagonal structure leads directly to these
hexagonal pictures for ice. By the way, the fact that ice has this unusual property means that you
can actually make ice melt by putting it under pressure. Normally, you put a substance under
pressure and you would solidify it. But for ice, you can melt it. And that's one of the things
that allows you to pack a snowball together and keep it together because you actually melt the ice
with the pressure. You put it together. Now, ice is only about 10% less dense than water,
and that means it floats very low in the water. And that's the answer to the question that is
implicit in the title of this lecture, the tip of the iceberg, because water is only 10% less
dense than, ice is only 10% less dense than water. It floats very low. By the way, that value
depends on where the ice came from. Ice from Antarctic has more rocks and trained in it,
so it has a different density than ice from the Arctic. And finally, let me end by taking a look
at this glass of water with ice in it. Some of the ice has melted in the course of this lecture,
but none of the water has spilled over. And that's because floating ice, as it melts, becomes
dense, more dense water, in exactly the right proportion. That's why it floats at the level it
does, that it doesn't change the overall volume at all. And that's why global warming and melting
of Arctic sea ice, although it may have major effects on climate, will not change sea level.
