Welcome to Lecture 31, Your Place on Earth.
This is the first lecture in the final module, Module 6, entitled Popery, and it is a real
popery of different ideas, technologies, physics concepts, and physics applications.
Some of the lectures in this module are outgrowths of some of the earlier modules.
They're perhaps more complex material that wouldn't fit into those other modules.
Most of them draw on ideas from several of the earlier modules and put together concepts
that we wouldn't be able to deal with with the subject matter of one of those modules
alone.
Module 6 is bracketed by two lecturers whose titles sound similar.
They both begin with your place, and so you might think, well, they're kind of similar.
One is the first lecture, this one, Lecture 31 is your place on Earth.
The final lecture is your place in the universe.
So they sound kind of similar.
Nothing could be more different.
This lecture, Lecture 31, is about a specific technology.
It's probably the most specifically technological, and in a sense, the most contemporary technology
I'll be dealing with in the entire course.
This is a very specific lecture about a very specific technology that allows us to determine
our place on Earth.
Lecture 36, the final lecture, Your Place in the Universe, is a much more grandiose
philosophical look at where we human beings fit into the universe, in particular how the
material of which we're made is descended ultimately from the stars and from the processes
that began and shaped our universe.
In between, we have more of that hodgepodge-like potpourri.
Lecture 32, Dance and Spin, deals with rotational motion, something that might have fit into
the second module but didn't fit, and that also has some specific implications ranging
as far and wide as how the North Star will not always be the North Star to how medical
resonance imaging works, or the fundamental principle behind it.
Lecture 33, The Light Fantastic, talks about lasers.
I said at one point the transistor may have been the most important invention of the 20th
century, but the laser ranks right up there also, and Lecture 33 deals with the laser,
how they work.
We'll see a number of demonstrations of lasers in action.
Lecture 34 is Nuclear Matters, a little bit about the atomic nucleus, its role in producing
energy, its role in a lot of other important technologies, some of the dangers it poses,
and so on.
Lecture 35 is Physics in Your Body.
We'll start out with a little bit about the mechanics of how your body works, but most
of that lecture will be dedicated to medical techniques that use physics, particularly
medical imaging, PET scans, CAT scans, MRI scans, bone scans, and that sort of thing.
So it is a real potpourri of different lectures.
We'll be shifting gears fairly rapidly from one to the other.
Lecture 31, this one, Your Place on Earth, is about the global positioning system.
The global positioning system is quite a new technology.
It's been available to civilians in its full form only since the year 2000, and it only
got into full implementation in about the year 1994, so it's a quite new technology,
and it is already revolutionizing many, many areas of business, of commerce, of technology,
of science, and so on.
So we're going to look in this lecture at the global positioning system.
The sense the global positioning system is an outgrowth of Module 2, again, when we
had a lecture on into space, because the GPS system is based on satellites, and satellites
are spacecraft, and they obey all those orbital parameters that we talked about in that module,
but there are many other technologies involved in the global positioning system.
So let me begin with a brief history of the global positioning system, and it's a brief
history because, as I indicated, this is a fairly new technology.
The first trial satellites for GPS went up in 1974 and 1977.
GPS was initially conceived as a military project, and until the year 2000, it was,
in some sense, exclusively a military project in the sense that civilians were not allowed
access to the most precise measurements it could provide.
In 1978 to 1985, the so-called Block 1 satellites were launched.
These were the first generation of GPS satellites.
The satellites are being continually improved.
From 1989 to 1994, the Block 2 satellites, some of which are still up there in more recent
versions of them, were launched.
And in 1994, the system became fully operational, meaning the 24th satellite was launched.
GPS requires that there be at least 24 satellites up there at all times.
In 2000, so-called selective availability, which is what made the civilian use of GPS
limited in its accuracy, was abolished, and so the full GPS accuracy became available
for the first time to civilians.
So what is this global positioning system?
Well, it's primarily, not exclusively, but primarily a space-based system of this so-called
constellation of 24 satellites.
So this is a symbolic picture of what it might look like.
I haven't shown all 24 satellites, but there is this swarm called a constellation of satellites.
There have to be at least 24 at all times, and there are usually a few spares up there
in case one of them fails.
They're up about 12,000 miles.
They're in inclined orbits.
I discussed the inclination of orbits back in the lecture on spaceflight.
These orbits are inclined at 55 degrees.
That's a fairly high inclination, and it allows them to be seen then from anywhere on Earth.
The orbital shape is circular, and the orbital period is about 12 hours.
So these are going around about twice as fast as the Earth is rotating underneath them.
So those are the parameters of the GPS constellation.
Now the exact orbits are monitored from the ground, so we know exactly how the satellites
are moving.
Furthermore, because they're up at 12,000 miles, there's essentially no air resistance,
and their orbits are very accurately predictable.
So we monitor those orbits.
We occasionally, actually more than occasionally, sometimes as often as every hour, send information
to the satellites, telling them exactly where they are, so the satellites know that information,
and then given that the orbits are very predictable by Newton's laws, they continue to know very
accurately where they are for some time to come, and they continually broadcast signals
that carry information about their precise positions.
GPS satellites typically last somewhere on the order of 7 to 15 years, and then they're
continually being replaced, and the newer satellites tend to have better capabilities,
more accuracy, and so on.
So how does GPS work?
Well fundamentally, it works by measuring the distances to, in principle three, in practice
four, and I'll tell you why the three are versus four, of the satellites, and using
the measured distances to determine exactly where on Earth an observer is.
So what a GPS user sees is the following.
A GPS user is sitting here on Earth, and the system is set up, the constellation of satellites
is configured, so that a given observer always sees at least four satellites.
There are always at least four satellites in the sky above you if you're using GPS,
and those four satellites are always above the horizon.
They're not always the same four satellites, but you'll always be in view of four satellites.
And the question is, how far is it to each of those four satellites?
If you can answer that question, as I'll show you, you can pin down your position with incredible
accuracy.
Well, let's see how that works.
You probably have used, at some point, or learned about a technique called triangulation
to measure distances.
For example, I was talking to a biologist recently who was measuring the heights of
the trees in a tropical rainforest, and the way that was done was to measure the distance
from the base of the tree to the observer.
The observer then cites up to the top of the tree, and knowing that angle in a little trigonometry,
you can calculate the height of the tree.
That's triangulation.
GPS uses kind of the opposite.
It finds out where you are by determining distances.
Determines distances by knowing where you are and some other measurements.
The GPS satellite measurements determine where you are from distance measurements, and that's
a process called trilateration.
I'm going to describe that process, and I'm going to describe it first in two dimensions
because it's easier to understand what's going on in two dimensions.
I've got a two-dimensional screen, and so I'm going to describe the picture in two dimensions.
I will then show it to you in three dimensions, which gets more complex.
And occasionally throughout this discussion, I will drop back to two dimensions just to
make the picture simpler.
But remember, all this is going on in three dimensions.
So how does this work?
Well, here's a GPS satellite.
And suppose I somehow know how far I am from that satellite, and I'll show you shortly
how we in fact know how far we are from the satellites.
Well, all that tells me is the distance.
I might be at the end of that blue line.
I might be at the end of that equal length blue line.
I might be at the end of that equal length blue line.
In fact, again, in two dimensions only, I might be anywhere on a circle whose radius
is this known distance to that satellite.
So all that distance measurement tells me.
If I know I'm 12,340 miles from that satellite, all that tells me is that I'm somewhere on
a circle, and in three dimensions it would be a sphere, whose radius is that distance.
But it doesn't tell me where on that circle.
But remember, there are more satellites in my field of view.
So here's another satellite.
And maybe I'm a little farther from that satellite.
So I know I'm on a circle whose radius is the distance I know I am from that satellite.
And in two dimensions, those two circles intersect in only two points.
There they are.
And so I know, in principle, that I'm at one of those two points.
And it turns out the ambiguity between which of those two points I'm at can usually be
solved.
One of those points will typically be way up in space, off the surface of the Earth,
or maybe it'll be down inside the Earth, but one of them is on the surface of the Earth.
And that's enough to tell me where I am in two dimensions.
So trilateration in two dimensions requires, in principle, measurements of the distances
to two different satellites.
And that pins down my position to within two possible points, one of which can usually
be rejected because it's obviously absurd.
Well, the world is not two-dimensional, it's three-dimensional.
So we need to do this process in three dimensions.
That's a harder picture to draw, but let me give you a sense of how that works.
So here we are now in three dimensions.
Again, here's a GPS satellite.
Here's a sphere surrounding that satellite, because in three dimensions, if I know the
distance from myself to the satellite, all I know is that I'm on a sphere in three dimensions
on the surface of a sphere whose radius is that distance that I know to that satellite.
Well, here's a second satellite, same one I was talking about before, but now instead
of being on a circle about that satellite, all I know is that I'm on a sphere whose radius
is equal to the known distance that satellite, but again, I don't know where I am on that
sphere.
Put together the information from those two satellites, and you can see from this picture
that the two spheres intersect in a circle.
So now what I know is that I'm on a single circle.
Three dimensions makes things more complicated.
In two dimensions, two satellites were enough to tell where I was to within this ambiguity.
In three dimensions, all they do is put me on a circle.
What one satellite did in two dimensions.
But the world is three-dimensional, so here's where we are.
So we need a third satellite.
If there's a third satellite, and I know I'm a certain distance from that satellite,
then I know I'm also on a sphere that surrounds that satellite, and whose radius is the known
distance to it.
And if you look at the picture, you see that those three spheres intersect in ultimately
two points.
So then with three satellites, I know I'm on one of those two points.
And again, one of them is usually absurd.
It's way up in space.
It's down inside the earth or something.
And so we can easily pick out which one I'm on.
That's great.
In principle, how we determine our position on the surface of the earth.
How do we determine it within a few feet?
Well that's where we're going in the rest of this lecture.
It's a little bit more subtle than just doing this as we'll see.
How do we determine the distance?
Well the distances are determined ultimately by timing radio signals coming from the satellites
and using the known speed of light to calculate the distances to the satellite.
The speed of light is fast, but we can nevertheless use it for timing.
And if we had perfectly accurate clocks in the satellites and on the ground in the receiver
we use, we could in fact measure that time with exact precision and with the exception
of some problems I'll bring up in a minute, we could determine our position.
Now the satellites have on board them very, very accurate atomic clocks.
They're good to about 10 billionths of a second.
And I want to digress for a moment about how atomic clocks work because they're the essence
of the GPS technology in a sense.
They're also the essence of how we keep time here on Earth in general.
So let me just take a little digression and tell you what an atomic clock is.
An atomic clock is a rather sophisticated thing.
It consists typically of a generator of microwaves, some kind of cavity into which those microwaves
are beamed, a non-uniform magnetic field, and I'll tell you in a minute what that does,
and an atom detector.
Now our standard of time is in fact based on transitions among energy levels in atoms.
I talked about such transitions back when I was talking about how semiconductors work,
for example.
And in particular, the atom cesium undergoes a very so-called hyperfine transition between
two very closely spaced energy levels, and it emits in the process electromagnetic radiation
at a precise frequency.
And our definition of the second, what one second means to humankind these days, is 9,192,631,631,770
oscillation cycles of the energy associated with that transition in the atom cesium.
That's how a second is defined.
And atomic clocks reproduce that transition.
Here's how it works.
We send a beam of atoms through this cavity, and if the atoms get bumped up into that slightly
higher energy level, which they will do if we bombard them with microwaves of just the
right frequency, then when they pass through that non-uniform magnetic field, they will
be deflected upward into that atom detector.
If they haven't been bumped up to that slightly higher energy level by microwaves of just the
right frequency, they will be deflected downward.
So what we do is have a control loop, a feedback loop, that looks at the number of atoms coming
into that detector and changes the frequency of the microwave generator, which is what's
bumping those atoms up in such a way as to maximize the number of atoms coming into that
atom detector.
And when we get the maximum number of atoms, we know we've got the microwave frequency
at exactly the frequency the atoms want to undergo that transition at.
Now there's some subtleties.
The atoms have to be cold.
Sometimes we actually drop them down in a big tower.
But ultimately, we connect a digital counter to that microwave generator.
We know those microwaves are at the right frequency to excite that transition in the
atom.
And so we're there right at that frequency.
And from that, we can actually tell the time.
The United States standard of time, which you can get off your computer.
You can, in fact, synchronize your computer's clock to the standard, or maybe you have a
so-called, quote, atomic clock at home, which is not an atomic clock, but simply a clock
with a receiver that gets the signal from the U.S. standard atomic clock.
You're looking at signals from this clock.
This is the U.S. official time standard, the NIST F1 cesium atomic clock.
NIST is the National Institute of Standard and Technology.
And here is their F1 cesium atomic clock.
This is a bigger, more sophisticated clock than on the GPS receivers, and it's what
sets the standard of time for the United States.
So now we know how atomic clocks work.
Back to GPS.
GPS satellites carry four different atomic clocks.
Some use cesium, some use rubidium, but they basically work on this same principle.
By the way, GPS is then broadcasting a time signal, so it can also be used to set your
time.
And the receivers know what time it is because of that.
Now each satellite sends out a unique signal that identifies that satellite, so called
pseudo-random code.
It's a string of 1s and 0s.
And here's what happens when you're using GPS to try to figure out where you are.
There's a particular satellite up there in space.
It's over the horizon.
You can see it.
Your receiver knows these pseudo-random codes for all the different satellites, so your
receiver identifies what satellite that is, and it produces in itself this pseudo-random
code.
You get the pseudo-random code from the satellite, but it comes to you a little bit delayed.
And that time delay tells you how long it took the signal to get from the satellite
to you.
That's what determines your distance from that satellite.
Remember, we had to know distances to three satellites.
And here's a little math.
The speed of light is about 186,000 miles a second.
The satellites are up about 12,000 miles.
So the time it takes to get from the satellite to you is about 12,000 miles divided by 186,000
miles a second.
That's about 6 or 7 hundredths of a second, about 65 milliseconds.
Pretty small time.
If those distances, if those timing were off by even 1,000ths of a second at 186,000 miles
a second, your distance would be off 186 miles.
And GPS is good to 10 feet, sometimes to inches.
How do we achieve that?
Well, we've got to look into a few other things.
First of all, your receiver is not a great big heavy thing with an atomic clock in it.
We can't afford to put an atomic clock or afford to fit one in the receiver.
So it has a more standard quartz clock like your quartz watch.
We have to somehow correct the fact that that clock isn't really good enough.
Here's how we do it.
And this is a two-dimensional analogy.
Remember if we had two satellites and distances to them, we would know exactly where we were
in two dimensions, or we'd know to within those two points.
What if we had a third satellite also?
Well, we would, presumably, its circle would also have to intersect at that point because
we are at a specific place after all.
So this is the ideal.
There's perfect agreement.
But because the clock in your receiver is not that accurate, there's some error.
There's an uncertainty in the distances because of that clock error in your receiver.
So what do we do?
Your receiver cleverly looks at that error, only it does this with four satellites because
it took three satellites in three dimensions to pin us down.
But with the clock errors, that isn't good enough.
We take the measurements from a fourth satellite.
If they're inconsistent, which they will be because of these timing errors, we then recalculate.
Your receiver recalculates all the distances in order to find the unique solution that
puts those at the same place.
And then your clock is corrected and matches the GPS transmitter clock in the satellite.
So that's why we need four satellites, three in two dimensions, four in three dimensions.
And the result is a measurement that's typically good to within a few tens of feet.
And I'll get to that in just a moment.
In addition to position, GPS receivers also measure the relative velocity.
They do that by the Doppler shift.
So if you're driving along the countryside, the GPS receiver can calculate how fast you're
moving.
There are a number of other errors that we have to correct for, or at least take into
account.
For instance, the satellite's positions are known, but not absolutely perfectly.
They're typically good to about 10 feet.
So there's a 10-foot error.
The clocks in the satellites are good to about 10 billionths of a second.
Light travels about a foot and a billionths of a second.
So there's another 10 feet.
A more subtle error is Earth's upper atmosphere.
The satellites are up at 12,000 miles.
We know the exact speed of light, 2,997,924,58 meters per second, exactly by definition.
We know the speed above the atmosphere.
But in the atmosphere, only about 100 miles or so, depending on what angle we're coming
at, the speed is affected by atmospheric conditions.
And here I want to draw on the module on electromagnetism a little bit, because here's why this happens.
About 50 miles up, there's a layer of the atmosphere where high energy radiation from
the sun ultraviolet and so on have ionized some of the atoms, and there are a number
of free electrons around there.
And Earth has a magnetic field.
And those electrons are doing what electrons do in a magnetic field.
They're experiencing magnetic forces.
They're charged particles, moving charged particles.
And they go spiraling around the magnetic field lines.
And that has a profound effect on radio waves coming through.
That those rotating electrons interact with radio waves and slow them down.
And the amount by which they slow them down depends on how many of these electrons there
are.
And that depends on local conditions and what the sun is doing and so on.
And it's quite variable.
So that's a hard thing to compensate for.
However, fortunately, that effect is frequency dependent.
And the satellite's broadcast signals at two different frequencies.
So here come signals from two different frequencies.
They come out out of step with each other.
Each one has been slowed down by a different amount.
And by determining that amount, we can determine what the ionospheric conditions are.
And we can sort of correct for that.
Our corrections bring that error to about 15 feet.
Another thing that happens is the signal from the satellite is supposed to come directly
to your receiver.
But what if there's a tall building nearby or a body of water or something?
The signal bounces off and it comes to your receiver.
And this is sort of like when you see ghost images on your TV.
The little ghostly image you see maybe to the right is from a weaker signal that has
come a little bit later into your TV receiver by bouncing off some object in your environment.
So this multi-path error is a problem.
And it typically amounts to about two feet.
And satellites, the receiver has sophisticated algorithms for trying to figure out which
signal gets to it first.
So there are a variety of error sources in GPS.
There's the positions about 10 feet, the satellite positions.
There are clocks, another 10 feet, roughly.
Atmospheric error about 15 feet.
Multi-path error, another two feet.
And the result is typical GPS accuracy is a few tens of feet.
You know where you are on the surface of the earth to a few tens of feet.
By the way, there's another very subtle effect or sophisticated effect that would cause errors
except we know to correct for it.
Both Einstein's special theory of relativity and general theory of relativity talk about
things that happen to time when an object is moving relative to you.
The satellites are moving relative to you.
Not fast compared to C, the speed of light, but still pretty fast.
And they're up high where gravity is different.
And both special and general relativistic effects have to be taken into account.
If they weren't, by the end of a day, the measurements made by GPS satellites would
be off by about a mile.
So there's one case where Einstein's theories are really everyday physics.
Now, I've got us down to a few feet, but we can do much better than that.
And we do that with so-called differential GPS.
And here's how differential GPS works.
You have a second receiver, and you put it at a fixed location and a known location.
A location that's been surveyed so we know exactly where on earth this location is.
And that second receiver, which may be up to 100 miles or so from where you're doing
your work, is at a known location, it's close enough to you that atmospheric conditions
above you and that receiver are the same, roughly, closely.
So we can compensate for that error completely.
We can get rid of atmospheric error completely.
Furthermore, because this satellite, this receiver knows exactly where it is, the errors
in its measurement, as determined by GPS, it can correct for those errors, and it relays
all those corrections to you in your nearby roving GPS.
And with differential GPS, you can easily get down to a few feet.
And with really sophisticated techniques, you can get down to a few inches.
So that's differential GPS.
Well, what do we use this GPS for?
I'm just going to give you a brief introduction to the many, many, many, many ways GPS is
used in today's world.
For example, GPS is increasingly built into cell phones, so that if a cell phone call
is made to 911, an emergency call, the 911 operator immediately knows where the cell
phone is.
That was a weak link in the whole 911 system.
When we got landline phones so that the 911 operators knew where they were, that didn't
work for cell phones.
Well, cell phones can identify themselves possibly by triangulation to cell phone towers nearby,
but with GPS anywhere on Earth, a cell phone could figure out exactly where it is and send
that information to 911.
Handheld GPS is great for hikers, boaters, and so on.
And here's a picture of a hiker with a handheld GPS receiver looking off in the mountains
and knowing exactly where they are.
We use GPS navigation in cars.
Increasingly cars are coming with built-in GPS navigation systems, or you can buy them
as add-ons.
They include things like roadmaps that show exactly where you are, and some of them will
even speak directions to tell you where to turn.
If you go into a canyon between buildings in a city or through a tunnel, there are auxiliary
systems based on your car's odometer and acceleration measurements that continue to tell you where
you are until you're back in a view of the satellites again.
We use GPS for tracking in a variety of applications.
For example, a freight company might want to know exactly where its trucks are at all
time.
So its trucks are equipped with GPS receivers.
The GPS receiver knows where the truck is, and then a transmitter on the truck beams
that to the company's headquarters.
So it knows exactly where its trucks are, when they're going to arrive at their destinations,
if its drivers are goofing off by the roadside, rest area for too long, or whatever.
And there are a whole bunch of other applications for vehicle tracking.
Emergency vehicles and taxi fleets are tracked this way.
That provides the most efficient deployment of vehicles to where they're needed, for example.
Rental car companies are increasingly using GPS.
I recently read of a case where a person had rented a car in California, and the rental
agreement said you must stay within the state of California.
They decided to go to Las Vegas, which is not very far from the California border, but
far enough that a GPS device in the car recorded that straying over the state line, and they
were hit up with a fine or something when they got back.
If you're an anxious parent, you can actually have a covert GPS recorder installed in your
car.
You want to know where your teenagers are going with the car, and it will record every
move of that car, and it can come with maps of your area.
So it will tell you when you play it back exactly what street they've been on, and you
download this thing into your personal computer.
Or if you're some kind of covert operative who wants to track somebody, these things
are being done now.
Farmers like GPS.
Farmers waste a lot of fuel plowing over the same ground twice or overlapping their
plow or whatever.
Well, farmers can use GPS.
They reduce fuel consumption when they do that, and they also reduce the time it takes
to plow a field.
So in the picture showing symbolically, a tractor pulling a plow, plowing these nice
straight furrows.
How does that work?
Well, GPS, straight GPS tells the tractor where it is to within a matter of a few tens
of feet.
That's certainly not good enough to plow a nice straight row and get the next one right
parallel to it, and not overlapping, but not leaving any gap in between, or getting
it positioned where you want it to be.
So you set up a differential GPS.
In this case, you don't need to know exactly where the differential GPS transmitter is.
All you've got to know is where you are relative to it, and that's real easy.
So here's a differential GPS receiver at the edge of the field.
It gets that information, and then it becomes very easy to measure the tractor's position
to within inches relative to that differential GPS receiver.
And so that allows the farmer really to save a lot of fuel, cutting down on those energy
servants that I talked about in a previous lecture, by the way, if you want to think
about some of the implications of that.
Now GPS does not only give position in terms of latitude and longitude on Earth, or on
a map that's built into a GPS receiver.
It also tells your altitude, tells how far above the ground you are, because it finds
your position in three dimensions.
So it's ideally suited to aircraft navigation.
And one system that went into effect in 2003, I believe, the wide area augmentation system
is designed to bring the benefits of instrument landing systems to small airports that didn't
have them before.
And here's how it works.
We've got a jetliner with GPS, and so it's looking at some GPS satellites and getting
approximate information on its location, but not good enough to land with, good within
a few tens of feet.
You might miss the runway at that rate.
Well deployed around the United States are 25 reference stations, which receive GPS signals,
and they send those signals to central transmitting stations, which beam them up to a geosynchronous
satellite.
Remember, those are those satellites up 22,000 miles that rotate once in 24 hours, and so
stay fixed above a given location on Earth.
And the geosync satellite beams all the information back to the aircraft and can tell the aircraft
exactly where it is.
And so an airport that does not have instrument landing systems, this can take the place of
instrument landing systems, and smaller airports can then be open to the kind of navigation
that only larger airports had before.
By the way, another advantage of this is it may save fuel because it may allow flight
controllers to vector aircraft on paths that take them straight from one airport to another
instead of going in roundabout paths as required now by air traffic control.
Well, there are a whole lot of other uses of GPS in science and engineering and business
and so on.
For example, if you're a scientist studying wildlife, you can stick GPS receivers on your
wildlife, the GPS satellites locate the wildlife, and then a transmitter on the little collar
device the elephant here is wearing tells you the biologist is where the elephant is
and you can track it around.
Oceanographers scatter GPS off the ocean surface, and they can use that to calculate the wind
speed at the surface.
Engineers worrying about dams breaking or bridges deforming put GPS receivers on them,
and they can actually measure the slight motions due to that deformation.
Geologists monitor the growth of the flow of glaciers and even continental drift, grow
the growth of mountains with GPS.
GPS is everywhere.
You may not realize it yet, but GPS is almost certainly already a part of your life, and
it's going to become more a part of your life in the future.
Just some examples.
GPS tracking of your children, possibly, of your pets, of your possessions, GPS will at
some point give us more intelligent cars and highways that may be able to drive themselves
because they'll know precisely where they are and where the cars around them are.
We'll have improved GPS capabilities in the future consisting of greater power, more frequencies,
more of them civilian accessible, more sophisticated timing, more pseudo-random codes linked to
the underlying radio signals, and more power and a whole bunch of new capabilities and
less interference.
GPS is truly going to be a part of your future, and it's truly part of physics in your life.
