Welcome to lecture 33, The Light Fantastic.
Surely the laser ranks right up there with the transistor as one of the most important
inventions of the 20th century.
You probably think of a laser as something, a light source, sort of like a light bulb
except that it produces a very bright spot, there it is on the screen over there, a very
bright spot, very intense, tend to be a very narrow beam.
Those are in fact distinguishing characteristics of laser light but the difference between
lasers and other light sources goes much, much deeper than that.
Lasers would be a scientific curiosity or maybe a scientific instrument for use in research
but for the fact that they are widely used throughout commerce, industry, science, medicine
and almost every other aspect of our lives.
I've got a couple pictures here on the screen just to remind you of that.
On the left you see a laser system being used to scan the barcode on a carton of milk.
On the right surgeons are using laser light to perform delicate eye surgery.
Lasers are very much a part of our lives.
In this lecture I want to give you a sense of how lasers work, why they're so dramatically
different from other light sources and then give you a panoply of applications to which
we put laser light.
Most light that we see in the world originates in atomic scale systems.
I argued that when I talked about electromagnetic waves and how the size scale of the system
that produces electromagnetic waves is somehow related to the wavelength and it happens that
atomic size systems typically produce visible light.
A quantum mechanical way to put that is the energy levels in an atom are typically separated
by distances that correspond or by energies that correspond to the energy of the little
minuscule units, the little quanta, the photons that make up visible light.
I want to explain lasers in the context of that atomic physics and the transitions that
electrons go in atoms.
So you'll remember we've seen this picture of an atom several times before, it's the
sort of solar system model, it isn't exactly correct quantum mechanically because the electrons
really are in kind of a statistical cloud.
But it's not bad either and what it shows quantum mechanically are these discrete levels
in which the electrons can quote live, in which they can orbit the nucleus, again they
aren't really nice circular orbits like that, they aren't orbits at all, the electrons
are just distributed statistically, but this model tells us a lot about how atoms work.
So there are these atomic energy levels and we often represent the energy levels with
a diagram like this and you've seen this before again in the context of our discussion of
how semiconductors work from a quantum mechanical point of view.
So this particular atom on the left has three electrons, two of them are in the innermost
lowest energy orbit and there's one electron all by itself in that middle orbit, the outermost
orbit has no atoms in it, it's empty.
And it's possible to promote that outermost electron to a higher energy level and one
way to make that happen is to have a burst of electromagnetic energy come along with
just the right energy to give the electron the energy to make that transition.
Now I haven't said a lot about quantum physics in this particular course, you can learn more
about it in my course on modern physics for non-scientists, but the fact is that light
in addition to being an electromagnetic wave also consists of particles and I'm not going
to get into the seeming contradiction there other than to say it's not a contradiction.
The sense for us in which light consists of particles is that light energy instead of
being spread equally over the wave is in fact quantized in little tiny bundles of energy
with discrete values that depend on the color of the light and you can't have any less energy
than that.
Here comes a photon which I'll represent as a little wavy thing because it also has
a wave character to it and that photon gives up its energy to the electron and the electron
jumps to the higher level state and I've shown that happen both in the picture of the atom
and in the energy level diagram at the left.
And understanding that process, jumping up and then jumping down again and emitting
a photon of exactly the same energy, exactly the same color of light is what goes on when
atoms either absorb or emit light.
We want to simplify this picture, I don't want to be drawing atoms all the time when
explaining how lasers work.
So a simplified picture of an atom conceptually would be just this energy level diagram.
But it can get even simpler than that because we aren't really concerned about what those
innermost electrons are doing, they're just sitting happily in their orbits and not jumping
up and down.
It's only that outermost atom electron that does so and so my simple representation of
an atom from now on in this lecture is going to be a pair of horizontal lines that represent
two separate energy levels and a blue circle that represents an electron that can be in
one of those two levels.
So there is our very simple picture of an atom and every time you see that, think atom.
Now here's three atoms.
Two of them happen to be in that excited higher energy state and they tend to go back down
naturally spontaneously to the so-called lower level state sometimes called the ground state.
Why does that happen?
Well, it happens for the same reason if I put a ball on this table sooner or later it's
likely to fall off.
There's a probability that that electron will make that transition downward and happens
for atoms in very short times, way under a millionth of a second or a billionth of
a second say.
So if an atom gets excited, it spontaneously falls back to that lower energy level and
it emits a photon and that atom has just done so and a little while later maybe that
atom does so and the photons they emit are going in different directions.
They may have exactly the same color or the same wavelength because it's the same energy
transition but they're going in different directions and more importantly the waves
are not in step.
They're what's called incoherent.
The crest of one wave does not line up with the crest of another wave.
And the key to laser light, the thing that makes laser light different from other kinds
of light, the key to that bright intense spot of laser light is not just the brightness
and the intensity and the narrowness of the beam but the fact that all the photons, all
the waves if you will that make up that laser beam are coherent, they're all in step and
that's the key to laser action.
If we have regular incandescent light bulbs, very many light by just random jostling of
the hot atoms, the rapidly moving atoms in the hot filament, a regular ordinary light
bulb emits light of all different colors as atoms are getting jostled, their energy levels
are getting squeezed around, there's all kinds of different energy levels, get different
colors out and they're completely incoherent.
That's the difference between a light bulb and a laser.
It emits incoherent light, random phases, random times when the waves are at their crest.
A laser, the wave crests are basically all coherent.
Even in fluorescent lights and neon signs, there's an electric current there, this exciting
atomic electrons, and they tend to emit discreet colors of light, although in a fluorescent
lamp they're changed from ultraviolet to visible by the phosphor coating on the inside of
the lamp.
In a neon lamp you're actually seeing those discreet colors, but still even though the
colors are discreet because they're due to particular atomic transitions from one energy
level to another, nevertheless the light coming out is not coherent, so it's not laser light.
Now spontaneous emission, this sense that if I get an electron up to a higher energy
level it will spontaneously drop, that's not the only reason an electron can drop.
In 1917, Einstein in one of his many brilliant realizations recognized that if you had an
electron at a higher energy level and a photon came by that had the right energy to have
pushed that electron up to that level, well that photon could also stimulate the electron
to drop back down.
So ironically a photon that could have put the electron up into that level if it's already
up there can stimulate it to drop back down, and that's called stimulated emission, that's
the S in the word laser by the way.
So what happens?
A photon comes along, it has just the right energy corresponding to that transition, if
it doesn't this won't happen, and it goes by and the electron drops down and it too
emits a photon and now we have two photons, and in the process of stimulated emission
those two photons are moving in the same direction and they're exactly in phase.
And a quantum mechanical sense they are identical particles, they're moving identically, they've
got the same phase, their crests all line up, they are perfectly coherent, the original
photon and the new photon, there they are crests lining up with crests trough lining
up with trough and so on.
That's the process of stimulated emission.
What laser stands for is light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.
Light amplification, a laser is a kind of amplifier as you'll see in a minute, it amplifies
a weak level of light, here's how it does it.
One photon comes along, that's pretty weak light, pretty soon you have two photons, pretty
soon you have more photons and more photons.
Light amplification by stimulated, that's this process, emission of radiation.
There are also masers which are microwave amplifiers by stimulated emission of radiation,
they in fact preceded lasers.
So that's what a laser stands for.
How do we make a laser?
Well the key to laser action is to produce a large number of atoms in this excited state.
And by the way they don't have to be atoms, we can also excite molecules, we can excite
electron hole pairs and semiconductors.
There is a wide amazing diversity of ways to make laser action happen and we've explored
many of them.
But all of them involve creating what's called a population inversion, a situation that
the material the laser is made of doesn't normally find itself in.
And I'm going to think about our lasers being made of atoms of gas and that is a common
kind of laser but it's certainly not the only kind of laser.
So here we have these atoms and normally they're all in their lowest energy state,
once in a while one or two of them get knocked up to a higher state but that's just a few
of them.
In a laser you have to do something, you have to supply energy in a process that's called
pumping that puts a number, a large number of atoms or whatever the lasing medium is
in this higher energy state.
So the first step is to establish what's called a population inversion.
So here's again a picture of three atoms, this is my simplified picture of an atom,
and they're all in that higher energy state.
I've established a population inversion, many ways to do that.
The very first laser in fact use a crystal of ruby, a cylindrical crystal of ruby as
it's lasing medium as it's called and wrapped around it was a xenon flash lamp, just one
of those bright white lamps like you use in a camera flash but it was wrapped around in
the form of a tube and when the xenon flash lamp went off it gave out a lot of photons
of different energies and some of them were right to stimulate the atoms in the ruby crystal
and so that's what created the population inversion.
Once you have the population inversion, one of those will spontaneously, one of those
electrons will spontaneously drop back down to its lower energy state but all around it
are other electrons in this excited state and now the process of stimulated emission
occurs.
So that photon from the left most electron dropping came by the middle one, stimulated
emission and those two photons go happily by the next one and stimulate an emission
there.
The photons all completely coherent, all completely in step, representing light and
it's now three times more intense than it was with that original spontaneous emission.
So when we have lasers we are amplifying the initial natural spontaneous emission that
occurs by this process of stimulated emission and this happens because we have somehow
artificially done what nature doesn't usually do and that is to create this population inversion,
this situation where we have a lot of atoms in the excited state rather than the lower
energy state.
Now how do we make a complete laser out of this?
Well there's a little bit more we have to do, again here's my symbolic picture of a
bunch of atoms, still represented as little horizontal lines, most of them are in the
excited state, one or two of them here are in the lower energy state but most of them
are excited, the population inversion isn't necessarily complete.
And here comes out of this system due to light amplification by stimulated emission
of radiation, a bunch of photons all completely coherent.
Now just a blob of gas put into its population inversion state is not enough to make a laser.
What we do also are add mirrors on either side of the region containing this gas or
this piece of ruby or whatever we've got, we put mirrors and notice these two mirrors
are different, one of them on the left is darker, that mirrors an almost perfect mirror.
Mirror reflects 99.99999% of the light incident on it.
The mirror at the right isn't quite perfect, it might reflect 99% or 99.5% or 99.9% of
the light coming on it but it's specifically designed that a little bit of the light incident
on it leaks out.
So what happens?
Well we've got a whole bunch of these photons and they've come and they've hit that not
quite perfect mirror but most of them have reflected off because it's almost perfect.
They were produced by that initial spontaneous emission and then by the stimulated emission
I showed you in the previous picture.
They go back through the medium again, they stimulate more stimulated emission because
not every electron has dropped back down again, they bounce off the other mirror, they go
back through and they stimulate still more and a little tiny fraction of that energy
in the form of light leaks out through that little imperfect mirror and that's the laser
beam.
When I turn on my laser here and shine it on the wall, that beam is just a tiny, tiny
faint residue of the extraordinarily intense laser light that is bouncing back and forth
inside the laser itself between those mirrors, light that I could never get access to because
if I tried to I would break the laser action but that light is much more intense inside
the laser.
It's only a little bit that leaks out to make the nevertheless very intense laser beam.
By the way you might say, well what happens when these upper levels are depopulated?
Well lasers can work in one of two ways.
You can fire a laser, a so called pulse laser, some of the highest powered lasers are pulse
lasers, you build up the population inversion, the laser fires, makes an intense but short
burst of light and then you spend some time rebuilding the population inversion.
More common lasers, continuous lasers are on continuously and the pumping is happening
continuously even as the device is lasing, that is producing laser light.
For example, this is a helium neon laser.
It has a tube containing helium and neon gas and an electric current is being driven through
that and that's what causes the electrons to be excited and drives the population inversion
at the same time when I turn it on, it's lasing.
Over here I have an example of a laser and this one is specifically designed to be visible
and what you see are some electronics that govern that pumping action and so on and some
other aspects of this particular laser that I'll get to later but here's the laser tube.
It's a glass tube, it's actually not this big tube about an inch in diameter but a smaller
tube down inside that that you can see if you look close up and when I turn the laser
on that small tube glows very vividly just like a neon lamp would.
In fact that's what it's being, this is a helium neon laser so it's glowing as a helium
with the colors of a helium neon laser and some other colors too.
The light you're seeing, the intense pinkish light that's coming out of there is not the
laser light.
Some of the photons that are emitted don't go out in the direction parallel to the laser
beam and they're lost so the laser is not perfectly efficient.
There's quite a bit of light being produced that's going out in different directions is
not going along, bouncing back and forth between the mirrors, is not stimulating more emission,
is not contributing to the laser action.
So quite a bit of the electrical energy is producing that glow which isn't doing anything
for us.
It's only the photons that happen to be emitted going back and forth that build up more and
more levels and they emerge as the laser beam which you can see here on my hand.
So again that's a tiny residue of what's bouncing back and forth inside that laser cavity between
two mirrors, the partly silvered mirror here at this end.
So that's what's going on inside the laser.
It's not a light bulb, it's not even a neon lamp although it has that same glow that a
neon lamp does.
The important thing that's happening is the stimulated emission that's occurring as a
result of that population inversion which is being driven by the electric current flowing
through there and the back and forth bouncing of photons between those mirrors building
up that high intensity light which comes out in a small fraction of it through that mirror.
That's how a laser works.
Now I mentioned that lasers can use a wide variety of media and just to give you one
example before I get to the specific example, all lasers have some things in common although
the details differ.
They have an energy source called the pump, that's what produces this population inversion.
A flash lamp on the first laser, electric current in my simple helium neon laser which
is pretty much the same as the laser in here.
Some very high powered lasers actually use chemical reactions which produce the products
of the, it's literally the combustion process, they come out in an excited state and then
they fall down and emit stimulated emission.
Some of the lasers are proposed for missile defense, for example, it worked that way.
Another laser can be the stimulating source.
So called dye lasers use organic dyes, they can be tuned to almost any wavelength of light
and you hit them with another laser and this dye undergoes laser action.
There's a gain medium.
The thing that's doing the stimulated emission, it could be a solid like ruby, neodymium glass
is used in very high powered lasers, gases, helium neon, there are carbon dioxide lasers,
there are nitrogen lasers, et cetera, there are liquids with these tunable organic dyes,
for example, and semiconductors.
All lasers also have in common the so called resonator, this cavity which also happens
to be the right length to be resonant like those waves on a string I had earlier at the
frequency of the laser, but that's not hard to achieve.
They have glass mirrors or if it's a solid medium you can simply polish the ends and
sometimes you polish them in an angle for reasons that have to do with the optics of
the way waves reflect or refract at interfaces.
Laser light tends to come out automatically polarized by the way, especially if you have
an angular cut for the mirror.
One other example, semiconductor diode laser because we know how semiconductors work from
the module and semiconductors, here's a semiconductor diode laser and it's basically just a PN junction
with a carefully engineered energy gap.
We send an electric current through it, you'll notice this is in the correct direction to
forward bias this diode with the positive side of the battery to the P and the negative
side to the N and if the two faces of the diode at the junction between the P and the
N are polished so they act as mirrors or coated with a thin metallic coating so they act as
mirrors then what would be a light emitting diode just emitting light at the energy of
that band gap in this particular semiconductor, the light bounces back and forth, stimulates
emission between electron hole pairs that are being created by the energy from the battery.
So the population inversion consists of there being electron hole pairs that wouldn't naturally
be there and we get laser action and out comes a laser beam so that's a diode laser.
Now we think of lasers as being very bright but this little laser pointer for example
is producing a light of about a thousandth of a watt or less, it's a tiny tiny power.
The only reason it looks so bright is because that power is concentrated in a very very
small space.
This little helium neon laser is probably at most a few milliwatts, a few thousandths
of a watt.
So the common lasers we tend to deal with are very very low wattage, low power, doesn't
mean their beams aren't dangerous because that light is very concentrated, you wouldn't
want to shine any laser beam into your eye.
There are also lasers available with very very high power.
On the left here for example you see the NOVA laser at Lawrence Livermore Laboratory.
The NOVA laser actually consists of a whole bunch of laser beams that converge on a spherical
chamber and the idea is to literally implode a tiny pellet of deuterium or deuterium and
tritium, more on that in lecture 34, next lecture, nuclear physics and try to make them
undergo a fusion reaction and there are two reasons the folks at Lawrence Livermore want
to do that, one benign and one not so benign.
The benign reason is because again as I've said earlier if we ever got fusion working
as an energy source the oceans would have 300 billion years worth of fuel in them at
our current energy consumption rate.
That might be a good thing, it might not be, but it's pretty non-polluting energy if we
could get it going.
The other reason the folks at Lawrence Livermore are doing this is because those fusion reactions
that go on as that pellet implodes are miniature hydrogen bombs and in an era when nuclear
testing doesn't happen it's a way of testing nuclear weapons.
At the right you see the airborne laser, it's a several million watt chemical laser
mounted on a modified 747 aircraft and it's under development for ballistic missile defense.
The idea is you would literally zap the missile and destroy it with this high intensity laser
beam shot maybe hundreds of miles from the upper atmosphere to the missile you're trying
to zap.
A lot of money is going into that, not clear whether that's a good idea, but there it is,
that's a very high powered laser and some of the highest powered lasers have applications
that I don't particularly want to think about, but there they are.
Lasers have actually been made in almost every wavelength, I mentioned masers, microwave
emission by stimulated emission, we have infrared lasers, the laser that reads the pits in an
ordinary audio CD is an infrared laser, the laser that reads a DVD disc is just into the
visible a little bit into the red, the lasers that will read those blu-ray discs are semiconductor
lasers, little diode lasers in the blue.
We have lasers in the ultraviolet, although infrared and visible are the most common.
People have made x-ray lasers and gamma ray lasers, nuclear radiation basically in an
intense laser beam are under development, by the way some x-ray lasers have actually
used nuclear explosions as the pump mechanism, strange phenomenon.
People are also working on what might be called atom lasers in which you get actual atoms,
not photons, but atoms of matter to all interact in that same coherent way and produce a coherent
beam and that's an atom laser.
So what do we do with lasers?
Well lasers have almost unlimited uses today, we use them in communication, we use them
in industry, we use them in commerce, we use them in science and I want to now spend the
rest of this lecture exploring a few of those applications and I want to start with an example.
Here's my helium neon laser again, my visible helium neon laser you can see through and
I've got it shining across the studio here, there's its beam and it's shining on a little
light detector and if I've got it aimed right it's going right into that little light detector
and that light detector is going into an amplifier which is going to amplify what it detects
and what's it going to detect?
Well coming in to the laser at the back is a signal from a CD player over here and it
happens to be playing my other course, Einstein's Relativity and the Quantum Revolution, Modern
Physics for Non-Scientists, I should have tuned it to the part in quantum physics and
I could be quiet for a while and you could hear about that.
I think we're talking about cosmology at that point though and that's coming in and some
of this electronics inside this plastic box is being used to modulate the laser beam,
its intensity is changing slightly with that audio signal that's coming in.
You don't see the modulation of the beam in a minute I'm going to hit play, it's much
too minor for you to see but this light detector can detect those slight differences in the
intensity of the laser beam and it's going to go into this amplifier which I'll turn
on in a minute.
First I'll hit play over here, ok the player is now playing, I'll turn on the amplifier.
Crazy physicist talking about infinite dough, I want to show you that that information that's
coming out of here that you can hear kind of scratchy, not the best communications link,
is in fact carried on that laser beam so I'm going to use my hand to interrupt the beam.
The further the reason is from you the more dough is expanding in between you and it and
the faster it seems to be going away and yet no reason can claim to be at the center especially
if I make the assumption that this particular weird loaf of ray spread is infinite in extent.
Gone, gone because I'm blocking the laser beam which is carrying that information.
I have a picture showing a whole lot of little elliptical shaped objects spread randomly
all over the screen in random directions, those are galaxies, I'm going to enlarge it
by about 25% and I'm going to put the launcher on the steam screen so we're going to see
what the reverse looks like at a certain time and we'll put it like a bit later when it's
expanded.
Ok you get the idea, we're clearly communicating by means of a light beam.
That light based communication is in fact what goes on in all our fiber optic systems.
Our fiber optic systems usually use a little diode laser or a little semiconductor laser
at the entrance to the fiber optic and it's turned on and off rapidly to represent the
ones and zeros of digital information.
But the principle is exactly like what I've showed here.
The only difference is this happens to be analog, I'm sending in an analog audio signal
we're taking it out of the headphone jack of that CD player.
It's an analog audio signal and it is modulating the laser in a continuous way that is analogous
to the intensity of the sound waves, that's why it's analog.
In fiber optic communication it is invariably digital because you can tell the difference
between a 1 and a 0 you can get through without distortion but it's the same principle.
Laser beams can be used to carry information and because the frequency of light is so high
you can cram an awful lot of information onto a laser beam.
Some other examples of laser use, I mentioned CDs and DVDs way back in the first module,
again those use semiconductor lasers that have band gaps in the infrared for CDs, the visible
for DVDs and for the new blue rays in the blue visible.
Lasers read barcodes, you've seen barcode scanning in supermarkets and libraries in stores of
all kinds, they're reading the barcode, they're shining the light that's then picked up by
a light detector, read the barcode.
Lasers with outputs in the kilowatt range can cut metal and they can cut it very precisely
so here's metal being cut with a high intensity laser.
Laser beams can destroy biological tissue, that makes for a kind of surgical knife, a
kind of optical knife and lasers are used in surgery.
We enjoy lasers in laser light shows in which laser beams are steered either by mechanical
or optical means.
We use lasers for remote sensing of the environment by using tunable lasers to hit individual
atoms and see what energy levels were exciting, we can determine what kind of materials there
are and how much there is in say a polluted hunk of air or water or some other material.
We may be able to detect clandestine nuclear weapons production this way.
One interesting thing laser beams can do is trap tiny objects, that's called optical
tweezers and I have a picture here of how that works.
Here's a laser beam and it's more intense in the middle, it's being shined through a
lens to a focus, it's more intense in the middle and it's also more intense at that
focus and here's a little particle and here comes some light from the less intense part
of the beam and it's refracted through that little particle and so that means the light
has been bent in that direction and by Newton's third law the light must have exerted a force
in the other direction on that particle.
On the other hand here comes some light from the more intense center of the beam, it's
refracted the other way, that means the force on the particle must be in the other direction
and the net force ends up being down toward the focus and the particle in fact gets trapped
just below the focus and you can actually move it around.
Here's a picture in which I show a cluster of three cells, they're going to stay fixed
and there's a little yeast cell being picked up by optical tweezers and moved relative
to those other three cells, there it goes.
We can manipulate tiny, tiny objects.
Here's a movie in which we see a microtubule, that's the long structure going diagonally
across here, at the end of the microtubule are two little glass beads and those little
glass beads are attached to the microtubule and they're being caught in the beam from
a laser and that whole thing is dancing around your screen, vibrating, twisting because the
operator of the optical tweezers is manipulating that object.
That microtubule is a tiny little structure from inside a cell that acts as kind of a
conveyor belt to move materials around in the cell.
Lasers are used in surveying, the straightness of the laser beam makes them a wonderful
survey tool, you can walk into your local hardware store or home store and find a whole
host of laser levels and other laser surveying instruments.
Lasers can be used to cool atoms because the Doppler effect and atom moving just the right
way sees the laser beam Doppler shifted and it absorbs that energy and it comes to a stop
and some of the cooling techniques used to get very close to absolute zero involve laser
cooling.
Finally, let me end with laser interferometry, a technique that uses lasers for very precise
measurement of distances.
This is a system where I have a beam splitter, it's going to split the laser into two directions,
it's going to go out to those two mirrors and it's going to bounce back to that beam
splitter, it's going to be recombined and the two beams recombine and they make an interference
pattern.
And if I move one of those mirrors slightly, even a fraction of the wavelength of light,
that interference pattern will shift and I'll be able to observe that and I'm going to quickly
demonstrate for you how that works with this laser system here.
So I'm opening up this laser, this is a little bit more powerful laser, it's a green laser.
You can see an interference pattern here.
There it is on that screen, a pattern of lines bright, dark, bright, dark, bright, dark,
that's the interference of those two beams coming together.
If I push on this one mirror with something as little as a feather on this rigid mirror
on a rigid steel post, the mirror is moving a few wavelengths of light and that's enough
to change that interference pattern.
If I pour a little liquid nitrogen on this, you'll be able to see the actual beams.
I'm actually not going to pour the liquid nitrogen, I'm just going to pour the vapors
and you can see the beams going back and forth between those two mirrors, coming out
of the original laser, coming out of the beam splitter, going to the mirrors and then going
to this lens which I use to magnify the pattern.
So there are the laser beams being produced in that interferometer.
Devices are used to measure very, very precise distances and optical surfaces.
Let me end with a very audacious use of lasers, an interferometer so big that it is 3 million
miles between some satellites that hold the mirrors.
This is a device used to detect gravity waves, it's not launched yet, it's aimed to be launched
sometime in the around 2010 perhaps and the precision to which this 3 million mile distance
will be measured is to about a billionth of an inch using laser interferometry.
That thing is a substantial fraction of the distance from the earth to the sun and it
will be a wonderful scientific instrument if we get it off the ground.
