What does it look like when an entire new dimension of existence and life is discovered?
Not just a continent, as in Columbus' encounter with the Americas in 1492, but an entire world
never seen before by humans. This is how the scene appears.
It is April 24th, 1676, in Delft, the third biggest city in the Netherlands,
the United Provinces, as they are called. Delft is a clean city with canals. Indeed,
the name of the town itself means canal. These canals carry high quality beer and an immense
variety of trade goods, especially Delftware, that graceful blue and white pottery made here in
Delft as a homegrown version of the exotic and infinitely expensive Chinese porcelain
which Dutch traders are bringing back to the Netherlands. Together, we stroll through Delft
and look in on the study of the cloth merchant Antony van Leeuwenhoek, as he examines an experiment
that he had launched using a microscope. The microscope has already been around for decades,
but Leeuwenhoek has improved the design through years and years of personal effort.
The aim of his original experiment was to find out why pepper tastes spicy. His hypothesis was
that pepper had tiny, almost invisible, but sharp hooks, and that this is what gives the
distinctive bite to a spicy dish. This is an awesome theory, but unfortunately turned out to be wrong.
Leeuwenhoek, however, discovers something else while testing his theory. He had soaked water,
pepper in water, for three weeks in order to soften it up and then looked at it using his
very basic microscope. In the water, he is astonished to see many living things in motion.
In fact, there are four different kinds, all amazingly small. He estimates that if he took
a hundred of them and laid them all end to end, they still would not be as big as one grain of sand.
Leeuwenhoek was the first to see bacteria, and in his lifelong occupation of exploring the
microscopic universe, the smallest world, he catalogued varieties, their habits,
motions, life cycles, and previously inconceivably small sizes. Leeuwenhoek was the first to see
microbes or microorganisms, red blood cells, bacteria, sperm cells, and mold spores.
Here's a nearly perfect symmetry to this discovery taking place here in the Netherlands.
Dutch society is in its golden age, often defined as 1570 to 1720. This is a new kind
of commercial society, marked by a degree of religious toleration and tolerance for new ideas
which are remarkable for their times. This society is also plugged in to an emerging world economy
through global trade networks, especially those of the VOC, the Dutch East India Company,
that deadly rival of the English East India Company, which we discussed in an earlier lecture.
Vast cargoes of pepper, cinnamon, cloves, coffee, sugar, and tobacco are flowing in
to be trans shipped or consumed here. This society is producing financial masterpieces
in its new economy, its stock market, and the Amsterdam Bank. With a population of only some
two million, the Dutch enjoy a standard of living that is the envy of most of the world.
The Dutch are also remarkably a military power, having won their independence from the Spanish
Empire after an 80-year long war, only ended in 1648 at the Peace of Westphalia. They are also
most distinctive politically. The United Provinces are a republic, not a kingdom with a dynasty,
but rather a federation of lands with a merchant elite. This is a society also producing masterpieces
of visual art, the paintings of Rembrandt and here in Delft, those of Johannes Vermeer.
The Dutch also produce technical equipment of the highest standard, especially when it is useful
for their sea voyages, equipment like telescopes. Around 1600, the first telescope was developed
in Middelburg, when a craftsman discovered that two glass lenses, like those used for spectacles
or for eyeglasses, put together could magnify far-off objects. These new telescopes were at
first actually called Dutch trunks because of the box-like shape of the first telescope. Actually,
telescope does sound much more scientific, doesn't it? The same technology was also used in Middelburg
to produce the microscope. It was this Dutch innovation that Leeuwenhoek used to discern
things that no one else had ever seen before because of their tininess. And in ways, this presented
a bigger discovery even than that of Columbus. That obviously was a discovery to Columbus and
Europeans, but those who inhabited the Americas knew very well where they were. Leeuwenhoek's
smallest world by contrast was a discovery for all mankind. As a founder of microbiology,
his discoveries resonate to our own times and our own bodies. This lecture will demonstrate
that discoveries take place often in a double context. On the one hand, they come out of the
individual inquiry and the hard work, genius, and application of particular people. On the other hand,
these discoveries also fit into a wider social or cultural context, and it's that context which
determines whether the discoveries are recognized, used, and exploited, or perhaps denounced, forgotten,
and discarded. This turning point was about new ways of looking at the world and the universe at
large, with vast implications for the status of the human being. One further thing which this
turning point did was to assert the dignity of the small. In contrast to the saying, bigger is better,
in our own times, we hear the counterpoint argument that small is beautiful. The modern
environmentalist idea of sustainability expresses this thought as well. But it was not always so.
Earlier in traditional art, especially before the use of visual perspective, if an artist wanted to
suggest to his viewers that symbolically something is important or more important than other elements
in the picture, often the way to do this was to depict that person or thing as really big,
dwarfing other features of the picture. This conveyed its spiritual or moral importance
in terms of physical size. The appreciation of the small, however, was already anticipated
during the Renaissance in Leonardo da Vinci's attention to anatomy and the astonishing details
to be found in nature. Levin Hooke's inquiries would also be followed by microbiologists and
especially by atomic scientists alike centuries later. What this turning point demonstrates
is a broader shift in intellectual authority concerning material things. Earlier, classic texts
by great scholars like Aristotle and Ptolemy or Galen for medicine or Holy Scripture were seen
as the final word on the universe, on the natural world. But now, by degrees rather than all at
once, authority increasingly passed from those ancient texts to experiment, to that which can be
demonstrated by the scientific method in a shift called the scientific revolution.
The scientific revolution was ultimately really about new ways of looking at natural phenomena.
Some historians argue that we should really avoid the term revolution, which sounds fast,
for what was really a long drawn out process, and that instead we should speak of a broad scientific
movement. Whatever term we use, it was a crucial shift. Scientific explanation pushed aside theological
or literal scriptural explanations of the natural world. In this sense, it precipitated a huge
transformation in human thinking. Some have argued, in fact, that this transformation was even more
profound than the Reformation itself. One could argue that we are still very much in this period
now, seeking constantly to assimilate the latest developments in many different fields of science
at once. This intellectual earthquake began more than a century before Levenhoek's experiments.
A key area was astronomy. The astronomer Nicholas Copernicus, born in Poland, overturned the small
and tidy medieval universe we described in our lecture on Columbus, those celestial spheres
harmoniously turning around the earth in perfect order.
In place of this earlier comfortable scheme, Copernicus offered a model of the solar system,
published in 1543 when he was on his deathbed. Protestant and Catholic religious authorities
criticized his model, which seemed to many to upset the traditional place of humans as well as the
divine. The Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei entered this debate when he learned of the Dutch
work on telescopes, remember the Dutch trunks. Finding the specifications, Galileo built one
himself and turned it on the nighttime skies to make ever keener observations of what was actually
out there, not just theorizing from text but working from observation. Galileo saw mountains
and craters on the moon. He saw moons around Jupiter and saw sunspots. These observations
suggested that the universe was a material thing and also that it was far larger that had been
understood before with countless stars, infinitely bigger than those cozy harmonic spheres.
For his championing of Copernicus' model of the solar system,
Galileo was brought before the Roman Inquisition of the Catholic Church,
before their tribunal in 1633, and they placed him under house arrest for the rest of his days.
Much later, in 1992, Pope John Paul II expressed regret for the errors and the proceedings
against his great scholar. As a crowning achievement, the work of the English scientist Sir Isaac Newton
was a synthesis of and advance on these earlier revolutionary ideas.
In his masterwork, the Principia of 1687, Newton outlined the principles of classical mechanics
and his three laws of motion, as well as the universal law of gravitation.
Now, the world itself came to appear ever more regular, more mechanically efficient
and orderly, explained mathematically on the basis of universal laws.
This worldview, replacing the earlier medieval one, has been called Newton's world machine,
and typified how the world was increasingly being seen until the impact at the start of the 20th
century of the discoveries of quantum physics that would upset this earlier scheme as well.
Now, clearly, these are familiar cases, Copernicus, Galileo, and Newton, and very often,
they're chosen as turning points in courses on turning points, but I'd choose in this lecture
to focus on Liv and Hook, because of how he shows, with such unexpected eloquence,
these new ways of seeing, observing, and measuring the basis of what would come to be called the
scientific method. The first systematic champion of the scientific method was an English scientist,
Sir Francis Bacon, who argued for rebuilding human knowledge by the inductive method,
proceeding from small and detailed observation of particular things, and then making generalizations
outward, rather than deducing from grand, great abstract principles. He was sure that this would
yield new human powers, useful to humanity. So, how did Liv and Hook exemplify and embody
this new science? We don't know as much as we would like about some key actors in these turning
points, like Ching He and Gutenberg, and so it is with Liv and Hook. His life and work remain
shrouded by several mysteries, but what testimonies we do have are very expressive.
Antony von Liv and Hook was born in 1632 in Delft, Holland. His parents were middle class
artisans, he was not a noble. His father was a weaver of baskets, perhaps baskets used to transport
that famous Delftware. The Liv and Hook family lived on a street called Liv and Port, or Lion's Gate
in English. Like the case of Gutenberg and Mainz, the family name probably came from where they
lived. Hook means a corner, so Liv and Hook is a corner on Lion Street. In 1648, at just that time
when the Peace of Westphalia, which we discussed in a previous lecture, was signed, Liv and Hook
left his hometown for an apprenticeship with a cloth merchant in Amsterdam. He did well,
and then he returned to Delft to run his own store. Liv and Hook, given his humbler origins,
did not have extensive formal education. He only spoke Dutch at a time when Latin was still
seen as needed for truly learned scholarly discourse. In 1660, Liv and Hook was appointed
manager of the City Hall of Delft, which meant that in some sense he had become a janitor.
But he was also made an inspector of weights and measures and a surveyor for the city, and all of
this seems to have been testimony to the trust that others placed in his skills for exact observation.
And then over the next 20 years, Liv and Hook took up, perhaps at first as a hobby,
the business of grinding lenses, and he became a master without equal. He produced tiny little
lenses, less than an eighth of an inch across, that were of tremendous power. They were nearly
spherical in shape, which gave them added potency. And Liv and Hook, using these lenses,
produced hundreds of microscopes. As with Gutenberg, who had been so secretive about his project,
the work of the books, as he called it, we really don't know in detail how Liv and Hook even did
his craft, because he kept it absolutely secret. Now, the instruments that he was producing were
not complicated and sophisticated mechanisms like the compound microscopes of multiple lenses
used in more recent times. Rather, this is what was called a simple microscope, with one lens
about the size of a pinhead set in a metal casing, only a few inches in size, that were to be held
up to the light. The sample to be viewed was set on a pin that was attached to the microscope.
The best of Liv and Hook's handmade microscopes magnified 266 times over, or even better.
But even more important than the equipment was the methodical use which Liv and Hook made of it.
He set about years and years of fine and repeated observation of almost anything he could get his
hands on. The head of a fly, the eye of a whale that had washed up in the Netherlands, the compound
eyes of beetles, even his own skin. Just to prove that no prophet is honored in his own country,
we need to mention that people in his neighborhood thought he was crazy. They apparently saw him
as a magician or believed him to be a fantastical storyteller who was always spinning crazy fairy
tales about all sorts of mythical invisible creatures. It's at this point that the collective
character of science enters the picture, and it involves English scientists. This very fact
is all the more remarkable considering that the Anglo-Dutch wars and the tensions between the
English and Dutch trading companies that we talked about in an earlier lecture were raging at precisely
this time, and yet scientific interest could bridge these tensions. The Royal Society of London
had been formally chartered by the King, just like the English East India Company had been.
It had been chartered in the year 1662, and Sir Isaac Newton was among its members.
One of the international corresponding members of this society was Rehnier de Graaf,
a doctor in Delft in the Netherlands. Dr. de Graaf was astonished with what he saw
in Levenhoek's study. In 1673, he urgently pressed the Royal Society by letter to request
that this man write to them about what he had found. At first, when Levenhoek did write letters
about what he had discovered, he was not believed by the English scientists, but then, when others
in England were able to duplicate his experiments and match his results that he had described in
his letters, he was honored and made a full fellow of the Royal Society in 1680. Over the course
of 50 years, Levenhoek wrote hundreds of long, rambling, astonishing letters to the Royal Society.
He wrote in Dutch because he couldn't write in Latin, and the letters would be translated
into English and then would be published in the Journal of the Society. The printing press,
in this case as in so many others, helped to spread word of the new discoveries with great speed.
Levenhoek, however, did not give the Society his microscopes, though they implored him to do so.
He always remained very secretive about them, and when demonstrating them to visitors, he always
proudly said that, oh, these were okay, but there were even better ones that he used only himself.
You really get the sense that he tremendously enjoyed tantalizing and even teasing his fellow
scientists. His experiments never ceased. He examined lake water and found it teeming with
animal cules, as he called them. Today we would say one-celled protests. It was becoming increasingly
clear that the heretofore invisible world outnumbered the visible world of plants, animals, and people.
In 1683, Levenhoek experimented by flossing his teeth. At the age of 50, his teeth were
untypically sound and healthy because he did something really unusual in those days. He
cleaned them daily. What he discovered on examining scraped plaque from his teeth was that there were,
as he put it, more teeming microorganisms in his mouth than there were people in the Netherlands.
When Levenhoek suffered an episode of diarrhea, you guessed it, he examined the results with
his microscope and predictably found life there as well. Levenhoek examined human sperm and discovered
red blood cells and saw the nucleus of those cells the first to do so. In his observations,
which he repeated again and again just to verify his results, he constantly engaged in
painstaking measurements. This raised a problem. What standard do you use to measure such tiny
things? He used units the size of a grain of sand or the eye of a louse. Now through it all,
Levenhoek seems not so suspected that microbes might actually be a source of disease. Certainly,
as we now know, he was seeing bacteria that were helpful to human life as well as ones that were
harmful. Levenhoek remained always profoundly critical in his outlook, always willing to change
his own ideas if proof could be shown to the contrary. Levenhoek argued against those who
believed at the time in so-called spontaneous generation. This was the notion that, for instance,
rotting cheese automatically produces maggots or that piles of dirty clothes that have been left
around spontaneously generate mice. In part out of a deep religious conviction that God had created
once and for all a universe that was whole and entire without such ongoing sort of spontaneous
creation, Levenhoek was convinced on the contrary that all creatures had parents like themselves
and life cycles all their own as well if you could only observe them.
To observe those life cycles, Levenhoek walked around with worms in his pocket and examined
them now and again. He asked his wife to keep insect eggs warm under her dress in the chilly
Dutch climate. It's very clear that his wife was a long-suffering, maybe even saintly spouse.
Levenhoek even kept a colony of lice inside his own stockings in order to observe them.
Until finally the itching became unbearable and that experiment got called off.
As his fame grew, many notables came to visit the man who was called the great man of the century.
These visitors even included Peter the Great of Russia and the Queen of England.
When Levenhoek died at the age of almost 91, his will ordered that 26 of his microscopes be
sent to the Royal Society. This was a tremendously generous gesture, as you'll remember he had
never shared his microscopes before. While alive, Levenhoek had avowed that his own work
was not for financial gain or to win fame, but rather as he put it, discovering the things that
are buried from our eyes and to satisfy a craving after knowledge. Let me point out how Levenhoek's
work fit into a specific social context. That context was the Dutch Golden Age.
The Dutch were proud of having formed their land out of constant struggle, a struggle with two
dimensions. First was the 80-year revolt against Spain with many bloody clashes and atrocities,
and they'd finally won independence in 1648. Second was the battle against nature itself,
against the sea. The Netherlands always struggled to reclaim low-lying lands from the tides,
to hold them back by building dykes, and to pump them dry using those windmills that soon became
a national symbol. This had an important implication. Because these new territories were
newly won, they were national property, shared, not the holdings of a feudal aristocracy alone.
In the revolt against Spain, many fiery leaders had been committed Dutch Calvinists,
but not all the Dutch were of that confession. There still remained a sizable and patriotic
Catholic minority, as well as other branches of Protestants as well. The result of this was that
the Dutch showed a measure of religious toleration and intellectual openness which set them apart
from the rest of Europe. This famous toleration became a magnet, especially for religious refugees,
in particular Jews fleeing persecution. Amsterdam came to be a famous melting pot
of diverse influences. The United Provinces also were something new in economic terms,
a society oriented towards commerce most of all, not towards agriculture, as had traditionally
been the case. The Dutch first came to dominate the Baltic grain trade in northern Europe,
then the shipping trade between northern Europe and the Mediterranean, and then they went global.
How astonishing it is to observe that so small a country could become the dominant trading power.
The Dutch East India Company, the VOC, was but one prominent example of that Dutch
worldwide economic power as they quested for prosperity. In fact, Leeuwenhoek was involved.
The day before he died, Leeuwenhoek was writing to the VOC about some geological samples they had
sent him in their quest for gold overseas. The Dutch thinker Huho Rotius, called the founder
of international law, actually crafted the doctrine of free trade on the seas at the
expressive request of the VOC. They felt they had most to gain from this philosophical statement.
Now, this famous Dutch commercialism could also have its lapses as during the famous tulip craze
of 1637, when a kind of mass hysteria set in in the Netherlands as ordinary people, as well as
the very rich, speculated wildly on the wealth represented by exotic tulip flowers, a market
that eventually crashed. But generally, the wealth just flowed and flowed. And oddly enough,
this created moral problems for a society often dedicated to austere religious doctrines that
were associated with stricter Calvinism. The character of this society and its complexities
is analyzed in a brilliant book by the British historian Simon Schama, entitled The Embarrassment
of Riches. Schama sees Dutch society in the Golden Age as being marked by a kind of troubled
conscience about, on the one hand, the enjoyment of wealth, on the other hand, versus the religious
call to repent and to deny oneself. One symptom of this complex was the famed Dutch cleanliness,
which struck contemporaries as extreme and even bizarre. The omnipresent sweeping and scrubbing
of the streets was an example. Clean and ordered home life, according to Schama, was a coping mechanism,
a way of dealing with the worldliness, the global riches that were swirling about this society.
In the rich Dutch visual art, the paintings of Johannes Vermeer and Delft stand out and indeed
speak to us today across the centuries with their sparkling use of light and their symbolic use of
detail. Many of Vermeer's evocative artworks fit into the tradition called genre painting,
the depiction in art not of haughty aristocrats and court life, but the lives of ordinary people
living in Dutch interior scenes. Actually, Vermeer and Leeuwenhoek were apparently close friends.
When Vermeer died in poverty at a young age, he appointed none other than Leeuwenhoek as his
executor. Many art historians also believe that the figure of the geographer in a famous painting
of Vermeer's is actually Leeuwenhoek posing for the picture. Some, but not all, experts also argue
that while Leeuwenhoek was experimenting with the microscope, his friend Vermeer was trying out other
innovative ways of seeing on his own for his art, using the Kamura Obscura, an early optical
projection device as part of his painting technique to use it to compose those powerful scenes that
he rendered in his paintings. Leeuwenhoek's turning point had striking long-term effects.
His recognition of this microscopic world was key to the development of microbiology,
especially the later development of germ theory. Writing later in 1890, the German scientist
Robert Koch would develop his famous postulates of germ theory, and the recognition of the power
of microbes for health or for death would spread. Ironically, in terms of public health,
the wider spread of the practices of that famed Dutch cleanliness were even more important.
In particular, the simple increased use of soap, so elementary but producing a radical
improvement in public health. Other scientists would launch into further investigations into
that smallest world in terms of atomic theory. Their work would of course be quite distinct
from the work of Leeuwenhoek, but was another aspect of the appreciation of the small.
What Leeuwenhoek's discoveries, which fit into that far larger trend of the scientific revolution
or scientific movement had accomplished, was to give intellectual authority to what could be seen,
measured, observed, and assessed over the earlier authority of classic texts.
This in turn would encourage our next turning point, the democratization of such findings and
discoveries through the quintessential project of the Enlightenment, the Encyclopedia,
giving authority to that which is useful, as we will see in our next lecture.
