Imagine a worldwide celebration on hearing of the end of a great injustice.
It's nearing midnight, and in a few moments it will finally be August 1, 1838.
By law, this will mark the end of slavery in the British Empire.
In Jamaica, a British sugar-growing colony, through the warm night, a Baptist congregation
has been waiting expectantly.
The clock ticks down to midnight, and at that precise moment in the little church, the tumult
is indescribable.
Jubilant the worshippers go outside, and there they bury a coffin symbolizing centuries
of slavery.
At just that moment as well, black congregations in Cincinnati and Philadelphia and mass meetings
in New York and cities in Britain all erupt in the same joy as well.
For millions, this was the turning point of their lives.
But how was it that the monster of slavery was finally killed?
Other turning points we've examined in this course involve scientific change, geographic
discovery, technological innovation, and political transformations.
This one is even deeper, a different kind of turning point, a change of heart.
For centuries before 1838, indeed only decades before, many people saw slavery not as an
abomination and a crime, but simply as part of the way things had always been, a seemingly
permanent feature of human society.
This change came through a movement of quite ordinary people, not the high and mighty of
the earth.
It included slaves themselves who struggled against the condition that had been imposed
upon them, it included British and American abolitionists, it included many acting out
of religious convictions, and it even included a former slave trader.
This remarkable movement, unprecedented and thus a key turning point of modern history,
began in the late 18th century, at a time when an estimated three-quarters of the world
population lived under some form of servitude or involuntary labor, slavery, or serfdom.
This movement did not succeed quickly or all at once, rather success came in gradual steps,
pushed along by social protest, and unfolding over several lifetimes.
A wonderful history, Adam Hochschild's Bury the Chains, makes a compelling argument that
this was, in a sense, the mother of all citizens' movements, into our own times, inventing crucial
tools for mobilizing public opinion and turning it into a powerful force.
Hochschild calls this the greatest of all human rights movements.
This will argue, was a turning point in the dawning recognition of human rights, universal
to us all.
Historically, what needs explaining is not the cruel fact of slavery itself, but instead
how it came to be seen as a crime, rather than normal.
It had earlier been seen not as a fate one would wish for oneself, but simply in the
order of things.
How could one change such a state of mind?
The movement to abolish the slave trade, and then slavery itself, had to be international,
as we'll see in this lecture.
The slave trade was tied into the expansion of European colonial world empires, and linked
with that emerging global economy based on commodities like sugar, tobacco, tea, and
coffee.
So it was global in extent.
Having this global phenomenon globally must have seemed daunting, if not impossible.
And yet, the movement endured, and then finally triumphed.
But it would prove to be a long, long process.
It is tragic but true that slavery, before the modern age, in many different forms and
under different names, has been an almost universal phenomenon.
New pre-modern societies did not have some form of slavery or forced labor.
In classical times, even Aristotle divided humanity into two great categories, slave
and free.
The monotheistic religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, even as they were preaching a new
religious message, did not call for the abolition of this institution.
In medieval Europe, traffic in human beings was practiced in the growing towns.
Often, these were young men and women from Eastern Europe who were enslaved.
Indeed, the word slave in English originally comes from the name Slav, the major family
of peoples living in Eastern Europe.
From 1200 to 1500, the trading empires of the great Italian cities of Venice and Genoa
did a brisk trade in slaves taken from the Caucasus mountain region through the Black
Sea and then sold them in the slave markets of Cairo in Egypt.
At the start of our course, when Constantinople fell in 1453, the remaining Christians were
sold into slavery by the Turkish conquerors, and Christian Europe took Muslims as slaves
in turn.
Later in the Middle Ages, slavery as such mostly disappeared in Northwestern Europe,
but serfs and peasants were subject to conditions of harsh servitude, and this was a pattern
that lingered for centuries longer in Eastern Europe where serfs were bought and sold as
unfree labor.
In fact, serfdom was only abolished in Russia in 1861.
Slavery came to the fore again as a phenomenon with the expansion of colonial empires, especially
after the encounter with the American continents after 1492, and we'll remember that this
began almost immediately.
Remember our lecture on Columbus, how he seized Native Americans whom he met to bring them
back to Spain to show off to his royal patrons.
And then, when Native Americans were decimated by the diseases that were part of the Columbian
Exchange, the Spanish began to bring slaves from Africa to Hispaniola around 1501, and
this established a new pattern of Atlantic slavery.
Slaves from Africa were forcibly taken to the plantations of the Americas.
This pattern endured for 350 years on the vast plantations in the New World where sugar,
tobacco, cotton and coffee were grown as global commodities by slaves.
The numbers involved are so vast as to defy comprehension, and the estimates are still
debated to this day.
From 1500 to 1820, it's estimated that between 12 and 15 million Africans were torn from
their homes and shipped across the Atlantic.
Such numbers mean that the movement of Africans easily outdistanced the number of European
immigrants coming across the sea until the mid-19th century.
Moreover, of that larger number, it's estimated that between 2 to 6 million slaves did not
survive the crossing itself.
How was such a vast commerce organized?
First in the 1600s, the Portuguese dominated this trade, but then other competitors moved
in.
The Dutch dominated for a while, and then the British, while Dutch, Danish and Swedes
continued to participate.
As we saw in our earlier lecture on the great trading companies of the earlier modern age,
these were big ventures with multiple investors.
In the British case, it was the Royal African Company which had received a royal charter
for this trade, and slaves in fact bore the brand mark RAC on their very skins.
Although no one country was able to totally monopolize the Atlantic slave trade, eventually
the British predominated.
From 1640 onwards, the British carried some 40% of the total slaves.
The French were next with some 20%.
At the peak, British ships were carrying 40,000 slaves every year.
This vast pattern of shipping came to be called the Triangle Trade or Triangular Trade.
Slave ships carried goods from England and Europe to West Africa, loaded up with a human
cargo there, and then moved across the Atlantic, disgorging those who survived, and then loaded
up there with a great commodities of sugar, tobacco and coffee, and once again sailed
for Northwestern Europe to begin the Triangular Cycle again.
This pattern was also further aided by the clockwise sea currents of the North Atlantic.
So European ports grew rich on slavery, including the booming port cities of Liverpool and
Bristol in England or Nantes in France.
A vast economy was built up around the slave trade, including those who made the goods
which were traded for human beings, those who built and outfitted the ships that transported
slaves, those who forged shackles for the prisoners, and those who resold the colonial
commodities that came back from the Americas.
Most of those who invested in the slave voyages and grew rich from them never actually set
foot in Africa or the plantations to which the slaves were shipped.
The slave ships headed to the coasts of West Africa, from what is Senegal to Nigeria today.
Slaves were usually brought to the coast by African middlemen and then offered to the
slavers.
Such prisoners were usually captives of wars, or had been reduced to slavery because they
were unable to pay their debts.
Human traders mostly bought them with cloth.
Especially cloth from India was desirable because it was lighter than English woolens,
so here we see another emerging global trade tie.
Also desirable were bars of iron, glass beads, manufactured goods like pots and pans, alcohol
and guns, and gunpowder, so a very elaborate pattern of trade in human beings developed
along the African coasts.
Slaves were usually unable to go into the interior themselves as they proved very vulnerable
to the tropical diseases.
This was a marked contrast to what we described earlier, the experience of the Columbian exchange.
Now the shoe was on the other foot in terms of infection.
The trade was a debilitating one for the Europeans in general.
Only one in ten employees of the Royal African Company who traveled to Africa actually managed
to retire alive.
For weeks the ships waited at the coast until they were loaded, or as the terrible expression
went, fully slaved.
Then began the horrors of the Atlantic crossing, what was called the middle passage.
Abhorred crowded ships, slaves were given only about four square feet of space.
Chained together so that it was harder for them to revolt, it was difficult for the Africans
to move about and the decks were marked by horrible conditions that bred epidemic disease.
The trip typically took about a month from Africa to Brazil, or two months from Africa
to the Caribbean or North America.
It's estimated that an average of 15% of the slaves died en route, often many more.
Ship crews also experienced very high mortality rates due to yellow fever and malaria.
Repeatedly desperate slaves tried to resist, over 300 mutinies took place on the slave ships.
Those who survived the passage were put to work in the plantations of the colonies, especially
the sugar plantations.
These had really taken off economically from around 1650 in the Caribbean islands, and they
generated a huge industry to feed the sweet tooth of the modern world.
Almost half of all Africans shipped across the Atlantic were sent to the Caribbean, to
Barbados, Jamaica, or San Domingue, now known as Haiti.
Sugar proved to be a deadly industry.
Work conditions were backbreaking and dangerous.
The cutting of the cane, then the fast turnaround time needed to process the cut cane into sugar.
The furious heat of the so-called boiling houses where the sugar was processed.
Most slaves were simply worked to death, often in about 10 years, and then replaced with
new human cargo from Africa.
Of the rest of the slave trade, about 40% of the slaves were shipped to Brazil.
North America actually received only some 5% of the total traffic, and actually saw a natural
increase in the African population, which was unusual.
As terrible as the conditions of slavery were in North America, the ones in the Caribbean
were even worse and fatal.
All of this reached its peak in the 1790s.
Up to this point, there had been isolated criticisms of slavery.
But a general condemnation of slavery is a recent sentiment in relative terms.
The Enlightenment, for instance, criticized many ancient institutions, including slavery.
Often these institutions were faulted for their irrationality and lack of utility.
But Enlightenment criticism had not been consistent.
The English philosopher John Locke, for instance, wrote powerfully about inalienable natural
rights and voluntary social contracts, but he also was an investor in the Royal African
Company.
But many thinkers did speak out against slavery along Enlightenment lines.
To remember an earlier lecture where we consider Diderot's Encyclopédie, that text condemned
slavery as a violation of natural law, and it said, if slavery was not a crime, then
anything at all could be justified.
The British Enlightenment economist Adam Smith saw slavery as less efficient, less profitable
than free labor and free trade, and the American Enlightenment philosopher Benjamin Franklin
had also been an abolitionist.
It was, however, religion that produced the beginnings of a truly mass mobilization against
slavery.
In particular, this involved the Quakers, the religious society of friends, as they
called themselves.
This group, which had been a persecuted minority in England, broke with the institutionalized
churches to gather in meetings of their own.
The Quakers saw fundamental equality in all people because of the immediate relationship
that each could have with the divine in a priesthood of all believers.
So it was from these beliefs that the Quakers, both in England and in the American colonies,
where many of them immigrated for a greater exercise of religious freedom, they spoke
out against slavery.
As early as 1688, Quakers in Germantown, Pennsylvania, condemned slavery and the slave trade.
By the 1760s, Quakers in Britain and in America were refusing to accept slave traders into
their own faith communities.
In Philadelphia in 1775, Quakers founded the world's first anti-slavery society.
It was around the same time in England that Quakers began to cooperate with evangelicals
within the Church of England, with Methodists and with Baptists to together work against
the slave trade.
In 1772, a legal case in Britain had prohibited slavery in the British Isles, so there were
no slaves in Britain at the time, but these activists were not content and had a global
outlook.
The result of this movement was a powerful partnership.
It included Thomas Clarkson, a tireless organizer, the politician William Wilberforce in Parliament,
and the African Ulauda Equiano, a former slave who had bought his freedom and had published
a best-selling searing autobiography about his experiences.
The first meetings of this group, which called itself the Society for Affecting the Abolition
of the Slave Trade, took place in a printing shop and bookstore in London in 1787.
This again underlines what we've seen before, the effect of printing as a means of spreading
the message.
This group decided to concentrate first on the slave trade, rather than working on banning
all slavery at once, even though ultimately this is what most of them wanted to see.
In Britain, abolition referred to the ending of the slave trade, and this makes the British
usage a little bit different from how we use the word abolition in American English to
mean the abolition of slavery.
Slavery itself seemed to these activists too socially and economically entrenched to be
overthrown all at once, so their hope was that by ending the trade, this would lead
to the gradual extinction of the practice as a whole.
The key organizer, Thomas Clarkson, had won an essay prize at university at Cambridge
on the question of whether slavery was lawful.
This had been just a theoretical rhetorical exercise, but when he'd written his essay,
he became obsessed with this question.
Increasingly, he felt that someone should do something about this.
And then with a shock, he realized he was the one.
His friends called him a moral steam engine.
Clarkson tirelessly traveled the country, collecting information on the slave trade,
gathering witnesses to testify in parliamentary investigations.
The movement's political fore, a voice, was William Wilberforce, a man who was tiny physically,
but who had a matchless, compelling voice and rhetoric.
He was a real political insider who had become converted to evangelical faith and now advanced
the legal cause of abolition in parliament.
It was also an unlikely recruit to the movement, a former slave captain, John Newton, who after
four slave voyages had experienced a religious change of heart and became a minister and
then a famous preacher.
In 1772, Newton wrote the most famous Christian hymn in English, Amazing Grace, which praises
the power of repentance.
But it actually took him many more years afterwards to finally denounce his past as a slaver.
He noted the moral effects on those who engaged in the trade quite apart from its sinfulness.
He noted a dreadful hardening of hearts on the part of those who participated in the trade.
Because many of the members of this movement were Quakers, and because many Quakers in
turn were merchants, this movement was itself very business-like, efficient, and innovative
in its tactics.
Activists worked to gather the dreadful facts of the slave trade and let those facts speak
for themselves.
They printed masses of pamphlets in many languages to convince an international audience.
In France, the Maquite Lafayette, for instance, helped start a society there for the same
aims entitled The Society of the Friends of the Blacks.
They pioneered fundraising letters by direct appeal.
The abolitionists also made great use of visual argument.
Here's the key example.
One activist was the manufacturer of China, Josiah Wedgewood, who became official potter
to the Queen.
His Wedgewood China, with its innovative product lines and marketing, remains famous and desired
today, and the firm that was founded in 1759 is still active today.
For the cause, Wedgewood used his talents to create an image for a medallion that became
an icon.
It showed a kneeling African in chains, asking the question, Am I not a man and a brother?
This image was soon everywhere, on pottery, on bracelets, on hairpins, on cufflinks, on
snuff boxes.
Benjamin Franklin actually praised this image as equal to the best pamphlet in the world
in terms of changing minds.
Another key winning tactic was using the role of women.
Women spoke up in public meetings on the topic, which was unusual at the time.
Women were also key activists in monster petition drives, huge petitions that were organized
to appeal to parliament.
The act of signing a petition was, in a subtle way, very democratizing, because people were
urged to sign up regardless of what their class was, regardless of whether they were
men or women, and regardless of whether they currently had the right to vote or not.
Remember, at this stage, even very few British men had the right to vote.
Women also organized the powerful Boycott of Sugar from 1791 to protest the slave origins
of this commodity, the largest British import.
The name Boycott would actually be invented later, but this was an effective early example.
It's estimated that in Britain, half a million people took part, and women, as the organizers
of their households, are the ones who made it happen.
Soon society at large was inflamed with this cause.
The message appeared in debates, newspapers, and even in poems.
In Parliament, Wilberforce pushed the cause.
His first speech against the trade was given in 1789, and Edmund Burke, the parliamentarian,
called it one of the greatest speeches of all time.
Parliamentary committees investigated the details of the slave trade in hearings, putting
powerful facts on record, and the facts were damning.
And in particular, one image, which you've probably seen, because it's reproduced in
almost every history textbook about slavery.
It is a print of the inside of one ship, a ship called the Brooks, owned by a Liverpool
family with that same last name.
It was a slave ship that transported people from the Gold Coast in Africa to Jamaica.
This famous diagram gave front, side, and top cutaway views of the inside, showing the
inhuman crowding on the ship.
Now in their care, not to be accused of exaggerating, the committee that prepared this document
even showed fewer slaves in their illustration than were sometimes carried by the ship.
They showed 482 people crammed in the hold, not the over 700 who sometimes were forced
into it.
That diagram had an electric effect, and to this day, it's one of the most reproduced
political images ever.
In Parliament, pro-slavery forces, organized as the West Indian lobby, rallied and advanced
some really ludicrous arguments in favor of continuing the institution.
But in spite of all of the moral engagement, the proposed bills failed again and again.
Legislation was blocked by the House of Lords.
But consciences in society had been mobilized, and at long last, Parliament did pass, in
the year 1807, a ban on the slave trade, which was declared a form of piracy.
This legislation did damage to the British economy, and some historians have even called
it an act of econocide.
That's to say, doing damage to oneself and one's economic resources.
But the moral argument trumped these economic considerations.
Soon after, the United States, the Netherlands, and France also prohibited the importation
of slaves, but it would take another quarter-century until the goal of freeing of slaves was achieved.
In the meantime, the British government took action.
This action intersected with a crucial political fact of the times, the supremacy of the Royal
Navy.
At this point, Britain truly ruled the waves as the superpower of its day, and it saw its
role as an international policeman to ensure the world order that came after the quarter
century of war with Revolutionary France and with Napoleon.
So for the next decades after 1807, even during those years when Britain was at war against
Napoleon, Royal Navy ships patrolled the slave ship routes to stop the trade.
At one point, a third of British Navy ships were involved in this exercise.
They captured many, but not all, slave ships.
Some slave ships, when they were pursued by the British Navy, would actually throw their
captives overboard as a way of destroying the evidence.
The Royal Navy did manage to release some 116,000 slaves.
But this was only part of the continuing slave trade.
Even after 1807, some 3 million more Africans were shipped, mostly from Africa to Cuba and
Brazil.
Many liberated slaves were set down in Sierra Leone, which became a British colony in Africa.
The British movement against slavery actually slowed down in the next decades.
It seemed to run out of energy, and some activists became content to be gradualists in their
hopes, until a new generation of women activists rose up to re-energize the movement and to
demand immediate abolition of slavery everywhere in the British Empire.
Slave uprisings in Haiti and Jamaica also helped convince many that emancipation had to come.
This finally led to the legislation in Parliament in 1833, which decreed the freeing of some
800,000 slaves in the British Empire, mainly in the Caribbean Islands.
That emancipation came in stages, and the owners of slaves were promised compensation,
even though ex-slaves got none.
But at long last, on August 1, 1838, the slaves were finally free.
At the ground level, even if economic exploitation still continued, the former slaves must have
experienced the moral difference in status from slave to free.
This must have felt profound.
It also needs to be noted that this does not end the story, or the crime of slavery indeed
was not ended all at once.
Ex-slaves continued to labor in hard conditions on plantations, but at least without the old
shackles, without the legal status of slavery.
Slavery however did continue elsewhere in the Americas.
American abolitionists, black as well as white, often traveled to Britain and cooperated in
a transatlantic movement for abolition.
Figures included William Lloyd Garrison and the former slave Frederick Douglass, but it
would take the U.S. Civil War, which exacted some 750,000 lives to finally free the slaves
in the United States.
The last open slave market in the Americas, in Havana, Cuba, was finally shut down in
1869.
Slavery stopped exporting slaves in 1870 due to naval interdiction by the United States
and Britain, and abolished slavery in 1886.
Finally, in 1888, slavery was also at last abolished in Brazil.
I wish that we could conclude right there, but that's not possible either.
Slavery continues today, in many forms of involuntary labor, on many continents and under
new names.
Today for instance, we would speak of it as trafficking, especially in women and children.
It is estimated that more than 20 million people are in servitude today worldwide, so
this anguish goes on.
But in the fight against this injustice, this legal abolition of the slave trade and then
of slavery was a powerful turning point.
That August night in 1838 brought great joy and comfort to the liberated Africans and
left a lasting legacy.
It created a new model for social mobilization, with key tactics and tools invented by the
abolitionists which could later be used by other movements spearheaded by ordinary people,
including today, whether for human rights or environmentalist concerns or countless
other causes.
In this lecture, we examine the use of legal means and state power to eradicate an evil,
and by a terrible irony, at almost the same time, legal means and state power were being
used to promote a deadly drug trade as a result of the British opium war against the Chinese
Empire, which we'll examine in our next lecture.
