It is early September in 1928 in London, fall is in the air, cooler days, and that feeling
of a new beginning as one gets back to work.
The Scottish biologist Alexander Fleming has just returned from vacation and is now cleaning
up his laboratory to prepare for a new season of research.
Before going on his holiday in late summer, he had been working with experiments with
staphylococci bacteria in small petri dishes.
So on September 3, 1928, he started to clean up, placing a stack of contaminated dishes
into antiseptic trays with antiseptic fluid.
But some dishes were out of the reach of the antiseptic.
In other words, this project was a mess, contaminated, unclean, with fuzzy growths, something that
really was in dire need of cleaning up.
Ordinarily, a laboratory assistant would have set to work then scrubbing and cleaning
and getting everything ready for a fresh start.
Instead, and this made all the difference, Fleming took his time and looked closely.
Because to his trained eye, something unexpected and interesting was to be seen.
He saw in one of the top dishes the greenish-yellow color of mold and surrounding it a kind of
open area.
The mold was somehow inhibiting the growth of the bacteria.
As Fleming investigated further, he discovered that the mold that had insinuated itself into
his experiment was penicillium notatum, a mold that under the microscope looks brush-like,
hence its Latin name penicillium or small brush.
What was happening around the mold was that the cells of the bacteria were breaking down.
Something the mold was producing was working to destroy bacteria.
This powerful substance, Fleming dubbed penicillin.
The antibiotic revolution was launched, giving mankind new tools in an eternal battle against
disease.
This scene illustrates the power of serendipity, finding something while looking for something
else.
And yet, it was not just chance that was at work here.
Fortune favors those who are prepared, and in the case of Dr. Fleming, those who are
attentive enough to take the time to look and observe.
Further, every discovery takes place in a larger context.
Fleming's insight needed to be made practically accessible and useful before it became the
turning point that saved millions of lives and transformed medicine into our own times.
In a real sense, the scene we witnessed, and will explore further in this lecture, was a
turning point within a turning point, a revolution within a larger revolution.
The advance of antibiotics took place in the larger context of the development of germ
theory, which revealed how many diseases worked to begin with.
Before effective therapies could be found, mechanisms of infection and disease needed
to be understood.
In just a few decades before 1900, germ theory overturned how we understood health and disease,
and how we envisioned human beings in relation to their environment.
We saw in a previous lecture how the microscopic investigations of Levenhoek had revealed microorganisms,
that smallest invisible world.
What was not understood was the importance of those bacteria for good or for ill for
human beings.
Over the previous centuries, indeed from the time of the ancient Greeks, health and disease
were most often understood in terms of the theory of humors.
The word humor comes from the Latin word for liquid or fluid.
This theory of humors postulated that all human beings were creatures in whom four fluids
mixed and operated.
These fluids were blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile.
Having more of one of these determined a person's temperament, sanguine, phlegmatic,
choleric, or melancholic.
Even in our own times, the terminology of this older theory is still with us.
We speak of someone as having a sense of humor, and we still speak of people being marked
by a temperament, whether sanguine, that is marked by blood, for someone who is lively
and sociable, or phlegmatic, for the understated and quiet among us.
Illness thus was understood as a loss of internal balance of these fluids.
If a high fever occurred, for instance, this would be understood as an excess of blood,
and bloodletting was called for.
Such a therapy is familiar from novels and movies about the 18th and 19th centuries,
and could involve the use of leeches to deplete an alleged excess of blood.
These aquatic worms were fastened onto the skin to draw off blood and restore balance.
In addition, contemporaries also believed that internal imbalances could be caused by
bad air, miasmas, as they were called, as a source of infection.
When we think of the theory of the humors, this older conception of the human body, this
theory has sometimes been compared to a hydraulic system, the body as a finely tuned machine.
In the decades before 1900, the authority of these concepts was overturned by medical
pioneers who instead advanced germ theory, the understanding that important diseases
were caused by infection with microorganisms.
This revolutionized pathology and surgery.
The pioneers of germ theory included a series of great scientists.
We already mentioned Leven Hook, but now his discoveries needed further interpretation.
By the 1840s, a number of physicians were noticing evidence for the contagious nature
of disease, being spread from person to person, not being caused by miasmas or clouds of bad
air.
One discovery was made by Dr. Ignaz Zemeweis, and it was a horrifying discovery for doctors.
He found that it had been doctors who had been spreading a deadly disease.
Zemeweis was a German-Hungarian doctor at work in Vienna, who noticed the high incidence
of so-called childbed fever or perperal infection among new mothers in maternity wards.
He was astonished at two wards that he visited, which had mortality rates respectively of
29% and 3%.
So seeking the reason for the difference, he discovered that in the ward with soaring
mortality, medical students who did autopsies went right on in to deliver babies and thus
infected their patients.
When he ordered all staff to wash their hands in chlorinated water, deaths from childbed
fever simply plummeted.
Another doctor, John Snow, traced deaths in London's cholera epidemic to one neighborhood
water pump and showed that cholera was a waterborne disease.
In 1865, Joseph Lister, a professor of surgery at Glasgow University, revolutionized antiseptic
procedures in surgery, and infections were reduced markedly as a result of these sterilization
procedures.
Indeed, Listerine mouthwashed was named after him in tribute.
The 19th century saw worldwide reform movements to create more hygienic urban environments,
to inspect food production, and to instill quite ordinary means of ensuring public health.
Something as basic as washing one's hands with soap turned into a revolution of its
own.
The great breakthrough came with the work of French microbiologist Louis Pasteur.
Pasteur's experiments proved that fermentation of wine and milk going bad were caused by
microbes.
Pasteurization was the process of heating foodstuffs to delay the action of microbes.
In other practical applications, Pasteur saved the wine industry in France, and the
silk industry where a disease had struck the silkworms.
Pasteur arrived at the conclusion that germs caused infectious disease. This was confirmed
in his investigations of an anthrax epidemic affecting sheep and humans in 1879. Pasteur
developed a vaccine.
At the same time in Germany, the German doctor Robert Koch was also studying anthrax and came
to the same conclusions. He also identified the bacteria that caused tuberculosis in 1882
and cholera in 1883. As a result, Koch won the Nobel Prize in Medicine for 1905.
Along with his rival Pasteur, Koch was a founder of microbiology and developed rules
for identifying specific microbes that caused disease. These are called Koch's postulates,
and they're still used as a guide today. They stated that you had to first identify
the microorganism that was always linked to a particular disease, then isolate that microbe
and grow it in the laboratory, then verify that it caused disease in a healthy animal,
and then be able to isolate it again in that new subject.
So here was the rigor of the scientific method applied to the new exciting hunt for microbes.
In his lab, by the way, Koch also chose an especially successful material on which bacteria
colonies could grow. This was an ordinary slice of the potato, that product of the Colombian
exchange from the start of our course.
In the hands of Robert Koch, the potato contributed to the triumph of germ theory by around 1900.
The message spread to ordinary people who became newly attuned to the dangers of microorganisms
and contagion, as well as to the reality that Leven Hook had long ago discovered. Germs
are everywhere, not least on and in each human being.
I want to mention one splendid and eloquent piece of evidence for the new thinking in
terms of germ theory around this time. This actually occurs in a novel by a figure we've
read before in our course, the British writer of speculative fiction or scientific romances,
H.G. Wells.
In 1898, Wells published one of his most famous stories. This was entitled The War of the Worlds,
and later was turned into a frightening radio broadcast by Orson Wells. In this story, we
see the earth invaded by Martians. This technologically advanced race sets down in their rockets
on the earth, and builds large tripod vehicles that are equipped with deadly heat rays to
attack the cities of the humans. The Martians drain blood from the humans that they capture.
London is nearly destroyed, and human weapons seem to be able to do little against the Martians.
The Martian invasion lasts for 12 days, and then suddenly stops.
Should I add here a spoiler alert? I'm about to reveal the surprise ending.
The narrator, by the end of the story, has lost all hope, and goes out just to die and
fighting against the Martians, but instead discovers that all of them have suddenly fallen
dead. The aliens had been killed, you guessed it, by germs. As Wells puts it, they were
slain by the disease bacteria against which their systems were unprepared. Slain after
all man's devices had failed by the humblest things that God in his wisdom has put upon
this earth.
So, for Wells, as a committed Darwinist, evolution played a key role, along with germs. Humans
through natural selection had acquired immunities, which the Martians did not have. In a sense,
this was the devastating epidemic dimension of the Columbian exchange from 1492 that we
talked about, but in reverse. What Wells calls our microscopic allies in his story had saved
humanity from aliens, at least for now.
From 1900 then, the hunt for bacteria and disease agents was an international and collective
scientific enterprise. Big advances in medical knowledge were due to cooperation internationally
through medical journals and worldwide conferences. It was a great fight. The microbes that caused
typhoid, diphtheria, tetanus, plague, and rabies were identified.
Once vectors of disease were discovered, it might be possible then to work methodically
to prevent them by vaccine or to cure them. Now the front shifted to fighting disease
that already had established itself. So the stage was set for a new kind of drug war. This
drug war would not be like the opium wars we discussed in an earlier lecture for narcotics,
but a drug war to discover healing medicines.
Impressive advances were made in Germany, which around 1900 was in its golden age of
medical research. The Nobel Prize-winning German Jewish scientist Paul Ehrlich conducted
work on the effects of chemicals on diseases. He was always seeking what he memorably called
the magic bullet, or sauberkugo, that would solve a medical problem.
In 1910, with a Japanese colleague, Ehrlich tested salversand, an arsenic drug that helped
destroy syphilis. The very name salversand meant saves through arsenic, a real but effective
paradox of the healing powers of a poison. Later, the German scientist Gerhard Domach
pioneered the first use of the sulfonamide drugs. Further advances seemed possible and
real.
A path breaking advance then came with that surprising scene of serendipity from 1928
with which we began this lecture, the discovery of penicillin. Who was Dr. Alexander Fleming?
How did the discovery occur? Fleming was born in rural southwestern Scotland in 1881 into
a large family, the seventh of eight children. Like Darwin, Fleming's youth was spent close
to nature, observing and exploring, and this shaped his later life and career.
When Fleming was 14, he was sent to London to school. For a while, he was employed in
a shipping business, but that only made clear to him that he did not want to spend the rest
of his life on a commercial career. Eventually, he followed an older brother into the medical
profession. From 1901, Fleming studied at St. Mary's Medical School in London, and
he later went on to spend the rest of his career there at St. Mary's.
He studied under the notable bacteriologist Almeroth Wright, the discoverer of the typhoid
vaccine. Once Fleming earned his degree, he went into private practice, treating syphilis
with a salversan which Erlich had invented. During the First World War, Dr. Fleming worked
in a military hospital in France, at a time when many lives were being lost to soldiers
being wounded in the trenches and then becoming infected as they were evacuated to the rear.
Fleming experimented with different antiseptic procedures in the military hospital, and found
strong chemical antiseptics actually often did more harm than good because they destroyed
tissue. On returning to St. Mary's after the war, he continued working on these antiseptic
questions. In 1921, Fleming made an accidental discovery
that Levenhoek would have much appreciated, and which really makes clear how good he was
at using accidents. While experimenting with bacteria, Fleming, who at the time had a bad
cold, saw that mucus from his nose fell into a petri dish, and instead of cleaning it,
he left it there to see what would happen. Do you see a pattern emerging here in his
research? Fleming discovered that the bacteria had been disrupted, and this revealed to him
the existence of lysosome, a natural human antibacterial enzyme that is found in body
fluids including tears. At this point, Fleming was already an established
and noted scholar, a successful scientist. He was soft-spoken, shy, often a bit disheveled,
and known for his eccentricities, not least the wearing of really dramatic bow ties. His
laboratory was marked by creative disorder rather than severe efficient regimentation.
So, if anyone complains to you in the future about the messiness of your office, just refer
them to the example of Dr. Fleming and his discoveries.
The entire building in which Fleming's laboratory was housed was not in the best of shape either.
In his lab, it was hard to open a window to get some air circulation, so Fleming kept
the door open, which connected with the rest of the building. As it turns out, this was
fateful, because down some stairs was a mycology lab, where experiments on fungus and molds
were being done at the same time. It was from down there that spores of mold had drifted
silently up and into Fleming's laboratory.
While Fleming was away for his late summer vacation, the weather turned unseasonably warm
for London, and this allowed the mold spores to reproduce where they had landed. And they
were ready for him to notice on that fateful day, September 3, 1928.
Fleming later declared, with becoming modesty, do not wait for fortune to smile on you, prepare
yourself with knowledge. Overall, he was understated about what he had done, saying,
my only merit is that I did not neglect the observation.
But now that the observation had been made, and this is a really important point, that
was not the end of the matter, it didn't finish there. Now the question arose of how
to use this discovery, how to develop it as a healing tool practically and in cost-effective
ways. For a time, Fleming continued to experiment with this new product. He isolated it and
diluted it, and was glad to find that even in small, small quantities, it was really
remarkably effective in stopping bacteria.
Fleming tried it out on mice and rabbits without ill effects, and that was good news
to as well. When he first discovered this strange substance, he called it mold broth,
or mold juice. Those were pretty good literal descriptions of what it was, but not as scientifically
impressive as the new name that he found for it, penicillin. And then, in 1932, Fleming
largely gave up active work on it.
Why? Fleming had made this individual discovery, but producing penicillin on a purified and
substantial scale was not what his laboratory was designed for. His own interests in fact
also tended much more towards noting new research findings, precisely what he'd done in this
case, rather than finding practical uses.
After a lag of some years, however, in a collective effort, the discovery was utilized more effectively.
This was done by Howard Flory and Ernst Hein at Oxford University. Flory was born in 1898
in Australia, became a doctor, then went to Oxford as a professor of pathology. On reading
an article of Fleming's about his findings, he decided to follow up on his research. In
a large laboratory at Oxford, Flory worked together with Ernst Hein, a German Jewish chemist
who had fled Nazi Germany, as well as other technicians and scientists. It really was
a large group undertaking, not a serendipitous venture by one man. Their work was also further
supported by funding from the Rockefeller Foundation.
This large team purified penicillin in greater quantities than Fleming had been able to.
They showed that they could cure mice injected with bacteria, and in 1940 they tried out
their product for the first time on a human being, a policeman who recovered from a very
serious infection as a result.
Research also extended to the United States. It was there in 1942 that the first person
whose life was saved was to be found. This was a native New Yorker, Ann Miller. After
a month at the New Haven Hospital, battling a streptococcal infection, she was at death's
door. Her fever was soaring to 107, and she was often lapsing into unconsciousness and
then reemerging, but nothing doctors could do seemed to help.
So in this desperate situation, her doctors got a small sample, the very first of penicillin
being produced in New Jersey and injected it into her as a final venture. Overnight,
the fever went down. By the next morning, she was not delirious and soon was on the road
to recovery. Mrs. Miller, in fact, lived another 57 years after that moment of medical history.
The next astonishing chapter in this story was how the arrival of the Second World War
created the desperate need for and the mobilization to produce vast quantities of penicillin at
breakneck speed. The American and British governments backed this effort. Howard Flory
even went to the Soviet Union, the ally of the United States and Britain, to help them
set up production as well.
When the invasion of France was launched with D-Day in 1944, vast quantities of penicillin
were on hand to treat the wounded. During the war, and in the difficult reconstruction
of a ruined world after the war, penicillin saved millions of lives that otherwise would
have been lost.
In 1945, the Nobel Prize Committee awarded a shared prize for penicillin to Alexander
Fleming, Howard Flory, and Ernst Hein. This was highly merited praise, but the drama ever
since of Fleming's accidental discovery has tended to overshadow the contributions
of Flory, Hein, and other members of the teams that had developed penicillin for practical
and extensive use.
After penicillin showed its potency during the war, other antibiotics were also developed,
part of that much larger antibiotic revolution. In 1944, American researcher Salman Voxman
developed Streptomyocin against tuberculosis, an ancient scourge of mankind. Now tuberculosis
was not eradicated worldwide, but much reduced and controlled.
Then in the 1950s came the development of so-called broad-spectrum antibiotics for a
range of bacteria not covered by penicillin. These were exciting and heady days, at a time
when it seemed reasonable to feel and think that medicine's advance was so successful
and relentless that soon perhaps all diseases might be wiped out by medicines that function
almost like magic bullets like penicillin.
In our own times, progress continues with the eradication of smallpox in 1980, and guinea
worm disease also likely to be eradicated soon. Efforts are continuing to wipe out polio.
And how good and pleasant it would be to end the story right there, looking forward to
the inevitable progress and improvement that continues. But the real story is actually
much more complicated and threatening. Already by 1946, Fleming, taking on sort of a role
as a talking head that he really felt himself into and enjoyed, Fleming warned that incorrect
use of penicillin could actually backfire on humanity. If the doses of penicillin that
were used were too small to absolutely really wipe out an illness, eventually he argued
bacteria would evolve to develop resistance to penicillin. This was a warning taken right
out of Darwin's teachings about natural selection that we considered as an earlier turning point.
And it's precisely what has happened and is happening since.
The very confidence in the seemingly miraculous powers of antibiotics led to their overuse
and misuse. Ordinary patients feeling a certain improvement once they had started a regimen
of antibiotics would then discontinue taking their medicines. Other patients craving the
reassurance of being under good treatment with powerful medicine insisted to their doctors
that they prescribe them with antibiotics, even in cases when antibiotics was not going
to be of any use, for instance, against viruses. So as a result, like Fleming predicted, we're
seeing more and more diseases that have developed resistance to entire generations of antibiotics.
As a result, in dire news, tuberculosis is making a comeback. Illnesses that decades
ago could be treated with penicillin pills may now instead demand hospitalization and
intensive care. Antibiotics also have been extensively used in livestock agriculture.
Indeed, much more antibiotics go to animals than to humans. In fact, in the United States,
it's estimated that 80% goes to livestock. And experts are warning of the possible dangers
of this use as well.
So the prospect before us is in many ways a frightening and discouraging one. The head
of the World Health Organization stated, a post-antibiotic era means, in effect, an end
to modern medicine as we know it. Things as common as strep throat or a child's scratch
knee could once again kill.
This is one other worry to add on to the anxieties of our present day, with the threat of global
pandemics or of the global transmission of diseases monitored by the Centers for Disease
Control. In a paradox, the ability of air travel that we discussed in an earlier lecture
as a turning point, the ability of air travel to move increasing numbers of people around
the world, with all the good that that can imply, also has inadvertently created another
effective vector for the widespread of disease.
A sobering observation to make here, thus, is that some profound historical turning points,
paradoxically, are not always permanent. They function, they have their results, and then
they can be overtaken by other great forces for good or ill.
Yet, in a sense, improved understanding is always a source of hope. This may be the case
in new ways of understanding the very existence of a human being biologically.
Before the advent of germ theory, the human body was seen, as we discussed, as a hydraulic
machine sloshing about with humors, those fluids that make us go and determine wellness
or sickness. Today, a new model is coming to the fore. This is a new vision of the human
being, in a sense, as an ecosystem, as an extensive environment. Each of us harbors
some hundred trillion bacteria of hundreds of species, many of them crucial to our digestion,
health, and life. Collectively, this is called the microbiome. Levenhoek would not in agreement.
And so one question we face now is, how better understanding of our own interdependence with
the larger microbiome might yield new strategies for health and fighting sickness?
At the same time as penicillin was coming into its own during the storms of the Second
World War, another turning point came with the unleashing of vast new power through atomic
energy, and this we will consider in our next lecture.
