In this fifth lecture of the series, we begin a new unit, lectures 5 to 8, that will focus
on the efforts of such neoclassical theorists as Horace, Longinus, Sidney, Dryden and Pope,
to discern, systematize and record for posterity the artistic elements and critical rules and
regulations that made classical poetry the envy of the world.
We begin in this lecture with a close look at Horace's verse epistle, The Art of Poetry.
After introducing Horace in his age, we shall enumerate Horace's rules and regulation for
writing great poetry.
With Horace, we now move into the second unit.
The first unit was classical theory.
This second unit, lectures 5 to 8, is neoclassicism.
In the writings of Horace, Longinus, Sidney, Dryden and Pope, we see a deliberate, self-conscious
desire to imitate the classical world.
The word neoclassical in Greek means new classical, and the neoclassical theorists, starting with
Horace and going right on up to Alexander Pope, look back to the classical age as their
model, and they're very deliberate and self-conscious in their imitation of the classical world.
Virgil's Aeneid would be neoclassical because it imitates the classical Homer, to give you
a poetic example.
Now in this lecture, we'll look at Horace.
In the next lecture, we'll look at Longinus.
Both of these men lived in the Roman world, and they looked back to the great writers
of Greece and attempted to assess why they were so successful.
So both this lecture, Horace, and the next one in Longinus are Romans looking back to
the Greeks and trying to figure out why their poetry was so great.
Then in lecture seven, we're going to jump way ahead to the Renaissance and look at Sir
Philip Sidney and his attempt to revive the glories of ancient literature and to defend
this revival along Aristotelian and Horacean lines.
Notice that Sidney now is not only imitating Aristotle, but he's imitating Horace.
So neoclassicists sometimes even imitate other neoclassicists.
They like to imitate and to try to figure out why they were great and move on.
Finally, in our eighth lecture, we will move to England and look at John Dryden and Alexander
Pope.
They lived in the British neoclassical age, which actually modeled itself on Rome, and
Dryden and Pope sought to do for their contemporary poets what Horace had done for his.
That is, systematize the rules of poetry.
Again, that's a brief overview of the unit.
So we'll pick up on all those themes, but I want you to see the relationship between
these thinkers.
This unit is the most spread out chronologically because it takes us about 1800 years, but
they all fit under this rubric and you'll see as we go through the unit.
All right, let me have a few opening comments on Horace before we look at his essay.
First of all, Horace was one of the great poets of Rome's Augustan age.
He was called the Augustan age after Caesar Augustus, the first emperor, some would say
Julius Caesar, but really Caesar Augustus, the first emperor of Rome, and he reigned
from 27 BC to 14 AD.
And his reign is known as the Augustan age, and it is the golden age of Roman poetry.
There are other great Roman poets later, but this is the golden age comparable to the fifth
century BC golden age of Sophocles.
Now this golden age included not only Horace, but Virgil, who wrote the Iliad, Ovid, and
two lyric poets, Proprius and Tobolus, and others, but those are the main figures we
associate with the Augustan age.
Horace, who was almost a leader of the group, was a master of the short lyric and the very
embodiment of wit.
Horace was not given to long epic works like the Iliad and the Odyssey.
He liked short lyric pieces that were very witty and had lots of turns of phrase.
And Horace is a poet who suffers greatly in translation because he likes to play on words.
It's not this wonderful narrative thrust of Homer, it's words, and so he does not translate
very well.
You really need to know Latin to really appreciate it.
Now in his age, the Augustan age, Horace became a model of the courtly poet who could
move around in high and even royal society without prostituting his talents or his arts.
This is something that's hard for us still living in a romantic age to believe.
We believe if we're writing for a noble, then we're going to be bastardizing our art.
Horace did not.
He made the rich people happy, if you will, and he wrote great art.
This is something we've kind of forgotten how to do, I think.
Horace can teach us.
Let's move on now to his work.
The work that he wrote, his contribution to literary theory, in Latin it's known as
ars poetica.
In English it's translated the art of poetry, and it does go by both names.
Now the art of poetry, although it is generally translated into prose, is actually what we
call a verse epistle, in other words, a letter written in poetry.
And this verse epistle is addressed to the piezo family, thus it's often called the epistle
to the piezos as well.
And the piezos were patrons of Horace.
In this letter, the art of poetry, Horace is purportedly giving advice to the two piezo
boys on how to write great poetry.
Although Horace did intend for it to be published, so to speak.
It's written to the piezos, but he meant it to be a public letter, very public man as
a poet.
Now the funny thing is, although it's supposed to be giving them advice on how to write
great poetry, it is really a none too subtle appeal to the two boys and their father to
give up poetry.
Today we would use the quip, don't quit your day job.
That is literally what he is saying to the piezo boys.
All right, you're trying, but he's saying it very subtly.
With much irony and wit, Horace advises the boys to put their poetry in a closet for
nine years before showing it to the public.
He's wonderful.
I've got to say, enjoy these neoclassical lectures, because this is one of the few places
where there's comedy in literary theory.
Literary theory is a pretty serious business, being philosophical and whatnot, but the
neoclassical people put such an emphasis on wit, that there's a lot of humor.
And again, someone that's lost in translation, but you can pick up on it.
If you read Horace carefully, you'll see what he's doing.
Horace is a master of what we call the ironic pose.
In fact, in his art of poetry, he expresses contempt for critics who flatter their patrons
instead of telling them the truth.
What is he saying to them?
Now, boys, I'm not going to flatter you, but that's because I'm a great poet.
In fact, you wouldn't want me to flatter you, because then I'd be a great poet.
Why do you want to patronize me?
So there's a lot of wit here.
It's very subtle.
I don't know if the piezo boys picked up on it.
We do.
And it makes it a more of a fun read, a lot of wit.
Now, in the art of poetry, Horace offers an influential view of the proper role of the
critic.
Now, we said that Aristotle showed the critic as someone who can inspire great art, but
Aristotle only does that indirectly.
I'm reading that.
It's there, but I'm reading it into it.
Horace actually states, he comes out and says, what the role of the critic should be.
And he says, in a famous definition, a critic is a whetstone against which poets can sharpen
their work.
Right?
A whetstone, you take a knife and sharpen it against the whetstone.
Well, that's what a critic, that's his function for poets to sort of sharpen themselves against
the critic.
The purpose of the whetstone, Horace says, is not itself to write great poetry, but
to teach the proper duty and office of the poet.
Now, of course, it turns out that Horace was a great poet, but you don't have to be.
He is saying that a critic doesn't have to be a great poet.
He just needs to understand it and appreciate it and be able to teach poets what their duty
is, what they should be doing as poets.
Now, part of this duty is to censure and edit poetry that either uses the wrong material
or handles that material in an inappropriate way.
That's the role of the critic.
And it goes back to that genre criticism of what is appropriate and what is not appropriate.
And it's the critic's job to point out what is or is not appropriate in case the poet
doesn't notice.
Now, you'll remember this word.
The laws that dictate what is and is not appropriate for poetry constitutes the central and foundational
notion of all neoclassical art, and you may remember the word was decorum.
Again, decorum are the laws that dictate what is and is not appropriate for poetry.
And neoclassicists are completely committed to the idea of decorum.
Let's look at some of Horace's specific rules.
At the heart of decorum, Horace says, is the stipulation not to mix unlike things.
In fact, Horace illustrates this in the very first rhyming couplets, in the very beginning
couplets of his verse epistle.
He lampoons the image of a mermaid.
He says, only a foolish poet would create a mermaid, take a fish and a woman and put
them together.
That breaks decorum because you're not supposed to mix unlike things, and so he makes fun
of that as being fanciful.
It's the product of a feverish mind, some crazy person making these concoctions that
shouldn't go together, breaking decorum.
Now more specifically, after giving us the comic image, Horace gets serious and attacks
poets who mix genres, who use, let's say, comic subjects as the basis of tragedy or vice
versa.
Now interestingly, the great Shakespeare breaks decorum.
Some of his tragedies have comic relief, and some of his comedies have tragic overtones.
Horace would not have approved.
Tragedy is tragedy, and comedy is comedy, and never the twain shall meet.
You don't mix genres.
That is one of the key points of decorum.
Everything's got its proper place.
Each genre should have its own style that is natural to it.
Again, there's that genre, the idea of there certain modes of imitation appropriate to
epic or to tragedy or to comedy.
There should be an unbroken, clearly defined unity of action, character and mood.
We don't want things breaking it up.
We want unity.
We want things that fit together.
Indeed, according to Horace, each genre should have its own specific meter, a meter whose
rhythmic sounds mimic closely the sense of the poem.
In other words, Horace gets pretty stipulative.
He says, if you're writing an elegy, a grieving about the loss of a person or a community,
you should have a metrical scheme that has an elegiac sound to it.
In other words, it should be long and mournful.
Or if you're writing something meditative, the sound of the poetry itself should be
meditative.
If you're going to do a serious tragedy, don't give me a sing-songy rhythm.
That is breaking decorum.
There must be a fittingness between the sound and the sense.
Those must go together as one.
Now, another aspect of decorum.
When writing on a traditional subject, quote modern poets or contemporary poets, must
be faithful to the literary precedents set by their poetic forebears.
In other words, what Horace gives an example, if you're going to do a modern portrayal of
Achilles or Aristides or Oedipus, you're going to do them again, you must be consistent with
earlier portrayals.
In other words, if you're going to write about Achilles, you better be consistent with Homer's
version of Achilles.
We don't want any revisionist myth-making going on here.
Now, Shakespeare breaks that decorum too.
I don't know if any of you have read his early play, Troilus and Cressida, but that is Shakespeare's
version of the Trojan War.
All of the characters from the Iliad are in there, but they are buffoons.
Achilles is a spoiled brat.
St. Elias, the husband of Helen, is merely dismissed as a cuckold.
It's amazing, for Homer and Horace must have been spinning in their grave.
So again, Shakespeare does not always follow decorum.
He breaks it.
But the real rules of decorum for neoclassical poetry says you must be consistent.
Now, this is interesting.
What Horace is doing here is two things.
First he is reiterating Aristotle's rule that tragic heroes must be both appropriate
and consistent.
He agrees, but what he's doing here is he's inscribing this within an accepted tradition.
So in other words, characters should be appropriate and consistent, not just because that's the
natural way of doing it, but because that's what Aristotle said.
So again, neoclassic people go back to authority and tradition, and they try to stick with
tradition rather than breaking with tradition.
Now, in addition to the notions of what is appropriate and what is traditional, decorum
also stipulates what is fit or proper to be shown publicly.
There's a lot of aspects and dimension.
Here's an aspect that deals with the stage, particularly.
According to Horace, gory, explicit scenes must be kept off the stage.
Such scenes of suffering should be related by a messenger.
In anybody that's a thespian, an actor, if you're ever in a Greek tragedy, you actually
want the role of the messenger.
See, in most tragedy, it's a thankless role, but not in Greek tragedy, because in Greek
tragedy, Oedipus does not blind himself on stage, Jocasa does not strangle herself.
You don't show that on stage, that's a break into quorum.
What happens is the act, the bloody act, the deed occurs off stage, and then a messenger
runs in, all wild, oh my, I have just seen the most horrible scene, and in beautiful
poetry describes the death of Jocasa or the blinding of Oedipus.
So actually, again, it's kind of a joke amongst actors, if it's Greek theater, you want the
messenger.
He only has one speech, but it's a juicy one.
Now let's think, does Shakespeare follow this rule?
Not at all.
Shakespeare loves to have death and destruction and mayhem all over his stage.
Now part of the reason is because he's appealing to the aristocrats and the poor people, right?
He's got a wider audience, he's not a courtly, just a courtly audience, there's the poor
people in the gallery.
The best example of a gory scene that would have horrified Horace, many of you know the
play King Lear.
There's a scene in King Lear where the evil cornwall blinds Gloucester, and he actually
plucks his eyeballs out.
And there's a scene on stage where he plucks out his eyeball, throws it on the ground,
and I think steps on it while he says, out vile jelly, where is thy luster now?
This is a definite break in decorum.
All right, another rule of decorum.
Related to decorum is Horace's famous comparison of poetry to painting.
According to Horace, just like with painting, some poems are best viewed close up, while
other poems are best viewed far away.
And that's sometimes true with painting.
Think of impressionist paintings.
You do not want to stand right up to them, right?
You have to stand back to get the right perspective.
Well he said that it's the same way with poetry.
Some paintings are seen better in shadows, others are better in light.
It's the same thing with poetry.
That's not exactly decorum, but it's related to decorum.
Now I should say here that in later neoclassical theory, a lot of people pick up on this idea
that a poem is like a picture, and they really go overboard with it, and I think they really
took it out of its context and made it sort of static.
I don't think Horace meant to say poetry and painting is the same thing.
He just wanted the analogy I made of close up or farther away, but that's something
that becomes a type, I suppose, of neoclassical theory.
You get to hear it a lot.
All right, those are the rules of decorum.
But Horace lays down a lot of other rules, and I'd like to survey those as well.
First of all, after his view on decorum, Horace is best known for his stipulation that the
proper end or goal of poetry is to please and teach.
The Latin dulce et utile, dulce suite, utile, utilize it, so a poem should both please and
teach.
Now you'll remember, lecture one, when I told you that's an aspect of pragmatic theories.
Member pragmatic theories are interested in the relationship between the poem and the
audience.
And Horace is moving into pragmatic theories because he's interested in the impact of his
poem.
Does it teach and does it please?
And that's one of the criteria he uses for good poetry.
That is a pragmatic criteria relating to the audience.
Now the way he explains teaching and pleasing, Horace says that old men insist that poetry
teach morality.
Old men, on the other hand, insist that it should please and entertain.
Well, Horace says the best poets will combine the two.
They can make everybody happy if they not only entertain, but through the entertaining
teach some moral.
Now the quote bastardized version of neoclassical theory is the idea of the sugared pill, Mary
Poppins.
It takes a spoonful of sugar to help the medicine go down.
And there is some truth to that, but that's unfair.
That's kind of being nasty and trying to reduce them to something they aren't.
But there is some truth.
I mean, through entertaining, we are taught.
It does work.
And by the way, Americans believe that they should learn through Cuba.
If you go to Europe, you don't have to make jokes as a professor.
You're going to fail in America if you don't tell jokes.
So in that sense, oddly, we agree with that, that you've got to teach and entertain.
Now Horace says that poets who do this successfully will win both fame and fortune.
If you can teach and please, it's practical too, because people will patronize you.
To best achieve this goal, poetry should be both concise and realistic.
Neoclassical theorists like concision.
They like short poems.
Now Virgil, of course, wrote on epic, but most neoclassical poetry is short because
it believes in wittiness.
It's through wittiness, through maxims and proverbs that you can teach and please.
Realistic, they believed that the work of art must be true to nature and to human nature,
or it won't teach and please.
So neoclassicists are not into fanciful kind of things.
That's more romantic.
They're into something that's realistic and that's true to life.
Alright, Horace also laid down some rules for drama, specific rules for drama that have
been very influential.
First of all, according to Horace, plays and also epics should not begin at the beginning,
but should plunge into the middle of things.
Don't begin your epic or your tragedy with the beginning of the story, the birth of Oedipus.
Begin in the middle of things.
The famous Latin phrase, and maybe I'll stress, many of you probably have learned that before.
Do not begin at the beginning, begin in the middle.
The best example would be a tragedy first, Oedipus.
Oedipus does not begin with his birth, it begins with that day when he discovers who
he is.
It's beginning in the middle of things.
What about the Iliad?
The Iliad is purportedly about the Trojan War, but it actually starts in the last year
of the Trojan War.
It begins and maybe I'll stress, rather than beginning at the beginning.
And here's something people don't realize.
He said the Latin phrase for in the beginning is ob ovo, which means from the egg.
And it's a reference to Homer's Iliad, because the real source of the Trojan War was when
Helen was stolen away.
And because Helen was born of Zeus in the form of a swan, raping Lita, Helen was born
as an egg out of which she hatched.
So don't begin from the beginning, from the egg ob ovo, jump and maybe stress like Homer
did or like Sophocles did.
Another quick one, plays should consist of five acts.
There's something we see in Shakespeare.
Modern people change that, but for a long time plays were five acts Horus decided that.
Also, they should not end with Deus ex machina.
In this sense Horus agreed with Aristotle, no Deus ex machina.
One, the chorus and choral songs should serve an integral function.
Now I haven't had much time to talk about the chorus, but the chorus in a Greek tragedy
would comment on the action.
They would sing or chant to the action.
Now what he said is, when you use a chorus, don't just have them merely commenting as
like a relief, whatever they say should be organically linked to the play itself.
This is another idea of unity, of organism.
The best example is Broadway musicals.
All Broadway musicals were not very unified.
You'd have the story and then a song and they would not be linked together.
Rodgers and Hammerstein, very Horation, were the ones in Oklahoma to completely link the
choral songs to the plot of what's going on.
That was a very Horation move that Rodgers and Hammerstein did when they integrated the
chorus into the action, rather than just saying, let's stop for a song and go back.
So that's very Horation.
Now the above four criteria again express an organic view of drama and of poetry in general.
Again, you notice Horace's influence by Aristotle.
Like Aristotle, Horace insisted that each part of a play be directly and intimately
related with all other parts and with the work as a whole, an organic whole.
All right, two more quick bits of Horation advice that have entered our language.
I bet you've heard this, but didn't know where it came from.
First, Horace counsels against tacking on elaborate, unnecessary descriptions merely
to impress your readers.
He calls these excrescences purple passages.
I don't know if you've ever heard that.
Young poets and writers love to throw in these descriptive passages that have nothing to
do with going on just because they like the sound of it.
That's called a purple passage, and that's something Horace invented for people that
use heightened language without any reason to.
That's a purple passage.
The second one, Horace also counsels against starting your work with epic promises.
Don't promise to do great things and then not deliver, because if you do, people will
say the mountain labored and brought forth a mouse.
There's an example, by the way, of Horace and Whit.
Notice a nice turn of phrase.
That one translates well, others don't as well.
That one does fine.
Finally, Horace comments in his art of poetry on the nature and the duties of the poet.
According to Horace, the true poet combines genius and art.
That is, he has an inspired craftsman.
Both of them are important.
In this sense, he is like an athlete who needs both native ability and rigorous training.
To a certain extent, you've got to be born an athlete.
You've got to have the capacity that you're born with, but if you don't also practice
and train yourself rigorously, you're not going to be a good athlete.
The same is true with the poet.
To a certain extent, you're born with it, but if you don't practice the craft, you're
not a poet.
Indeed, I really would say that for neoclassical people, they tend to put art just a little
bit above genius, because they're really into rules and regulations and doing it with decorum.
The artisan poet above all must never be mediocre.
If you're a mediocre poet, the neoclassics are going to cut into you with wit.
You better watch out.
They said, while a mediocre lawyer might still win his lawsuit, Horace says, if you're a
mediocre poet, you're a laughing stock.
You might as well put it in the closet for nine years like he told the piezo boys.
The best poets, Horace says, make it look easy.
Their works are so perfect and unified that the reader feels he could do the same, though
of course he could not.
But that's the sign of great poetry to a neoclassicist.
When it looks easy and simple, but if you tried to do it, you couldn't.
Read Oedipus the King.
Everything is so simple and straightforward in that play.
Try to do that.
You'll never be able to.
So that's something neoclassical.
Make it look easy.
Now the role of the poet, Horace admits, is difficult, especially the role of the dramatist
who's on a public stage, because he has to please an often vulgar crowd while staying
true to his art, sort of like Horace, please the rich people, but also don't prostitute
your art.
Well also, I mean, if it's on stage, you've got poor people there too, people that are
unlettered, so to speak.
So again, it's very difficult because you need to be able to please all different people.
See, Horace was very conscious of the social role of the poet, and he's got to realize
that he is a social figure, and he has got to please society.
Finally, he's got to make a living without letting the love of money taint his soul.
That's very hard to do.
Again, most people, if they got money from the government, would get maybe a little bit
sloppy and say, I don't have to really, you know, to strive.
Horace said no.
Horace understood.
And I remind you again of Shakespeare, who was able to make everybody happy, to appeal
to everybody.
Again, an amazing talent.
And finally, Horace provides us with two contrasting views of the poet.
There's a negative view and a positive view.
Now the negative view depicts poets as grubby, bearded, unkempt leeches driven wild by their
poetry and eager to waylay innocent bystanders into listening helplessly as they spew out
their mad verses.
Some of you may have had a friend like that.
They just grab you and say, listen to my newest poem, and you're stuck.
It's like if you've ever read The Rime of the Ancient Mariner.
It is an ancient mariner and he's stuck with one of three by that long gray beard and glittering
eye.
Wherefore, stop his thou, me, this old guy, grabs onto you and makes you listen to his
story about his sea journey.
So that's the comic view.
That's a negative view.
And actually, the negative view sounds a lot like Plato's possessed poet, doesn't it?
The mad poet who doesn't cut his hair or cut his fingernails is just always dirty and
grubby.
And a lot of people feel, nowadays, that's what a poet should be, right?
Horace contrasts this with a positive view.
And I would argue that his positive view is meant as a rebuttal to Plato.
He leads us in with the negative view and then ends with the positive view.
The positive view is that the poet is the great civilizer of humanity.
He tamed the beast within and established cities, laws, and moral rules of conduct.
In other words, this idea that poets are the ones that not only create poetry, but they
create society out of their imagination.
Some of you know the great myth of Antheon.
The story, do you know how the walls of Thebes were built?
The story is that Antheon played his pipe so beautifully that the stones moved of themselves
to form the city of Thebes.
Here is an idea of poetry.
We say today, music calms the savage beast, right?
You're familiar with that cliche.
It's kind of that idea that poetry civilizes us and makes us better people.
It sets down rules of conduct because it can teach and please.
Indeed, the poet for Horace is in some ways a divine oracle, a mouthpiece of the gods,
and he deserves honor and fame.
This may be a little cut on Socrates.
If any of you have ever read Socrates' Apology, Socrates said that philosophers should be
put on the public dole because they're great public servants.
He might be sort of playing with that and saying, actually, poets are the ones who are
due honor and fame.
Now, we will encounter again this ennobled, almost deified view of the poet.
In The Great Defenses of Poetry, we'll look at, later on, Sidney and Shelley both wrote
Defenses of Poetry, and part of their defense plays on this Horacean idea that the poet
is actually a prophet, a divine person, somebody that forms civilization.
We will see that idea, again, elaborated more fully.
All right, in our next lecture, we will turn to Longinus and look at his definition of
what sublime poetry is.
