Lecture 14, Mr. Wordsworth's Preface
Lecture 14 will be devoted to a close analysis of Wordsworth's preface to lyrical ballads.
We shall explore how Wordsworth radically redefines both the nature of poetry and the
poet, and the function of poetry and the poet in society.
We shall conclude with a brief look at Keith's famous distinction between negative capability
and the egotistical sublime.
But first let me remind you again that lyrical ballads was published in 1798.
The preface does not come until the second edition of lyrical ballads in 1800.
And the reason was that the first edition did very well, and a lot of people said, you
know, I'd like to know what these poets were thinking about.
Is there a theory behind this?
Now really, Coleridge should have been the one to write the preface.
He was the much more critical and philosophical of the pair.
But Coleridge had a way of putting things off and being a little bit slothful, and so it
fell to Wordsworth.
And that may have changed history, because Wordsworth was not first and foremost a critic,
but this sent him in a critical way that he probably wouldn't have gone if Coleridge
hadn't turned the buck, or so to speak, over to Wordsworth.
Now in his preface to lyrical ballads, Wordsworth redefines the nature and status of poetry
along expressive lines.
Once again, expressive theories interested in the relationship between the poem and the
poet.
Rather than treat poetry as an imitation of an action, in other words, mimetic theories,
or as an object fashioned to teach and please a specific audience, that's pragmatic, Wordsworth,
who was expressive, sees poetry as a personal reflection of the poet's interactions with
himself and his world.
Again the idea of poetry as self-expression, which today is basically taken for granted.
This is invented by the Romantics, that concept.
Of course, this is not to say that Wordsworth is unconcerned with imitating or with teaching
and pleasing.
He is very much, as we'll see later in this lecture, but that these theoretical concerns
imitation teaching and pleasing now are going to flow directly out of his view of the poet.
So he's interested in imitation and teaching and pleasing, but he now looks at those things
from a new perspective or point of view that of the poet.
As we saw in our previous lecture, it is not the rules of decorum anymore, but the visionary
imagination of the poet that is now to become the source and end of poetry.
In a famous phrase, Wordsworth defines poetry as the spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings.
That is to say, as an externalization of the internal emotions, moods, and perceptions
of the poet.
You'll remember from our last lecture that phrase externalization of the internal.
The poet takes what is inside of him and projects it or externalizes it onto the world.
The spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings is the feelings inside are overflowing and
spilling onto the page onto the world.
Again, this is a radically different concept of what poetry is.
Indeed, Wordsworth's nature poetry is less a reflection on nature than on the feelings
and ideas excited in the poet as he contemplates nature.
There's a very bad stereotype that romantics are all nature lovers running around like
nature boy hugging trees.
Now they care about nature, but it's not so much nature that their poems are about as
their experience of nature, their reflection on nature.
So that's slightly a misnomer.
They do care about nature, but the way we think of it is again really a misnomer.
Heck, even in his more narrative poems, Wordsworth asserts that it is really the feeling that
gives importance to the action and not vice versa.
In other words, the feeling is what we're looking for.
The action can be anything.
The action doesn't determine the feeling.
The feeling determines the action.
I want you to notice this turns Aristotle on his head.
Remember Aristotle said plot is more important than character?
Well if Wordsworth wrote about drama he didn't, but if he wrote about drama he probably would
have said character is more important than plot.
It's not the action, but the feeling that is at the heart of poetry.
Nevertheless, as I suggested before, there is a strong mimetic element towards Wordsworth's
theory.
Although he's interested in expressive, there is a mimetic element.
I'll explain.
Wordsworth often wrote on rustic subjects not so much because the country made him feel
good, but because in such a setting he felt that men were more in touch with elementary
feelings and durable truths, and it was these essential passions, this emphatic, unmediated
kind of life that Wordsworth wanted to capture and embody in his poetry.
There is something he wants to imitate, that he wants to incarnate, that he wants to embody
in his poetry.
And it's a kind of life or a kind of experience.
He felt that rustic life, because it was in touch with nature, was in touch with something
that was more eternal.
We all know that in the countryside things change very, very slowly, whereas in the city
it's the new fad, it's the new fashion, it's whatever is fashionable today, whatever Madison
Avenue tells us is up.
Romantics don't like that.
Romantics want things that stay the same.
Now that's not to say they're quote conservative, they're actually more liberal the way we define
it.
But what it's saying is that they want to get at the essence of things.
They want to get to what is emphatic, and unmediated, and direct, and true.
And Wordsworth found that in the countryside more than in the city.
Indeed, for Wordsworth and all romantics, the city court life of the 18th century poets
was something to them artificial, insincere, and out of touch with the wellsprings of our
most humanity.
Again, they don't like the city, Jean-Jacques Rousseau agreed with that.
We want to get away from the city, we want to get to what is authentic.
If you want to see a great romantic movie, see the French movie Jean de Florett.
It's about a man who leaves the city to seek what he calls the authentic.
He is a true romantic, seeking the authentic.
To sum up, Wordsworth looked both to the freer life of the country and within his own
heart for real passions and truth.
The way he can be both expressive and have a memetic element is that when he looked inside
of his soul, he saw that same eternal nature that he saw on the countryside.
And so both of those things come together in Wordsworth's poetry.
Wordsworth agreed with Aristotle and with Sydney that poetry is more philosophical than
history because it deals with both specific facts and general truths.
So maybe we say he finds his specific facts in the countryside, but he wants to link them
to general truths, to eternal things, things he finds that are even deeper than what he
sees in the country and deep inside of himself.
Again, another thing of what I'm trying to say is that for Wordsworth, self-expression
is not an end in itself, but a means to reach that which is most permanent and universal.
You see, today I really believe that we've gone too far.
Today people believe that self-expression is an end in itself.
They think that all they have to do is express themselves and that's worthy of art.
The romantics didn't really go quite that far.
Again they opened the door for it, but for Wordsworth, again, self-expression is not an
end in itself.
He's using self-expression to get at eternal truths.
Again, that makes romantics different than the post-romantics of the modern era.
That is, Wordsworth's poetic version of Kant's subjective universality.
Because Wordsworth believes that in describing his own feelings, the poet describes the
feelings of all men.
In other words, Wordsworth felt by exploring his subjective experience, by getting his
ideas onto the page, he felt he was also expressing what all men believe.
And that's why it's important that Wordsworth is not a self-expression that's cut off from
everything.
Wordsworth's self-expression is linked into, again, the eternal unchangingness of his beloved
Lake District.
I hope that makes sense.
I want to make a distinction between, again, modern self-expression and original romantic
self-expression.
Alright, just as Wordsworth sought to imitate the life and passions of his native Lake District,
just so he sought to imitate the simple, direct language of the country.
He not only wanted to capture their manners and their view of life and their traditions,
he also wanted to imitate their way of speaking.
Wordsworth rejected, to him, phony poetic diction of the 18th century with its purposely
contorted syntax and its artificial poeticisms.
You see, when a romantic reads Pope and the other ones, he sees their poetic diction as
phony.
Now, again, maybe that's not very genial because to an 18th century person, that's what a poet
is supposed to do.
In other words, he's supposed to write a poetry that's a totally different language.
We would say with these and vows, I mean, that's kind of the way, you know, the language
turned around and syntax all mixed around.
In other words, to an 18th century person, he wants you to know that it's poetry, okay?
Let's put it that way.
But again, the romantics, again, reject everything that to them seems artificial about the 18th
century, and he believed their manners, their way of life, and even their poetic diction,
the way they wrote poetry, was to the romantics, especially Wordsworth, artificial.
And so, Wordsworth adopted a more natural, less mannered style that mimicked the syntax
of good prose.
He called it the real language of men, that's a famous Wordsworthian phrase.
Again, he actually said that good poetry is not that different from good prose.
Interesting, because what he's saying is he doesn't want a poetry with contorted syntax
all over the place.
He wants it pure and unmannered and natural, the real language of men.
Now, when, 17 years later, Coleridge wrote his own version of the preface in his Biographia
Literaria.
When he wrote his autobiography of Biographia Literaria, Coleridge tried to go back and
fix up the mistake that he made in not writing the preface himself.
By then, Wordsworth and Coleridge had a falling out, unfortunately.
And he would quibble with the phrase, the real language of men, saying that Wordsworth
went too far in his praise of rustic manners of speech.
Oh, he says, that's not true.
Well, I really think Coleridge is being a little unfair to Wordsworth.
He's taking it too literally.
Because just as Wordsworth tempered his expressivism with a mimetic focus on truth, in the same
way he tempered his celebration of the so-called real language of men.
The poet, Wordsworth asserts, should not slavishly imitate the rustic, as Coleridge
seemed to think he meant.
But through a process of selection, purge his natural speech of its grossness.
In other words, poor people sometimes use a lot of profanity and whatnot.
Wordsworth is not going to put that in.
He's going to purge it, and he's going to purify it.
So again, Coleridge, again, took it a little too literally.
When he said real language of men, he meant a simple, unsophisticated kind of speech.
But again, purified.
All right, let's continue.
Just as Wordsworth redefined poetry, both subject-wise and language-wise, in the same
way, Wordsworth offers us a new vision of the poet himself.
For Wordsworth, and all the romantics, the questions, what is a poem, and what is a poet,
are considered synonymous.
If you understand what the poem is, you understand what the poet is, and vice versa.
And so, just as poetry is to be written in the real language of men, just so, excuse
me, the poet is to be a man speaking to men.
That is to say, the poet is not to be viewed as a different creature.
He is of the same kind as all other men, though he does differ in degree.
In other words, the romantics want to break from this 18th century idea of the coterie
of poets, as poets as an elite little group that meet together and read each other.
Again, they want to break from that idea, though the poet is like every other man.
He's a real man.
He's a man speaking to men, but he differs in degree.
He's like all men, but he has a little bit more, again, breaking from the 18th century.
What is this degree that the poet has?
What is it that he has more than other people?
Well, the poet, Wordsworth says, possesses a more organic, comprehensive soul than do
other men.
I love that phrase.
Organic more comprehensive.
In other words, he's got a bigger soul, we might say, that can just take everything
into it.
He has, Wordsworth says, a more lively sensibilities and is more in touch with his feelings.
This modern idea that the poet should be sensitive and, you know, that's very much a romantic
idea.
That's not to say 18th century poets are insensitive, but the romantic wants the idea that they
have lively sensibilities, that they're in touch with everything.
Another way to put this, the romantic poet needs little stimulation to experience deep
emotions.
He's so sensitive to things, the tiniest touch, a sunflower, opens his heart.
Indeed, he is able to feel absent pleasures as though they were present.
He doesn't even need it there.
The memory of beauty will inspire the sensitive, comprehensive soul of the romantic.
He rejoices, Wordsworth says, in his own spirit of life and seeks to discover that joy in
the world around him.
And you know what?
If he can't find the joy there, he will create it.
He'll take the joy inside of him and put it in the world.
He wants joy around him.
The romantic poet has a rich store of memories that he can tap for poetic inspiration.
Romanticism is very much based on memory, on personal memory and bringing that up, being
able to tap it.
And the romantic poet is not only able to call up the memory, he is actually able to
relive his memories and the emotions attached to them.
Much of Wordsworth's greatest poetry is a memory of his childhood.
Wordsworth was able to actually re-experience his childhood with all those emotions that
were attached to it.
That's how sensitive he was, how in touch with his feelings, today we would say in touch
with his feminine side.
And actually, romantic poetry is much more feminine than masculine and tends to be very,
very popular with women.
And women always love romantic poets because they are more feminine, they're more in touch
with that side.
Finally, a romantic poet can sustain an inner mood of tranquility and pleasure.
Once he gets into that mood, he can hold on to it, at least for a little while, as he
writes.
Alright, another aspect of the romantic poet is that he is a lover of his fellow man who
honors what Wordsworth calls the native naked dignity of man.
And he does this by humanizing all things in accordance with the human heart.
I did my dissertation on Wordsworth, Wordsworth is one of the people that drew me into English,
and the reason I love him is because he treats humanity with such respect.
Whether it's humanity in the court or humanity in the countryside, he loved humanity and
he believed that we were all linked together.
You know, 18th century people, I didn't talk about this, but they love satire, like Jonathan
Swift as an 18th century figure.
Very little satire in romanticism.
They don't want to cut down and criticize, they want to bring together, again, there's
a love of man.
The romantic poet, Wordsworth says, is a friend of man who binds all things together with
passion and love, brings it all together.
Whereas the scientist seeks truth as an abstract idea, the poet, Wordsworth says, rejoices
in the presence of truth as our visible friend and hourly companion.
You see, for a scientist, truth is abstract.
For a poet, a romantic poet, he is what a true philosopher should be.
What does philosophy mean?
The love of wisdom.
It's just like Solomon, who pursues wisdom as if it were a beautiful woman, Sophia.
Well, that's what the romantics are.
They love this truth and they seek it as if it's a real flesh and blood person.
That's why their poetry, I believe, is so human.
Indeed, you know what's interesting?
Wordsworth prophesied that if science were ever to become so familiar an object that
it would take on flesh and blood, then it would be the poet and not the scientist who
would help transform and humanize science into a kindred spirit.
Now, Wordsworth was living at the very beginning of the Industrial Revolution.
Science was just taking over.
But if Wordsworth lived today where science and technology had become a part of our world
and a part of who we are, he would probably write odes to science and technology because
he would believe that it would be his role as a poet to take science and humanize it,
make it a part of who we are.
So Wordsworth is not just rejecting science or rejecting those things, only because they
weren't really a part of people at that point.
But once they become a part of it, the romantic poet will humanize it, make it part of the
human experience.
Finally, Wordsworth ascribes to the poet and poetry a new social function, very different
from the social function of the 18th century.
All right, and this is one of my favorite parts, by the way, of the preface.
Wordsworth, in his preface, warns against the ill effects of urbanization and industrialization.
And I remind you, that's just starting right now.
Wordsworth is incredibly prophetic.
Wordsworth says that the massing of men into cities and the repetitive drudgery of their
jobs produces in them an ignoble craving after extraordinary incident and a degrading thirst
after outrageous stimulation.
Wordsworth felt this was terribly unnatural, pushing people into cities.
Do you know that London was the biggest city since the Roman Empire?
In other words, there was no city as big as Rome until London, you know, 1800 years later.
So this is something new, the real massing of men into cities.
And this assembly line work over and over and over again, Wordsworth felt this was terribly
unnatural and it killed the soul.
What happens to these people, Wordsworth says, is that their senses grow dull and they need
grosser, more violent and more scandalous stimulants to satisfy their blunted psyches.
They need more and more to rise them up.
Now Wordsworth calls this state of emotional and spiritual deadness, this loss of the ability
to be moved by simple beauty and truth.
He calls it savage torpor.
He sees people in the city walking around sort of insensitive, cut off, callous to the
world, no longer picking up on things.
I love that phrase he uses, a degrading thirst after outrageous stimulation.
I can define that word in three letters, MTV.
I don't know if any of you are familiar with this, I think the greatest abomination of
the modern world.
But what MTV is, and your kids and grandkids spend a lot of time watching this, is endless
rock music bombing at them at high decibels while they watch kaleidoscopic images usually
linked to sex or violence in one way.
I really think, I agree with Alan Bloom, the closing of the American mind, that this is
one of the most debilitating and bad things of modernism.
I think it destroys the souls of our children.
They're just banged over the head again and again and again and what happens is they lose
their subtlety, their ability to appreciate small and subtle things.
This also happens to adults that spend all day reading the inquirer and newspapers like
that, that are just banging them over the head with sensationalism.
And by the way, during Wordsworth's time, they had that kind of stuff.
By the way, the British who were supposed to be so sophisticated, they invented the
idea of the inquirer.
So let's remind ourselves that we didn't invent it, although we propagated.
But anyway, for Wordsworth, this is a terrible thing.
This is a killing of the soul.
It's kind of like what Longinus said, the way materialism and hedonism kills our soul.
He felt that this is something that, again, blunts our powers.
Well, as you might guess, Wordsworth then saw it as the role of poetry to restore this
lost ability, this ability to be sensitive, to bring us back to ourselves.
Poetry, he felt, by enlargening and refining our sensibilities has the power to rehumanize
us, to bring us back into the human community.
Wordsworth is serious about this, and Romantic poetry really has helped me and other people
like that, to bring us back and touch with ourselves, to make us, again, stop and see
the roses, again, the way Vincent Van Gogh does in his painting.
Poetry, Wordsworth says, Romantic poetry, restores our childlike wonder and revives
our ability to take joy and delight in the natural world and in the quiet beatings of
our heart.
Again, there's so much noise in the world out there.
The Romantics help us to be quiet and listen again and hear again, because we've grown
deaf, we have ears and do not hear, eyes and do not see.
Now, considering this new social function, poetry is more, not less necessary, in an
industrial age than in a rural pastoral age.
Sometimes people say, this is a technological industrial age, we don't need poetry.
Wordsworth would say, no, we need it more, because people are more and more out of touch
with themselves, and so they need poetry even more.
The Rustics don't need it as much, because they've got it all around them, so to speak.
It is in an industrial technological age that we need it.
Now, we might note here that though Wordsworth rejects the refinement and wit of the 18th
century, he does promote a new aristocracy of sensitivity.
You could say he's elitist in a way, and I suppose in my attacks on MTV, I'm being
a little bit elitist, but there is a kind of aristocracy, but it's an aristocracy of
refinement and sensitivity rather than of courtly manners and whatnot.
Wordsworth was educated at Cambridge, but you see him as a man of the people, he doesn't
come across as an academic in any way.
Alright, finally, Wordsworth says, though poetry does instruct, it does teach, as we
saw, it exists first and foremost to give pleasure.
Wordsworth says, it is through pleasure that poetry draws us back into touch with our world,
our fellow man, and ourselves.
So entertainment and pleasure are very important to the Romantics.
In fact, in a weird way, it's even more important than the Neal Classic says, because the Romantics
believe that pleasure is actually something that unites...
You think of joy, the happiness of a wedding, the way we're united by that joy?
Well, that's what Wordsworth wanted.
A joy and a pleasure in the poetry.
The pleasure that poetry gives is no mere entertainment.
In other words, it is the very spirit through which we know and live.
So in the same way that Schiller says, we should not look down on playing in the play
drive, Wordsworth says, don't look down on pleasure.
That's good.
Poets should give pleasure.
Alright, in the last five minutes of my lecture, I would now like to say a little bit about
John Keats and something he says in one of his letters.
John Keats, by the way, wrote no essays of literary theory, but in letters he sent to
people there is literary theory embedded in it.
And in one of these letters, John Keats makes a distinction between what he calls negative
capability and the egotistical sublime.
And this distinction, I think, offers an interest in critique on Wordsworth, and that's why
I put it here.
Let's define these terms.
Whereas poets who possess negative capability are able to enter in to the lives of other
beings and see the world from their perspective, those possessing the quality of the egotistical
sublime always mediate their visions of the world through their own strong, dominant personalities.
Let me give you an example.
Shakespeare is the ultimate example of negative capability.
Negative capability again means that I can move out of myself towards other people, even
lose myself and other people.
Well, think about it.
Shakespeare loses himself and his characters.
You cannot say people try to, but you can't say Hamlet is Shakespeare, or Macbeth is Shakespeare,
or Othello is Shakespeare.
None of them are Shakespeare.
He loses himself in his creations, in his characters.
That's negative capability.
Milton and Wordsworth would be the other.
Egotistical sublime means rather than moving out, you draw everything to yourself.
Milton, even when he's writing about God and Paradise, he's still writing about himself
in one way or another.
He is always writing about himself, and in a way, Wordsworth is always writing about
himself and his perceptions.
That doesn't mean he's callous, but about his perceptions.
Now, to link Wordsworth to the egotistical sublime is not to say that he is arrogant
or selfish.
That's not what he means.
But that his personality is such that it both draws all things to itself and colors
all things by its perceptions.
So egotistical does not mean like we think about it stuck up or something or pompous.
What it means is that his ego, his personality is so strong that he draws everything to it.
And one of the reasons we read Wordsworth is because we're interested in him and his
perspective on the world.
Just like we watch certain movies by directors like Bergman, we like, all of Bergman's films
are about himself in one way or another.
We're interested in his character, so we want to see his movies.
So again, egotistical sublime does not mean stuck up as we say today.
Coleridge also noted in his biography of literaria, he would agree with Teetz that even in his
poetic studies of others, Wordsworth is finally a spectator ab extra.
That's Latin for a spectator from the outside.
What he was saying is that although Wordsworth had sympathy, he never really had empathy.
Wordsworth was able to feel for people, but in a way, Wordsworth could never really enter
into the rustic and see the world through their eyes.
That's just a different kind of person than he was.
All right, a little more about negative capability.
Keats' desire to move out of himself, this negative capability, because Keats wanted
to be a negative capability person, not an egotistical sublime.
Keats' desire to move out of himself is not so much a rejection of as an antidote to the
romantic belief that things are as they are perceived.
That idea, that's more egotistical sublime, everything's the way you perceive it.
Keats is not so much rejecting that as he wants to find an antidote to it.
Let me explain.
The strong focus on the poet and his perception that we've been talking about, Keats noticed
that it often leads to the romantic disease of over self-consciousness.
In other words, what happens is the poet thinks so much that he loses his ability to feel
and experience the world directly.
Sometimes because of this subject of epistemology, perspective, what happens is romantics think
too much.
And you all know, you've all been through that.
When you think too much, it sort of ruins things.
And this is a terrible irony.
Because what happens is that the romantic is forced to choose between that direct, unmediated
vision of the world that he wants and desires and his own poetic practice that says everything
is a perception of reality.
Do you understand?
There's an angst here.
In one way, they want to be unconscious and unmediated and direct and emphatic.
And yet their poetry, their process of poetry keeps making them self-conscious, overly self-conscious,
so they can't just enjoy anything.
They're thinking too much.
Keats wants to break away from that.
Finally, let me mention that in Unit 5, we're going to look at an anti-romantic turn, a
turn away from the romanticists.
Those people in the next unit are going to reject this struggle between conscious and
unconscious and super self-conscious in favor of a more impersonal, objective view of poetry.
And they're going to use Keats's negative capability as a springboard for this more
impersonal view of poetry.
And we'll talk about that more when we get there.
Finally, let me just mention quickly that there's another aspect to Keats's negative
capability, but we will deal with that in Lecture 16.
All right, in the next lecture, Lecture 15, we will turn to Coleridge's Biographia Literaria.
