Pickles. And you don't like pickles. And you say, pickles. Barf. Pickles barf is not something
that can be literally true or false.
Recording another one of these lecture videos.
Ugh. Today we're talking about AJ Ayer and chapter 6 of his book. But let's talk about what I just said.
That utterance. Can that be true or false? Literally. Can it literally be true that recording a lecture
video? Ugh. No. It can't. That's not the kind of thing that can be true or false. I don't mean that
that statement or that utterance isn't true. I mean that it can't be true. And I don't mean
that it isn't false. I mean that it can't be false. This kind of utterance. This kind of
linguistic expression when you say, ugh. That can't be true or false. Or you see some pickles.
And you don't like pickles. And you say, pickles. Barf. Pickles barf is not something that can be
literally true or false. Whereas by comparison, an ordinary assertion, something along the lines of
it's raining can be true or false, right? It's raining is true when it's raining. And it's false
when it's not raining. So there's a difference here. Some utterances have what's called a truth
value. They can be true or false. And some utterances don't. They can't be true or false.
These, these ones, this one in particular is just merely an expression of a sentiment. It's just
merely expressing how I feel. I come in here and I say, recording another one of these lecture videos.
That's just expressing my sentiment about having to record another one of these lecture videos.
It expresses the sentiment of distaste or not wanting to record the lecture video.
But it doesn't literally say, I don't want to record this lecture video. That would be something,
that would be an assertion, that would be something that could be true or false, right?
If I said, I don't want to record today, that's a full blown assertion. That can be true or false.
And it's true if I don't want to record today. And it's false if I do want to record today,
right? So these two utterances, they express the same feeling, but only one of them,
as Airwood put it, asserts a proposition that can be true or false. This one makes a claim. It
makes a claim about how the world is. In fact, it makes a claim about a very particular part of
the world. It makes a claim about me and my mind, this part of the world, the part where my wants
are. It says, I don't want to record today. That's just a statement about what I want.
This is not a statement about anything. Okay, so why are we talking about this? Well,
Air is going to make a claim about a particular type of talk or a particular type of discourse.
Namely, he's going to say that moral talk or moral discourse is not the kind of thing that can be
literally true or false. He's talking about moral talk. Notice something. Previously in this course,
we've been talking about something very different. We haven't been talking about moral talk. We've
been talking about morality. Previously, we've been talking about what's right and what's wrong,
right? So if you read a philosopher who's arguing, for example, that you should give all of your
expendable income, all of your extra income to charity, then that philosopher is making a claim
about morality, a claim about what's right and what's wrong. It's different to make a claim
about moral claims, a claim about moral language. Talking about this is a meta-ethical
claim. We're making a move from talking about morality or ethics to talking about morality
or ethics. Okay, so the key thing to take away is that everything we say about Air is about moral
talk. There is a connection with morality, and I'll say what that connection is right now,
but just know that all of the central claims that Air makes are about language. They're not about
what's right and wrong. They're about our talking about what's right and wrong. Okay, so what is the
connection between moral talk and morality for Air or for anyone who wants to say anything about the
nature of moral talk and philosophy? The connection typically is this. Let's say that you wanted to
be a moral skeptic. You wanted to say that there's no such thing as morality. Another way to put it
is that you'd be a moral anti-realist. You'd say there really are no moral facts. Well, you still
have to explain something that there obviously are. There obviously are lots of statements that
people make in real life about morality. He says to Tyson, maybe, violence is wrong. That's a moral
claim. That's moral talk. That's real. People really do say that. Now, the moral skeptic is going to
want to say, well, there really is no underlying morality that would make a statement like this
true. And so it looks on the surface like you've got two options. If you deny that there's any
morality, but there obviously is moral talk, you can either say that all of this moral talk
is false or misguided or confused and that therefore, presumably, we should stop. We should
stop engaging in it. We should stop the moral talk. We should stop saying this sort of thing.
And we say it a lot. So that's a huge revision of what we're doing is to say that all of this
talk is mistaken and misguided or false and that we should let go of it. That's one option.
But the other option for the moral skeptic who wants to get rid of morality is to say that
all moral talk is not really truth apt. It's not true or false. So it's not false. It's doing
something else altogether and so we can keep it. We can keep this moral talk, which is a big part
of our lives, even though we're getting rid of morality itself. And so what we're going to get
from Ayer today in the little snippet of the chapter that we read is an account of this kind
of language that allows us to say that it's not true or false. It allows us to say that it's like...
It's like... Right? It's a kind of talk that can't be true or false and that therefore,
the fact that there isn't some underlying moral reality does not entail that we need
to get rid of all this talk. We can keep it. So here's something that Ayer says. This actually
wasn't in the part of the reading that we read for today, but it was on the reading guide that you
read. Here's what he says. So he says, value statements are not in the literal sense significant,
but are simply expressions of emotion, which can be neither true nor false. What does that mean?
All right. Well, let's just go through some talk, some examples of talk. Here are some things
that you can say. Ready? One thing that you could say is the door is shut. You could say that.
That's an assertion. You're telling me something about the door, right? The door is shut. This
sort of thing can be true or false. The door is shut. It's true if the door really is shut
and it's false if the door is not shut. That's easy. Okay, but there's lots and lots and lots
and lots of language that can't be true or false. One example is the one that I already gave at
the beginning of video of the video, which is if you just say or something like that. That's some
kind of exclamation or something like that or some kind of expression. And you can say that and it
can be very meaningful. That can be a very meaningful thing to say, but it's not the kind of thing
that can be true or false, right? True or false doesn't make sense. It's neither true nor false.
It's just merely an expression of emotion, which can be neither true nor false. That's
but it's not just sounds like that. Also, what if I said this is the door shut?
We have a name for utterances like this. Questions. A question also can't be true or false, right?
A question isn't making a claim about how the world is. It's not saying that the door is shut.
It's not saying that the door is open. It's just asking what's up with the door, right? So a question
can't be true or false, but it's still a perfectly meaningful thing to say. It's just not in the
business of describing how the world is so it can't be true or false. Or here's another one,
ready? Shut the door. What's that? I don't know. That's like an order or a command.
An order or a command. Can that be true or false? No. No, that can't be true or false, right?
It's not telling you that the door is shut. It's telling you to shut the door, right?
All of these, these three at least, they are all talking about the door and its status,
but one of them and only one of them is describing the status of the door, whether or not it's shut.
The others are well asking about the status of the door and commanding someone to make the door
have a certain status, being shut, right? So actually it looks like most language,
most talk is not the sort of thing that can be true or false. Most of the things we say or that
come out of our mouths or at least a lot of them are not assertions. All right, here's the thing.
These statements, the kinds of value statements that we care about, we care about moral statements,
we care about value statements, at least right now we do, right, in this course.
These kinds of statements, the ones that look like this, violence is wrong, right?
That statement, it sure looks like the door is shut. The door is shut. Violence is wrong.
It looks like this is an assertion. It looks like lots of our moral talk is the kind of thing
that can be either true or false. And therefore, if there is no such thing as right or wrong,
of course, then all of these statements are going to be false because they're the kind of thing that
could be false because they're assertions. But Ayer thinks, no, these aren't assertions. They
look like assertions. This looks like this, but actually, really, literally, all it means is
something like this. According to Ayer, this is the part to remember. Don't miss this. According
to Ayer, violence is wrong is really like saying, boo, violence, boo, violence. That's not the kind
of thing that can be true or false. That's not actually making an assertion about how the world
is. Okay, so let's go back to the sentence. Value statements are not, in the literal sense,
significant. That is, they're not assertions that can be true or false. They are simply
expressions of emotion, which can neither be true or false, which can be neither true nor false.
That's what Ayer is saying. Ayer is saying that value statements like this, they look like this,
but they're really like that. Strictly speaking, they can't be true or false. Okay, so to further
understand this point, think about the context where we say things like urgh or boo, right? Say
that you're at a sporting event and half of the crowd in the stands are fans of one team and half
of the crowd are fans of another team. And they introduce a player at the beginning, right? And
they say, and now the point guard for the Golden State Warriors, Stefan Curry, right? And Curry comes
out and half of the audience says boo, and the other half says yay. Imagine the announcer then
comes along and says, well, who do you think is right? Boo or yay? No one's right. No one's wrong.
No one is making a claim about how the world is. They're just merely expressing how they feel.
Okay, notice one thing about these mere expressions and assertions.
They can still be criticized, both of them actually. So compare, for example, the following two things.
I could bump into you on the street and say sorry, right? Sorry. Or an alternative thing that I could
say in the very similar or exactly the same situation is I could say I am filled with sorrow
because I bumped into you. I could say that, right? This one is an assertion. This one is not,
right? This can be true or false. I am filled with sorrow because I bumped into you.
This is a description of how the world is. It's true if I really am filled with sorrow.
And it's false if I'm not filled with sorrow. But just saying sorry, that can't be true or false.
You bump into somebody on the street, they say sorry, you can't come back and say,
false. I don't think you are filled with sorrow. What? You can criticize them for being insincere.
You can say that didn't sound sincere. I don't think you're really sorry, right? If they bump into
you in the street and they say sorry, sorry like that, that's insincere. They're not really sorry.
Sorry is capable of being insincere because it expresses a sentiment or a feeling.
It expresses a feeling and therefore it can be sincere or insincere,
you know, write it like that. Sincere or insincere, right? It can be sincere or insincere because
it expresses a sentiment and if you really have that sentiment, then it's sincere to say you're
sorry. But if you really don't have that sentiment, if you're not filled with sorrow, if you don't
have regret, then it's insincere. This can be insincere too, right? An assertion, this is an
assertion. It's an assertion about how the world is. It just says that the world, a very little bit
of the world, the part right here is a certain way. It says I am filled with sorrow. I feel lots
of sorrow. So this is an assertion but it also expresses a sentiment. It expresses basically
the same sentiment maybe and because it expresses that sentiment, it can also be sincere or insincere,
right? Just in the way sorrow can. But the assertion does a second thing. The other thing that it does
is that it, well, it puts forward a claim and it puts that forward, it puts forward that claim
as if it is true. It says of this, of this claim, this is the way the world really is,
this claim is true. I am filled with sorrow. It describes the world. Because of this,
it can be true or false, that assertion, right? So notice that the assertion is doing two things
and the mere expression of sorrow or sympathy is just doing one thing, right?
Ayer is able, because of these facts, Ayer is able to say when he translates violence is wrong
to boo violence, he's able to say that you're still able to criticize this kind of claim.
We still can criticize these claims. We criticize them as sincere or insincere.
We just can't strictly speaking criticize them as true or false.
Okay, so in a minute we're going to talk about an alternative theory, a different theory,
a theory other than Ayer's own theory that's also about moral talk. But let's just reiterate
really quick. This is Ayer's claim. His claim is that value statements like violence is wrong,
the kind of statement that he might have made to Mike Tyson during that encounter that we read
about, right? That kind of claim really just means boo violence. It's really not an assertion,
even though it looks like an assertion. Value statements are not in the literal sense significant,
but are simply expressions of emotion which can be neither true nor false. Okay,
he's going to now talk about an alternative theory. Let's get to that.
Remember that we are talking about language. We're talking about moral language or moral talk,
right? And our running example is this claim that Ayer might have made to Tyson or something like
that, the claim violence is wrong. Ayer says that what this claim really means is something like
boo violence. That's Ayer. All right, can you see me? Is this line in my face? It doesn't matter.
Violence is wrong really means boo violence. But there's an alternative theory. The name for that
theory that Ayer uses is the orthodox subjective theory. We're just going to call it subjectivism.
This is an alternative theory of what this phrase means. And the alternative theory just says
that this phrase means something like I dislike violence.
That's the subjectivist claim. Okay, so notice that these are very different, right? Whoops.
Ayer is claiming that this looks like an assertion, but it's no assertion at all. It's a mere
expression. It can't be true or false. The subjectivist is claiming that this assertion
is an assertion. It's just a different assertion, right? Violence is wrong looks like it's a claim
about violence. It looks like it's just saying violence is wrong. Really, according to the
subjectivist, this is an alternative to Ayer's approach that he brings up and then attacks,
really, according to the subjectivist, this is not a claim about violence. It's a claim about the
speaker. It's a claim about me when I'm talking. Let's back up for a second. We'll explain this
claim in a sec. But first, let's just see that these aren't the only two alternatives. This is one
translation of violence is wrong. This is another translation of violence is wrong. But then there's
the just sort of ordinary naive translation, right? The naive theory, the theory that you would
have if you weren't thinking hard about these things, and it might be the right theory, by the way.
The naive theory about statements like violence is wrong is just that it means
violence is wrong. That's what it means. It's an assertion. It asserts that violence has a
certain property and the property is wrongness, right? If you just take the statement, a regular
ordinary statement like grass is green, if you take an ordinary statement like that,
well, what does that really mean? What are you talking about? It really means that grass is green.
That's what it means. It's an assertion. It's true if grass is green. It's false if grass is any other
color. That's what grass is green means. Grass is green means grass is green. It says that grass
has a certain property of being green. That's it. You might think the same thing about violence
is wrong. That's the naive view. Violence is wrong just means violence is wrong. It has the feature
of being wrong. That's it. So both Ayer's theory and subjectivism are departing from the natural
way of interpreting this kind of language, this moral talk. Okay, but put that aside for a minute.
Let's understand these two alternative theories, Ayer's and subjectivism. Subjectivism means or
subjectivism claims rather that moral talk really consists of claims about the individual who's
speaking at the time. So when I say that violence is wrong, my statement can be true or false
according to subjectivism. It can be true or false, but its truth or falsity depends not on the nature
of violence and whether it's really wrong. It depends just on the nature of me, the speaker,
and whether I really dislike it or something like that, whether I have some negative sentiment
towards it. That's what really determines whether the statement is true or false. Whereas on Ayer's
view, the statement can't be true or false at all. Ayer brings up this theory, subjectivism,
for three reasons. The first reason is to help clarify what his own view is. Once you see that
there's an alternative theory about what moral statements mean that makes them into assertions,
just different assertions than you might have thought they were, then you realize, oh whoa,
his theory is rather radical. It says that they are not assertions at all. They're not
claims that can be true or false at all. Okay, so you get a clearer sense of what his view is.
His view is the violence view. You get a clearer sense of what his view is by just bringing this
view up and saying, my view is not that. Okay, so that's the first reason he brings up subjectivism.
The second reason he brings up subjectivism is because subjectivism is obviously wrong,
and he can attack it, and that shows that his theory has a certain advantage. It doesn't fall
prey to the kind of attack or mistake that destroys subjectivism. He only talks about this for like
two sentences in the part that we read. They come and go really fast, but basically the objection
that kills off subjectivism but that doesn't hurt Ayer's own theory is this. Violence is wrong
or any moral claim. It seems like if it's true, it's not true because of something about the
speaker, right? Imagine that a philosopher comes to talk to you and they make some moral claim.
They say, spending money on luxuries is evil. You cannot do it. It's wrong. Buying a cup of coffee
made at a coffee shop rather than just making the coffee yourself at home and donating the extra money
to famine relief is wrong. Those are all moral claims. They make moral claims like that and maybe
you start arguing with them and you say, oh no, you know, I live in a capitalist society and blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. The philosopher can't just come back and say, no, no, no, no,
you don't understand. It's wrong. Let me prove it to you. And then they cut open their skull
and rip it open and put a brain scanner on them. And then the brain scanner reads off on a screen
and there on the screen it says, it shows all the things that they think and right there on the
screen it says, this guy dislikes coffee. That's what it said on the screen of the brain scanner
or it says something like, this guy dislikes spending money on coffee instead of donating
that money to famine relief. Does that, does that evidence, that brain scan evidence,
does that prove that the moral statement, you know, coffee is evil?
Does that prove that this statement is true? This brain scan? Brain scan? No, no it doesn't. No one
takes that seriously. That's not the kind of evidence that you'd ever try to give for a moral
statement like this. It's just obvious. We take this for granted in all of our moral discourse.
It's just obvious that moral statements like this are not statements about the speaker. If I
make a statement about me, we all know that it's a statement about me and we talk as if it's a
statement about me. I say, I'm exhausted and someone might say, oh, is it because you haven't
gotten enough sleep? It's all about me, right? Whereas if I say violence is wrong, no one says,
oh, is it because you're like a curmudgeonly person and you dislike a lot of stuff? Is that why
violence is wrong? No, that's not why violence is wrong. That might be why I think it's wrong,
but my thinking that it's wrong or my disliking it, that's not the same as it's being wrong.
If this is true, it sure isn't true just because I dislike violence. This theory,
subjectivism, this theory is no good. It makes this crazy claim that these statements are true
or false based on what the speaker is thinking or what the speaker feels, and that's just not
how anyone thinks about morality. So that is the second reason why air brings up subjectivism,
is to argue against it in that way. And it shows that air's view doesn't have that problem. I mean,
air's view is in a way more radical. It says that moral statements don't even have truth values,
but that radicalness gives it the advantage of not having to say that the truth value of a
moral statement depends on the speaker of the statement or the mind of the speaker of that
moral statement. Okay, so he argues against subjectivism in that way, but then the third reason,
the third reason that air brings up subjectivism is to give an objection to subjectivism,
raise an objection that comes from the philosopher G.E. Moore. Moore's objection.
So this objection is not like the one that we just saw towards subjectivism,
where it only applies to subjectivism and doesn't also apply to air's view. This objection, if it
works, also is a problem for air's own view. So we're going to talk about that objection,
and then we're going to get air's response to it. This all happens in like the four pages that we
read. So what is Moore's objection? This happens, by the way, in the reading that we're using
on page 110. We get an explanation of Moore's objection, and then also on 110 going on to 111,
we get air's response. So if you follow and understand everything I'm saying about Moore's
objection and air's response, but you didn't pick it up in the reading, go back to those pages,
reread those pages to get Moore's objection and air's response. Okay, well, what is Moore's objection?
The objection is this. Fundamentally, Moore is claiming that
we have genuine moral disagreements. We have genuine moral debates. We productively argue with one
another about morality, and when we do this, we literally contradict one another. When we have
moral debates or moral discussions, we very frequently have situations where one person
says something, and the other person says, no, that's not the case. That's false, right? So one
person says abortion is wrong, and another person says abortion is permissible. It's not wrong.
It might not be great, but it's not something that's always wrong. These two folks are disagreeing
with one another. They are contradicting one another. They cannot both be right.
If air's view is true, then they're not really contradicting one another, because really one of
them is just saying, boo, abortion. That's the first one. The other one is saying, okay, abortion.
They're not contradicting one each other, one another. If one person says boo, and the other
person says yay, and they're screaming back and forth at each other from across a stadium
at a sporting event, they're not arguing. Now, there's a sense in which there is a tension
between the sentiments that they are expressing. One of them feels a certain way, and the other
person feels a different way, and an individual person can't coherently feel both ways at the
same time. They can't, as it were, well, be in favor of something and be against it at the same time,
right? But that doesn't mean that the things that they've said contradict one another. They're not
productively disagreeing. Here's an example that goes back a little bit to subjectivism. Say that
I'm sitting at a table eating pickled tomatoes, and someone comes up to me and says, I don't like
pickled tomatoes. And I say, I do like pickled tomatoes. And they say, I don't like pickled
tomatoes. And I say, but I like them. We don't disagree with one another. We're just screaming
back and forth, and I'm talking about me, and this other person is talking about themselves.
And so we don't really disagree. There's a kind of confusion. We are, as it were, talking past
one another. If you're a subjectivist about moral talk, then you have to say that disagreements,
like this one, are really just two people shouting back and forth at each other when they're really
each talking about different things. One of them is talking about themselves, and the other one
is talking about themselves. And so too with air. Moral disagreements like this, it looks like
these people are arguing with one another, but they're not really arguing with one another.
One is just yelling boo, and one is just yelling yay. And here's Moore's claim.
Moral disagreements are real. They're genuine. They exist. And so any theory, Moore thinks,
that gets the results that there aren't moral disagreements, that theory is no good.
That's Moore's objection. Okay. What's air's response to Moore's objection?
All right. Air does something that in philosophy, we call biting the bullet.
You bite a bullet in real life. I mean, you probably hopefully will never bite a bullet.
You bite a bullet in real life when you have to do something really painful, like get surgery
without anesthesia. And you're supposed to bite the bullet in order to bear the pain.
So air is, as it were, going to take on something that's a little bit painful,
but he's going to do it to save his theory, which he thinks has many other advantages.
He just bites the bullet and accepts that we don't have genuine moral disagreements.
He denies that we have genuine moral disagreements. He says that it looks like we have genuine moral
disagreements, but we really don't. How can he possibly say that? It really seems like we have
moral disagreements. Here's a little bit of an argument for air's view that defends him from
Moore's objection. Say that we're talking about public policy, drug policy, right? Here's a moral
claim. Marijuana, that's just how I'm going to write marijuana because I don't know how to spell it,
marijuana should be legal. Let's say you think that. Well, if you do think that you're using
moral language, you're making a moral claim, you're talking about what should be the case.
You're talking about how our society ought to be arranged. What is the just way to arrange our
legal system and our laws? This is a moral statement if there ever was one, right? Marijuana should
be legal. Okay, say you were arguing for that claim or you were arguing against it. What might you
say? Think about it. Actually pause the video right now and make up an argument either for the
claim that marijuana should be legal or that it shouldn't. You didn't pause the video. No, you
don't really pause it. You're not actually going to think of something. You're just going to keep
on watching. Okay, well, listen. Here's what you could have said. Here's what you probably would
have said. You might have said something like this. Well, marijuana should be legal because
marijuana maybe stops seizures. Oh, I don't know how to spell seizures, but something like that.
Okay, marijuana stops seizures. You might argue in favor of marijuana legalization by making that
point. Or if you're an opponent of a marijuana legalization, you might say marijuana impairs
judgment impairs judgment. And that in turn causes car crashes, which cause death. We could go back
and forth about all of this sort of stuff. But did you notice something? This was a moral statement,
a normative statement about a statement about how things should be. But then when we started to
actually have this debate or started to have this discussion, all of the claims that we started
hearing were factual claims. They were factual claims. Factual. These ones are factual. This one
is moral or normative in at least some sense. But these are not claims about how things should be.
The fact that marijuana stops seizures, if it does, in some cases, is not a fact about how
things should be. It's a fact about how things are. It just is true that this chemical interacts with
this other chemical in this certain way. That's it. It's a factual claim. It's not a moral claim.
It's a factual claim. Same thing for marijuana causes impairment, which in turn causes car crashes
if you're driving. That's a factual claim. That's a claim about chemicals. Chemicals interacting
with other chemicals, chemicals in the marijuana, chemicals in your brain, nerves leading to your
hands and feet when you're driving. These are all factual claims. Ayer thinks this. He thinks that
when we are having disagreements that are genuine, they're not really moral. And when we're having
disagreements that are really moral, they're not really genuine. We can have a genuine disagreement
about, well, whether marijuana should be legal. But that's only because we're really at the
underlying level disagreeing about some factual claim, whether or not marijuana stops seizures
or whether or not marijuana has some other effects or something like that. We're just
disagreeing about factual things. We're able to have that disagreement because under the surface,
there is actually some degree of moral agreement. We agree about something. Namely, we agree,
well, we agree about something moral. We agree that stopping seizures, I still don't know how to
spell seizures, is good. That's a moral claim too. We agree about this. And it's only because we have
this kind of agreement. We have the same sentiments here that we're able to have this kind of
disagreement. Moore's claim is that we can have our sentiments aligned on certain things, on
certain matters. We can have the same sentiments. We would express them in the same thing. And then
when we get to the level of disagreement, really, we are disagreeing about factual things because
there's some underlying moral convergence. That's his response to Moore's objection, is that we don't
have genuine moral disagreements, or at least not nearly as often as we think we do, what we have
are moral agreements and genuine non-moral disagreements. Now, we are able to explain what
I think is the most difficult sentence in the reading. So right now, I'm going to explain to
you, given everything I just said, what this very difficult sentence said. So let me get the sentence.
Here's the sentence. It happens on the bottom of page 111. And I'm going to write it up now,
and then we're going to use everything that we just said, our understanding of Aire's view,
our understanding of subjectivism, and Moore's objection to subjectivism, and then Aire's response
to Moore's objection. We're going to use all of that to understand what this sentence says. Okay, here it is.
Let's go through it real slow. If our opponent concurs with us in expressing moral disapproval
of all actions of a given type T, then we may get him to condemn a particular action A by bringing
forward arguments to show that A is of type T. Okay, what's going on? The background is that Moore
is talking about how actual moral disagreements work, how we actually try to persuade one another
to change our minds about moral matters. Suppose you wanted to convince some people
that marijuana should be illegal. You were Jeff Sessions or something like that. You want to convince
folks that marijuana, I really hope that's how you spell it, right, should be illegal. Okay,
you want to convince someone of that fact. How do you go about doing it? Well, we just heard
that Aire's response to Moore involved him saying that underneath this disagreement,
where one person thinks that it should be illegal, and the other person thinks it's fine, it should
be legal, right, underneath this disagreement are factual disagreements, and then underneath those
factual disagreements are moral agreements, right. So here's something, here's something that, well,
if you're Jeff Sessions and you're trying to argue for this, you know that your opponent is going to
agree with you about, okay. They're going to agree with you that we're talking about behavior that
leads to murder. Everyone is going to agree that that's bad. They're going to have the same negative
sentiments towards that, right. Okay, everyone agrees that this is bad. Let's call this type of
behavior, behavior type T. Behavior type T is any behavior that leads to murder. Okay, and then
let's talk about some more specific type of behavior, behavior type A, and this will be
smoking marijuana. Let's say you were Jeff Sessions, you thought that marijuana was terrible,
it should be illegal. You know that everyone agrees with you that if something leads to murder,
then it should be illegal too. So you just have to, well, make a factual claim. You make the
following factual claim that this type of behavior, smoking marijuana, is really just some of this
type of behavior. It's a subset. Smoking marijuana is one type of behavior that leads to murder,
and you do this with science or made up science if you don't have real science to back you up,
right, or whatever you're going to use, right. This is a factual claim. The factual claim is that
smoking marijuana is a type of behavior that leads to murder. That's a factual claim.
Ayer is saying that this sort of thing is what goes on when we have moral disagreements, right,
and that his theory is perfectly able to explain this. All right, let's go back to the quote.
Let's read it again. If our opponent concurs with us, so if our opponent agrees with us, if we all
agree, what do we agree about? We agree in expressing moral disapproval of all actions of a given type
T. So we all disapprove of anything that leads to murder, right? Okay, so we all agree that this
is to be disapproved of, any action of a given type T. Then we may get him our opponent, okay,
we may get our opponent to condemn a particular action A, right, so we want to condemn A. You're
Jeff Sessions, you want to condemn A, right? We may get him to condemn, we may get our opponent
to condemn this by bringing forward arguments to show that A is of type T, to show that this
is really of this type, that this is the claim. Now, I'm not saying it's true and I'm not saying
it's false, I'm just saying that according to Ayer, this is the kind of moral argument that we
make. We say that this type of action is really of this type of action and we already agree in
condemning this type of action and so by making this factual claim, it's a factual claim to say
that smoking marijuana leads to murder, that's just a factual claim, that's not a moral claim,
right? This kind of factual claim is the kind of claim that we actually disagree about and that
that's what's really at the heart of moral disagreements. One last thing before we're done.
We've said all these things about Ayer's theory and Ayer's theory one more time is a theory of
moral talk or moral language, not of morality itself. Why again do we care about moral talk
or moral language? The answer, I've already said this but it's worth repeating, is that if you want
to be a moral skeptic, if you want to deny that there really is any such thing as morality,
then you're going to need to explain all of the moral talk. Are you going to say that it's all
false? Ayer is able to say if he's right about moral talk, which he might not be, but if he's
right about it then he's able to say that, well, morality is not real but we don't have to throw
out all of our moral discourse and all of our moral language, that's fine. We disagree about
factual matters that are underlying our moral debates and when we do express moral sentiments,
we do so in a way that doesn't also assert that things are true. So we don't have to throw out
all of our moral talk because it's all false, just because we're moral skeptics, because moral
talk was never the kind of thing that was true or false in the first place.
