This guy, Gottlob Frege, published this paper
über Sinn und Bedeutung on Sense and Reference in 1892.
And it is the most important paper in the history of the philosophy of language.
It is very complicated, but I'm going to explain it now.
Frege realizes that linguistic terms, words, have to have two levels of meaning.
They each have to have a sense and a reference.
I'm going to explain exactly what those are,
but first we need to see the puzzle that forces Frege into this position.
To illustrate this puzzle, I'm going to have you watch like a viral video.
Okay, that was fun.
The noteworthy thing about this interaction is that the woman, her name is Ellen,
she already knows the meaning of the name Jay-Z.
So it's not like what happens is that the guy tells her,
oh, there's this name Jay-Z and the name refers to me.
It's my name.
That's not what happens.
No, no, she's familiar with the name.
She knows the meaning of Jay-Z,
but she still learns something at the end of the video
when he tells her that he is Jay-Z.
So there's like two possibilities.
She could learn something linguistic about the name,
or she could learn something empirical.
Empirical just means knowable by observation or experience.
Another term for this is a posteriori.
And the point of this story is just that what this woman learns
at the end of the conversation is not linguistic.
She's not learning anything about the meaning of the name Jay-Z.
She already knew that name.
She's learning an empirical fact, a fact about the world,
which is, oh, this guy that I've been sitting next to, he is Jay-Z.
Consider these two sentences.
Sean Carter is Sean Carter and Sean Carter is Jay-Z.
That's Jay-Z's government name, his regular name.
Sean Carter, that's his name.
Sentences of this type are called identity statements
because they say that two things are one thing.
Two things are identical.
They're the very same thing.
Imagine in the case of Ellen and Jay-Z on the subway,
imagine that she knew him by the name Sean Carter.
Like maybe he got on the train
and they introduced themselves to each other
and he introduced himself as Sean Carter.
That's his name.
She knows who Sean Carter is
and she also knows that there's this musician,
this rapper named Jay-Z.
Maybe she's seen pictures of him.
She knows who Jay-Z is.
But she hasn't yet put it together in her mind
that this guy right next to her, Sean Carter, is Jay-Z.
If that's the case,
then sentence number two can be informative to her.
It has, as Frege says, cognitive value.
You can really learn something from sentence number two.
This woman, Ellen, can really learn something
by discovering or being told that Sean Carter is Jay-Z.
So I'm writing here that sentence two is informative.
It can teach her something in the way that sentence one never could.
Sean Carter is Sean Carter.
Yes, of course.
As long as these two names, here and here,
are being used in the same sense to mean the same thing,
well then one is totally banal and uninformative,
whereas two can be informative.
But sentence two can also be empirical
in the sense that the information that you get from sentence two
can be, in some cases, not about language,
not about the meanings of the words,
but it can be something that has to be discovered
through going out into the world and existing
and discovering things like, namely,
oh, this guy sitting next to me, he's a famous rapper.
That's the point of this example.
In the middle of the train ride,
Ellen knows all the linguistic facts.
She knows what this name, Sean Carter, means.
She knows who it refers to.
It refers to this guy sitting next to me.
She also is familiar with and understands the name Jay-Z.
She knows, oh, that's the name for this famous musician.
Maybe she can name a whole bunch of facts about Jay-Z.
She can know all the linguistic facts,
but still there's that moment at the end of the train ride
where she learns something like sentence two.
She learns that this guy, Sean Carter, is Jay-Z.
And so what she learns can't be linguistic
because she already knew the linguistic stuff.
It has to be some empirical fact about the real world,
some observable experiential fact.
Now we're ready to state the puzzle.
How can we have a theory of language, a theory of names,
that explains these two features of sentence number two,
that it can be informative,
and then more specifically, the kind of information
that it can give can be empirical information.
The reason this is a puzzle is that there was this other theory
of names published in 1881 by John Stuart Mill
and according to Mill's theory,
the meaning of a proper name like Sean Carter or Jay-Z,
the meaning of a name like that is nothing more
than the object named.
And Mill's theory sounds really good
when you read that paper that he published in 1881,
but then you run into cases like this
and he can't handle this.
According to Mill, the name Sean Carter
and the name Jay-Z mean exactly the same thing.
And so sentence one and sentence two are no different.
Mill is unable to explain why a sentence like two
can be genuinely illuminating, informative,
why it can have some cognitive value
in a way that a sentence like one doesn't.
Because after all, on Mill's theory,
the meaning of these letters right here is just the dude
and the meaning of these letters right here
is the exact same dude.
So it's just this dude is this dude.
Yeah, duh, just like in this case, this dude is this dude.
There's no difference.
Now there's an alternative to Mill's theory
that can explain how sentence two
can be illuminating, informative,
in a way that sentence one can't.
And that theory translates sentence two
as a sentence about language itself.
On this theory, sentence two is really just shorthand
for something like sentence two star.
The name Sean Carter and the name Jay-Z denote the same person.
If this is what two means,
then it makes sense why two is informative
in a way that one isn't.
One would be translated correspondingly
as something like the name Sean Carter
and the name Sean Carter denote the same person.
That's obvious.
But this is not obvious.
Like this is a fact that you might not know.
And this theory that translates identity statements like this
into sort of linguistic statements like this,
that theory is actually Fraga's old theory
from the Begriff Schrift, which he published in 1879.
But 13 years went by between 1879 and 1892
when he published On Sense and Reference.
And during those 13 years, Fraga realized that this theory,
the theory that translates identity statements
into linguistic statements like this,
that theory wasn't good.
And the reason is that statements like number two here
can be informative, not just informative,
but empirically informative.
The idea is simply that when Ellen had this moment
of realization on the subway,
she wasn't realizing something about the meanings
of these terms, she was realizing something
about the world around her.
And Fraga gets this.
He understands all this stuff about Ellen and Jay-Z.
And so what he does in On Sense and Reference
is he tosses out his old theory
and he gives a new theory of sentences like that.
And it turns out to be not just a theory of identity statements
like this, but of all of language.
Very quickly, I'm going to illustrate this again
with Fraga's own example,
which involves the morning star and the evening star.
To understand this,
you're going to need some astronomical background information.
So here it is.
If you look at the sunrise, just before sunrise,
right near where the sun is about to rise,
you can see a very bright star, sometimes.
And the name of that star is the morning star.
And then also just after sunset,
right near where the sun just set,
sometimes you can see this other bright star
and that star is called the evening star.
Okay, those are stars and people have known
about these stars for a long time
and they name the stars because we name things.
But then at some point, someone discovered
that these two stars were the exact same thing.
And they're not even stars.
It turns out they are the planet Venus.
So what you've got are sort of trivial sentences
like the morning star is the morning star.
Yeah, duh.
And then you've got possibly very informative,
noteworthy sentences like the morning star is the evening star.
So just like in the case of this sentence too,
this sentence too can be informative.
And the kind of information that this sentence carries
is not linguistic information,
but empirical astronomical information.
Someone can be in a situation
where they know the meaning of this name
or this phrase or whatever the morning star.
They know which star it is.
They can even point to it.
They can even say that one's the morning star.
That's the object denoted by the name
or the description, the morning star.
And they can do the same thing, let's suppose,
for the evening star.
They know what this phrase means
and they can point to it.
So they know what is denoted by all of these terms,
but what they don't know
is that these two objects are one object.
And so when you tell someone
the morning star is the evening star,
you can be telling them something
that they didn't know already
and not something linguistic at all.
And Mill's theory of names
and Frago's old theory of names
that translates identity statements
into these linguistic statements or whatever,
neither of those theories
can explain these facts about this sentence and this sentence.
That they are informative
and that the kind of information that they can give
is often empirical.
Okay, so that's the puzzle.
That's the problem.
And what Frago does
is he solves this problem
by introducing an additional layer of meaning.
And that sort of additional middle layer
of the meaning of a term is the sense.
It is natural now
to think of their being connected with a sign,
a name, combination of words, letter,
besides that to which the sign refers,
which may be called the referent of the sign.
Also, what I would like to call the sense of the sign,
wherein the mode of presentation is contained.
Okay, so Frago is talking about three different things.
The first thing is the name or the sign.
And then of course,
there's the thing that the name picks out
or refers to the referent,
which in this case, the referent is the guy,
the actual person, Jay-Z.
But in addition to the referent,
Frago is saying that there's this other
middle level of meaning,
which he calls the sense.
And it's really not clear at this point in the paper
what the sense of a name or of any expression is,
but it has something to do with a mode of presentation.
So I have to explain what that is.
Are you familiar with the concept of a McMansion?
That's like a poorly constructed ugly home
with too many roof lines or whatever.
Imagine one of these ugly houses.
And in the front of the house,
there's like fancy stonework or bricks or columns
or something like that.
But in the back of the house, it's just plastic siding.
So you can imagine a case
where you've seen this house from the front.
That's one way of viewing the house,
one literal angle or perspective
from which you can view the house.
You might also see the house from the back.
That's a different perspective,
a different mode of presentation of the house,
a different way that the house could be presented to you.
And you can know the house in both of these ways
without actually knowing that they're the same house.
And then it might be informative to you to find out,
oh, look at that, that's the same one house.
That's what Frege is getting at
with this idea of a mode of presentation.
There are two different ways of knowing Sean Carter.
You could know him as the kid from Brooklyn or whatever.
Or you could know him as Jay-Z, the mogul,
the billionaire rapper or whatever.
I don't know if he has a billion dollars,
but close to a billion or a little more, I think.
The simplest way, although this is a little contentious,
to think of the sense or mode of presentation
of a name or phrase is to think of it as a description.
You could describe this guy as a billionaire music mogul
or you could describe him as a middle-aged man
who was born in Brooklyn
and still lives most of the time in the greater New York area.
Those are two different ways of presenting
or characterizing this guy, Sean Carter or Jay-Z.
Frege's point is this.
A name, or for that matter, any other linguistic term,
a name has not only this level of meaning,
which is the object named,
but also the way that that object is characterized
or presented by the sign, by the name.
Frege himself actually explains this,
though with a somewhat abstract mathematical example
that might not have been obvious from just reading the text.
So I'm going to read it and then explain exactly what he means.
Let ABC be the lines connecting the vertices of a triangle
with the midpoints of the opposite sides.
Okay, so there's no actual diagram in the published paper,
but I created this diagram.
You see that inside of this triangle, there are three lines.
There's the vertical line, which is called A,
and then there's this other line, that's line B,
and then line C is the third line
going from the lower right to the upper left.
And the important thing to notice
is that all three of these lines intersect,
they cross each other or meet at the very same point in the middle.
The point of intersection of A and B
is then the same as the point of intersection of B and C.
So there's just one point here in the middle of this diagram,
but Frege mentions at least two different ways
of describing that exact same point,
the place where lines A and B intersect,
or you could describe the very same point
as the place where lines B and C intersect.
So we have different designations
for the same point.
And these names, point of intersection of A and B,
point of intersection of B and C,
likewise indicate the mode of presentation.
So these two different names for the one point,
the point of intersection of A and B,
and the point of intersection of C and D,
these two names, they pick out the same point,
but they present that point in different ways.
They involve different modes of presentation
of that same point.
And hence, the statement contains true knowledge.
What he means by that is just that
because these two different names for that one point
have different modes of presentation,
that sentence, the sentence that
the point of intersection of A and B
is the same as the point of intersection of B and C,
that sentence, like sentence two here,
can contain real genuine information,
true knowledge, as Frege calls it.
In our example, accordingly,
the reference of the expressions
the point of intersection of A and B
and the point of intersection of B and C
would be the same, but not their senses.
Right, so these two names have the same referent,
but different senses,
different ways of presenting that referent.
That's exactly what's going on with Sean Carter and Jay-Z.
These two names, they refer to the same guy,
they have the same referent,
but they have different senses.
They present him in different ways.
And it's the same way with the example
of the morning star and the evening star.
The referent of evening star would be the same
as that of morning star, but not the sense.
So those two names, the morning star and the evening star,
they have the same referent,
which happens to be Venus,
but they present that referent differently.
They make reference to Venus via different senses.
And this theory, this theory that says
that for all the linguistic signs,
there are two levels of meaning,
the level of sense and the level of reference.
This theory can explain both of these facts
about identity statements like two.
It can explain why these sentences are informative
and it can explain why that information
can be non-linguistic and empirical.
It's possible for one to already know
the linguistic information.
One knows the sense of Sean Carter, the meaning.
And one knows the sense of the term or name Jay-Z.
But then one can find out, oh!
Oh!
These two terms that I already know the meaning to,
they refer to the very same guy.
That is how Frege solves the puzzle.
Oh, but there's more, there's like way more.
The regular connection between a sign, its sense
and its referent is of such a kind
that to the sign, there corresponds a definite sense
and to that, in turn, a definite referent.
The point Frege is making there is just that
in the normal case, for one name, there is one sense
and then one referent, one to one to one.
While to a given referent, an object,
there does not belong only a single sign.
But if instead we start with the object, the referent,
there might be more than one name for that object, right?
There might be Jay-Z and Sean Carter and Hove.
That's another one, I think.
The same sense has different expressions
in different languages or even in the same language.
Okay, this is an additional point,
but Frege thinks that the same sense
can be the meaning of different terms.
It might be, I'm sort of playing a little fast
and loose here, but it might be that Jay-Z
and Hove, H-O-V, I'm pretty sure that's how it's spelled,
those are two different names,
but maybe they present him in the same way.
So they have the same sense, two different names,
same sense, same referent.
That's also possible, Frege thinks.
And then there's the case of what are today
commonly called empty names.
These are names that are meaningful,
but they don't refer to anything.
It may perhaps be granted that every grammatically
well-formed expression representing a proper name
always has a sense.
This just means that if a name is meaningful,
it has a sense.
But this is not to say that to the sense,
there also corresponds a referent.
But just because a name is meaningful and has a sense
doesn't mean that there really is an object in the world
that is referred to by that name.
Frege is going to give us an example right now.
The words, the celestial body most distant from the earth
have a sense, but it is very doubtful
if they also have a referent.
The phrase, the celestial body most distant from the earth,
that's a perfectly meaningful label,
it's a definite description, it has a meaning.
Frege just thinks, and I think he's probably right,
that there is no object in space that is the one object
that is the farthest away from the earth.
Maybe because like space curves or I don't know,
but there might not be a thing out in the world
that's referred to in that way,
but nonetheless, the name can be meaningful.
Here's another thing that's very important to Frege.
It's important that the sense of a term is public.
Different people can mean the same thing by a term,
and so they have to be able to share the sense.
And for that reason, the sense of a term,
the mode of presentation contained in the name,
blah, blah, blah, all of that,
that's not the same as some private mental thing,
some conception or image in your mind.
It can't be that because that thing in your mind is private.
No one else can see your conception can have it.
And so whatever private stuff is going on in there,
that can't be what Frege means by sense.
The referent and sense of a sign
are to be distinguished from the associated conception.
The associated conception is whatever shows up in someone's mind
when they hear this name, and Frege is saying,
that is not the sense, and that's not the referent,
that's some other thing.
This constitutes an essential distinction
between the conception and the sign's sense,
which may be the common property of many,
and therefore is not part or a mode of the individual mind.
Frege's point there is simply
that the sense of a term is common property.
It's something that multiple people can share.
And you can see why Frege thinks this.
The sense is the meaning of the name,
and he wants two different people to mean the exact same thing.
If the meaning of a name was some private thing
inside your own mind,
then you could never mean the exact same thing
by a term as someone else.
This wasn't in the part of this paper that I've assigned,
but Frege also thinks that the sense of a name or a term
determines the referent.
That is, why is this referent the referent of this name, right?
Why is Jay-Z the name of this guy?
Oh, well, it's because there's some description,
there's some characterization,
there's some mode of presentation of this guy
that's associated with the name,
and he meets that description.
He fits that mode of presentation.
Frege thinks something like that.
Also, there's this famous telescope analogy
that explains how all of these things are related,
and I'm gonna use this in my picture of that.
That's a pretty good drawing.
Let's read the quote and figure out what Frege is saying.
Somebody observes the moon through a telescope.
I compare the moon itself to the referent.
It is the object of the observation mediated by the real image
projected by the object glass in the interior of the telescope
and by the retinal image of the observer.
The former, I compare to the sense,
the latter to the conception or experience.
Okay, so there's a person who's looking through a telescope
and they see the moon,
and there's three things involved here.
There's the moon, there's the image of the moon
on the piece of glass inside the telescope,
and then there's the image on the inside of the person's eye
on their retina.
That's like the back of the eye or something.
There's the image that is reflected inside their eyeball.
The moon is analogous to the referent.
It's the object out there in the world.
The image on the inside of the telescope
is analogous to the sense, right?
Because a sense is a public thing,
and different people could come
and look through the telescope
and they would see the very same image
on the glass inside the telescope.
It's not the object out there,
but it's still something public
that different people can interact with.
It's common property.
And then there's the image on a person's retina.
That is analogous to the conception,
the mental conception.
That's a totally private thing.
Only you can see the images on the back of your retina.
No one else can come and look at those.
The purpose of this analogy
is just to explain how all of these things,
the referent, the sense,
and the conception are related to one another.
Frege actually doesn't care about mental stuff,
like your associated mental conception
or experience or whatever.
This is irrelevant really.
When he's talking about the meanings of terms,
he's just talking about the sense and the reference.
But he has to mention all of this stuff about conception
just so that his readers don't accidentally
or mistakenly think that when he talks about sense,
he's talking about some private mental thing,
he's clarifying that that's not what he's talking about.
Okay, now things get real.
Up to this point,
we've only been talking about names
or maybe subject expressions,
whatever.
We weren't talking about whole sentences.
Now, Frege is going to start talking about the sense
and the reference of whole sentences,
like Sean Carter is rich or Jay-Z is rich.
The thing you have to absolutely understand
in order to understand what happens in this part of the paper
is the idea of compositionality.
I have a whole other video explaining compositionality
and if you haven't watched that,
you got to go watch it, link in the description.
But very briefly, the idea is this.
The meaning of a whole sentence is composed of
or built up out of the meanings of the individual parts.
So the meaning of this sentence, Jay-Z is rich,
is made up out of the meaning of Jay-Z,
the meaning of is, and the meaning of rich.
You put those together,
there's some rules for that,
and you get the meaning of the whole sentence.
This is a fact about language,
and Frege takes it very seriously.
He thinks that compositionality is operating
at both the level of sense and reference.
If terms, if linguistic terms have sort of two levels of meaning,
they have the level of sense and the level of reference,
then those, the sense bits are all going to add up together
to give you the sense of a whole sentence.
And also, all the references are going to add up together
to give you the reference of a whole sentence.
So what he's trying to do in this part of the paper,
the middle of the paper,
is he's trying to figure out,
okay, I've already basically said
what the sense and reference of like a name is,
what's the sense and reference of a whole sentence?
And he's constrained in his answer to that question
by compositionality.
The only thing that could be the sense of a sentence
is something that could be made up out of
the senses of those individual words or terms.
And the only thing that could be the reference
of a whole sentence is something
that could be made up out of
the references of all the individual words or terms.
The first thing that Frege considers
as a possible sense or reference
of a whole declarative sentence
is what today we call a proposition.
Frege doesn't call it a proposition,
he calls it a thought.
Now, that's confusing because normally
when you think of thought,
you think of a private mental thing,
and that's not what Frege is talking about here.
When he says thought,
he means the publicly available meaning of a sentence.
Is this thought now to be regarded
as its sense or its reference?
So the question is,
is the proposition or the thought associated with a sentence,
is that the sense of the sentence
or the reference of the sentence?
Let us assume for the time being
that the sentence has a reference.
If we now replace one word of the sentence by another,
having the same reference,
but a different sense,
this can have no influence
upon the reference of the sentence.
Ah, so Frege has found a little test
to tell whether the proposition
or the thought or whatever
is the sense of the sentence or the reference.
He realizes that there are these terms,
Sean Carter and Jay-Z,
which have different senses,
but the same reference.
And so if you switch between the two,
if you swap out this name,
Sean Carter,
and you put in this name Jay-Z
into the same sentence,
that's the difference between three and four,
if you swap them out
because these two names have the same reference,
then switching between these two sentences
should not change the reference of the whole sentence,
but it should change at least sometimes
the sense of these sentences.
We're just switching out two terms.
We're going from a term with one sense
to a term with a different sense.
So these two sentences
should have different senses.
But because these two names have the same reference,
these two sentences should have the same reference.
Frege is trying to figure out
whether or not the proposition
or the thought expressed by a sentence
is the sense or the reference.
Well, there's this constraint.
These two sentences
will have different senses,
but the same reference.
Yet we can see that in such a case,
the thought changes.
Frege notices that these two sentences
express different propositions.
They express different thoughts.
So the thought cannot be the reference of a name
because the thought changes between these two,
but the reference can't change
because this name has the same reference as this name,
this has the same reference as this.
These are referentially the same.
So if something changes,
if the thought changes,
then the thought has to be the sense,
not the reference.
The thought, accordingly,
cannot be the reference of the sentence,
but must rather be considered as the sense.
Okay, so having figured out
what the sense of a whole sentence is,
it's the proposition expressed by that sentence,
the next question is, well, what's the reference?
What is the reference of a declarative sentence
like this or like this?
Sean Carter is rich.
Jay-Z is rich.
We know what these names refer to.
They refer to the guy.
What do the whole sentences refer to?
And once again, when figuring this out,
Frege is constrained by compositionality.
Whatever this thing the reference is,
it's gonna have to somehow be built up out of
the references of all the individual parts.
And this gives Frege an argument
for why the reference of a declarative sentence like this
is that sentence's truth value.
The truth value of a declarative sentence
is just whether or not the sentence is true or false.
There's two possible truth values.
True is one of them, false is the other.
You know, this sentence, Jay-Z is rich.
That's true.
Its truth value is true.
So Frege thinks that this whole sentence
refers to truth or the true.
That's what it refers to.
Okay, weird, but he has an argument
for why he thinks this has to be the case.
The reference of a whole declarative sentence
has to be composed up
out of the references of the individual parts.
Therefore, any change in the reference
of any of the individual parts
must result in a change in the reference of the whole sentence.
And whenever there is not a change
in the reference of the individual parts,
like when switching between three and four,
the references of all of these parts,
this name, this, this, this name, this, this,
the references of all this stays the same
when you switch from three to four.
So the reference of these whole sentences
has to stay the same.
Therefore, whatever the references
of these declarative sentences are,
they have to be the same.
These two sentences have to have the same reference
because all of their parts have the same reference
because Sean Carter and Jay-Z
are two different names with the same reference.
These two names are what's called co-referring terms.
Co-referring terms.
Co-referring terms.
They refer to the same thing.
And so this test that Frege has come up with is,
oh, well, if you swap out one term
for another term that's co-referring,
right, if you go from sentence three to sentence four,
if you do this swap,
you have to always preserve
the reference of the whole sentence.
So then the question for Frege is very simple.
What is something about these sentences
that always stays the same
whenever you swap out co-referring terms?
Whenever you go from a sentence like three
to a sentence like four,
what stays the same every time?
Well, it's not the thought.
It's not the cognitive value.
The thought changes.
That's the sense and that changes.
It's the truth value.
Whenever you swap in a different name for this guy,
the resulting sentence will always have
the same truth value as these two.
And there it is, hove.
Hove is rich.
That's true as well.
This is true, this is true, and this is true.
You're never gonna be able to get a sentence
that just switches in a co-referring term here
and all of a sudden that sentence is false
whereas all of these remain true.
You're never gonna get that
because the truth value always stays the same
when you swap in co-referring terms
and that is Frege's argument
for why the truth value of a declarative sentence
is the reference of that sentence.
And the same would hold if these sentences were false, right?
If instead of saying Sean Carter is rich,
this sentence said Sean Carter is enshrined
in the country music hall of fame,
well then three would be false
but then the same sentence where you swap in Jay-Z,
that would also be false.
Hove would also be false.
Any sentence that is false of Sean Carter
is also false of Jay-Z, is also false of Hove.
Swapping out these names with different senses
but the same reference changes the thought or proposition
but never changes the truth value.
At least that's true in the case
of simple sentences like this.
More complex sentences with like quotations
and things like that, this won't work
but we're not gonna worry about that now.
Let's just read Frege's argument for this conclusion.
If our supposition that the reference of a sentence
is its truth value is correct,
the latter, that is the truth value,
must remain unchanged
when a part of the sentence is replaced
by an expression having the same reference
and this is in fact the case.
Right, cool, that's just what we were saying.
Leibniz explains,
That's my best shot pronouncing the Latin.
It means equal are those which for each other
mutually substituted can be saving the truth.
And what that means in comprehensible English
is just that what it is to say
that two things are the same thing
is that every sentence that's true of one
is true of the other.
What else but the truth value could be found
that belongs quite generally to every sentence
concerned with the reference of its components
and remains unchanged by substitutions
of the kind in question.
Frege is asking what could it be that stays the same
when you keep doing this substituting
other than the truth value
and the implied answer to this question
though he doesn't say it in the paper,
the implied answer is nothing.
There's nothing other than the truth value
that fits this role
and therefore the truth value of a declarative sentence
has to be its reference.
Okay, those are all the major claims in the paper.
There's a whole bunch of other weird grammatical stuff
in the second half of the paper,
but no one ever talks about that
and I'm not assigning that to my students.
So this video is done.
