If we are gaining the power of gods, then without the love and wisdom of gods, we self-destruct.
That we are gaining the power of gods is now both a given and unavoidable. So what is the gain,
the love and wisdom of God's curve that gets there in time?
Greetings, future fossils. Welcome to another episode of the podcast that explores our place in time.
And as I'm sure most of you already know, our location, our address in the landscape of time
is right at the crux of what chaos theorists call a catastrophic bifurcation. A shift between one
way of living in the world together and a completely different way of seeing and understanding
our surroundings and our participation in them to help us make sense of this turbulent transition
between worlds. This week's guest, Daniel Schmockdenberger of the Neurohacker Collective,
joins me for a conversation about complex systems thinking and macroeconomics that I found
surprisingly engaging. But as Daniel says later in this episode, that's just evidence that gaining
insight into structural incentive and value systems, or to put it in different terms,
starting to understand the operating principles of the ecology of mind in which all of us exist,
what motivates us, and of course how we can design better systems that allow us all to win
together. On that note, before we begin this episode, I want to thank all of you who have taken
a moment to rate and review this show on iTunes, your five star ratings, and creatively enthusiastic
reviews have been very helpful getting this podcast into the ears of like minds and kindred
spirits, and I appreciate you. I also want to give a shout out to Aaron Young, the newest
supporter of Future Fossils podcast on Patreon. I'm up to almost 80 subscribers on Patreon right
now, which is really exciting and very close to my year end goal of 100 people who believe that
this podcast is facilitating important conversations about our future and helping people make sense of
the complex and confusing times that we live in. So if you want to join that group and help ensure
that I can continue devoting my full attention to intelligent and inspiring creative media,
then you can join Aaron and 77 other people and counting over at patreon.com slash
Michael Garfield, where you can also find for free an extensive amount of the music that I've
produced over the years, including the kind of stuff that you're listening to now, as well as the
science fiction audiobook I just released, an oral history of the end of reality, which explores
the social, psychological, and spiritual consequences of AI forgery and our decaying
ability to agree on the facts. Kind of a dirge for simpler times and an ode to the vast new
landscapes of possibility emerging before us. Lastly, before we begin this episode, a big thanks to
Future Fossils podcast sponsor the Body Hacking Conference here in Austin, Texas from February
2nd to 4th of 2018. Body Hacking Con is about human augmentation, personal expression, democratized
medicine, and bringing the DIY ethos to our own bodies. They're bringing people together from
all industries interested in what's happening right now and body hacking all over the world to
make connections, friends, and share experiences and resources in order to build the best possible
future. Some of these folks, including conference director Trevor Goodman and one of this year's
key presenters from Australia, my buddy Meow Ludo Meow Meow, have been on Future Fossils before. I
highly recommend that you go back and listen to their episodes and if you're interested in that
juicy confluence of intelligent and creative people, then go to bdyhax.com. And with that,
I release you into the wilderness of this wonderful conversation with Daniel Schmockdenberger of the
Neurohacker Collective. Thank you so, so much for listening to this show. Thanks for telling your
friends enjoy and have a beautiful day. So shall we begin? We shall. Awesome. Daniel, it's a pleasure
to have you on Future Fossils. It's a pleasure to be here with you. Like we were discussing just
before the call, I heard you talking on Future Thinkers and was impressed with your conversation
with them and the the scope of your synthesis of like ecological thinking and how it is that we
can create real powerful opportunities for ourselves in a regenerative economy over the next few
decades. And you're clearly in this space already with your your various enterprises. So I'm I'm
curious to know how you got to this point in your life, how you how you decided that thinking about
this biggest you know this big picture stuff was important to you and why it became like personally
significant to your work. I had no it's great. It's great to kind of understand where people
are coming from into this. I had a fortunate early exposure. So I grew up on the work of Buckminster
Fuller and complexity science and systems theory and futurists. And so it's kind of always been
the come from and then fairly early on I got into activism work and it started with animal rights work
and then environmental work and then social dynamics work. And so I was working with different NGOs
that you know starting really young like nine years old homeschooled that got to be a huge part
of the homeschooling and having some systems theory background already I was able to see that
the causes of the issues weren't being well addressed and the interconnection of the issues
and the generator functions weren't being well addressed. And as a result, the really well
intentioned and very hard earned success is largely displaced problems elsewhere. There were
externalities even to the positive projects that were trying to solve externalities. And so
you know where we would think of something like the death of elephants as an externality of an
incentive system that makes their tusks or something. There was a project that I was working on to
try and protect elephants at a preserve Greenpeace and World Wildlife Federation a number of groups
working on it. And the solution was bigger fences around the preserve and harsher sentencing for
poachers. And after a tremendous amount of work that happened and it actually succeeded in terms
of keeping poachers from poaching elephants in that area. It of course didn't address the poverty of
those people who had really no other solutions at all. It didn't address the worldview towards
animals at all as a whole, the black market on various other animals. It didn't address the
macroeconomic system that creates poverty inexorably. It didn't address any of those things. So
the same group of poachers moved to start hunting the mountain gorilla and the white rhino.
And because I was working on enough different projects, I got to see those movements. And
you know, there was an existential devastation that started. It started with seeing all of the
suffering that humans were inducing unnecessarily on themselves and each other in the world. And then
at least there was some hope that there were projects working to resolve these. When
it became clear that the projects working to resolve them weren't really resolving them,
I started to look deeper and say, where else is that happening? Where are the other
environmental projects? So we work really hard to prevent a dam that's going to have ecological
catastrophe. But then that means that the energy from the dam doesn't come in. So the coal plant
comes in or, you know, like there wasn't a deep enough focus kind of anywhere at how do we actually
do complex system problem solving and design and management. We only knew how to do simple
systems or complicated systems and we're doing complex systems and the toolkit was obviously
broken. Right. And so as I started diving in deeper there, kind of early in teenage hood,
I saw that the trends that were happening in terms of biodiversity loss and in terms of
peak resource use with nitrogen, phosphorus, etc. If we just continued those curves at their
current rate, while also looking at the positive curves of increase in solar or whatever kind
of positive curves, we only got to an adequate evolutionary place to deal with the negative
curves after extinction. And so the forecast, you know, and this was basic methods of forecasting,
but the forecast was inexorable self termination. And so then I'm thinking not only of, you know,
unnecessary human induced suffering and the failure of the solutions, but existential risk
at large. And so of course, the idea of succeeding at some partial set was broken,
right? The idea that I can have success in my personal life working on some of the problems
and other ones are continuing to happen. And I know about them. I know what it's like in a factory
farm, right? I know what it's like in extreme poverty. But I can be stoked because I'm succeeding
in some small area. I can only be stoked if I can disconnect my empathy from what's actually going
on, which is a kind of being a psychopath, right? Some level of abstract psychopathy.
Yeah, cognitive dissonance is a characteristic of the modern human. I think it's like it's necessary.
It is. Because we have a system where structural violence and externality are implicit throughout
the system completely. So participation with it at all requires participation with that, right?
And so it was clear that there were no models of success that could actually work for me,
and that killing myself to get off of the kind of like crazy bit of violence didn't help anyone
else. And so the only thing was, is there a solution to all of this that's actually viable?
And it was clear that it wasn't going to be more of the kinds of things we were already doing that
weren't working. It was going to be, you know, we've got in the for-profit world something like
$70 trillion trading hands every day that is almost all externalizing harm somewhere along a supply
chain. Then if I was to allocate a billion nonprofit dollars really intelligently per day,
I'm still five or six orders of magnitude too small in my effect. How do we have a system where
human agency has been predisposed to be directly and indirectly harm causing? How do we change
that generator function at scale where all human agency is disposed by the nature of the system
to be omnipositive? And that if you do that, you can get off of the current curves and have a
discrete nonlinear phase shift, which evolution does, single cell to multi cell, etc. And it was
clear that nothing less than a discrete nonlinear phase shift was adequate. And so then, you know,
the rest of the process has been what are the necessary and sufficient criteria of the post
transition world? And how do we actually support that emergence?
So this is around what time are you starting to think this way? Like how long have you been
in this in the pocket with this one?
The assessment of definitely self terminating on the current path was around 15.
Yeah. And so yeah, because there's that that thing about, you know, neglect in the traditional
presentation, our mutual friend Bruce Damer talks about how he was helping Ray Kurzweil with the
images for his book, like the graphics for his book, and that he was responsible for giving
the Kurzweil the infamous hockey stick chart, which is appropriate because Bruce is a Canadian.
And the, you know, he makes this point with the chart that, you know, a lot of this stuff was
absurd. But the timing of those predictions aside, you're looking at the collapse of that complex
dynamic that you're discussing here into, this is like the common problem with science fiction.
It's like even if Ray Kurzweil gets all of them, even if his projections are all totally accurate
and the oceans die in like 2033, we never get to 2045. It's the neglect of, well, like any
science fiction film where it shows one, one thing that's been torn 100 years into the future,
and then they're still driving, you know, internal combustion engine cars around or whatever.
So seeing it this way, knowing that there has to be this discrete jump and to be clear, like
this kind of thing does happen, it's not like you said, just the transformation and individuality
from like individual cells to a multicellular organism. But it's even you see it even within
human culture, where we start to organize at a larger level. And so the units of human society
that were at once the the major organizing unit like the city becomes an organ in the body of
something larger. So like, I guess this might just be a tangent, but fuck it, let's write it and see
what it takes us. How do you understand your work as a junior process or an organ within a
superior process or superorganism in this particular thing? Like, is that a framing metaphor
that you use? Is this how you understand the nature of this shift? And like, in that sense,
like what kind of role do you and the work that you're doing fit into that?
So if we think about that question, in light of the name of this podcast, Future Fossils, right?
So we think back about all the civilizations that we know of in recorded history. And one
of the first valuable insights is that they all ended, right? And so if we read Joseph Tainter
in the collapse of complex societies, we see certain patterns of, and there are updates to
that work since then, but we see certain patterns of how collapse occurs. But whether we're thinking
about Sumeria or Mesopotamia or the Byzantine Empire or Rome, like none of them exist anymore.
And think, and there were actually elements of unsustainability in their own growth patterns
that led to their self termination. Even if there was an attack from outside, it was usually after
there was increasing decoherence where they weren't able to have the military capacity that they
previously had, et cetera. But they were all local collapses, right? The collapse of that empire is
because it was wasn't the collapse of everything. And so we're in a unique position now where
the only meat, like the thing that we're looking at having collapse is a fully globalized civilization.
And the collapses are all between catastrophic and existential, right? The collapse scenarios.
And we are currently on the path for collapse scenarios. And so when, and it's important to get
that many of those early cultures actually did ruin their environment. They had unsustainable
agriculture that desertified the area and then people starved, right? But they didn't ruin
the life support capacities of the planet writ large, right? Which is very different. And a lot
of them killed each other militarily, but they didn't have nukes that could leave nuclear winter
for a long time. And so if you think about the evolution of history from a game theoretic
perspective, and you think of it as the evolution of power and win-lose games. And so you have tribes
that so long as the resource is plentiful relative to the population, don't bother killing each other,
and as soon as the population outstrips the resource, they're competing implicitly for scarce
resource, it becomes important to then compete explicitly. And so then one tribe kills the
other one that has the riverfront. Now they don't have the competitor for the same resource,
and they have the riverfront life is better for them. Now all the other tribes who didn't do that
have to do that by default, or they're going to die from the ones learned to start doing military
strategy as a method of advancing. And so then you have a big tribe, little tribes can't compete.
So if you have them band together, and now you get groups of tribes, and then this continues
to happen. And then you get villages and kingdoms and nation states and global economic trading
blocks, and they increase their competitive power in a win-lose game on all sides. And so that means
military power goes up. It means the ability to extract scarce resource from the environment,
including unsustainably faster than it can reproduce. And they increase their propaganda
capacity to disinform the other side and have more adherence on their side. When you add the
hockey stick part of an exponential tech curve to that win-lose game theoretic dynamic, and you get
exponential military capacity, where no side can actually deploy the power necessary to win
without destroying the playing field, you get exponential extraction capacity where you actually
run up to the fragility limit to the biosphere, you get exponential information tech applied with
the incentive to disinform, and you get now a post fact world where nobody knows what the
fuck is true about anything. You get to the place where to try and continue to win at a win-lose
game with exponential power equals omni-lose-lose equals existential collapse. And so either you
figure out an omni-win-win game or you self-terminate. And that's the discrete phase shift. Basically,
we've been in a win-lose game theoretic structure for a very long time, and that's the phase that's
ending. And so then we either have a discrete phase shift up to an omni-win-win kind of model
in which when you say what is the larger body that they become organs of, all of the separate
in-groups that define themselves in relationship to an out-group in a win-lose way actually dissolve
here. And it doesn't mean there aren't levels of self-organization. A city is a real thing, right?
It has a natural self-organizing dynamic. Tribes within it are real things, but the win-lose dynamics
at the boundary have to go away. If you look at the cells within tissues, within organs, within
organ systems in your body, your kidney's not competing against your liver for scarce resource.
If it was, you would be dead very quickly. And so they have boundaries, right? Your cell has a
boundary, but energy and information transmit across that boundary in an intersymbiotic way with
the other things around it, right? And the same is true across all of the boundaries, right? Plants
and animals and gas exchanges. So that's the key thing we have to get. So the only thing about
future fossils, there won't be future generations to be able to look at the fossils of this culture
if we don't actually make this phase shift up. And if we do, they won't have to be looking at
fossils because we will actually get down intergenerational knowledge transfer.
So we are at a unique point in that whole historical curve right now.
So I happen to be reading two books that you alluded to very strongly in this last bit.
Timothy Morton's Hyper Objects, if you're familiar with this one, Philosophy and Ecology
after the end of the world, talking about the influence of this complex and distributed
phenomena that we have to take as real, and a phenomenon like global warming.
And then the other one is James Peacarse's Finite and Infinite Games. And this is exactly a vision
of life as play and possibility. The fact of it is, we transit here, if successful, it sounds
like you're saying we transit from that finite zero sum type thinking to a game, the goal of which
is to keep the game going for as long as possible. To continuously better the quality of the game.
Yes. And so that rewards all participants. And so I guess the, you know, the question then
is at its base, an economic question, isn't it? And so I think this is a very fun topic.
Like I can tell that I've become a boring grownup because I'm now like fascinated by economics.
And it's a big part of it is watching the conversation in the last few years shift around
cryptocurrencies, shift around universal basic income. A lot of these things that I didn't really
give much, I didn't put much stock in quote unquote, when they first appeared on my radar to
mix metaphors. But the thing that's always stuck with me is something that Doug Rushkoff brought
up in present shock in terms of which, you know, he's the one that introduced me to Finite and
Infinite Games. He said that you look at the really thriving societies and it's the societies for whom
the money lost value if you kept it out of circulation, where the money was pegged to the
decay of some real world resource, because we don't really, you know, news doesn't gain value
when it's a day old, bread doesn't gain value when it's a day old. And so he was, he was suggesting
that some sort of negative interest could be applied to things so that it propels everyone.
It encourages and incentivizes everyone to keep their money in circulation. It encourages a culture
of micro philanthropy. I mean, that to me seems like the real, the real thing. Or like, is that,
is that something that you're thinking about talking about in all of this? Or like, where,
what do you see as the potential strategies for this whole thing to flip overnight?
So when you say that you're a boring adult because you're getting interested in economics,
if you're getting interested in economics as a philosopher, it actually means that you're just
gaining deeper insight into how structural incentive and structural value systems and
disposition work, which means you are not being a good philosopher if you aren't thinking about
those things. And so if we say, all right, how much is air worth economically? Right now it's
worth nothing at all. And because it's worth nothing at all, and we make decisions based on
financial statements, right? Then we will pollute the air and burn it up. Now how much is
gold worth? It's worth a lot, a certain amount per ounce. So we will destroy an ecosystem if we need
to to get the gold out from underneath it to put it in bars in a safe that is not doing anything
for anyone other than affecting a financial accounting sheet. And I want the gold because
since we see it as relatively scarce in a win-lose game structure, if there are scarce things that
were that not everyone can have it abundantly, then I get differential advantage by having it.
If something is abundant like air where everybody can have it, then it gives me no competitive
advantage over anyone else so fuck it, we don't value it. Now if we were valuing what's really
relevant to life support or to quality of life or to systemic advantage, of course that would be
flipped. But in a fundamentally win-lose game theoretic structure, we value things that are
relative to our capacity to win at that game. And that is pretty much exclusively pathological.
It doesn't mean that it didn't serve some relevant evolutionary value, but that value is at the end
of its life cycle. And so let's talk about what the future of macroeconomics has to be and then
so the concept of demarrage, negative interest. Obviously when we have interest, we have an
incentive to keep money out of supply, keep resources out of supply, which means that it's
going to maximize extraction and have and maximize hoarding, right? And you're also going to get
increasing wealth inequality because those who have more will get more compounding interest on
that and etc. So demarrage is an interesting thing to address some of that nowhere near
adequate and it creates some of its own problems, which is now you have an artificial incentive to
make transactions occur and transactions movement in the system actually is entropy if the
action is not actually relevant, right? So system wide incentives of almost any kind are
usually problematic, right? So we need to actually go to a much deeper level of insight here. So we
say what is it that we're really trying to do? One way of defining it in terms of macroeconomy
would be we need to rigorously align the incentive of every agent and whether the
agent's an individual or a group of people, a government, a corporation, whatever,
we need to rigorously align the incentive of every agent with the well-being of every other
agent and of the commons with no gap. And to the degree that there's gap, meaning that
two agents have misaligned interest and you have direct harm, right? Direct competition,
which can express itself militarily or through corporate competition that can involve disinformation
or whatever, right? Or to the degree that someone's interest and the well-being of the commons are
misaligned, then you get externality. As you run exponentially more energy through a incentive system
that externalizes harm or that causes direct harm, exponential externality is existential.
That's a lot of x's, right? But is existential? So we will be is the point. Yeah, if that goes down.
And so in the face, you can think of exponential tech and specifically distributed exponential tech
as increasing our agency vector, our capacity to affect the world. But if we are not increasing
the goodness of our decision making, right, then if you have more ability to affect the world in
the way we've always affected the world, we've always murdered, we've always caused war, we've
always, we've always used war as a reasonable way to solve problems. And in fact, it's really
important to get that in every society that had private ownership, you had increasing wealth
inequality until the wealth inequality was so much that war was the only mechanism to stabilize it,
to address it. In every democratic society, you have increasing polarization and radicalization
of political views until war is the only way of stabilizing it. And yet, when you have exponential
tech, you don't get to have war anymore and make it through. And so we don't know how to do
civilization without war, right? We don't know how to do it where we actually have reasonable
ways of resolving differences and etc. So it's a fundamental shift. So if you say we're really
talking about getting off win-lose game theory completely, that's the phase that we're at.
That's of course unprecedented, right? It's unprecedented in the whole story. But as you said,
unprecedented shit actually is the precedent of universe when you take a very long view,
which is, you know, let's say that life originated on this earth and the model of
cosmogenesis that we use commonly is true. Neither of those are true, but let's just
take them as true for a minute, because it's a good analogy. Then you got 12 billion years of
universe existing and doing all kinds of shit and making galaxies and stars and supernovas and all
this stuff and it never made life. And you would think if after 12 billion years of interactions,
it would have kind of exhausted its search base. So life is not possible and then fucking life happens
and it's totally unprecedented based on the things previous, right? And then you go on and on all of
human history 250,000 years right before the plow and there's we didn't actually have economics.
We only had ecology. We were part of an ecology, but we didn't have surplus. And without surplus,
you don't have private ownership, you don't have economics, right? So then economics emerged
unprecedented and on and on, right? So it is actually the precedent of universe in the long
view to do unprecedented shit. And so the the shift for us right now is if we look at Kurzweil's
curves of everything getting exponentially better in terms of compute power and the corresponding
power to make better biotech and address health issues and it can solve problems. It's true.
All of that's true. All those exponential positive curves are true. If you look at all of the decrease
in biodiversity and increase in pollution and damage of the biosphere and increase of existential
risk probability, all the negative exponential curves, they're all true too. And people cherry
pick the ones that they like from the data set to cause a confirmation bias. But when shit is
getting exponentially better and exponentially worse at the same time, neither of those are
actually happening. It's just that the phase is destabilizing, right? The movements away from
the homeodynamic centerline is getting further and further. That means you're moving from one
type of organizational complex system into a chaotic phase, which will be a liminal phase.
And then you'll get the emergence up into a higher degree of order or an entropic
drop down to a lower degree of order. That's the precipice we're on the verge of and it is not
economic. It's economics, governance, infrastructure, culture together, right? And we can say,
but economics is a good way of thinking of the heart of it because economics can be seen as the
interface layer between our values and the way we build the world. The value equation, right,
which is that the air is worth nothing because we're only valuing things to give us competitive
advantage. Our value systems get codified into an economic value equation of how much
actual value that confers real power we give different things, right? A whale swimming in the
ocean has no economic value to anyone currently. A dead whale on a fishing boat might be a million
dollars in whale meat. So this is why we are fishing out the oceans and causing species extinction
of mass, right? But that's a value system, right? That is a memetic, spiritual, existential,
ethical value system codified as a value equation that determines what we confer power and advantage
to, what ends up winning and how we actually build infrastructure in the physical world.
So changing that is actually at the heart of and requires change in infrastructure,
change in the corresponding social structures, governance, law, etc., and in the worldview.
So clearly this is not the kind of thing that's going to happen in a linear way because there's
an obvious chicken and egg with you've got to get people to shift, you've got to get a critical
mass of people up to a developmental level where they are able to think in the terms of the complex
systems in order so that they can start assigning an economic value or at least urging an economic
value for things like that living whale. Or as Christian Schvagerl talks about in the Anthropocene,
he talks about his discomfort with the notion but his sort of settling on it as a best strategy
that the World Economic Forum was examining how we could assign a value to the atmosphere
processing that a given acreage of rainforest in the Congo would provide so that those people are
able to participate in an economy without having to succumb to predatory international
development strategies. So that all makes sense, but again, you can't put a number on what you
don't see, right? And we know through work as developmental psychologists like Robert Keegan
at Harvard that it takes years for people to learn to think at a new structure of consciousness,
like a new layer of awareness to move out of, you know, self-interest and into a wider sense of
participation and therefore ethical responsibility, you know? So I don't know where you,
you seemed like you were shaking your head about the ecosystem services too, so I'd love to
break off wherever you want to break off into that. Ecosystem services sounds like a nice idea.
Like lots of kind of new economics ideas sound like a nice idea, and it's not that they have no
possible transitional relevance, but in the face of distributed exponential tech, it doesn't work
at all. And so, you know, we can just think about that as a defining criteria for a moment and say,
okay, with the distribution of tech, right? The first existential tech the world had was nuclear
bomb. We had two superpowers that had it because it was super hard to make, super expensive, and so
you could have those two spy on each other and have a mutually assured destruction system so
nobody could use it. And we could live in the relatively dreadful piece of the Cold War, right?
Now, of course, we have a lot more than two countries that have nuclear weapons and we have
nuclear weapons in places that we don't even know, but with exponential biotech and nanotech and AI
tech, etc., you have stronger than nuclear level capacity by non-state actors, radically distributed.
How do we make it through that is a very deep question, right? And it really is if you want to
think of it in a mythopoetic sense, which I think you actually have to. If we are gaining the power
of gods, then without the love and wisdom of gods, we self-destruct. And that we are gaining the power
of gods is now both a given and unavoidable. So what is the gain the love and wisdom of gods curve
that gets there in time? And so that that power is actually used for the good of the whole, because
if it's used against, which elicits counter against, which have that much power everywhere, then you
get self-destruct. And so it's important to really get that as a framing. So we don't think that the
things that have worked before, some modified version of them will work now, because it's a
radically different context. Okay, so environmental services. So if I have a rainforest or a marshland
or whatever, it's not worth anything right now. So if it gets cut down and turned into grazing land
for cattle or whatever, it's worth something. So how do I how do I keep it from getting cut
down? Well, can I make it worth more alive? Well, I can say it's sequestering so much CO2 and
stabilizing so much, you know, soil runoff when the rains come. And then if I can get a value on
that up to CO2 can be in terms of carbon credits and the, you know, whatever, right? Then maybe we
can keep it alive to the degree that that helps any ecosystem right now. I'm delighted as a long
term strategy, if what I'm in, several things wrong with it, if I'm incenting, if the way that
it's making money is sequestering CO2, then I want to start optimizing it for heavy sequestering CO2
plants, right? Or then it makes more money as opposed to the whole rich biodiversity that makes a
healthy forest or ecosystem, many of which are going to be less optimized for CO2 sequestration,
then, you know, another way of doing it, right? And so, but then I say, well, what are the other
things that it's doing that I don't know how to monetize yet? There are other plants that are
pulling out different kinds of particulate pollution and also what is the effect to the
pollinators and to the birds and to that, right? And when I really understand what a tree is doing,
it's doing an indefinite, like an undefinable number of positive things to an undefinable
number of beneficiaries. And so, when I take some small matrix-based subset, then I will start to
optimize for that small matrix-based subset, which is exactly the fucking wrong problem that we do
everywhere, which is we take a complex system, reduce it to a complicated system, optimize for
the complicated system, kill the complex system in the process. And so, if I take an n-dimensional
set of self-organizing complex metrics and I reduce them to 10 metrics and I run optimization
functions across those, it'll be the wrong thing every time. So, matrix-based optimization, right?
I can look at somebody's low-density lipoprotein, give them a statin drug and their low-density
lipoprotein comes down. Awesome. Except that the toxicity to the liver and the toxicity to the brain
that come with that statin and et cetera, and even why the cholesterol was high that might have been
the body protecting its vascular system from certain kinds of damage, I'm not measuring those
things, right? And when if I try to measure all of them, now I get so many metrics and trying to
optimization across them that it's actually uncomputable. It becomes an NP-complete issue and
you can't actually find optimization points. And matrix-based optimization has us always think
in terms of theory of trade-offs. So, okay, how much liver damage is worth? How much brain damage
is worth? How much risk of heart disease so that I optimize between those? But they're uncomment
rateable, right? How many dead rhinos is worth? How many parts per million of mercury in the water
is worth? How many tons of CO2 to know how to allocate my resources? I don't know, but I'm going
to find out because I am... That's not... No, but I mean, you're right, though. It's like...
You have to actually stop that for Uplift Connect. There's actually a socially toxic
dimension to life optimization for this very reason. It's like the sinister side of this
trend to reduce the human being to information. It's part of that, that you say, oh, in order to
adapt to my post-industrial work existence, then I have to optimize my life so that I can
get as close as possible to an imaginary Paleolithic human being or whatever it is.
It's bonkers. So, anyway, sorry, go on. There's a couple different issues there. One is,
are the things that we think we are optimizing for the right things at all, right? If we have the
ability to genetically engineer the human is our goal to make us all the best hyper-competers
possible, right? Like, as we get exponential tech and we can actually change what we've thought of
as nature itself, we get very deep ethical and existential questions at the core of it.
But what I'm actually bringing up here is that's a core issue. I'm bringing up a separate issue,
which is actually just a result of metrics. And there is actually a way around it, which is
from a information theory point of view, I want to know what is everything that matters
in a particular situation where we're going to try to do development or, you know, enhance
something. But I want to know what is everything that matters? What is it that matters about it?
How is it interconnected? Now, if I use metrics, and I've got this thing is on a
one to a thousand scale, and this is on a negative a thousand to a thousand scale, and this is this
kind of unit and this kind of unit, how do I co-mentorate them when they're actually non-fungible
types of value, right? This species goes extinct, but this other one, like, it gets a little bit
better there. Well, did they have a say in it? Are they considered beneficiaries of the system?
And so if instead, if I use a if I use a Boolean system, where it is a zero and one based
system, and really what I'm looking for is does this thing matter? Does this particular value
creature process matter? And if so, then we have to create a design that tends to it. And then we
can have a Boolean tree underneath it that says what matters about it. But when I have them in zero
and one, I don't look at how much do I damage it or how much do I take care of it. I define
thresholds of what take care means that creates the zero one, but then everything that matters
becomes a design constraint to an integrated complex system design process. And now I'm not
looking at these each of the issues separately and saying how much resource do I put into this one
and put into this one where it's the optimization point. I'm saying, how do I create an integrated
system design that tends to everything that matters here? And so this is a different
information theoretic way of approaching complex systems that is actually relevant to complexity.
So it seemed for a while there that you were getting into this whole stream
conversationally drifts into the area of where this change is going to come from. And clearly
because it is a planet wide phenomenon, it's going to come from everywhere at once in some sense.
But then you have the William Gibson future arrives and it's unevenly distributed, right?
So how do you see this? Well, it's more than holistic, right? Because holistic tends to
reduce things to systems. And I know from you, you know, your acquaintance with Ken Wilbur that,
you know, you don't see the individual or the system or the culture or the inner life world,
the experience as like reducible to one another, you know? So how do we understand this like
every like all scales of organization, all levels of complexity, co-occurrent shift in the order?
Like in what way do you expect to see it taking shape? You know, how are you
consciously participating in its emergence? Yeah. So there's a number of projects that were
working on related to these things. But I'll just go ahead and talk about how do we see the shift
occurring kind of macro. So just to use a very classic analogy, when we think about the transition,
the discrete nonlinear phase shift transition from caterpillar to butterfly, it goes through a
liminal phase, right, which is the chrysalis. And the caterpillar doesn't just like lose weight
and grow wings, the caterpillar actually goes through a very complete dissolution process.
And then the amino acids are re-sequenced by a second set of DNA, butterfly DNA, caterpillar DNA,
two different code bases. And so we can really see that the caterpillar's job was it had a
developmental phase where it was basically defined by net growth and consumption unrenewable gathering
the parts necessary to then be reassembled foundationally into a different code that was
not about net growth and consumption in the same way. If the caterpillar didn't go through that
phase shift, it would eat itself into extinction. So if you plotted those curves, you would say it
eats itself into extinction. But of course, as the blood starts getting rich enough to be able to,
you know, go into the chrysalis, you start getting the first imaginal cells kicking in,
which of course, the caterpillar body attacks as foreign invaders. But then they start to proliferate
more, triggers the movement into the chrysalis dissolution of the caterpillar recoding.
So this, and then just to complete that story, the butterfly is actually pollinating the plants
that the caterpillar decimated, but across these vast ecosystem spaces that helps the evolution
of the whole thing, right? So you get what was net, unsustainable, devastating, based on growth and
consumption was actually a developmental phase of something that's helping the evolution of
all those systems. So if we think about developmental phases, the 40 weeks of a baby in utero, if it
continued, would kill itself and the mom. And the phase shift of leave the birth canal,
umbilical cord cut is not predicted by the 40 weeks before, if you didn't know that thing was
going to happen, right? The same is true of a chicken inside of an egg shell. So you have all
of these discrete phase shifts associated with developmental phases. And I think it's fair
to look at humanity as being in a developmental phase defined by net growth and consumption
of the technological and scientific and, you know, et cetera capacities that are necessary. And
it was when loose game theory and capitalism and the military industrial complex, they got us those.
But now itself terminates if you keep it in that phase, just like the caterpillar or the
in utero baby, but you can then. And what the interesting thing is, if the baby comes out too
early, it dies, but if it if it stayed in later, it would die. It is there's a very kind of tuned
window where it both has to shift and can write it didn't have the capacity to before all the
developmental phases are defined by that. So the kind of economics that is necessary for a
distributed exponential tech world is not Marxism is not capitalism is not any version of
capitalism, not socialism or fascism. It's a fundamentally new shit that we couldn't have
even thought of before because we didn't have the tech necessary to mediate it. And so, you know,
if you have shitty jobs that nobody really wants to spend their life doing that a civilization
needs, you have to figure out how do you force people to spend a lot of their life doing the
shitty jobs. So you either give everybody meet everyone's needs as a state communist way,
and then the state has to force people to do the shitty job. So it's imperial, we don't like it,
or you let the free market force them, which is if they don't do the jobs, they starve.
But as soon as technological automation starts replacing the shitty jobs,
and it's non sentient doers of those things, the need for extrinsic control extrinsic incentive
of all the humans goes away. And it's a foundational axiom of every economic theory so far.
You think we're going to get rid of all shitty jobs?
Progressively. Yeah. And but basically it goes like this, if you can write a process for it,
you can automate it. It requires the technology to advance, but anything you can write a process
for you can automate. And without a GI, right, with just automation, and anything you can write a
process for no human wants to spend their whole life doing, it's fun for a little while, you might
get kind of zen with it, you might learn something, but ultimately, doing things that are discovery
and creativity and connection based is where our intrinsic incentive is going to come.
And so there happens to be a very nice match here, right, between what our generalist capacity
that can write processes and create technology to do those things can do, and what we actually
want to do in an intrinsic incentive based civilization, an economy, educational system,
etc. So where does the change come from? Like the imaginal cells, there will be initial prototypes.
That now, you know, we have plenty of eco villages that are prototyping some things,
and it's a part of the curve, right? And it's nice. But they actually don't offer a model for
how civilization could change comprehensively. They don't have the ability yet technologically to
automate the shitty jobs to, you know, have an internet of things that is taking an inventory
of the commons and being able to inform a data system that can help the enrichment of the commons,
right? It doesn't have those new forms of governance and economics factoring boolean
fields. So they're nice steps, but our ability to actually build prototypes of civilization
that have fundamentally new forms of economics, and governance, and infrastructure, right,
integrated complex system that have necessary and sufficient criteria for complexity,
that basically outcompete the current world systems comprehensively, because the increased
coherence of those systems makes a lot less resource per capita create higher quality of life
output across the entire set of things that we would consider. And so here's the real funny irony
is that the Omni-Win-Win system actually outcompetes the win-lose system while
obsoleting win-lose dynamics itself. And that is the transcendence of the win-lose phase into
the Omni-Win-Win phase, because in the win-lose phase, you get a fractal win-lose defect process
where I'm supposed to cooperate with these guys on my team to compete with the other side, but the
competitive mindset has gone at such that even those CIA and NSA and FBI are on the same team
called the United States are all competing with each other. And then different departments
within are competing with each other, and then different people are. And as a result,
you're actually getting fractal decoherence everywhere, which means radical inefficiencies,
right? And the best things that could be built won't be because the IP separated by
separate companies that are competing with each other, so they can't synthesize the knowledge.
And because information equals competitive advantage, we hide the information and then
intentionally disinform others. So then we live in a world where there's so much disinformation,
you can't par signal from noise. That is the decay of this system, fractal decoherence and
disinformation, that will make it possible for another system to actually radically out-competed
if it gets coherence down. And coherence actually does mean not win-lose dynamics within that system.
Sounds like you're in the sort of like Hyperion cantos where the character Ania is asked to,
she attempts to reduce Jesus' Sermon on the Mount to two words, and she offers,
choose again. Yours might be open source. That's the distillation here, is that if we really want to,
you know, like, was it a former CIA guy who has been strongly advocating the open sourcing of
intelligence agency work? And it sounds like that that's exactly what you would see if
you're going to get this sort of multi-cellularity, like the emergence of a like a planetary
individual. As you were discussing earlier, that there's there's a free exchange of information
across the cell membrane of participating subordinates. Although you got to be careful
with that, right? Because you're talking about like a what you might call like a whole arctic
organization. It's a nested natural hierarchy, not like an enforced hierarchy.
A hierarchy of inclusiveness. So a city includes all the tribes within it, the tribes don't
include the city. So there's different levels of consideration where the city is working on having
the tribes within them have omnipotent dynamics across them that the tribes on their own don't
necessarily have to think about. But it is not a hierarchy that has any of what we've thought of
as power structures involved. Open source, as we understand it right now, is necessary, but not
sufficient. And if you were to, you know, reduce it to a couple words, you could reduce it to a word,
which would be omni considerate, or then the applied side of that, which would be omni win win,
which means that any act of agency positively affects everything that it affects.
And what is the omni considerate is the consideration of how to do that, right? But
that can't just be an idea, it actually has to be the economic system itself and the governance
system, as well as culture and the tools that are necessary to do that.
So I know that we're running out of time here with you. And this is, this just points us to
what could end up ultimately being kind of a cliffhanger question, because I feel like we've,
we've created up, you know, the map of the problematic here. And we're starting to glance
at at least the contours of or textures of this, the flavor of some solutions. But I guess,
you know, if you have insight or suggestion into this particular area, maybe this would be a good
way to end it, which is, because we're all at different points along a, like a developmental
sequence, you know, like what we're able to consider, what we're able to attend to,
who we're able to take into consideration as an audience, or as the affected by our actions,
is, you know, limited by our ability to perceive and to cognize by, by that, like by how much we,
I, we are able to experience and thus I have the potential to identify with in our, in our worlds,
you know, like how much, how big is the planet of our experience, how far is that horizon.
And so, you know, when we talk about the way that this is going to work is by organizing things,
so that everyone's incentivized to participate in a way that benefits everyone. Is it even possible
to have that kind of, does not omniconsideration require omnipresence, like a total surveillance,
or like perhaps like a shift in our consciousness as individuals that would be
perhaps like difficult for us to contain psychologically? I mean, how does this even,
how do you see this being deployed, implemented?
Sure. So it's pretty hard for me to consider how to increase the quality of life of the creatures
in another galaxy, because I don't have very much sense data about them to know how to do that.
Fortunately, I also don't have the ability to affect them very much, so it doesn't really matter,
right? Now as soon as I start getting the ability to affect them, then understanding that matters.
So I need my sense systems and my information processing systems and my actuator systems connected.
If you think about from an evolutionary bio point of view,
it's never advantageous to select for sensory systems alone. It has to be sensory systems
that then can integrate that sense info with the other senses and then be able to have information
processing to inform choice and then have the actuator capacity to act on that choice within
a closed loop of the ability to sense the effects of that choice and learn, right? And so information
input, information processing, actuator output, closed loop, that's actually what gets selected
for is that triplicate. If you, if I could sense something that I couldn't make any sense of,
it would actually fuck me up. If I could sense something that I couldn't act on, it would mess
things up, right? Similarly, if I could act on things where I couldn't sense the effect of the
action, then I wouldn't be able to learn if that was successful or not. And so the triplicate of
those is what defines the evolutionary adaptiveness of a creature. Now what's happened for humans
is that our ability to make tools, which means our ability to identify some of our capacities,
our corporeal capacities and extend them in tools, I can see the way that my fists can bang
something, I can make a hammer that can do it better, I can make a wrench that can do what my
grip can do better, I can make a telescope that can extend my eye or a microscope, I can make
an industrial supply chain that can extend my entire production capacities, right? I can make
computational systems or an avocas, right, that can extend my, my processing capabilities.
But we can make these in isolation from each other so the triplicate is not bound anymore.
So right now we have a world where we have an amazing amount of sensory input possible, right?
We can see stuff from the Hubble, we can see stuff from electron tunneling microscopes,
and then we can see input from around the world on the internet. But that's decoupled from sense
making. So when I read stuff, I can't actually tell if it's fucking true or not. I can't put it
together with the other things that I know, right? And so I have a tremendous amount of sense input
that I can't make sense of. Then to the degree I make sense of something, like, okay,
their CO2 is actually a problem, I have no idea how the fuck to act on it. And then to the degree
that I act on things, like I go buy this laptop that we're talking on that comes from an industrial
supply chain that affected life on six continents, I actually have no sense coupling to what the fuck
was actually affected and how it was affected to inform if I want to make that choice or not.
So our information processing system is broken open, which is fundamentally non-adaptive,
and we're running exponentially more energy through that broken open information ecology.
And so omni-considerate, we basically, when you said this requires surveillance,
the sensory input and information processing and actuator output have to be coupled. If I'm
affecting shit, I have to know that I'm affecting it and be able to factor it. If I'm not affecting
it, it doesn't matter that much. So to the degree that our actuator technologies are giving us the
ability to affect things in the world, we have to know how they're being affected and then be able
to process that in a way that informs how we use that capacity. And that's why it's so exciting
to plant this recording in history, that Facebook has told everyone this week they will be letting
you know who paid for that ad. So this has been super fascinating. I know you've got a hop to
another meeting. I feel like we've really only started getting into the real meat of it. And I
would love to do this again with you sometime. Yes. I didn't actually answer your primary question.
So I want to say one thing to it. The people who already have the capacity and disposition
for omni-consideration will find each other and build systems that increase that capacity and
more people. And that will be an auto-poetic cycle. I think I agree that really it's not so much about
making this change occur as it is making it land as lightly as possible, making sure as many people
can get on that boat as possible, possibly widening the definition of person here. And where the boat
is actually a training ground for boat builders, right? And captains. And this is the key thing is
that those who are oriented to will build refugee solutions at scale for the massive
upcoming human migration issues. And they'll say how do we build refugee solutions since the people
won't be able to integrate with current societies because nobody wants them. And they won't be able
to go back to the places they came from for maybe forever. So they have to be enduring, which means
that we can't subsidize them forever. They have to actually be generative. And since we're basically
building cities from scratch that have to be generative at scale for a long time, this gives us
the opportunity to take the fallout of the current failing system and build a new world, what should
the education system there be? What should the economic system be? What should the governance
system be? What should the media system be? What should the, you know, all the human services be?
And how do we actually prototype that? There will be people similarly thinking about how do we create
macroeconomic systems that automatically are incenting win-win dynamics better so that everyone
who's participating in those will be growing in their own consideration by the byproduct of
interfacing with the system, educational systems, etc. So it is those at the front end of
a omniconcederation bell curve from the fortune of the life that exposed them to those things
have to self-organize and will self-organize to create systems that then bring that kind of
disposition to wider audiences, which then continue to do the same thing and then it scales.
Absolutely. Yeah, I think one of the most interesting things about this is imagining
how we can encourage people to play by new rules that benefit everyone. And with that,
how do people find you other than your totally pervasive Facebook ads for your amazing neotropic
products? Where do we send folks to follow up on you and the way that you're helping out?
So the ads you're speaking about are a company that we have called Neurohacker Collective,
Neurohacker.com is the website and there's one product out right now which is in the cognitive
enhancement space. But the goal of that, just to tie it together, is working on complex systems
medicine and complex system psychopharmacology to actually do a better job of having human
physiology predisposed in fundamentally balanced and positive ways. And there's a whole bunch
happening beyond what's obvious there so far. I have a blog you can check out,
CivilizationEmerging.com, just put up, has a little bit of stuff and Facebook.
Awesome. Daniel, it's been super fun. I think I didn't have to bust out my brand of time travel
sickness pills for this conversation, but we got close. I think you have a really clear vision
for all of this and it's a treat to have you on the show. Thanks a lot.
I love the show. I love the concept of it and what you're doing here and it's really fun to
be in the dialogue. So I look forward to more. Absolutely. Cool. Take care. Have a good one.
Take care, my friend. Thanks again for listening to Future Fossils podcast,
a member of the MindPod network along with such excellent shows as the Synchronicity Podcast,
Third Eye Drops. It's all happening with Zach Leary and many, many more. Go to mindpodnetwork.com
to check those out. And if you would like to support the show, give us a rating on iTunes
or stop over at patreon.com slash Michael Garfield. Thank you and have a most excellent Eon.
