Lecture 5, Broids Thinking
At this point in the course, we've covered some of the history of psychology,
and looked at some of the precursors in philosophy,
and some of the history of both experimental and clinical psychology.
We've looked at some of the methodologies that are used in psychology,
both the quantitative methodologies of experimentation and
correlational observation, and some of the qualitative
methodologies that are used as well. And then we had a lecture on
evolutionary theory and how that might impact our thinking about
human behavior. Today, we want to
look at another conception of who we are.
And this is a very old one in psychology. This is Sigmund Freud's
psychoanalytic theory. And psychoanalytic theory
has had a major impact on psychology. Today,
psychoanalytic theory is not used nearly as much as it originally was.
And in fact, even the therapy based
upon psychoanalytic theory, psychoanalysis, is not in as much use
as it was originally in psychology. And some of my
colleagues, in fact, are surprised that I'm still lecturing on psychoanalytic
theory. But I think it is an important theory to think about.
After all, if you ask the average person, name one psychologist,
they'll name Sigmund Freud. That's the one that immediately comes to mind,
even more so than Joyce Brothers and Dr. Phil.
Sigmund Freud is somebody that they remember. And when I tell
people I'm a psychologist, they'll immediately jump to the conclusion
I'm a clinical psychologist and I'm somehow intimately linked with
Sigmund Freud, even though my training is far distant
from psychoanalytic theory. But I think psychoanalytic
theory over and beyond that is also important because it's affected
many of our social institutions. And in fact, some of the basic
tenets of psychoanalytic theory are tenets we still believe in
in many of our social institutions. In fact, when I
start to talk about psychoanalytic theory in my classes,
I often come in and I say, alright, I've decided to run for
governor. And I have a new plan and we're going to save a lot
of money and move money from the prisons over to education.
And the way we're going to do that, it's a very simple plan, I've decided
that we ought to beat our prisoners whenever they must behave.
And the punishment will cause them to behave properly
because nobody likes to get beat. So this sounds like a good idea to me.
So that's my new plan. We're going to beat the prisoners until they behave properly
and then we'll allow them to go back out in society and empty out our
prisons. I say, what do you think of that plan?
And they, of course, immediately jumped at the ethical considerations and said,
well, you can't do that. That's inhumane. I say, well
ignore that for a minute. Let's just talk about whether or not that would work.
Do you think it would work? They say, well
no, I really don't think so. I say, well, why? I mean, if you were beat,
wouldn't you decide to behave properly so you could stop being beaten?
They say, well, it sounds
right, but I don't think so. I don't think it would work. Well, why wouldn't it work?
Well, I don't know, people just don't think that
way. Well, how do they think? What's causing their behavior if that's not
the case? Well, there's something that's kind of beyond their control
that's causing their behavior. Well, what is that? And sometimes they even come up
with the word, well, there's something at the unconscious level that's doing
this. And they have immediately jumped to a Freudian
concept here. That is his key concept, in fact, in psychoanalytic
theory, is that our behavior is driven at the
unconscious level. And the unconscious level is one of the most important
drivers of our behavior. And if you want to correct behavior, you have to do it
at the unconscious level. You can't do it at the conscious rational level
and get people to make rational decisions because part of this
is out of their control. That's a very Freudian concept, as we'll see.
So I think psychoanalytic theory has been very important
for our social institutions, our penal systems, our mental institutions,
and so forth. And we make a lot of assumptions about this
when we're trying to correct people's behavior. Okay, let's go back
and talk a little bit then about Freud and his life. We're going to talk some about that.
Then we'll talk more about the unconscious level. And finally
we'll talk about the three components of our
personality. This is a personality theory, after all, and there are a number
of personality theories. But this is one of the ones that
is most cited in psychology. Sigmund Freud
was born in Moravia, which is now Czechoslovakia
back in 1856. And he was born
to a Jewish family. His father was a
wool merchant and was not very successful. In fact
when he was four years old his father lost his job and they had to move to Vienna
to try to get another job. And they were not in real good circumstances
either. This was his father's second marriage. He had two boys
by his first marriage and by his second marriage there were
eight kids from that marriage, so they had ten kids in this family.
But Freud, to his credit, Sigmund Freud
went on and got a good education and then tried to decide
what to become. And as a Jewish boy he didn't
have much choice. If he wanted to be a professional in those days
about the only option was to become a doctor. So that's what he decided
to do. And he went to medical school and got a degree, a medical degree
and became a medical doctor. His particular specialty was
neurology. He was studying the nervous system. Originally
sort of the organic basis of things like neurosis
and other neurological disorders. But he became
increasingly interested in non-organic
and the psychological roots of neurosis and other
nervous system disorders. And he
was dealing with a set of usually
middle class, upper middle class women in his practice
and discovering that many of them had what was
classified as hysteria. This is a kind of old classification.
We'll mention this again when we talk about classification systems a little bit late
in the later lecture. But it's now called conversion disorder
and it was considered to be a disease
solely of women. It's why it's named hysteria after hystera
which is the uterus. And so it was expected that women had this
but men did not have it. And a conversion disorder or hysteria
some part of the body quits working. And it's
considered to be a conversion because it's converted a psychological problem
into a physical problem. So this may cause
blindness or the inability to hear or perhaps the left arm
is paralyzed or something like that. And they can't find any
organic neurological reason for this but it
apparently has a psychological cause to it. So those are the kinds of problems he was
interested in and trying to solve those using psychology.
And very early in his practice he discovered
that there was a fellow named Jean Charcot
who was practicing in Paris and using hypnosis
in his practice. And so he went for a year to study with Charcot
in Paris and he found Charcot giving all sorts of demonstrations.
Let me give you an example. Charcot was in a room
and he had an audience and he brought a woman down and put her into a hypnotic trance
and then told her that when the clock struck one
she would get up and open the window. And he took her out of the trance, had her sit down
there and sure enough when the clock struck one she went over and opened up the window and sat back down
again. And then Charcot said, now why did you open the window?
And she said, well I thought it was kind of hot and stuffy in here
and I thought we needed some air and that's the reason. Well Freud was
impressed, number one, that he got her to open the window
and number two, that she had no recollection of why she
had opened the window, that in fact she rationalized why she opened
the window. She already had behaved in a particular way so she used her rational
mind to try to come up with a reason
for her behavior. He also discovered that Charcot could
simulate conversion disorder or hysteria
in people who didn't have it by putting them under
hypnosis and he could get somebody, for example, under the hypnotic
state to have their left arm become useless
while they were in the hypnotic state. So again he thought that there might be
psychological origins at the unconscious level for this
kind of disorder. And this was an important breakthrough for
him. So he went back and opened up a private practice. He practiced
with a fellow named Brewer for a while and they
both were using hypnosis in their practice to try to get
at this hysteria problem. And that seemed to
work okay. He would put somebody into a hypnotic state and then have them try to
talk through their problems. But there were
difficulties with that as well. He didn't think that people really confronted
their problems as well in a hypnotic state. So in fact he
moved on to other methods and thought that maybe it was the talking
part of the thing that was helping them solve their problems more than
being in a hypnotic state. So he eventually did away with the hypnosis
altogether and just started talking therapy, which is psychoanalysis
as we know it today, where there are things like free association that we'll talk
about a little bit more later. Okay, so that's
what sort of the early career of Freud. And
if we look at the unconscious a little bit
more clearly, let's envision
what this might look like. And one way that people do this is to imagine an
iceberg. So we have this big mass of ice that's sitting in the water
and below the water line is about 90% of this
iceberg. And above the water line is about 10% of the iceberg.
And the way this is used is the part below the
water line is generally conceptualized as the unconscious.
And the part above the water line, that 10%, is the conscious level.
The water line represents kind of a censoring mechanism that keeps
us from figuring out what's going on at the unconscious level, prevents
you from getting to the unconscious level. Now there are other variations
of this. There's the pre-conscious, which sometimes comes into play.
That's a level where you can get to the pre-conscious level
if you work hard enough, but it's something that's not currently in your conscious level.
But we'll keep it fairly simple and just pretty much talk about the unconscious level.
The unconscious level, as we talked about,
is what primarily drives our behavior and we don't have direct
access to it. And so there's a problem if you want to correct
behavior, if you want to change behavior. If the primary driver of behavior
is what's happening at the unconscious level and you don't have direct access to it,
how do you get to it to do something about it? And that's kind of a conundrum
that Freud had to figure out how to do that and that's where he
came up with psychoanalytic theory. Okay, at the unconscious level,
we have things kind of seething down there
and these are due to various kinds of energy that we have.
And these are instinctual kinds of things. So Freud was not
a blank slate theorist at all. He thought that there were
in fact instincts that were there from birth.
And one of these instincts is a life force or a life instinct
that is sometimes called the energy from that called the libido
or the libido, I've heard it pronounced. And the libido is this life force
which is largely made up of sexual energy.
Now that shocked people when he said that. You got a picture of the times.
We're talking the late 1800s, the Victorian age in Vienna,
Austria, where women were dressed with their collars going up
to their necks and their skirts down to their shoes.
People would certainly never even talk about sex in polite society in those days
and here was Freud suggesting that a newborn baby is a bundle
of sexual and aggressive energy. You can imagine people's
shock at that. In fact, this fellow brewer who he had originally started to practice
with eventually became so uncomfortable with the notion that sex was so
important that he dissociated himself from Freud and went his own way.
But for Freud this was very important. This life force
that was energizing much of our behavior.
Later on in about the 1920s, Freud published a
book that talked about the death instinct as well.
And this is a bit more controversial. It came a little bit later
in Freud's career. Freud lived a long time. He lived into the
late 1930s and eventually died in London where he had gone
the last year of his life because of Nazi persecution.
He died of jaw cancer where he had had
you've always seen the picture with Freud with the cigar in his mouth
or in his hand in almost every picture while he got cancer of the jaw
and had 33 operations and eventually died of this.
At any rate, Freud made contributions throughout his life
and this death instinct is one of the later contributions.
He thought that when life originally came about
it was quite tenuous and there was a life instinct to keep it going
and there was a death instinct that might take it back to being an inanimate
object instead of an animate object. And that that death instinct
has stayed with us through evolutionary history into
today and so humans still have some of this death instinct
and that's part of the reason perhaps why people commit suicide.
However, usually this death instinct, the life instinct kind of overcomes
it but it's still there and so at the unconscious level
it's kind of seething around trying to figure out what to do. If we can't kill
the owner, let's figure out something else to do and it leads to aggressive kinds
of behavior toward other people. So again, he was not a noble
savage kind of person. He thought that we were all basically quite aggressive
and that we had to sort of cap this aggression
and hold it down at the unconscious level and that's part of the source of this kind of conflict
that occurs. So all of this is happening at the
unconscious level. Now he wasn't the first to actually talk about
the unconscious level. Others have done that as well.
I was wandering in a bookstore some number of years ago and found
a book by Maudsley called Body and Mind.
This book was published in 1870 and you remember Freud, we're talking about
kind of turn of the century here. So this is 25 or 30 years ahead of
Freud and if you look in this book, Maudsley
says some things, let me just read about a paragraph of this
book. He says the fact that memory is accompanied by consciousness
in the supreme centers does not alter the fundamental nature
of the organic processes that are the condition of it.
The more sure and perfect indeed memory becomes, the more unconscious
it becomes and when an idea or mental state
has been completely organized, it is reviewed without consciousness
and takes its part automatically in our mental operations
just as a habitual movement does in our bodily activity.
We perceive in operation here the same law of organization of conscious
acquisitions as unconscious power which we observed in the functions
of the lower nerve centers. Later he says, accordingly in the brain
that is not disorganized by injury or disease
The organic registrations are never actually forgotten but
endure while life lasts. No wave of oblivion can efface their characters.
Consciousness it is true, may be impotent to recall them
but a fever, a blow on the head, a poison in the blood, a dream, the agony of
drowning, the hour of death, rending the veil between our present consciousness
and these inscriptions will sometimes call vividly back in a momentary
flash and call back too with all the feelings of the original experience
such that seems to have vanished from the mind forever.
So he's talking about the unconscious level there and that was kind of a revelation
to me that it wasn't Freud who invented this and in fact I found another
book, I was just reading last week in preparation for this lecture
on mesmerism from 1892 and in this
book I was reading along and they were suddenly talking about the ego
as we'll see in a minute, the ego is part of the personality according to Freud and I thought he made
that up but apparently that was being talked about as well.
In science there's a thing called the Zeitgeist which is a notion
that sort of a lot of people have the same kind of thought about the same time
versus a great man theory or a great person theory of science
which says that one person was responsible for something. This
sort of indicates that there was a Zeitgeist going on and Freud was picking up these
concepts and we certainly give him credit for it but he was not the only one talking
about things like the unconscious. Alright,
let's talk about the fact that psychoanalytic theory is a deterministic
theory. By deterministic what we mean here is that
everything you do is determined. There's a cause for
everything you do, not only your actions but also your thoughts
and your feelings, that there is a root cause
for this. We may not know what the cause is particularly if it's at the unconscious level
but that in fact is the goal. If we want to change human
behavior or change your thoughts or your feelings we need to understand what the
cause was. So in fact if you go to the grocery store
and you're trying to buy all the things that you need and you forget the bread
Freud would not say that's an accident or a slip of the mind.
He would say there was a reason you forgot the bread. There's no
accidents. In fact you may be familiar with the term Freudian slip
when people misspeak. Freud would say well they
didn't misspeak as an accident. It wasn't just a phonological
problem that there was a deeper problem that was causing this.
There's a story told of a fellow who was a typesetter and typeset the
headlines on a newspaper and this
widely decorated general had come back from the war
from the front lines and they wrote an article
about him being very positive about him but the fellow was doing the typesetting
didn't think much of this general and he wrote the headlines and
said the battle-scared general returned from the front.
It was supposed to be the battle-scarred general returned from the front
and the newspaper was just very upset about this and so they printed
a retraction the next day and they let the same guy write the headlines
unfortunately and he said the bottle-scarred general returned from
the front. The point is it wasn't an accident in the first place
there was a root cause and that root cause
produced the second problem as well.
So this is a deterministic kind of thing that everything that you do
that there's a reason for it.
We already talked about how the unconscious is one of the
fundamental kinds of things in our society and that we
make a lot of decisions in society as if the unconscious were true.
Now beyond that we want to talk some about the structure
of the unconscious and the structure of the personality
and Freud says that there are really free concepts
there. Now these are not real entities you can't cut open the brain
and find the superego over here and the ego over here but these are concepts
that underlie the
personality. The first of these is the id
and the id is said to operate on a pleasure principle
and again we go to the fact that we are not a blank slate the id
is built in. The newborn baby is carrying id around
already at birth and so
the newborn baby in fact pleasure is the whole source of
what that child wants to do doesn't care about anybody else
wants to get all the milk it can get, wants to get all the pleasure it can get
very hedonistic kind of baby. If we were all
id and we were unchecked by any other part of our personality
we'd do whatever we wanted to do. There are no wrongs and rights for the
id it just does what feels good. And so if you're sitting there
and you like the person's pencil or the sitting next to you
you think it's better than yours go ahead and grab it it's your pencil
go ahead and take it or if the person sitting next to you is an attractive person
you might grab that person, feels good that's what the id says to do
if unchecked by everything else. You can imagine the chaos
in our society if we were all just id. In fact people
who have psychopathologies of various kinds, psychopathic personalities
are one way to talk about it
is that they're all id and they're not properly checked by the other parts of their personality
alright so it operates on the pleasure principle
tries to satisfy itself and that's about all we have there
okay that's built in. Then shortly after
birth our parents start telling us little rules that we
have to follow. And other people are day care people, television everybody
starts telling us rules. What are the do's and don'ts of life
and that begins to form our conscience
and in psychoanalytic theory that's called the superego
so the superego is much like our conscience it contains all
the rules that our parents try to teach us and it
doesn't get along very well with the id obviously the id says hey hey that would be
fun let's go do that and the superego says oh no no no
that's against the rules you can't do that and the superego
has at its disposal a weapon which is a fairly
powerful weapon and that's guilt. Go ahead and do that if you want to
but you're going to feel really bad because I'm going to make you feel bad with this guilt
if you go do that. Now it's not all bad stuff the superego
has it also has pride and satisfaction if you do the right thing
but that guilt is a very powerful kind of thing and keeps the
id somewhat in check. It doesn't make the id happy
but it keeps it in check and that's part of the source of this conflict
there's anything at the unconscious level all the time that we have to deal with
and what Freud was trying to deal with so that's the
superego sometimes said to operate on a moral principle
so these are the morals these are the rules the dos and don'ts of life
now there's a third part of the personality as well
and that's the ego and the ego is really required because if all
we had was the id and the superego and these guys are fighting all the time
we're going to go down there we're going to be very unstable
and sometimes we're going to be over here doing things that give us pleasure
and sometimes we're going to be over here feeling really guilty
and so we sort of vacillate and swing back and forth and nobody knows what we're going to do
from time to time. Well the ego comes along
and the ego operates on a reality principle
what's the real world like what can we get away with
between the superego and the id and tries to get him to get along
again they're not happy with it but the ego
says okay id you want to do this superego says
you can't do that what can we do here to settle
this to mediate between these two what can we do to get some happiness
but not break the rules too much either so that's kind of a function
of the ego now as we get older
the ego gets stronger again the ego is not there from birth
this is something that we learn as we experience the environment we move around
we learn about reality and what we can get away with
and what we can't get away with and the ego gets stronger
and ego strength is a good thing in terms of being a psychological
concept the stronger the ego the more
well developed you are as a person and the stronger your personality
is so after a while you don't have to mediate every little conflict
what you end up with is sort of an image of who you are
so I have this image of David Martin in my mind about what this guy named
David Martin does and whenever I'm confronted
by something that my id telling me boy it'd be great to go do that wouldn't it
and my superego saying well you know that's really kind of against the rules
I have this picture of who I am that I compare
these things to and say what would David Martin do in this
case and as I get a stronger ego
a stronger self image that picture gets stronger
and it allows me to be much more consistent in my behavior
so I now can kind of solve this problem
and at least outwardly appear that things are
fairly placid even though at the unconscious level again
things are not so placid there are still these seething
kinds of forces against one another caused by the life
kind of the life instinct and the death instinct that are sort of fighting
with each other the death instinct that can't kill the organism so that
the death instinct is causing aggression and then you have
the id who wants to use this aggression to go
against other people to feel good and you have the superego saying no
you can't do that and will give you a lot of guilt and you have the ego
trying to referee this whole sort of mess that's going on down there
at the same time so you can imagine the kinds of problems that you have
at the unconscious level and so that was Freud's conception
of this whole thing and what's going on and if you have all of these
problems at the unconscious level and you have all of these conflicts how are you
going to solve the problems and that's where he came up with the basic tenets
of psychoanalysis and he
with psychoanalysis with things like free
association with dream analysis with some projective
tests and that kind of thing what the whole purpose of that was to break
through this censoring mechanism and try to be able to get down there at the
unconscious level and from time to time get a little inkling you could never
be sure what's down there but you get inklings about this and that's why
psychoanalysis takes such a long time because you just get little bits and pieces
from time to time and try to build what's at the unconscious
level to understand these conflicts that are going on down there
and so it's quite a complex problem
to try to figure out what's going on at the unconscious level
now we've been over the rudiments today of psychoanalysis but it goes
into more detail as well there are certain stages
and that is a theory that has developmental stages to it
as you can imagine because we start out as an
id that would be a different stage than after we add little superego to it
and a little ego to it and so we have these psychosexual developmental
stages and we'll talk more about that in the next lecture
we'll also talk more about how you deal with the kinds of
conflicts that are going on at the unconscious level because these conflicts
at the unconscious level are quite upsetting to the person
and we have to have ways of coping with these kinds of conflicts and we do
that and we'll call them defense mechanisms and we'll talk a little bit about that
in the next lecture as well. So today I've given you a little
background in terms of who Sigmund Freud was, how he came up with the notion
of the unconscious, how important the unconscious was to psychoanalytic
theory and also to our thinking about how our
social institutions work, it's really the underpinnings of a lot of the
ways we've designed our social systems and we've also talked
some about the parts of our unconscious and our personality
and how they are in constant conflict. So next time
we'll go into a little bit more detail about this. Thank you.
applause
