Lecture 7 Classification of Mental Illnesses
At this point, in this lecture, we want to begin to talk about mental illnesses a little
bit.
It's a very important part of psychology.
As I mentioned in the very first lecture, the clinical psychology comprises about two
thirds of what psychologists do.
Those people are concerned with folks who have problems.
These problems are mental problems.
We need to somehow figure out what kind of problem they have and then try to do something
with them.
That's what we're going to be talking about in the next series of lectures.
Today, we're going to talk about first, how we know abnormal behavior when we see it.
What makes it distinct from normal behavior?
Where do you draw the line?
Secondly, today we'll then talk about classification systems that have been suggested.
How do you classify the various mental illnesses and what are the distinctions among these
mental illnesses?
So we'll talk some about classification systems.
And finally, we'll talk some about the prevalence of the various overall major classifications
of disorders, how prevalent they are in our society, how many folks have these disorders.
So let's begin by considering how we know abnormal behavior when we see it.
Suppose I were standing up here and I took off my shoe and I walked back here to the
wall and started slamming my shoe on the wall.
Now they'd probably fire me from the job I have here.
But what would you think out there?
Would you think that I am abnormal?
Probably.
Do you think I ought to be locked up for that behavior?
Well, maybe, maybe not.
We'll talk a little bit more about that.
Or suppose instead that instead of wearing this shirt and tie, I came in this morning
with a trench coat on and started my lecture and about this point in the lecture, unbuttoned
my trench coat and opened it up and I didn't have any clothes on underneath.
Now am I normal or abnormal at that point in your eyes?
Is that abnormal behavior?
Should you lock me up for that?
Suppose instead that I wore a dress in here today, all right, had a nice skirt and a dress
on in here, would you think I'm abnormal?
Would you lock me up for that?
All of these are sort of questions about where do we draw the line?
How do we know abnormal behavior when we see it?
And there have been numerous criteria to try to decide what's normal and what's abnormal.
And people employ these in a rather loose way sometimes and mix these criteria.
For example, you could define abnormality in a statistical way.
If you have a distribution, you have some characteristic along the bottom of that distribution
and then you plot the number of cases of people along that characteristic, a frequency count,
you would end up with a distribution.
You're probably familiar with things like bell shaped curves and then we can sort of
say the tails of that distribution are by definition abnormal.
They're not what most people are.
They're deviant in some ways.
They're statistically deviant because, I mean, we have terms like standard deviation,
which is talking about deviation from some norm that we expect to have in behavior.
So we can say that the people on the tails are deviant.
Does that make them mentally ill?
Well, suppose that this we're plotting some form of intelligence, IQ score or something
like that.
Suppose I told you I have an IQ of 140, don't I wish?
If I had an IQ of 140, would you consider me abnormal?
Well, I don't know.
Would you consider me mentally ill?
Probably not.
We'd say, hey, that's great.
Got an IQ that high.
Suppose I said I have an IQ of 64.
So I'm way down on the other end, that other tail.
Am I abnormal?
Statistically, I would be defined as abnormal.
My mentally ill, actually, as we'll see as we go through this classification system that
we're about to talk about, yes, I do have some form of mental illness, a mental retardation
when I have an IQ measured down there.
So on one end of the scale, we called it perhaps abnormal, but we certainly didn't call it mental
illness.
And on the other end, we did call it mental illness.
So statistically, it may work some of the time, but it certainly doesn't work all of
the time.
Is Lance Armstrong abnormal?
Yeah, he probably is.
I mean, anybody can write up the Alps like that to hardly catching a breath.
That's abnormal in my book.
Is he mentally ill?
Of course he isn't mentally ill, and so we wouldn't apply that to him.
So the statistical thing works to some extent.
Another standard is a moral standard.
In fact, when I opened up my trench coat here, I was probably violating your moral standards,
and you don't think it's appropriate.
I'm not likely to hurt you.
In fact, exhibitionists, which is one of the categories that we're going to talk about,
statistically are not really very likely to harm you in any way, but people get very uncomfortable.
It violates their standards somehow, and even though we couldn't show that they are statistically
more likely to harm us, it still makes us uncomfortable.
We don't know what's coming next, and so it bothers us.
Now those standards change over time.
When I started teaching many years ago, I would lecture about the classifications of
mental illness, and I'd talk about homosexuality as a mental illness.
The American Psychiatric Association at that time classified it as a mental illness.
It made people uncomfortable.
It violated their moral standards, and they didn't like homosexuality.
That changed, and for the last, I think it's now probably 30 years ago, that the American
Psychiatric Association took homosexuality out of the classification system and said
it's an alternative lifestyle.
It's okay.
You're not mentally ill if you're homosexual anymore.
Well, why were people 50 years ago mentally ill and people aren't now?
Society's standards have changed, and so from a moral point of view, it's changed its basis.
So that's another kind of classification, a way of a criterion that we can use to try
to decide whether or not a person is abnormal.
Another one has to do with whether that person might harm us.
In fact, as we'll see, for most states, harming somebody, including themselves, is one of
the major criteria for locking somebody up in a mental institution.
So maybe when I'm banging my shoe on the wall over here, you don't care too much about
that.
If you can still hear me in the lecture, why should you care?
But in fact, you start thinking, well, if he's banging that shoe on the wall, maybe
next he's going to be banging that shoe on me.
So maybe I ought to be a little worried about this.
If he's this strange, I'm not sure whether he's going to harm me or not.
And this isn't helped by movies where people who are mentally ill are portrayed as characters
with masks and knives and going around attacking people and that sort of thing.
For most classifications of mental illness, you're safer with that person than you are
out in normal society.
You go into a mental institution.
In fact, it's nowadays a pretty placid kind of place, and you're not likely to undergo
harm at all in a place like that.
But nevertheless, we fear that, and we fear people hurting themselves or hurting us.
And so that enters into our decision about whether or not to call something abnormal
and whether or not that's mental illness.
And finally, we also, another criterion has to do with how unhappy the person is.
How much they don't want to be the way they are.
We don't always commit people to institutions.
In many cases, people voluntarily go into institutions, and they do so because they're
unhappy.
They're not doing well.
And they want that somehow changed.
And so that can be a criterion of mental illness, too, if they're unhappy with their
situation.
All right?
So all of these things have been used, and they're used sort of in a mixed way.
And it's not always clear how we do this.
We kind of do the best that we can.
And it's a difficult process because in many cases, you have a continuum here of the behavior.
And exactly where do you draw the line?
Where do you make the mistake?
Because like any decision situation, you have people who are mentally ill and people who
aren't mentally ill, and these are overlapping distributions in terms of their behavior.
And if you draw the line, you're going to make a mistake one way or the other.
You're going to call somebody who's mentally ill, you're going to call them well, or you're
going to call somebody who's well mentally ill.
And as you move that line back and forth, you vary the proportion of errors, but you
don't get rid of errors.
So sometimes it's a difficult decision to make.
I have sat on and watched admission boards at hospitals where people sit around and argue
about a particular diagnosis for somebody who's come into the mental institution.
And they won't agree on those diagnoses.
You say, how can they not agree on those things?
Well, it's not always clear cut.
As we will see when we get into some of the classifications of mental illness, in fact,
there are not hard and fast lines between these classifications.
Okay, let's talk some about classifications and the history of classifications.
And the first question we might ask ourselves is, why would we want to classify somebody
as having a mental illness or not?
What's the advantage of being able to classify somebody?
Well, according to the American Psychiatric Association, now you have to remember that
the psychiatrists are medical doctors.
We talked about that in the first lecture.
And the people who run the classification system, at least in this country, the people
are members of the American Psychiatric Association, not the American Psychological Association.
And so they follow very strongly a medical kind of model since they're medical doctors.
What's the first thing you do when you go to the doctor's office?
Well, the doctor comes out and diagnoses you.
That means that the doctor's putting you into a classification system of some sort.
And so the doctor may do various kinds of tests on you and try to decide where you fit.
Do you have a stomach ache or appendicitis?
Those are two different classifications.
And then the treatment is going to be dependent upon the classification.
Now it would be nice if we could follow the medical model in psychology and know exactly
what the treatment is once we've made the diagnosis and classified somebody.
But as I pointed out in a previous lecture, that doesn't always follow in psychology.
Sometimes the therapy is more determined by the training of the therapist than it is by
the particular diagnosis.
But the hope is that the diagnosis would tell you something about what therapies might be
brought to bear to try to correct the condition.
So that's one reason to have a classification system and probably the major reason for classifying
mental illnesses.
There are other reasons why you might want to do it.
In fact, we're about to talk about some classification systems and the real impetus for a classification
system in this country came out of a clerical reason.
After the Second World War, when people were being released from the military, they had
to sort of classify what their condition was.
And they often didn't have a box to check to say what their mental condition was because
we didn't have a very good classification system at that point.
So it was around 1952 that we got the first official classification system from the American
Psychiatric Association.
And that was partly driven by the necessity of this clerical task of sort of putting people
into the box.
Today we have a clerical duty that is even greater than that, the insurance companies
and the third party payers for people with mental illnesses.
They want to know what the classification of the person is.
And so in fact, if you're a therapist and dealing with a particular patient, one of the first
things you have to do is make a diagnosis and write down the number from the classification
system that says what category this person fits into.
Because then the insurance company says you can do certain things, you can have a certain
number of sessions of therapy if the person has this particular classification, but it's
very different for this other classification.
So again, it's kind of a clerical matter here.
Now there's some problems with classification systems.
There are some problems like self-fulfilling prophecies.
Once you're classified somebody in a particular way, people expect you, the label tells them
something about your behavior.
There was a famous kind of study that was done where people voluntarily committed themselves
to a mental institution, in fact to several different, I think there were eight different
institutions that they committed themselves to.
And these were just sort of normal people who were committed to these institutions.
They self-committed themselves.
They said, okay, I'm not feeling well.
I have these, I'm hearing voices that are saying things like dull and thud.
And they tried to use a category which was an existential psychosis, which was a category
that hardly anybody fit into.
But they reported this upon entry into the institution.
Then the question was how likely was it that they were to get out and what would they be
classified when they did get out?
And in fact, after that they stopped simulating any abnormal behavior.
And they were in the institution on average, as I recall, it was over a month in the institution
before they let them back out again.
And without exception, they were classified as, because they were put in most of them
as schizophrenic, because they'd been hearing voices and that's one of the major indications
of schizophrenia.
They were classified as schizophrenia and then when they were let out, they were classified
as schizophrenia in remission.
They didn't say they were normal again.
They had been classified and so now they couldn't get rid of that label.
And in fact, some of these people in the institution would do such things as write down and take
lots of notes and they would look at their behavior and they'd say, oh, note-taking behavior,
as if that's sort of a symptom of schizophrenia.
Once they have the label, what they do is sort of tainted by the label.
And so there can be kind of a self-fulfilling prophecy in classification, which is not a
good thing.
All right, let's talk some then about classification systems and the history of these.
I've been around for a long time.
We know people who've dealt with mental illness for a long time.
In fact, if you go into some of the archeological digs, they have dug up skulls of people
who have little holes chipped in their head, a process called trefining, that they apparently
did to release the bad spirits in the person's heads.
We don't know because no history has been written of this.
We can only infer what goes on from finding the skulls.
But that's the idea.
And in fact, some of these people apparently live.
There are cases of the whole healing up to some extent.
So the person survived the operation, apparently, and maybe it did help them because probably
in some of these cases they had brain pressure from an accident, and that may have relieved
the brain pressure to some extent.
So mental illness has been around for a while, and we've had some therapy for mental illness.
If we look at the first case of trying to classify this, Hippocrates, around he lived
from 460 to 377 BC.
This was a long time ago.
Hippocrates is kind of considered the father of medicine.
You may be familiar with the Hippocratic oath that doctors take.
That's named after Hippocrates, who's the father of medicine.
And as the father of medicine, it should not be surprising that he took the first crack
at classifying mental illnesses.
And he classified it into three categories, mania, melancholia, and a thing called phrenetus,
which is a brain fever of some sort.
I don't know much about phrenetus.
Mania is probably what we call psychotic today, somebody who's sort of running around out
of control, and melancholia is probably what we call depression today.
And so he had these three different classification systems, and he had certain theories about
why this was, including bodily fluids and bile and other things that were happening.
We're not going to go into any detail about that, but he had kind of a whole theoretical
system to talk about that sort of supported this classification system.
Then in the Islamic tradition, Avincia from Arabia, and this was about 980 to approximately
1037, added a couple of classifications to it.
He included epilepsy as one of them, and also included hysteria, which we talked about in
the last lecture, in fact.
We talked about psychoanalytic theory and how many of Freud's early patients were categorized
as hysteria, which we now call conversion disorder, where you have a part of the body
that doesn't work quite properly and it has a psychological root cause to it.
So he added those two categories to it, and we're still talking here over a thousand years
ago that this classification system was being proposed.
Then not much happened after that for many, many hundreds of years.
This is partly because people totally misunderstood mental illness.
They thought that mental illness was caused by demons, for the most part, and it was kind
of a religious kind of experience, and so it was the era of witches and that kind of
thing instead of considering mental illness to be a medical condition.
If it's just demons, how do you classify a demon?
A demon can do almost anything a demon wants to, so that there wasn't much in the way of
classification at that point.
Then in the 20th century, we did start formal classification systems, and I already alluded
to sort of one of the reasons that we wanted a classification system in terms of the military
being released from the Second World War, and so the American Psychiatric Association
decided that they would start an official classification system at that point.
They used some of the classifications that had sort of been left over from history as
a starting point, and the other thing that they used was psychoanalytic theory that we
just got through talking about, because psychoanalytic theory had sort of provided a theoretical
context for many of these mental illnesses, which is part of the reason I wanted to talk
about psychoanalytic theory before we talked about mental illnesses.
They came up with what is called the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
commonly referred to as DSM, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, and the first one
that came out, we now call DSM-1 because they have been subsequent DSMs, and that came out
in 1952, and then it took them, I think, about 15 years to come up with a new one, DSM-2,
and then the times got shorter and shorter, and so I think we're coming out with a new
official one about every seven or eight years now, and there's often a revision in the middle
of that process, too, because there's a DSM-2, DSM-3, DSM-3R, we're now on DSM-4, and we're
on DSM-TR, which is another revision called text revision, that's what TR stands for.
So we have sort of new versions of this kind of thing from time to time, and supposedly
as we learn more, we change this diagnostic and statistical manual, and it gets thicker
and thicker, and the number of classifications become larger and larger, and over the years,
this has changed in a number of ways.
The original one, as I mentioned, had a lot to do with the theoretical underpinnings of
psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic theory.
We got rid of that, really, between DSM-2 and DSM-3, DSM-2, as I recall, had about seven
different classifications in it, DSM-3 had a whole bunch more classifications, because
under DSM-2, for example, you had neurosis as a category, and then there were a number
of different kinds of anxiety disorders under that, and it was all in kind of a psychoanalytic
model.
And then they broke all of those out in the DSM-3, and DSM-3 tried very hard to become
a theoretical and to get rid of this sort of underlying psychoanalytic structure that
had propped up DSM-2.
DSM-3 also made quite a breakthrough in that they were far more concerned with specifying
the exact sort of symptoms a person had to have, and now in DSM-4, in fact, we're down
to the point where as I go through DSM-4, and we talk about some of these symptoms, we'll
get lists, like you have to have this or this, and you have to have three out of the following
five things in order to be diagnosed with this particular disorder, and so it's very
much more driven by observing the person and trying to decide whether, and there's still
some subjectivity to this, and you can't get rid of all of that.
But because they've been able to do that, they've been able to make the system far more
both reliable and valid.
By reliable, we mean that if you have one person who's doing the diagnosis, take a particular
case, that person gives a classification to it, how likely is it that a second clinician
would give the same classification to it?
If they do, then that's a fairly reliable system, and DSM-2 was very unreliable.
People disagreed quite a bit about these things. In fact, people disagreed with themselves.
If you ask them at a particular time to diagnose a particular condition, and then ask them
a year later, give them the same symptoms, people couldn't even agree with themselves
necessarily on it because it was so nebulous, so ambiguous, the description of the classifications.
One thing that has been achieved with Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 4 is much more reliability.
Now, validity we're not quite as sure about because you're never quite sure. How do you
know for sure what the person has? Validity means that you have classified it correctly,
that it indeed is the disorder you have just called it. We do know that if it's not reliable,
it's not going to be very valid, but that doesn't say whether it's the correct thing.
They had a good list of diagnostic criteria for whether or not somebody was a witch a
number of centuries ago. They were quite reliable about it, but were they valid? Well, we don't
think so today because we don't think that there are witches today. Validity is a bit
different concept, and we're not quite as sure about that, even with today's fairly
sophisticated systems. Alright, let's look at DSM4TR and see what it looks like in terms
of how you diagnose mental illnesses. There are five axes, and so there are five diagnoses
that enter into the final description of what the person has. The first axis is usually
considered to be the most important because that's the clinical diagnosis that the person
has. And so that would say that the person is bipolar or that the person is schizophrenic
or the person has a very depression or anxiety disorder or something like that. That would
be on the first axis. So most of what we're going to talk about in here is going to be
on axis one. It's kind of the clinical condition that the person has, a clinical syndrome.
The syndrome is a collection of symptoms that a person would have. Alright, axis two
contains personality disorders and also mental retardation. Alright, so a person might have
a particular clinical symptom, suppose that the person has schizophrenia, but that person
may also have a personality disorder. Perhaps this person is a paranoid personality as well
as perhaps being a schizophrenic. And so they would get both of those diagnoses, one on
axis one and one on axis two. Or the person may have some form of mental retardation as
well as having a clinical condition of some sort. So they would get a diagnosis on each
of those axes in that case. Axes three has to do with medical condition of the person.
So the person might have a particular mental disorder, might have a personality disorder
and might be diabetic on top of that. Or have chronic pain or something like that. That
would be a medical diagnosis on axis three. Axes four evaluates the psychosocial or environmental
stressors that might be present. So they might have a clinical condition, might have a personality
disorder, might have diabetes, and they're also living in a high stress household where
the father has been missing and the mother has 10 kids and there's a lot of yelling and
screaming and that would be a diagnosis there. And the fifth axis is a global assessment
of how the person is functioning at the current time. So you would say, how is this person
doing? This person can't communicate. This person is mute, for example. That would be
an indication of that person's functioning at this particular time. So this particular
system would give a person really five diagnoses. That would be all part of the pattern and each
of those things might say something different about what kind of treatment the person should get.
Okay, let's just look finally here at the various prevalence of major disorders. And we'll talk
in much more detail about these major disorders. But let's look just very briefly about over a
12 month period of time, how likely would it be that somebody that you would find would have
a particular disorder? And the first figure I have is that mental illness affects 37 million
adults in the country during a given year. And that's about 18 and a half percent of the population.
So if you're walking down the street and people are passing you on the street,
you know that about one in five of those people is having a mental problem of some sort. Now it
might not be debilitating. This person's not going to jump out and kill you, but this person may be
depressed or may have anxiety about certain kinds of things. So about one in five have some form of
a disorder. Anxiety disorders affect nearly 12 percent of the population in any given particular
year. And those include things like panic disorders, things like phobias, and we'll talk about those
as we go along. Mood disorders such as depression and bipolar disorder affect a little over five
percent of the population. Depression, unipolar depression being the major one of those. So that's
about five percent of the population. Substance abuse disorders, including alcohol and drugs,
affects about six percent of the population in any one year. Now the rate of alcoholism itself
is higher than that over a lifetime, but in any particular year. And schizophrenia affects about
one percent of the population. And you might say, well, why do we spend so much time talking about
schizophrenia if it's only one percent of the population? Well, it's such a severe disorder
that schizophrenia accounts for so many of the hospital beds and mental institutions and so much
of the time and effort that's spent on mental patients that it's a major disorder even though
it doesn't affect that many people. So we're going to go through these classifications in the next
series of lectures and talk about the various mental disorders, the various symptoms that occur
with these. We're going to have just a preliminary, ask the question what might be causing these kinds
of things and go right through the diagnostic and statistical manual and try to learn it at
least at the level that we would be able to recognize mental illness when we see it. So today
we've talked about a little bit about why people are considered abnormal, what criteria are used,
some statistical criteria, moral criteria, whether or not they're likely to harm us,
whether or not they're happy with their condition. And we've also talked historically about some
of the classification systems and what today's modern classification system looks like and what
the axes are on that system. And from here on out we're going to be talking in much more detail
about the individual classifications. Thank you.
