Lecture 8, Anxiety and Mood Disorders
We've now talked about classification systems for mental illness and talked a little bit
about what makes abnormal behavior abnormal, and I promised you last time that we were
going to start to go through the diagnostic and statistical manual four and look at some
of the classifications of mental disorders, and so we're going to start that process
in this lecture.
And today we're going to look at two of the major classifications of mental illness, anxiety
and mood disorders.
And if you recall in the last lecture, I mentioned the prevalence, the one year prevalence of
various disorders, and for anxiety disorder it was 12 percent, and for mood disorder it
was about 5 percent.
Those are very high, and so what we're talking about today comprises an awful lot of what
you see as mental health problems out there.
Now as we'll see, many of these health problems are not such that a person would be institutionalized
for them, in many cases they're just unhappy, and that it might affect their job to some
extent and their ability to socialize and some other kinds of things, although they
would not necessarily be institutionalized.
Nevertheless, they're very important kinds of problems.
So we're going to go over anxiety disorders and the subclassification of anxiety disorders,
including phobias and panic disorders, also generalized anxiety disorder, and obsessive
compulsive disorders.
So those are some of the subclassifications under anxiety disorders.
And then under mood disorders we're going to talk about the two major classifications,
unipolar mood disorder or depression and bipolar depression as well.
And finally we're going to talk a little bit about suicide at the end as well.
Okay, so let's talk some about anxiety.
As a classification has been around for a long time, we used to call it neurosis.
And when I talked about Freud, you may remember that I mentioned neurosis and the fact that
he was dealing with neurotic patients for the most part, people with hysteria, which
is an anxiety disorder.
And between Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 2 and Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 3,
we started calling them anxiety disorders.
So these have been around for quite a while.
And in general, anxiety is about what you would think it would be.
It's an apprehension about a possible danger.
And that apprehension might be a more generalized apprehension that we'll talk about in a minute
or it might be fairly specific.
For example, phobias.
Phobias are undue fears about specific objects or situations that a person might get into.
And these cause avoidant behavior.
So once they have the phobia, they then avoid the behavior.
And when we talk later in learning theory, a little bit about avoidance learning, we
will discover that this may be kind of a cycle where they get the fear they avoided and that,
in fact, reinforces the fear again.
So phobias are sometimes difficult to get rid of once we get them.
So we have this undue fear of specific objects.
And then there are some subclassifications under phobia.
For example, animal phobias include the fear of snakes, spiders, dogs, and other kinds
of animals.
Now that might not be surprising to you and it should not surprise you really at all because
the evolutionary psychologists have looked at phobias and a universal is a universal
across cultures fear of spiders and snakes.
So in some respects, perhaps we're all mentally ill in some ways, but most of us don't let
it affect our behavior.
We don't refuse to go out in our backyard because we're afraid a snake might get us.
But we have that fear and it's probably built into us.
There's probably an adaptation.
Our ancestors tended to survive if they were afraid of snakes and spiders and those that
weren't afraid of it tended to not to have offspring.
So this is probably a built in adaptation that generally works pretty well.
But in fact, if it's too strong, it can lead to some debilitating kinds of behaviors.
Natural environment subtype includes fear of heights and water and perhaps some other
things like earthquakes and tornadoes and that sort of thing as well.
And again, there might be some adaptive value to that, but it can be overdone.
A third type is blood injection or injury subtype, which you can have fear of hypodermic
needles and the sight of blood.
And I know, for example, one of my sons is particularly fearful of hypodermic needles.
I hope he grows out of it as he has more experience with those kinds of things.
Situational subtype includes particular situations such as flying an airplane, being afraid of
that or riding in an elevator.
And then an atypical subtype would include things like having fear of choking or vomiting,
something like that.
So these are all phobias.
They're fairly prevalent in the population and more prevalent in women than in men.
About 16% of women have phobias and about 7% of men have phobias.
So it is more prevalent in women.
Things once you get them are fairly easily dealt with with behavior therapies.
And we'll talk about that when we talk about therapies and how you would do this.
It's a learning therapy where you have a person relearn an appropriate response to this undue
fear of a particular stimulus.
And that can be usually fairly successfully done.
Panic disorders are a second kind of anxiety disorder.
With panic disorders, there's not a particular stimulus that sets it off so much.
Panic disorders, somebody might be out, let's say, shopping or something like that and driving
home in her car.
And suddenly her heart starts to race.
She starts to breathe very shallowly.
She breaks out in a cold sweat.
She thinks she's having a heart attack.
She might get out of the car and start running along the sidewalk trying to get somebody
to help her because she thinks she's having this medical problem and it's a very severe
kind of thing.
That would be a description of a panic attack that somebody might have.
These are distinguished from generalized anxiety disorders that we're about to talk about by
how quickly they come on.
They develop in 10 minutes or less in general and how quickly they subside.
They usually go away in about 30 minutes or so.
So if you run across somebody having this, if you can just quiet them down for a while,
it will go away.
They are people who do think that they're having a medical problem when this happens
and people go to the hospital with these panic attacks at least early on when they think
that's what their problem is.
In some cases, panic attacks can lead to agoraphobia.
Agoraphobia is a fear of crowds or a fear of public places and that may be combined
with a panic attack of some sort.
And people with agoraphobia, sometimes if it's severe enough, end up being home-ridden.
They stay home, they order out their groceries, they don't cross their front door for months
at a time if they have a severe form of agoraphobia.
The prevalence of panic disorders is about 5% for women and about 2% for men, although
that's probably an underestimate.
I'm not sure we know all of the people who have this.
In fact, they've gone into a college population of women and in that population, 30% or 40%
of the women will claim that they've had an incident like this in the previous year but
not severe enough that they would go to a doctor about it and be diagnosed for it.
So we're probably underestimating the prevalence of panic attacks.
Panic attacks can be dealt with through cognitive behavioral therapy to some extent like
phobias, as I mentioned a minute ago, but also medications such as minor tranquilizers
and antidepressants can be effective with panic attacks as well.
Generalized anxiety disorder is another subclassification of anxiety disorder.
And with generalized anxiety disorder, you have a chronic excessive worry about life
events.
So there's not a specific precipitating stimulus that kicks it off, nor is it like panic attack
that sort of comes on quickly and then goes away.
But in fact, it's a chronic kind of condition where you just feel like things aren't right.
Symptoms include unhappiness, difficulty concentrating, tension, headaches, sleep disturbances and
that sort of thing.
And it affects much of life.
I play a tape often for my students of somebody with generalized anxiety disorder, and this
is a young lady, I believe she's 17 years old.
And she's living in a house which is not a desirable place to live.
Her father is sometimes indicating he might sexually molest her, and he's pretty tough
on the kids and spanks them and throws them around a little bit.
So it's not a nice situation, and you might say, well, her problem is due to that situation.
But in fact, when you talk to her about this problem, she says, well, she's kind of afraid
of everything.
She's afraid of the mother some of the time.
She barricades her door to keep people out of it and stuffs a towel into the door lock
so nobody can look in and sometimes sleeps with a knife and has dreams of people coming
attacking her at night.
And she says, she's just afraid of everything.
And that's a sort of a characteristic of generalized anxiety disorder.
The final subcategory of anxiety disorder is obsessive compulsive disorder, sometimes
called OCD.
Obsessive compulsive disorder is really the combination of a couple of disorders here.
These are intrusive thoughts and repetitive behaviors.
So the thought part is the obsession.
As an obsession, it means that they have recurring, disturbing, and inappropriate
kinds of thoughts about things.
So perhaps somebody sits and thinks a lot about how they don't want to have germs around
them, and they want everything to be clean, and they're afraid that somebody's going
to come through the door who has disease and they might get this disease.
Somebody like Howard Hughes, for example, was obsessive compulsive with this particular
disorder where he was afraid that he was going to get infected with something.
And so he thinks about this and it takes over his thoughts.
Now we all have some kind of obsessive thoughts.
I sometimes carry music around in my head where I sing in a choir and I'll get a piece
of music going, and for half a week, this will pop up from time to time as kind of an
obsessive thought.
It doesn't bother me very much that this is the case.
It doesn't seem to affect my behavior otherwise.
If you have that kind of thing, you can understand a little bit about what these people are going
through when they have these kinds of obsessive thoughts.
And these then lead to compulsive behaviors.
The behavior part is the compulsion, where they then don't do certain kinds of things.
They don't step on the crack.
The old step on your crack, break your mother's back kind of thing, where people walk down
the sidewalk and never step on the crack, or people, particularly if they have these obsessive
thoughts about diseases, they may repetitively wash their hands, and somebody may wash their
hands eight times or something like that.
There's a woman that I'm familiar with who is a nurse and afraid of HIV, and it's become
an obsessive kind of thing with her, where she thinks about it all the time that she
might get HIV, and so she goes home and she washes her hands and won't let her kids touch
her, because she's afraid they'll get HIV, and that sort of thing.
So that's the compulsive part of this obsessive compulsive disorder.
OCD are, of those who have obsessive compulsive disorder, about 67%, about two-thirds are
also depressed.
And so we have what's called comorbidity, where they have more than really one condition
that's leading to their behavior.
And for obsessive compulsive disorder, there are behavioral therapies where they try to
treat it with that, but also antidepressant drugs, especially the selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors like Prozac, are used for people with this disorder, and have been
found to have some benefit for people with that disorder.
Okay, moving on then to mood disorders.
As I mentioned at the beginning of this lecture, there are two major subclassifications of mood
disorders.
And these are unipolar depression and bipolar depression.
Now whether or not these are the same disorder in terms of being sort of just a different
version of the same disorder, we're not quite sure.
It looks like it's probably unlikely that that's the case.
For example, I'll cite it in a minute with depressive disorders, unipolar depression.
Women are far more likely to have this than men.
For the case of bipolar disorders, about an equal distribution of women and men, which
indicates that there might be a difference in this.
If you look at heritability of the disorders, there's also a difference for depression and
for bipolar disorder.
Now we're not here talking about normal depression.
Everybody has depressions.
If you have a loved one who dies, people become depressed.
And this may go on for three months or so.
That would be considered a normal kind of depressed period for having losing somebody.
So that's not what we're talking about here.
We're talking about depression where there doesn't seem to be a major precipitating event
and which seems to come over somebody and they're kind of unable to shake it even with
time.
Unipolar depression, the prevalence rates for the lifetime, not the one-year rates,
but for a lifetime, are 13% in males and 21% in females.
So women are more likely to have unipolar depression or be what's called sometimes clinically depressed.
The milder form of unipolar depression is called dysthymia and it requires, according
to the classification system, the person to have a depressed mood for most of the day
for more days than not for at least two years.
But it's considerably milder than unipolar depression.
And also to have at least two of the following symptoms, appetite change, sleep disturbance,
low energy, low self-esteem, concentration problems, and feelings of hopelessness.
So those are all symptoms of dysthymia, which is a sort of milder form of unipolar depression.
Those with major depressive disorders experience, and this is one of the cases where we have
sort of a menu of things that a person could have.
This person must experience either a depressed mood or a loss of interest in pleasurable
activities.
One of those two is required, but it is interesting, isn't it, that depressed mood is not required.
You can be, actually, have depression without necessarily being overly sad and have a depressed
mood.
If you have the set of symptoms that we're about to read off here, you can be depressed
and be diagnosed as clinically depressed, even though overwhelming sadness is not one
of the symptoms.
And so people are often not appropriately diagnosed with this.
In fact, it's estimated that only about half the people who have depression are ever diagnosed
with depression, and many of those who are have been to many doctors before they get
a proper diagnosis for depression, because it is a bit elusive, and sometimes you don't
have to have major sadness.
So you have to have one of those two things that I mentioned, either a depressed mood
or a loss of interest in pleasurable activities, and then you have to have three or four of
the following.
So you have to have a total of five symptoms, fatigue, sleep disturbance, appetite change,
slow down of activity, concentration difficulty, self-denunciation, recurrent thoughts of death
or suicide.
So if you have an appropriate number of those, then you would fit the criteria for diagnosis
of unipolar depression.
And there's a recurrence of major depression in about 80% of the cases, and the more often
you have depression, the more you have a recurrence, the more likely it is that you'll have an
additional recurrence as well.
And so you get people who have depression, and they start on, say, an antidepressive
drug, and they're starting to feel pretty good, and they quit taking the drug, even
though their doctor told them to continue taking the drug.
It's quite likely that person will have a recurrence of depression if they quit taking
the drug.
Treatments for unipolar depression include antidepressant drugs, and there are several
versions of those.
There are tricyclic drugs, which are the more old-fashioned of the drugs for combating depression,
and they have some side effects that are not too desirable.
And also serotonin reuptake inhibitors, like Prozac and Welbutrin and some of the other
kinds of drugs that are available now for depression, and we'll talk in more detail
about those drugs later, and in particular about some of the recent concerns that people
have, particularly with adolescents taking these drugs and the possibility of suicide.
These are also sometimes used for depression, and for severely depressed people, especially
drug-resistant patients where you've tried about everything that you can with them, sometimes
electroconvulsive shock therapy, or ECT, is used for severely depressed people.
And we'll talk in some detail when we get into therapies about ECT and its effectiveness.
It turns out that for those people, ECT works pretty well, and there's some hope for the
these folks, even if they are resistant to drug therapies.
Bipolar disorders are another of the subcategories of the mood disorders, and bipolar disorders
are very interesting because they have not only the depressive episodes that you expect
with unipolar depression, but they also have manic episodes as well, and there's a swing
between the depressed episode and the manic episode.
And it's not quite sure how long this swing even should be, and the more typical cases
the swing is on the order of weeks or even months, but there are also rapidly cycling
people who are bipolar as well, where these swings may be a bit faster than that.
Now, this is one point in the course where sometimes I have people coming up to me after
I lecture and saying, I think I have it.
You know, I have these mood swings all the time.
Some days I'm just really up, and some days I'm really down.
And I try to assure them that it's probably not the case that they have it, that we all
have mood swings, and some days we're up and some days we're down.
We're talking about very severe mood swings when we talk about bipolar disorders.
And these mood swings are, I'll describe some here in a minute.
The lifetime risk for bipolar disorder is about 1%, and this one, as I mentioned a minute
ago, does not have sex differences, where unipolar depression does have sex differences
here.
The depressive episodes are largely indistinguishable from unipolar depression.
And in fact, the person may have unipolar depression for some period of time, and then
later swing into the manic kind of phase as well.
So the original diagnosis is often unipolar depression before the manic phase kicks in.
The manic phases have different amounts of severity to them.
In some cases, these can be very severe and can lead to even psychotic behavior, in which
case anti-psychotic drugs may even be prescribed for these.
Psychotic behavior, we've not used that term before.
That's basically where there's a break from reality, and that the person becomes sort
of detached from the world even in knowing who they are or where they are.
And so it's a very severe form of mental illness.
I had a neighbor once who became manic depressive, and this fellow at a certain point, he suddenly
had a Harley-Davidson motorcycle sitting in his garage, and he went out and bought a
new car, and he bought some real estate over on the coast, and he would just talk about
these things and be going and seemed as happy as could be about it.
The police followed him in one day, had been speeding down the highway, didn't know quite
what he was doing, and it turned out he had bipolar disorder and was entering a manic
phase in that disorder.
We had a graduate student in my program, and this poor young lady was fairly new in the
program, and was working with a fellow who had a laboratory that had some animals in
it, and she was on teaching assistant, and she was supposed to come in and take care
of the animals on the weekend.
She came in this one time and couldn't get into the laboratory because she forgot her
key, so she found something to knock the door down and picked up a piece of furniture and
slammed it in the door enough times that knocked the door down, and then she fed the animals,
and then she couldn't figure out how to lock the door back up, so she went to the hardware
store and bought herself a big chain and a lock, and locked the door shut with this chain
so that her advisor couldn't even get into his own laboratory anymore.
And it turned out that she was doing other bizarre kinds of things.
She bought a new car as well.
She went out, she would sell cosmetics and other kinds of things, a flea market kinds
of things, and she set up her stand to sell these things, a table next to a four-lane
highway where people couldn't even pull off the side of the highway trying to sell these
things with no recognition that this was a totally inappropriate thing to do.
Her judgment was completely impaired.
She did unusual and bizarre kinds of things, and finally, her husband recognized this enough
as did the rest of us, that we got her some help, and she ended up, in fact, being institutionalized
for a period of time until they got her medication straightened out where this wasn't a problem.
But that's an example of sort of the extreme case of the manic phase.
Now, the manic phase isn't always hypermanic.
That would be hypermanic, what I was just describing.
The manic phase can be hypomanic as well, meaning a little less than manic.
And people who are hypomanic are actually very pleasant to be around, and they enjoy
themselves a lot.
It used to be that in mental institutions, if you want to find somebody to sort of produce
a talent show or something like that, find a hypomanic person who's in the hypomanic
phase of being bipolar, and as long as they can hold it in the hypomanic phase, they'll
be terrific at it.
They don't sleep much, they're awake, it's kind of like they're an amphetamines or something
like that.
They're quite productive before they cross over the boundary into the hypermanic phase
where they no longer can use good judgment.
And in fact, many people who are quite creative have been diagnosed as bipolar.
Some we know were bipolar, people like Hemingway, for example.
And some people, we kind of infer that they're bipolar because they lived a long time ago
before these classifications even came along.
But just a partial list of people, Lord Byron, Herman Melville, Edgar Allen Poe, Rossetti,
Shelley, Tennyson, and then others like Balzac, Virginia Woolf, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Charles
Lamb, I already mentioned Ernest Hemingway, and among composers, people like Handel, Schumann,
Mather, Rossini, Tchaikovsky, Rachmaninoff, all of these people, it has been, there's
fair evidence that these people were bipolar.
And one of the problems with trying to correct bipolar disorder is that people who are bipolar
often like being bipolar.
They really don't want to change because this hypermanic phase is so much fun to be in and
they feel so creative and so fulfilled when they're in this phase.
And if you get them on proper medication, it sort of flattens out their affect and they
don't have these highs that they can have where they have these bursts of creativity
that allow them to do the kinds of things that this list of people did in life.
In fact, from an evolutionary point of view, being bipolar perhaps is a good adaptation,
at least if you can keep it in the hypermanic phase, because these people can really be
quite creative and move societies along quite nicely.
So at any rate, the bipolar disorder, one of the real problems is people often go off
the medication because they don't like what it does to them.
It changes them into a different person, they think.
And so that's one of the problems with this.
But if you can do it, treatments for the depressive phase are usually anti-depressive treatments
like Prozac and the other drugs.
And then for the manic phase are things like lithium that's been used for at least half
a century now against bipolar disorder.
And then more recently, anti-convulsive drugs have been found to be effective against the
manic phase of bipolar as well.
And if the manic phase goes hypermanic into psychotic episodes, then sometimes the anti-psychotic
drugs are used as well, and we'll talk about the anti-psychotic drugs later in the course.
One of the problems with depression and mood disorders is suicide.
People are more likely to commit suicide.
In the U.S., suicide attempts for women are about three to four times more likely than
for men.
But on the other hand, men are three or four times more likely to commit suicide than women
to be successful at committing suicide.
And it's a real problem.
Suicide is often very much comorbid with other kinds of diagnoses as well.
And one of the real things that leads you to want to get help for somebody with either
unipolar depression or bipolar depression is if they're suicide ideation, if they're
thinking about suicide, if they're thinking about death.
In fact, if you look at people who do commit suicide, most of them have recently talked
to their family about suicide or about death and dying, but only about half of them have
ever gone to a therapist about this.
So the best thing you can do if you hear somebody talking about this is try to get them to a
therapist of some sort to try to get some help with the problem.
And it might surprise you to know that suicide rates, that we often hear about that with
young people, and I work in a college setting and often we're worried that if one person
commits suicide, it'll lead to kind of a chain reaction of suicides.
And that is a worry.
But in actual fact, suicide, completed suicides are most prominent for people 65 years of
age or older.
Those people actually commit suicide more frequently than even the younger population
does.
So it's important to recognize the possibility of suicide with depressed folks.
So today we've talked about two of the major classifications of mental disorders, talked
about anxiety disorders and the subclassifications of anxiety disorders, including the phobias,
undue fear of objects or situations, panic disorders.
We talked about generalized anxiety disorder, which is more pervasive and chronic.
We talked about obsessive-compulsive disorders, the problems with obsessive thoughts and compulsive
behaviors.
Then we talked about mood disorders and the two major subclassifications of that, unipolar
depression and also bipolar depression.
So these are very important categories and ones we should be aware of as we're talking
about mental illnesses.
Thank you.
