Lecture 9 Disorders of Brain, Body, Self, Drugs, Sex
This lecture is a continuation of the lectures we're having on the classifications of mental
illness. As you recall, we're using DSM-4 and going through the various classifications
of mental illness, and we talked considerably at length on classification systems and how
they work, and we've already been over a couple of these. We've talked about anxiety disorders
and mood disorders. Today we're going to talk about five more disorders, so we're not going
to be able to spend a whole lot of time on any particular disorder, so I'll have to run
through these fairly quickly. The disorders we're going to talk about today are cognitive
disorders, where there's actually some problem with the brain organically that causes behavioral
problems. Then we're going to talk about somatiform disorders, which are disorders where there
are bodily complaints that have a psychological root cause to them. Then we're going to talk
about dissociative disorders, where there is an integrated whole personality, but something
breaks off from that personality in some way. We'll then talk about substance-related disorders,
drugs of abuse, and drugs that you're exposed to, and what kinds of effects those have.
And finally, we'll talk about sexual disorders, which is kind of a catch-all category that,
as we will see, has people who have problems with sexual functioning and also people who
have what's considered deviant sexual practices. So that's what we're going to try to do today.
The cognitive disorders are disorders where there is an impairment of the brain. Something
has gone wrong. We'll talk about some of the causes in a minute can be due to old age,
can be due to accidents, for example, and other kinds of diseases. And all of these can cause
an organic problem with the brain that shows up as a behavioral problem. First, we need
to define a few terms so that we understand what these behavioral problems are. One term
that we need to understand is delirium. Now, we all sometimes use the word delirious. With
delirium, it's defined as a disturbance of the consciousness in some way. And that disturbance
can lead to things like confusion and disorientation. And the most frequent cause of this is drug
intoxication or withdrawal. And this is particularly true for elderly. But it doesn't have to always
be drug intoxication. For example, perhaps your parents or your grandparents have been
out shopping or something like that and get lost and don't know where they are and are
very confused and disoriented and can't quite remember even why they're there. That would
be an example of delirium. A second definition is kind of dementia. With dementia, what you
have is multiple cognitive deficits. And usually there's a deficit of the memory as part of
dementia. And dementia, for example, is a major symptom of Alzheimer's disorder that
we're going to talk about in some length in a minute or so. The third thing that we
need to define is amnestic disorders. And these are specific deficits in memory where
there are not other cognitive impairments involved. So this would be a person who seems
to have memory problems, but everything else seems to be pretty well intact. Okay, let's
talk some about Alzheimer's disease, because it's a big one. It's part of the reason why
cognitive disorders is a classification that has lots and lots of folks in it. The biggest
subcategory of that is diseases of old age, and Alzheimer's is the biggest of those.
About 56% of dementia cases, in fact, are Alzheimer's disease. Now, you're probably familiar
with Alzheimer's disease now, because it's so prevalent in our society, and so many
people are dealing with parents or grandparents who are going through this. It's a slow, progressing
disease where there's a deteriorating health condition. And when I first started to lecture
some 35 years ago or so, Alzheimer's disease was considered pretty exotic. And it was used
only when talking, for the most part at least, about presenial disorders. Somebody who would
get this at, say, age 45 or 50, which was considered quite unusual. And so there weren't
very many cases of Alzheimer's, at least they weren't called that. They were called senility,
and people when they got to be 60, 70, 80 years old, who started losing brain function
were just considered to be senile. And they would typically die, and there wouldn't be
an autopsy. And so they didn't realize that in fact it was Alzheimer's that had the same
kind of symptomology that this early onset kind of senility also had. Now we know that
if you in fact do an autopsy, you'll see gross kinds of changes in the brain. So if you look
at the brain itself, it'll have kind of shriveled up, sort of like it's been kept in salt water
or something like that. All these nice fat convolutions on the outside of the brain will
have withered away to some degree. And that would indicate Alzheimer's. And then you could
also do it at the neurological level where you go in and look at the micro level and
you'll see changes too. And apparently this is due to a protein plaque that forms on the
brain and eventually kills the neurons of the brain. And so the brain in fact physically
gets smaller and withers up due to this protein plaque. About 4 million people in the U.S.
currently have Alzheimer's disorder. And it's expected to triple this number in the
next 50 years unless we find some way of curing Alzheimer's. And that's mainly because the
demographics of the country are changing. And people are living longer. And there's
a huge sort of population bubble that's going in that direction. And with those folks, a
lot of them will have Alzheimer's. It does increase. The probability increases as a
person gets older. In the 60s and 70s, the numbers start to pick up. And then by the
time people are in their 80s to 90s, about half the people have Alzheimer's disease at
that point. There's really no effective treatment for Alzheimer's disorder. People try various
kinds of things. I just saw an ad on TV this week for a psychopharmacological intervention
where there's a pill that's supposed to improve the person's memory who's having Alzheimer's.
I'm not sure about the clinical studies on that. They're selling it for that. And it may
have a slight improvement. I'm not sure. But not much. They've tried various things. They've
tried massive vitamins. They've tried oxygen as a way of trying to keep the brain from
shriveling up. We do know that some of this may be hereditary. People with Alzheimer in
the family tend to be more likely to have Alzheimer's. And we also know that there are
some environmental kinds of things as well that influence this. People who are mentally
active tend to do better. People, the proportion of people who get Alzheimer's for those who
are not mentally active and physically active, for that matter. There is a larger proportion
of people who get Alzheimer's with that. The other causes of cognitive disorders besides
the diseases of old age and Alzheimer's is one of these is stroke, where there's a blockage
of the blood supply to the brain. And part of the brain loses its functionality. And
physical therapy is supposed to retrain another part of the brain to do those functions. Parkinson's
disease and also brain injury. So somebody who's in an automobile accident or somebody
has a gunshot wound to the head, they would fit into this category as well. And the most
frequently occurring amnestic syndrome, that is memory loss, the pattern of symptoms of
memory loss, is chronic alcohol use. All right. That's cognitive disorders. Let's move
on to the second. And that's the somatic somatiform disorders. Now, soma means body.
So here we're talking about a disorder where there are complaints about bodily symptoms
or deficits. And for which we can find no corresponding organic or medical cause for
these particular deficits. One of the classifications here is hypochondriasis. This is a person
who believes that they have a particular disease. And they have symptoms associated with that
disease. At least they report those symptoms. And yet if you give them physical examinations,
you'll find no medical basis for this. And so they may complain that they have heart
palpitations and that they don't think their heart beats strongly enough. And it's irregular.
And they have this whole collection of symptoms. And they go to the doctor. And the doctor
gives them an EKG and does other tests on them and can't find any problem with them.
And they insist that they do have this problem. Now, it's hypochondriasis if it's a sort of
a single disease that they're talking about here. And if it lasts for at least six months
according to the classification system, it's not somebody who just for a week or two complains
about lower back pain or something like that. We're talking about somebody who for a considerable
period of time thinks they have a major medical problem. So they're preoccupied by their bodily
function. Now, these people can be helped to some extent by cognitive therapy, but they
don't really want to go see a psychologist because for them, it's a real problem. They
think they have a physical problem. They don't like people even suggesting that it's in their
head somehow, that there's no real root cause to this problem. So they're very reluctant
to go to try to get help for the problem. A second form that looks a lot like hypochondriasis
is somatization disorder. And it's similar to hypochondriasis in that there are physical
complaints, but in this case, there are multiple physical complaints. And so they may have,
according to the classification system, they have to have a minimum of four pain symptoms,
two gastrointestinal symptoms, one sexual symptom, and one pseudo neurological symptom.
And they have to have all of that. And that may seem odd to you that you'd have to have
that much. But it's not that unusual. I play a tape for my students of a fellow who
has this diagnostic category. And this poor fellow, I mean, he sounds like a commercial
for painkillers on TV. He complains about how his stomach hurts and his solar plexus
are swollen up in the middle. And he doesn't know much about the human body and how his
wrists hurt and how his back hurts from picking up his boy and how he has trouble sexually
and how he has trouble digesting his food and he has constipation and on and on about
headaches. And I mean, he has everything that there is. And for 20, 25 minutes, he goes
on and on about these things. And you might think this poor fellow, he's really in pretty
bad shape. But then you discover that he's been going to the doctor. And in fact, at
the end of the tape, he finally admits that on some days he would go see three different
doctors on the same day because he had all of these complaints. And none of them can
find anything wrong with him. So that's somatization disorder where there are multiple complaints.
Pain disorders also fits into this category where a person reports a pain that might be
in some area or multiple areas of the body. And again, which there's no medical condition
that they can discover for this. And this is a particularly difficult one to do. Pain
is so subjective. How do you crawl inside somebody else and find out whether they really have
pain? And for these people, it certainly is pain. You can't say, well, I deny the fact
you have pain. It's all in your head. They don't want to hear that at all. And yet they
have a very difficult time often finding the diagnosis. So they don't attribute the problem
to themselves. They attribute the problem to the incompetence of the doctors who are
trying to find what's causing their pain because the pain is very real for them.
Conversion disorder. We did talk about conversion disorder already here. When we talked about
Freud, in fact, we talked about hysteria, which was the early name for conversion disorder,
where you might have an arm that goes numb or you might have blindness for a period of
time and there's psychological causes to it rather than physical causes. And finally,
there's this sort of exotic one called body dysmorphic disorder. And this is when somebody
thinks that they have something wrong with their physical appearance and that it's so
bad that they can't have a proper relationship with somebody else. They think people at work
are always looking at them because of this ugly distortion they have in their body somehow.
And we've all had a little of this. I mean, when I was growing up, I used to look in the
mirror and say, oh, my nose is awful big or my ears stick out too far. So all of us sort
of think that. But these are people who really think they're grotesque, yet they're fit within
the normal range of physical variability. And so that is called body dysmorphic disorder.
All right, that's the somatiform disorders in the second category. The third category
we're going to look at is dissociative disorders. And if you picture somebody having a well-integrated
self and something becomes dissociated from that self, that's the general category here.
An example of that is depersonalization. And in this case, a person might think that they
don't even exist or that they're detached from reality somehow, on a temporary basis,
at least. And some people find that a very exotic thing to try to think about. I actually
can resonate to that a little bit. If I go visit a strange city and don't know anybody
there and go for several days without talking to anybody and wander around the city and
nobody pays any attention to me, every now and then I start feeling sort of weird, like
maybe I'm not even there. If you've had that experience, you're having just a little bit
of this. But these people really do start to believe that they don't exist. And it's
a far more serious disorder. A second one is amnesia. And we're all pretty familiar
with that. It's a memory loss for the events in a person's life or one's identity. And
it has to last for a period of time. And again, there's no physical precipitating event.
They didn't get a blow to the head or have some other traumatic thing happen to them.
They just wake up one day and something's missing from their memory about their life.
Another subcategory here is fugue. And that means flight. And this would be exemplified
by somebody who goes out to the grocery store to get a loaf of bread and never comes back.
And two years later, they find this person in a different location, moved to California,
having a different life with very little memory of the previous life. That would be an example.
That's obviously a dissociation from the previous life and the previous self. Another one is
identity disorder. And you've all heard of this. It used to be called multiple personality
disorder or split personality. And people get this confused with schizophrenia because
they know schizo means split. And they think that that must mean that there are multiple
personalities. But it's a very different category as you see. It has nothing to do with schizophrenia.
In this case, people have identities that they switch often fairly frequently in the
order of seconds. And the one identity does not know the existence of the other identity
there. It's a rather, again, it used to be considered a rather infrequent and unusual
and exotic kind of a disorder until 1979. In fact, there are only 200 reported cases
of multiple personality disorder or what's now called identity disorder. And they were
so unusual that people wrote books about them, the three faces of Eve and the 12 faces of
somebody else. If you want to become a famous psychiatrist back in those days, you would
just write another book having a patient who had more identities than the last patient
in the book. And so it was quite unusual. But then, by 1999, there had been reported
over 30,000 cases of this disorder. Well, did people just start having this disorder?
Well, it's kind of controversial because one of the things that happens is that there are
a whole school of therapists who believe that women in particular who are having problems
very often have been sexually assaulted or abused in the family situation when they were
young, and that's the source of their problems, and that that leads to this particular disorder,
identity disorder, and that they have to have identity disorder if they had this set of
symptoms. And I'm afraid that many of these therapists have convinced their clients that
they have multiple personalities when, in fact, a lot of therapists believe that they
do not. So it's kind of a controversial issue, and it's part of the reason that increased
number is there. Let's move on to the fourth category here, and that's substance-related
disorders. And in this case, it can refer to people who have drug abuse, but it can
also refer to people who've had problems with medication, the side effects of medication,
and also to toxin exposure. And we're going to talk at great length about drug abuse and
the drugs that are used recreationally in a lecture, a subsequent lecture. So let me
just talk just a little bit about this category. One subcategory includes the actual physiological
impairments that people have from having prolonged and excessive use of a particular drug like
alcohol. One of the ones that people often cite as an alcohol abuse disorder called Corsikov
syndrome. With Corsikov syndrome, the person has a memory problem, and it looks like that
memory problem is a difficulty in transferring things from short-term memory, the kind of
memory we use when we're trying to remember a phone number for 30 seconds or a minute,
into long-term memory, the more permanent memory that we have throughout most of our
lives. And we automatically kind of transfer that, particularly with rehearsal, that it
goes in long-term memory. Somebody with Corsikov syndrome seems to have lost the ability to
do that. I have a tape of a fellow with Corsikov syndrome. This fellow is about 70 years old,
so he may be getting some problems with Alzheimer's as well. But on this tape, he talks about having,
he works in various breweries around Cincinnati, and at the time the tape was made, there were
lots of breweries around there. He claims he drank mostly beer, but he drank a lot of
beer. And he would get the shakes, although he claimed he didn't get the delirium tremens
where he would see bugs and that sort of thing. But he did drink a lot. And during the interview,
the interviewer, who is a psychiatrist, at one point asks him, and what is my name? And
he says, well, your name's Harry. And then he goes on for a while, and two minutes later,
the interviewer asks him again, what did you say my name was? He says, your name's Happy.
Then the phone rings about five minutes later, and he sets it down. He says, what did you
say my name was? And he says, your name's Bob. So he was changing it every time. And
that characterized, he would do what's sometimes called confabulation, make up pieces to sort
of fit in where he had memory deficits. So if you talk to this guy for 30 seconds, he
sounds like he's fairly normal. But if you talk to him for as much as five minutes, you'll
realize he's forgotten what he's told you just two minutes ago. And that's a characteristic
of Corsacoss syndrome. A second major category are addictive disorders due to the use of a
particular substance. And the person uses this substance, and it's a pathological use that
results in hazardous behavior. And continued use of the substance can bring on very great
negative consequences. And we're going to talk about that a bit more. Substance dependence
occurs when you have a physiological need for the substance to the point where tolerance
develops. That is, you need more and more of the particular substance to get the desired
effect. So these are all substance related disorders and fit in that category. Let's
talk about the final category here. And that's sexual and gender identity disorders. And
there are several subcategories that are really quite different from each other in this overall
category. The first are sexual dysfunctions. And this means that somebody is having a difficult
time performing the way they would like to to be sexually active and healthy. And you
might ask, well, why is that one of the classifications of mental illness? Is this person really mentally
ill? Well, if this person wants to go get some help from a sex therapist or something
like that, they have to have a classification. So it fits in here so that they can convince
their insurance company to go talk to a therapist. And that's why it fits here. It doesn't mean
that the person's crazy or anything just because you have an erectile dysfunction doesn't mean
that you're having a severe mental problem at all. But it has to fit in the classification
system here. So some of these sexual dysfunction include things like hyposexual desire, not
hypersexual, hyposexual desire in which there's little interest in sex, and sexual aversion
in which you want to avoid sexual contact altogether. So if a person were having that
kind of problem, you would be diagnosed this way and would go see a therapist about it
if it were severe enough. Sexual arousal problems and dysfunctions there, such as male erectile
disorder, which was at one time called impotence, or female sexual arousal disorder, which is
formerly called fragidity. So if there's a problem with that, one could see a therapist
about it. There are also dysfunctions having to do with orgasm. In males, the usual complaint
is premature ejaculation. And again, one might see a therapist about that particular
problem. And in women, the complaint is usually one of an inability to achieve orgasm, although
that can be a complaint of both sexes as well. And there's also pain disorders where a person
reports having severe pain when they try to have intercourse. So if the person had any
of these particular disorders, this classification would allow them to go get some help for these
disorders. Also fitting under sexual and gender identity disorders are what are called the
paraffilias. Paraffilias are characterized by frequent sexual urges, fantasies, or behaviors
involving unusual objects, activities, or situations, which cause distress. And I should
point out here, I did earlier in this course, but I will point out again that homosexuality
is not one of the subcategories here. Back in 1973, the American Psychiatric Association
took homosexuality out as a subcategory of the paraffilias. It is now considered to
be an appropriate alternative lifestyle and is no longer considered a disorder. But some
of those that are considered disorders are things like fetishism. And that's the case
where a person receives sexual gratification from the use of an inanimate object such
as an article of clothing, a body part which is not usually considered sexually arousing.
Those would be fetishes. And there are all sorts of these, an unbelievable number of
different kinds of fetishes that people have that seem unusual to folks who don't have
those fetishes. Another one is transvestic fetishism. People are sometimes called transvestites.
And this involves a man receiving sexual gratification by dressing in women's clothing. This is kind
of an unusual one because this is a case where if you'll recall back when we were talking
about what's the definition of abnormal behavior, we said very often one of the criteria is
how socially acceptable it is. And in our society, women are allowed to wear men's clothing,
aren't they? I mean, when I look out at my class of 200 students, 90% of the women are
dressed in clothes that I could wear. They're wearing pants and a shirt or something like
that. And in today's society, that's considered quite acceptable. But if I wore a skirt to
class, people would say I have transvestic fetishism. In fact, I had a colleague or my
former university who taught sexual behavior. And once a semester, he would wear a skirt
to campus and walk around campus quite proudly in his skirt just to see what people's reaction
is, to point out the absurdity of the fact we have this rule that men can't do this and
that women can. But that's part of the way abnormal behavior is defined. I play a tape
of a fellow who has a transvestic fetishism to my class, and this is a 17-year-old young
man who in fact derives great pleasure out of dressing up as a woman. In fact, he goes
a little bit farther and even sometimes performs as a female impersonator. But he feels much
more comfortable when he's dressed as a woman. And he says he really feels more like a woman
and we'll talk about the possibility in a minute that he also has gender identity disorder
with this particular set of problems that he has. Because that's not necessarily typical.
More typically, a guy works in a factory all day and comes home and then the privacy of
his own home gets out female clothing and puts it on and he gets some sexual gratification
out of that. So that's transvestic fetishism. Voirism, what we sometimes call peeping, occurs
when a man receives sexual gratification from observing an unsuspecting woman in a state
of undress or in sexual activity. Exhibitionism is the opposite of that. That's when somebody
derives sexual pleasure out of exposing one's genitals or being nude in front of somebody
else. Again, I mentioned that when we were talking about abnormal behavior. Sadism, which
involves receiving sexual gratification out of inflicting pain on somebody else and the
opposite of that masochism, which is receiving sexual gratification out of having pain inflicted
upon you. Froturism involves sexual pleasure from touching or rubbing against somebody
else who doesn't consent to that activity. Pedophilia, I think we're all familiar with
that. That's sexual activity with a child. And then there are some even more exotic ones
that have to do with corpses and animals and so forth. So these are all parapherias, what
we usually consider to be deviant kinds of sexual practices. And this is very much tied
up in the moral criteria and the social criteria of abnormality. Finally, there is gender identity
disorder in which the person has a strong desire to be really the opposite sex. They feel like
they've been inappropriately assigned their gender. And this may lead in some cases to
actual operations to do gender change as well. All right, so today we have been over five
different categories of the Statistical Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 4, talked about cognitive
disorders where there's an actual brain problem due to accidents or due to diseases, talked
about somatiform disorder where there are complaints about the body or even the perception
of the body and whether this is appropriate but for which there are no medical kinds of
conditions that should cause those complaints. We talked about dissociative disorder where
there's some dissociation from an integrated whole where a person might have a problem
with memory or other problems of multiple personality or something like that where there's a dissociation.
We talked some about substance related disorders where the person is ingesting something that's
not good for them over a prolonged period of time. And finally we talked about sexual
disorders both where there are complaints about sexual performance and where people
seem to have a deviancy in terms of the sexual behavior that they have. So those are five
categories of mental illness. Thank you.
