Lecture 10 Schizophrenic Disorders
In this lecture, we're continuing our discussion of the various mental disorders.
You'll recall that we're using the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 4
to go through the mental disorders and look at the various symptoms
and other information about these disorders.
And today, we're going to talk about Schizophrenia.
This is a very important disorder.
You may recall when we looked at the incidence of the various mental disorders
that Schizophrenia only comprised about 1% of the people,
or only 1% of the population, has Schizophrenia.
That may seem like a small number.
However, the severity of the disorder is such that it is one of the major disorders
that we have to be concerned about.
People are hospitalized at very high rates for Schizophrenia.
And so, a lot of the resources in this country that go to a mental health field
go because of Schizophrenia.
Many of the hospital beds in our mental hospitals go to Schizophrenic patients.
So today, we're going to talk about Schizophrenia.
We'll talk first about the symptoms of Schizophrenia, what defines this as a disorder.
Then we're going to talk some about the various subtypes of Schizophrenia.
In fact, there are those who would argue that Schizophrenia is not a single category,
but is a collection of subtypes of Schizophrenia,
and those subtypes might have different root causes.
And finally, we're going to talk some about the possible causes of Schizophrenia,
and we don't have surefire answers yet,
but we have data that suggests what some of the possible causes of Schizophrenia might be.
So that's what we're going to do today.
Schizophrenia is a psychotic disorder.
And by psychosis, we mean generally that there's a break with reality.
Somehow the person is no longer in touch with the external world in one way or another.
And when there's a break with reality, there are other psychosis,
although Schizophrenia is the largest disorder where there is a break with reality,
where there is psychosis.
And one of the ways that you might try to determine whether there's a break with reality,
if you were talking to somebody to try to do a diagnosis,
you might ask them person, place, and time orientation questions.
Who are you? Do they know who they are?
Do they think they're Napoleon instead of who they actually are?
Do they know where they are?
Do they realize they're in a mental hospital,
or do they realize what city they're in?
They may think they're in a different country altogether.
Do they know what time it is?
Not the time of day, but do they know even what era they're living in?
If they think they're Napoleon, they may think they're in a different century even.
So person, place, and time orientation is one of the main ways of trying to determine
whether somebody has a psychotic disorder.
With Schizophrenia, very often there are deficits in their person, place, and time orientation.
There are what are sometimes called positive symptoms
and also negative symptoms of Schizophrenia.
This doesn't mean that the positive symptoms are good things to have
and that the negative symptoms are bad things to have.
The positive refers to behaviors that are added over and above
what are considered to be normal behaviors.
And the negative symptoms are behaviors that are subtracted
from what are considered to be normal kinds of behaviors.
So we'll go over some of those symptoms.
Let me make a point that I made in the previous lecture,
but I think it's worth making again.
People think that Schizophrenia, because Schizo means a split of some sort,
often think that Schizophrenia has to do with split personalities.
And that is simply not the case.
As we learned in the last lecture, split personalities or multiple personalities
are now called dissociative identity disorders,
and that's a completely different category from Schizophrenia.
So what does split mean?
Well, split means a split of, partly because there's a break with reality,
so they have split with reality,
but there's also a split of the emotions from reality.
And throughout these subcategories, when we go over them,
you will see that in many of the subcategories,
there is inappropriate emotion as part of what you're getting with that subcategory.
That's the split, the emotion from reality.
All right, the positive symptoms, those things that have been added to normal behavior.
Delusions is a very frequent positive symptom.
In fact, about 90% of Schizophrenic patients exhibit some form of delusion.
These are false beliefs.
They believe that perhaps they're the king of Prussia or something like that,
when in fact there's no evidence to indicate they are the king of Prussia.
So those would be a delusion of grandeur where they think they're more important.
Perhaps they think they're Jesus Christ.
Those would all be delusions, but they don't have to be delusions that are quite so large.
They might believe that people can see into their heads.
That's always a fear of many Schizophrenics.
They're afraid that people can read their minds,
and that terrifies them because they have all of these what they think are strange thoughts
and they think other people can see that they have strange thoughts.
They might have delusions that they're hearing things,
in which case we would call it a hallucination.
A hallucination, in this case we have sensory events that are usually auditory in nature.
I always thought when I first read about hallucinations and Schizophrenics
that they were seeing things like ghosts more frequently.
It's that they're hearing voices, hearing voices in their heads,
and hallucinations occur in about 75% of Schizophrenic patients.
People report that these voices are very real to them.
Some people describe it as if there were a radio sitting in their head playing and talking to them.
They hear these voices and these voices can be very commanding.
Sometimes usually the voices are saying rather negative things to them,
like you're no good and telling them how bad they are.
They have to listen to this all the time and can't get away from it.
Sometimes when you see Schizophrenics patients who seem to have nothing going on,
they're sort of standing there not doing anything,
and you ask them to report what's going on,
and they report that there's a lot of activity.
It's all happening in their head,
and they have to spend all of their attention on what's going on in their head
and can't even interact with the environment for that reason.
So hallucinations are a primary symptom, a positive symptom of Schizophrenia.
A disorganized speech is another symptom of Schizophrenia.
That's one that I think is diagnostic before the person might have extreme delusions or hallucinations.
You'll hear people when you talk to them who are just bordering on Schizophrenia,
starting to have speech kind of patterns that are very unusual.
There's a tape I play my students of a paranoid Schizophrenic,
and I'll describe her a little more later,
but one of the things she does is use speech in a strange way,
and she even uses what are called neologisms.
Neologisms are making up words that are not real words,
or using words in their speech.
They also use words that rhyme with each other.
So she, in fact, describes a...
She says, well, her parents came from Bell Fountain, Ohio.
You know that, that's where Grandpa Bell's fountains were, she said.
And then later on she's talking about the Liberty Bell,
and how they had ringed the Liberty Bell, hear ye, hear ye, and gather around.
And then she's talking about the bell referring to the Statue of Liberty in the harbor,
and talking about her Grandpa Bell, and using this word in sort of this strange way,
and often even rhyming it while she's doing this.
So she makes up words, neologisms, she rhymes words,
and you'll see people doing this very frequently as they are entering into Schizophrenia.
They also, patients also have disorganized behavior quite frequently,
in terms of their hygiene, in terms of the way they dress, their health,
their personal interactions with people,
and in the extreme case, they might have even catatonic behavior.
We'll talk about that as a subclassification in a minute,
where they have postural immobility, where they don't even move.
So those are some of the positive symptoms of Schizophrenia.
Those are things that are added to normal behavior that you wouldn't usually see.
And then there are a whole collection of what are negative symptoms as well.
And there seems to be sort of a dichotomy here of the positive and the negative symptoms.
Once we give people, we'll talk a little bit later about therapies for Schizophrenia.
And one of the major therapies are anti-psychotic drugs that they take.
And at least the older anti-psychotic drugs, one of the problems was
they were pretty good at getting rid of the positive symptoms.
People had fewer delusions and no longer hallucinated.
But in fact, the negative symptoms were still there.
So it may be a different kind of collection of things we have
with the positive symptoms and the negative symptoms.
Some of the negative symptoms include absence of normally occurring behaviors
such as flattening of emotions, lessening speech, which is sometimes called alogia,
deficit in will, which is sometimes called abolition,
where the person can't even get motivated to act in a particular way.
And in general, we could describe this as kind of an apathetic
or withdrawn kind of personality at this point.
So in addition to having some of these more exotic positive symptoms,
they also sometimes have this sort of flattening of emotion
and withdrawal and apathy kind of thing that's going on that we call the negative symptoms.
Now, let's look at some of the factors that influence the likelihood
of somebody getting schizophrenia.
We already mentioned that schizophrenia affects about 1% of the population.
And we also know that schizophrenia comes on.
The onset is usually around late adolescence to early adulthood.
My college students are often interested in finding that out
that they're in prime time for the possibility of getting schizophrenia.
I had a friend and fraternity brother when I was in school
who seemed to be a normal kind of guy.
He'd act a little strange from time to time, but nothing so out of the ordinary
that he wasn't considered a pretty good friend to us.
And he went home for holiday break one year and started acting oddly,
and he never came back to school.
And he was diagnosed with schizophrenia.
He was in and out of hospitals for the rest of his life.
He's now dead.
In fact, he died about seven years ago and had a diagnosis of schizophrenia.
So that's kind of the time that most likely occurs.
However, there are differences between men and women in this regard.
Men tend to get schizophrenia earlier and they tend to get it more severely than women do.
If you look at a graph with age across the bottom
and you plot it with a bar showing men and women in the 20s into the 30s,
you'll see men considerably above the women in terms of the incidence of schizophrenia.
And then around 30 or so, the graph changes
and more women start getting schizophrenia at that point.
And that increases, in fact, all the way into the age of 60 or so,
that women get more schizophrenia than men do.
And it's been hypothesized that it might be due to estrogen.
And as menopause occurs and the estrogen levels change,
that estrogen perhaps is having some positive effect in preventing schizophrenia.
We're not sure that that's the case, but that's a hypothesis at least at this point.
Children born to older fathers are also of higher risk for getting schizophrenia.
And later in this lecture, we'll talk some about heredity of schizophrenia as well.
All right, let's talk some about the subtypes of schizophrenia.
And I already mentioned that these subtypes may be different diseases themselves.
We're not quite sure.
The one that is probably the most prominent,
the one that I tend to see if you go into a mental institution
and you see more people with this subclassification,
is paranoid type schizophrenia.
Now, I think you probably know what the word paranoid means.
Somebody who's paranoid thinks that folks are out to get them,
that people are plotting against them,
perhaps people are opening their mail and reading it and so forth.
And we'll see later on when we talk about personality disorders,
that there's a whole disorder called paranoid personality.
So just because you have paranoia does not mean you're schizophrenic.
You have to have these other symptoms as well,
things like delusions and hallucinations, and it has to be pretty strong.
This is one subcategory.
And these people have a pervasive belief that they're being persecuted by folks.
And these persecutory delusions are often quite elaborate,
involving convoluted stories of multiple enemies and delusions of grandeur.
This woman who was on the tape that I mentioned just a minute ago
who had paranoid schizophrenia,
she talked about how the Confucianists were out to get her,
Confucianist is a neologism, a word she made up,
that the Confucianists were out to get her
and that these were British Confucianists who were at her day and night,
she said and they were trying to rape her
and they were trying to kill her relatives
and she went through this huge story.
If you think that mentally ill people are sort of dull and dim-witted,
you should listen to a paranoid schizophrenic for a while.
Her mind is racing just as fast as it can.
She's going through this story faster than she can get the words out
and you're sitting there with your eyes wide open
listening to this story and in no way is she dull or unintelligent
but gives you this elaborate kind of story.
When I was in undergraduate school and took abnormal and clinical psychology,
we would go visit a mental institution, a local mental institution
and we were assigned our own patients to interview.
We'd go in three times a week and do this over about a four week period of time.
I had one fellow who was a paranoid schizophrenic who I would talk to,
an interesting fellow and what I discovered,
not only did he have these elaborate stories,
but the stories changed from day to day when I'd go in to talk to him.
He had a military background so many of the stories had a military kind of flavor to them
but one day I would go in and he'd tell me how he was a military chaplain.
He'd tell me about all the folks he had helped while he was a military chaplain
and then the next day I would go in and he had invented the airplane
and he was a very important person in the military because he invented the airplane
and he would go on and on about that.
So very creative but he certainly was paranoid
because there then was a theme running through these stories about people were out to get him
and that's why he was locked up after all.
He had done nothing wrong.
He was locked up because he was a political prisoner
as many paranoid schizophrenic patients think they are when they're in a mental institution.
In fact, the paranoid schizophrenics in mental institutions
often are convincing enough that there gets to be kind of a lore in a mental institution
and everybody picks up a little bit of the paranoia
and thinks that there's arsenic in the drinking fountains
and that bodies are being stuffed down the sewer at night and that sort of thing.
That's sort of a general belief that people pick up who are in mental institutions
because there are so many people with these kinds of stories.
So they have persecutory delusions
and the cognitive functioning is usually higher, as I mentioned,
in this type of schizophrenia.
Another type, subtype of schizophrenia, is the disorganized type
and this used to be called hebafrenia or hebafrenic schizophrenia
and it occurs earlier and more gradually than something like paranoid schizophrenia
and involves symptoms of disorganized behavior and speech and also inappropriate emotions.
I play a tape for my students of somebody with disorganized schizophrenia,
somebody who's been in the mental institution at that time for 30 years
and in fact for disorganized type, while the symptoms are not quite so pronounced and severe,
the prognosis is poorer than for paranoid schizophrenia.
Paranoid schizophrenics often do recover some from their condition.
Disorganized schizophrenic patients often do not.
So she had been in the institution for 30 years.
At the time she was not displaying a lot of hallucinations or delusions.
She was taking some medication that were probably blunting those to some extent
but she still had some of the other behaviors that are characteristic of this disorganized type
and in her case the most noticeable thing was her inappropriate laughter and giggling.
She would be telling her story and telling a story about, for example,
she would say, well, I've been in this institution, the doctor who was interviewing her said,
well, do you have any kids?
She says, well, I guess I have some kids.
I thought I had one kid.
They told me I had two kids and she would just do this kind of laughing.
Well, are you going to get out of here?
Well, I certainly hope so.
And just this sort of strange kind of laughing and inappropriate emotional connection
to the kind of thing she's talking about.
And that's a common characteristic of disorganized type schizophrenia.
So inappropriate emotions, laughter and giggling.
There may be hallucinations and delusions.
In her case they were no longer there.
But they're not the elaborate organized kind of thing that you see with the paranoid schizophrenic.
And there's also sometimes bizarre behavior when she was put into the institution the 30 years before.
Part of the reason they put her in is she was tearing off her clothing and yelling and screaming
and acting in a very bizarre way.
All right.
The next category or subcategory is catatonic type schizophrenia.
What is sometimes called catatonia.
And these patients are generally unresponsive to the world around them.
And the way we're most familiar with is when they go into a stupor and have a maintain a fixed posture.
What's sometimes called a statue like posturing.
And it sometimes has what's called waxy flexibility.
Means they're kind of like a mannequin.
And you can move them around.
They're flexible.
So they're standing there perfectly still, not having any kind of emotion.
And you can walk over and grab their arm and hold it up.
And they'll assume that posture like they're a mannequin.
And they'll stand there for minutes and sometimes for hours at a time in that posture you put them in.
Again, people thought, well, they've just shut down completely.
But when they talk to these people about what goes on while they're in this catatonic state,
again, they'll say that things are just rushing through their mind.
And it's all they can do just to pay attention to their mind.
And so it's not that their body, that their mind has shut down.
It's kind of like their body has shut down and separated itself from their mind.
People who are in the, have this subcategory sometimes have the opposite of that
and are excited and agitated and resemble the manic phase of bipolar disorder
that we talked about in a previous lecture.
Then there's a category that's not very exciting called undifferentiated schizophrenia
in which there are kind of a catch-all category.
They have the general symptoms of schizophrenia,
but it doesn't fit cleanly into any of the other subclassifications.
And finally there's a category called residual type schizophrenia.
And this is a person who at one time had all of the kinds of symptoms
that we would expect to have with schizophrenia,
but in recent times are not showing the severe positive symptoms,
although the negative symptoms are still present.
I play a tape of a fellow who has this categorization too.
He had been in the mental institution for 32 years.
He became schizophrenic when he was 17
and started having trouble in school
and then had a break with reality and they put him in the institution.
But at the time they interviewed him, he had been in there for so long
that he had developed a institutionalized kind of personality.
So he was willing to admit to anything.
He talked in kind of a low monotone in the interview.
Very little emotion, that's the negative side of things.
This apathy and withdrawal.
And he was willing to agree to anything you would say.
The fellow who was interviewing him said,
and what was your father's name?
He says, Ted, I think.
He says, you're not sure what your father's name was?
No.
He says, well, maybe your father was named Frank.
Yeah, could be.
Or maybe George.
Could it be George?
Yeah, could be.
Maybe it's Rudolph.
Was it Rudolph?
Yeah, could be.
He says, well, what was your father's name?
Well, it was Fred.
Well, why did you say it could be these other kinds of things?
This fellow had been in there for so long
he was just trying to get along.
He was institutionalized.
If you had let him out of the institution
he would have been totally incapable of dealing with the world at that point.
So he had this residual type.
He still had these negative kind of symptoms of schizophrenia
but no longer was displaying the positive symptoms.
What are the reasons for schizophrenia?
What's the cause of schizophrenia?
And as I mentioned earlier
we only have an inkling of what that might be at this point.
If I had been teaching this course 50 years ago at this point
when I was trying to talk about the cause of schizophrenia
I would have told you what was the prevailing attitude at the time.
Schizophrenia is caused by cold and uncaring parents.
Mothers in particular.
It's their fault.
And that's kind of the blank slate notion
if we go back to what I talked about earlier on in this course
about the blank slate and how the behaviorists were held sway at that point
and that everything was written on.
Well, if you don't have a brain disorder
if nothing's built in there to give you schizophrenia
it must be due to the environment.
And if people are getting schizophrenia in their late adolescence
their environment is pretty much their family
so let's blame the family for it since we don't know
and so that's what I would have been teaching you.
It's absolutely wrong.
We know that that isn't the case.
There is no correlation between cold and uncaring mothers in schizophrenia.
So what is the cause?
Well, we do know that there's a clear genetic connection.
We know that through heritability studies
where you go in and you take a person who has schizophrenia
and then you try to find out how likely it is that somebody else
who has a particular relationship to that person has schizophrenia.
And if you do that you find that for identical twins
you would expect that to be the most, if there's somewhat inherited
you would expect that identical twins would have a close correspondence
of having schizophrenia.
And indeed if one identical twin has schizophrenia
the likelihood of the other one having it is about 50%
which is very high.
Now this tells you that it's not absolutely deterministic this way
because otherwise it would be 100%
because genetically they're alike with an identical twin.
I'm sure you know that you have an egg that was fertilized by a single sperm
and then later that split.
And so the genetics of these identical twins are exactly alike.
So if it was entirely genetic both of them would have it 100% of the time.
So it's not 100% deterministic this way.
So that does tell us Albert
that there is a strong genetic hereditary predisposition to schizophrenia.
If you get folks who are not quite so related,
first-degree relatives, those are people like siblings or brothers and your sisters
it drops down to about 10%.
If one has schizophrenia the likelihood of the other one having it would be about 10%
as opposed to remember that in the general population it's 1%.
So it's 10 times more likely than you would be to have it just by being in the general population.
Second-degree relatives such as nephews
where the relationship is down to a genetic relationship of about .25
we're down to about 5%.
Third-degree relatives such as first cousins we're down to about 2%.
And then there's also relationships in terms of, for example,
if both parents have schizophrenia it's around 50% again.
So there's a relationship that way as well.
And we also know from research on adopted children
that the environment is not nearly the kind of predictor that the heredity is.
If you have identical twins who were raised separately,
now there's not a whole lot of data on that.
It's a fairly small number of people that you can find with that situation.
But if they were identical twins and raised separately
it makes almost no difference in terms of how likely they are to get schizophrenia.
It's still about 50%.
So in that way the environment probably is not nearly so strong as the genetic connection.
We do know by doing genetic studies that at least four chromosomes
might contain genes that are related to schizophrenia.
We know that schizophrenia is undoubtedly a polygenic trait.
That means that there are multiple genes that are determining this.
Back when I was first lecturing I predicted that within 15 years
we'd have a cure for schizophrenia because I thought we would have made enough progress
with genetic engineering that we could go in there and tweak that gene
and get rid of schizophrenia.
But it turns out that it's located in multiple places in the genetic code
and we're probably, if we're going to do that kind of work,
have to go get it in multiple places.
It's not a single gene that's causing schizophrenia.
We do know that the prenatal environment has something to do with schizophrenia as well.
That things like viral infections, the RH blood incompatibility with a mother,
malnutrition and even delivery problems can cause a higher incident of schizophrenia.
We also know something that brain volume.
Perhaps you've read about people with schizophrenia have larger ventricles in their brains
and it is true some of them do.
And it is somewhat of a predictor.
But then it's not a perfect predictor either.
Not all schizophrenic patients have larger ventricles in their brain.
So brain size doesn't predict it entirely.
We know that it has something to do with the neurotransmitter substances too.
We're going to talk more about that in a future lecture.
We have neurotransmitter substances by which neurons talk to each other.
We know that dopamine and glutamate are related to schizophrenia.
And finally, we also know that there is some environmental effect,
that if you take a person with schizophrenia who gets out of the hospital
and goes back into a situation where there's a lot of emotional tension in the family situation,
that they are more likely to go back into the institution
than if they go into a more placid environment.
So we know that the environment has something to do with it,
but it's probably not a major driver.
So that's a quick overview of schizophrenia.
What we talked about today are the symptoms of schizophrenia,
both the positive and the negative symptoms.
We then also dealt with some of the subtypes of schizophrenia,
such as paranoid, disorganized type, catatonic, undifferentiated,
and residual type schizophrenia.
And finally, we talked briefly about some of the possible causes of schizophrenia.
Thank you.
