Lecture 11 Childhood Retardation Personality Disorders
This is the last lecture in our series on classifications of mental illness.
We've been going through the diagnostic and statistical manual four, and we've hit most
of the categories so far, except for the three we're going to talk about today.
And those three categories, the first one has a rather unwieldy title of disorders usually
diagnosed in infancy childhood or adolescence, and as we'll see, it includes a whole lot
of things.
And then we're going to talk some about mental retardation, a classification that's actually,
as you'll recall, on axis two of the diagnostic and statistical manual.
And then we're going to talk about personality disorders, which is also on that second axis
of the diagnostic and statistical manual.
So that's our agenda for today.
Disorders usually diagnosed in infancy childhood or adolescence.
It's a big category, and it has a lot of things that you may think you wouldn't ever call
a mental illness.
It has things like stuttering and stammering, communication disorders like that.
It has disorders like bedwetting, which is kind of a motor skills disorder, and you might
say to yourself that those don't sound like mental illness to me, and you're right.
This is another one of those categories where you need to have them in the classification
system so you can get some help.
So if your child is having trouble with speaking problems or with math problems or reading
problems, you can go get some help and have an insurance company help you with that.
So these disorders include learning motor skills and communication disorders.
One of the more prominent, I'll emphasize three of these subcategories of this classification.
And the first one, I'm sure all of you have heard of, and that's attention deficit, hyper
activity disorder, some times called ADHD.
And in this case, the child has impulsivity and overactivity that get in the way of completing
schoolwork properly and also, in many cases, having interpersonal relations that are good.
ADHD occurs in about 5%, down to about 3% of school-aged children, depending upon which
study you read.
And it is 6 to 9 times more prevalent in boys than girls.
That's not 6 to 9% more, that's 6 to 9 times the number of boys than girls.
Boys are diagnosed with this at a very high rate, especially African-American boys.
There's also an ethnicity difference here.
There's some controversy over this, because some people contend that it's overdiagnosed
and that perhaps part of the reason is that we have so many women teachers of boys this
age and they're more used to the way girls behave than the way boys behave.
And so some people would contend that there's an overdiagnosis of this disorder for boys.
And it is, you must admit, that if you look at the way probably our ancestors' kids were
brought up, they didn't go to school and have to sit in a classroom quietly for 6 hours
a day.
They probably ran around in the clearing and played games and did those kinds of things.
So we're forcing kids to do something unusual and there may be a difference in the adaptation
for boys than girls.
And so that may be part of the reason that ADHD is diagnosed the way it is.
Because of their behavior problems, children with ADHD test from 7 to 15 points lower on
average in terms of IQ tests.
And there's some controversy also with respect to whether ADHD continues beyond adolescence.
There are people nowadays being diagnosed with adult ADHD and there are folks who think
that that might not be a proper diagnosis as well.
So there's some controversy there.
The most frequently prescribed medication for ADHD is Ritalin and it's found to be effective
in about 75% of the cases.
And what's particularly ironic about Ritalin being effective for this when you have a hyperactive
kid is that it's a form of amphetamine which usually brings about more activity but it
does seem to quiet down hyperactive kids.
And there's some controversy about this and whether there's over medication for the disorder
as well.
Let's move on and talk about autism which is another category of disorders first diagnosed
in infancy childhood and adolescence.
Autistic children seem to cut themselves off from the world in some respects and this causes
deficits in language, in perception and in motor development as well as difficulties in
social situations.
Autism occurs in 5 to 7 children out of every 10,000 and it's 2 to 4 times more frequent
in boys than girls.
Autistic children seem to lack the ability to empathize, to put themselves in somebody
else's place.
And this often leads to poor social skills.
It's what psychologists nowadays are calling having a theory of mind.
Having a theory of mind means that I can figure out as we talk what you're thinking about
and I can respond appropriately and you can do the same with me.
And we are one of the few animals who can do that.
This is a difference between us and the primates for example.
The primates don't have any theory of mind and so that's part of the reason why people
think that perhaps primates don't have language, that it may be necessary to have a theory of
mind to have language.
And if autistic children don't have a theory of mind like this, that may explain part of
their communication skills as well as their social skills kinds of problems.
So they often have severe deficits in speech and they engage in behaviors such as echolalia.
Echolalia is if you try to get an autistic child to speak and you say something to them
like you say, say toy, they'll say, say toy instead of saying toy.
They just echo back what you've said as if again they don't understand what's in your
mind for them to do.
All they know to do is echo it back at you.
So this parrot-like repeating of phrases is quite common with autistic children.
They also engage in self-stimulation, masturbatory behaviors and also things like spinning and
rocking and self-destructive behaviors to some extent like head banging.
Sometimes I've seen autistic children who have to wear boxing gloves to keep them from
beating up their face too much and having massive bruises on their face.
They'll sit there and hit themselves in the face with their fists multiple times, hundreds
of times until they're bruising and bleeding from this.
It's almost like they are not getting sufficient stimulation from the world so they have to
sort of make up their own stimulation to try to get through to themselves.
Autistic children show large intellectual deficits, but they also sometimes have special
very narrowly defined cognitive abilities, what's sometimes called being a savant so
that they might be particularly good at adding up numbers or something like that.
But otherwise, they have a strong intellectual deficit.
Medications have proved largely ineffective for autism, however, behavior therapies and
we're going to discuss this in a future lecture, what behavior therapies are.
But there are programs that have been designed using reinforcement to get children to try
to speak and I will describe some of those when we talk about behavior therapies.
They use reinforcement such as food and drink and later hugs and kisses to try to get these
kids to be able to form speech.
But actually even after they form the speech and they can even speak in sentences, it
sounds to us very stilted in their speech.
It's sort of like they're trying to imitate somebody, but it's not again coming from deep
inside them.
So we'll talk about that a little bit more.
There's an interesting recent thing that's happened within the last year to my knowledge
at least and that's their autistic advocacy groups are now arguing that autism is not
a mental disorder at all, but that it's an alternative way of being and behaving much
like you hear for advocacy groups for the deaf who think that it's fine to be deaf
and that they should have their own community and be able to engage in activities with each
other and that it's wrong for the hearing society to force them to have cochlear implants
and things like that and learn sign language or learn lip reading.
It's okay, they're okay with sign language, but lip reading is they want to be able to
consider this to be a deaf community and much in much the same way of arguing these advocacy
groups for autism are arguing that maybe we should consider it to be an okay thing
to be.
It's quite controversial.
Tourette syndrome you may have heard of.
It's a tick disorder where there are muscular contractions that are inappropriate and sometimes
vocal behaviors also.
There seems to be with Tourette syndrome a build up of tension that occurs in the person
and this tension can be relieved by having an outburst of some form or another, a shout
or a snort or a yelp or even certain kinds of words and in about a third of the cases
they have what most people associate with Tourette syndrome and that is that the words
are obscenities.
I was shopping at the grocery store the other day and was going up the aisle and minding
my own business pushing my cart and I heard right beside me and I turned around and I
said what was that and I thought the woman maybe had a cold or something and she went
shopping along the aisle a little further and they went like that and it happened repeatedly
and she had Tourette's disorder here and it was a release of this tension that was building
up in her.
She was controlling it so that she did not shout obscenities.
That sometimes happens and people with Tourette's syndrome with that particular behavior sometimes
have a great difficulty because they'll be walking down the street and shout some obscenity
out and the person who's passing them will take offense at this and sometimes get into
a fight with them because they think it was meant for them.
Very strange if you were writing science fiction and were trying to come up with a mental disorder
that seemed to be a very odd thing to have.
I think you would invent Tourette's disorder.
But it's not funny to the people who have it because it's difficult to control and even
after they have certain kinds of therapies to try to control it, you can use some anti-psychotic
medications that are sometimes effective and behavior therapies can be effective in terms
of decreasing the frequency of the outbursts.
But the people will report even though the frequency of the outbursts has been decreased,
they still have this tension and it's only with great control and concentration that
they can overcome the outbursts.
So they're not even comfortable very often after the therapy.
Tourette's begins around the age of seven and usually lasts into adulthood.
So those are the disorders of infancy, childhood and adolescence.
Let's move on to the second classification of disorders and that's mental retardation.
And again, let me remind you that we've now moved to axis two of the diagnostic and statistical
manual.
And that's partly for the reason that a person could have mental retardation and some other
clinical syndrome as well from axis one.
Mental retardation is the classification for someone who under 18 years of age has significantly
sub-average intelligence and significant limitations in adaptive functioning in at least two areas
such as communication, self-care, academic skills, work, health and safety.
So in order to be classified with this classification under the age of 18, if it's over the age
of 18, you might have a cognitive disorder or something like that.
But if it's under the age of 18, you have at least two of those areas, problems with
it and a lowered IQ score, you would probably be classified as having a form of mental retardation.
There are genetic factors that are apparent in mental retardation.
It does tend to run in families and in conditions such as down syndrome.
It's particularly prevalent in that case for older mothers and fathers which is due perhaps
to an extra chromosome.
That's what the current thinking is in terms of the genetic contribution with down syndrome.
It can also be caused by infections or toxic agents that can increase the probability of
mental retardation such as prenatal German measles and alcohol intoxication during the
prenatal period.
Also, physical birth traumas such as insufficient oxygen, if the cord gets wrapped around the
child's neck and it does not get sufficient oxygen, that can cause mental retardation.
And while it's less frequent today, in the past radiation such as exposure to x-rays
was also implicated in mental retardation.
Pretty much learned about that sort of thing and so when you go to the dentist today, the
dentist will put an apron on you even if you're a guy to prevent x-rays from penetrating
your body.
Unlike when I was a kid and we used to go to the shoe store and stick our feet into
the x-ray machine while the x-rays were being shot up our legs.
We know a lot more about it now and so we prevent those kind of things from happening.
Although prenatal dietary deficiencies can cause deficits.
So all of these things can cause mental retardation.
The degrees of severity of mental retardation, we have names for those degrees of severity
and they're really defined by the intelligent quotient, the measured IQ of the person.
It used to be that we had other names for these kinds of things and the words actually
idiot, imbecile and moron that we use in a derogatory way with each other nowadays were
actually once the technical medical names for the various degrees of mental retardation.
But when they got these pejorative kind of meanings to them, that was stopped and instead
they are now called mild retardation, moderate retardation, severe retardation and profound
retardation.
So those are the categories, the subcategories of mental retardation.
Everybody with mild mental retardation has an IQ of somewhere between 50 and 55 up to
about 70.
And this is the largest category, about 85% of the cases of mental retardation are in
this category.
And the person with this classification can acquire about sixth grade academic skills
and they can achieve social and vocational skills adequate for self support.
And you see these folks out in the community quite often.
If you go into a fast food restaurant and you find somebody working cleaning the tables
and or if you go to the supermarket and in the checkout line you may have somebody bagging
your groceries who's got this classification and they get along fine in the world under
at least fairly controlled kinds of conditions.
Those with moderate mental retardation, that's an IQ of 35 to 40 in that range up to 55 to
about 50 to 55 and that's about 10% of the cases of people with a diagnosis of mental
retardation.
They can achieve only about a second grade academic level in terms of skills but they
can be vocationally trained for unskilled and semi-skilled work under supervision.
And there are folks who you may run across in thrift stores and that sort of thing who
are doing productive work under fairly supervised conditions who might have this classification.
I often play my students a tape of a young lady with mild mental retardation, very sweet
personality but she can count forward from 1 to 10 and tries hard to count backwards
from 1 to 10 and she takes things very literally.
At one point she has her mouth open, she's yawning and the fellow doing the interview
says well you have your mouth open, are you sleepy?
She says I always when I'm sleepy my mouth is open and she takes very literally what
he's saying but she is a very sweet and intriguing young lady.
If anybody has worked with Special Olympics or something like that you'll find that people
with mild and moderate retardation can be a lot of fun to work with.
Mental retardation is a category for an IQ level of between 2025 up to 35 to 40 and
this accounts for about 3 to 4% of the cases of mental retardation for those who are classified
that way.
A person in this category can eventually learn to talk although it's a real struggle and
they can be trained to some extent in self-care skills but they don't derive much benefit
at all from academic training and the person may be able to live at home if they're very
closely supervised or perhaps in a group home.
Profound mental retardation is the most severe form of it with an IQ of about 20 to 25 in
fact it begins to be almost impossible to measure IQ at that lower level and this constitutes
about 1 to 2% of the cases of those diagnosed with mental retardation and this person usually
has considerable impairment of functioning and needs constant supervision and custodial
care and most frequently you would find somebody with profound mental retardation in an institutional
setting of some sort.
So that's mental retardation and it's one of the two subcategories under axis 2 and
the other one is personality disorders.
Somebody with a personality disorder, it has an onset in adolescence or early adulthood
and these are relatively permanent or inflexible patterns of interpersonal difficulties and
problems with one's sense of self.
Personality disorders in particular I think are going to be difficult for us to deal with.
I bet we find a cure for schizophrenia before we find a cure for personality disorders because
it seems to be such a pervasive pattern that a person has and seems to have less of a hereditary
component to it and people with personality disorders often don't seek any help because
they like their personality.
They think they're perfectly alright, it's the rest of us who sometimes have trouble dealing
with their personality so it's a difficult disorder to deal with and there are a number
of subcategories of this.
Someone can have a paranoid personality and someone with a paranoid personality, we've
already talked about paranoid schizophrenia earlier so we know what that means but this
would be a person who's suspicious of other people's motives although there's not a serious
break with reality as there is with paranoid schizophrenia.
So this person is in touch with reality, they're not having hallucinations, they have these
mild delusions that somebody's after them and somebody might be trying to do them harm,
somebody's puncturing their tires on their car or reading their mail or one thing or
another that a paranoid personality might think and that sort of permeates their personality
so they think this about a lot of people in a lot of different situations.
Somebody with a schizoid personality tends to be cold and uncaring, they're detached
from social relationships and they express a little emotion and they have no desire to
form closer relationships either so if you know somebody who's kind of cold and uncaring
and seems to be out for themselves it could be that they should have a diagnosis of schizoid
personality.
Somebody with a schizotypal subcategory of a personality disorder, they have peculiar
thoughts and speech that interfere with their social relationships.
These symptoms are very similar to having schizophrenia but in a much milder form and
so they may have some of what the symptoms that you would usually associate with schizophrenia
but to a far lesser degree.
Someone with an antisocial personality disregards other people's rights and violates their rights
and refuses to follow ethical rules.
So this person just kind of ignores the rules that the rest of us try to live by.
Somebody with a borderline personality has marked impulsivity and instability in interpersonal
relationships and sometimes self-destructive behaviors are part of that such as self-mutilation.
So you find this often in adolescent girls for example who will cut themselves and that
would be their diagnosis of borderline personality disorder.
The histrionic personality disorder would be somebody who has excessive emotionality
and seeks attention from other people and behaves in an infantile manner.
I have a tape that I play my students of a young woman who's I think she's 17 or 18
and she had a married boyfriend, got drunk at a union party and spent the night with
him and then she was, actually I guess she was underage so he was arrested later and
she's describing this incident and giggling and laughing much like a young child who was
maybe seven or eight years old would be doing and she's describing this kind of thing and
she has a pin cushion that she made that she's sticking needles in and pretending it's the
boyfriend and laughing and giggling and then right in the middle of the interview she goes
completely the other way and ends up sort of hysterically screaming and yelling and
crying and very upset about this kind.
Again, much like you'd find in a young child who can't control their emotions and acts
in an infantile manner and while she's only 17 it's likely that this will be a continuing
trait.
With these personality disorders these don't tend to come and go but they are sort of an
enduring quality in the personality and she'll probably at least have some of those characteristics
as she gets older.
Someone with a narcissistic personality has a pattern of grandiosity with a need for admiration
and a lack of empathy so they think they're the best thing that's come along.
They don't care much about you, they're all into themselves, they're on what would sometimes
be called an ego trip although probably since we now know something about psychoanalysis
they're probably more on an id trip than an ego trip here.
So that's narcissistic personality, they're concerned about especially about their looks
and the way they portray themselves.
Some of them with an avoidant personality disorder avoid social interaction because of feelings
of insecurity and a fear of being negatively evaluated so this might in fact lead to behavior
like agoraphobia that we've already discussed.
A dependent personality needs to be taken care of so they develop a submissive and clinging
personality and they need somebody else around all the time to try to take care of themselves.
Someone with an obsessive compulsive personality disorder shows a preoccupation with orderliness,
perfection and control but this is different from obsessive compulsive disorder that we
talked about earlier in the classification system and that it's not nearly so severe
they don't have the obsessive thoughts that continually run through their heads and they
don't have the degree of compulsive rituals that they go through about washing their hands
many times and that sort of thing.
I happened to know a lady with an obsessive compulsive personality and her house is always
immaculate, she always has to have everything exactly right in the house but beyond that
she doesn't exhibit any of the more severe symptoms that you would find in somebody with
a truly obsessive compulsive disorder.
So what we've done today is go over three of the final categories of mental illness.
We've talked about disorders that are diagnosed in infancy childhood and adolescence all the
way from the mildest ones like stuttering and stammering up through fairly severe things
like autism and Tourette's syndrome.
We've talked about mental retardation and what some of the possible causes of mental
retardation are and what some of the subcategories and how we define it based upon IQ.
We've talked about personality disorders which are a more permanent part of a person's personality
and talked about the wide variety of different kinds of personalities somebody might have
who had that classification.
So this concludes our looking at diagnostic and statistical manual four and the various
classifications of that diagnostic and statistical manual and so our next step would be if we're
following the medical model we have now done our diagnosis and now we want to bring some
intervention into effect to try to correct whatever the problem is that we've diagnosed.
So that's what we're going to talk about in our next set of lectures are the possible
therapies that you can use to intervene to try to correct the problems we've been talking
about in this series of lectures.
Thank you.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
