Lecture 12 Physical Therapies, Drugs
In this lecture we're going to start a series where we're talking about therapies.
Where we have just been is we've talked about the classification system for mental illnesses.
And following a medical model, once you do diagnosis then you should be doing a therapy
to try to correct whatever problem that you've diagnosed.
And that seems quite logical and in a medical model the logic is clearer
where there is a specific therapy for a specific disorder.
We'll discover when we're talking about therapies here that which therapy you pick
kind of depends upon what you think about the disease.
And as we've been going through these mental disorders,
we've noticed that there has been some controversy over the causes of the disease.
And when you have a controversy over the causes of the disease,
then you have a controversy over how you ought to intervene to correct whatever the problem is.
Again in a medical model if you have a problem with appendicitis the cause is pretty obvious what that problem is.
But if you have a problem with depression, is the root cause biological in nature?
Is it something you inherited in your genes?
Is it something that's bad about your biochemistry of your body?
Or is it something that's happening in your life that's causing you to be depressed?
Or is it having learned inappropriate kinds of responses to things in your life?
And depending upon your answer to that question you might want to intervene at a different level.
So that's why there are a number of therapies and why I'm grouping these therapies as I am.
Today we're going to start talking about physical therapies
and in particular today we're going to talk about psychopharmacological intervention, the use of drugs.
And the starting assumption there is that we have a physiological problem here.
It's a brain problem, at least a central nervous system problem.
And if you're going to intervene you have to intervene at that level.
And so we're going to talk some about neurons and the effects of transmitter substances and that sort of thing today.
But you can also intervene at a physical level in other ways.
In future lectures we're going to talk about electroconvulsive shock treatment,
which is certainly another physical way of intervening.
We're going to talk some about psychosurgery, actually going in and changing the structure of the brain.
And we're also going to talk at least about the future possibilities of gene therapy.
And those are all kind of physical interventions as well.
Following that we're going to talk about the talking therapies.
Psychoanalysis and cognitive therapies and the humanistic therapies that are involved in trying to talk to somebody.
And you would use a talking therapy if you believe that the problems are caused by the way people are thinking about things.
That's what Freud thought.
At the unconscious level there was this thought and this great amount of conflict.
And so if you're going to intervene, you don't intervene by changing the neurotransmitter substance.
You intervene by getting people to think about things in a different way.
So you talk to them about this.
So that's the general notion with the talking therapies.
And finally there's a set of therapies called behavior therapies,
which are based upon the general notion that people have learned inappropriate responses to things.
And behavior therapies are based on simple learning like classical conditioning.
And so we'll talk about those therapies based on the simple classical conditioning model.
And we'll also talk about those therapies based upon operant conditioning.
So that's where we're going to go in the next set of lectures is talking about these various therapies.
Today then we're going to begin by considering physical therapies and in particular drugs.
Human behavior is really controlled by at the neural level through neural impulses.
We are made up of nerves of course that go all over our body.
And in those nerves we have neurons and they're packed with these neurons.
And if something, if somebody touches our skin in fact a message is sent through these neurons up the nerves
to our central nervous system, to the spine first and then to the brain.
And then various components of the brain talk to each other through these neurons
and eventually send messages perhaps back down to our muscles to tell us how to behave
given the processing that the brain did.
And all of that's being done by the neurons.
We are packed with millions of neurons in our central nervous system.
And these neurons have to communicate with one another.
Now we could have a whole course and we could talk about how the neural impulse travels along the neuron
but what I want to be concerned about in particular is how a single neuron talks to another single neuron.
And the way they do this is by having an upstream neuron, what I will call a presynaptic neuron
prior to the synapse.
The synapse is the space between neurons.
It's kind of a small gap and then you have a postsynaptic neuron.
So if you will picture on one side having a presynaptic neuron and then a bit of a space
and then a postsynaptic neuron.
And what happens when these neurons talk to one another?
When the upstream, the presynaptic neuron is just fired,
the next thing that's likely to happen is it will release some transmitter substance,
a chemical into this gap, into the synapse.
And that chemical can cross the gap and have various effects on the downstream neuron,
the postsynaptic neuron.
And it can release various kinds of transmitter substances.
There are different neurons that release different transmitter substances
and there may be multiple neurons dumping these transmitter substances into the synapse
and different transmitter substances.
And then whether those transmitter substances have an effect is dependent upon the downstream,
the postsynaptic neuron.
The postsynaptic neuron has certain receptors in it.
And much like a key fits into a lock, these receptors are responsive to only certain
of the transmitter substances that have been released into the synaptic cleft or into the synapse.
So you have the upstream neuron releasing transmitter substance, crosses the synapse
and looks for sites.
I'm getting a little anthropomorphic here, but it doesn't have its own intelligence, of course.
But in fact, it bathes the downstream neuron and the transmitter substance will fit into certain sites there.
And if it does fit into certain sites, it makes that next neuron more likely to fire
or in some cases less likely to fire.
It depends upon whether it's exciting or inhibiting the next neuron.
So that's the basic anatomy of how one neuron communicates with another neuron.
Now we have to be a little bit more specific about this.
The upstream neuron, when it releases this transmitter substance,
it can or cannot affect the downstream neuron depending upon certain kinds of things.
It's possible that some of those sites where the neurotransmitter substance could fit in
have been blocked in some way.
And that's one of the actions that you can have with drugs, is to block the downstream sites
so that transmitter cannot fit into the keyhole.
A transmitter substance already has a key in it and won't allow this transmitter substance to fit in.
And that's one way that you could affect behavior.
Another way that you could affect behavior with a drug is to get it to release more
of the transmitter substance from the upstream neuron.
From the presynaptic neuron, it could release more transmitter substance,
in which case it might fit into more sites on the postsynaptic neuron
or even less likely to fire, depending upon how many sites it could fit in.
So how much transmitter substance is being released, you can affect with drugs as well.
These transmitter substances, when they're released into the gap there,
not all of them are used, not all of them fit into sites.
And for what's left over, there's a process called reuptake,
whereby they're reabsorbed into the upstream neuron.
So it has released it, it's affected some of the sites, there's some left over
and it's reabsorbed into the neuron.
And again, drugs can affect the reabsorption process
and keep it from being reabsorbed quite as quickly,
in which case there is more of the transmitter substance still sitting in the synapse
that might affect the downstream neuron.
So those are just some of the ways that drugs affect neural transmission.
So we'll be talking about drugs and referring to things like a reuptake inhibitor.
What that means is it inhibits the reabsorption of that neurotransmitter substance
from the presynaptic neuron.
All right, so that's a brief crash course for you in neural transmission
and that tells us a little bit about what we might be able to do
using drugs to try to affect people's behavior.
And these drugs usually have their effects on the communication
that's being done using transmitter substances.
There are some drugs that are a bit different that affect hormones and other kinds of things
but for the most part the drugs we're talking about will be having their effect
on the transmitter substance.
Now I've oversimplified by a huge amount what I've just talked about.
I'm pretending there's one upstream neuron and there's one downstream neuron
and there's one synapse.
When in fact what you typically have, if you could actually take a picture
of what's going on, it's possible to do that nowadays.
And if they take a picture, there are many upstream neurons
and many downstream neurons and the synaptic clefts are all sort of pushed together
and there's all sorts of different kinds of transmitter substances,
some having excitatory effects and firing off the downstream neuron,
some having inhibitory effects, some counteracting each other in the synapse,
some having reuptake and some not having reuptake.
It's a very complex kind of thing as you can imagine
if you have millions and millions of these neurons in your central nervous system.
So I've oversimplified by a great margin
and sometimes when we have drugs that affect these things
we're not quite sure what's going on here.
The drug companies, I hate to admit it,
but sometimes what they do is mess around with drugs that they know work
and do a slight tweak of the chemistry of the drug and try it again,
never being quite sure what's going on in terms of the transmitter substance
and exactly what the effect is of that particular drug.
It's only been in recent years, we've known the effects of many of the drugs
that the drug companies produce.
So it's a complex situation and we'll only be able to get a glimmer
of what goes on with these kinds of drugs.
Now what I'd next like to do is move on and talk about some of the drugs
that we do use in therapies and the effects of some of those kinds of drugs
and I hope we keep in mind what we've just learned about neurotransmitter substances
and the communications of neurons with one another as we talk about these.
One class of drugs, a very important class of drugs,
are the antipsychotic drugs.
These are sometimes called neuroleptics.
That's kind of their technical name.
They've been called major tranquilizers, although that's a bit of a misnomer
and we probably shouldn't call them that.
But if you ever hear of anybody talking about those,
they're probably talking about the antipsychotic drugs.
And these are used to treat psychotic disorders such as schizophrenia
or severe mood disorders.
We talked about in the manic phase of bipolar disorder, antipsychotic drugs
are sometimes used.
These drugs were invented in the mid-1950s
and they had a profound effect upon the number of people who are in mental institutions
and also the general characteristics of a mental institution.
If you look at the number of people in mental institutions,
over the years you'll see an increasing number right up to the mid-1950s
and between the mid-1950s and 1960 there was a marked change in that
and the ever upward trend turned into a downward trend.
And the major reason for that was the antipsychotic drugs,
especially the antipsychotic drugs and their effect on schizophrenic patients
who then began to be able to leave the hospital.
So that was one of the major contributors to the fact that our mental hospitals
have fewer people in it today than you would expect.
There were some other contributors and I think we'll talk a little bit about those
as the course goes on.
Contributors such as the ability to sue doctors
and the ability to ensure through the legal system
that you're getting treatment in mental institutions and that sort of thing.
There are actually far fewer people in mental institutions today than one would predict.
If you take the 1955 figures, in fact, in mental institutions
where there are about, I believe there are about 900,000
there would be 900,000 people in mental institutions today
if you extrapolated the population in the country today
and the proportion of people who were in mental institutions in 1955
we'd have almost a million.
We have about 70,000 people in mental institutions today.
One of the major reasons is the antipsychotic drugs
and also some court rulings and some other kinds of things that have affected that.
It also changed the way mental institutions are.
If you visit a mental institution today, you'll find it quite quiet
and you'll see people sitting around and maybe rocking
and maybe doing some strange things, but for the most part
you don't see people screaming and yelling and running around and kind of out of control.
The major reason is the antipsychotic drugs.
Mental institutions were bedlam.
That's kind of an inside joke because bedlam is the name of a mental institution.
That's where that name came from.
It was kind of a mess.
The drugs, because they attack the positive symptoms of psychosis
and in particular schizophrenia, they quiet the patients down markedly.
Of patients who are treated with traditional antipsychotic drugs
the positive symptoms, the hallucinations, illusions and so forth
have been eliminated in approximately 60% of the cases
within about six weeks compared to those receiving placebo's
who have only 20% reduction in those positive symptoms.
And so that's a pretty good result.
Now it's perhaps not as good as what you might think
because they're not cured.
In fact, none of the therapies I'm going to talk about
of the ones currently in use cure anybody.
When we get to the gene therapies and start talking about the possibility for the future
there may be the possibility of a cure,
but right now the kinds of therapies we use don't cure the person.
They for the most part just get rid of the symptoms.
And so a person taking antipsychotic drugs
should continue to take the antipsychotic drugs.
And one of the problems that we have nowadays
is that somebody gets diagnosed with schizophrenia, let's say.
They're acting oddly.
Their family's afraid.
They check them into the psychiatric hospital and they're evaluated
and it's determined that indeed they have a diagnosis of schizophrenia.
They go before a hearing in the legal system,
have a lawyer to argue their case,
but their behavior is indeed bizarre
and they end up in the mental institution.
They usually in that case if they're diagnosed with schizophrenia
they would start them on these antipsychotic drugs.
And the drugs would begin to take effect
in over a six week period of time,
maybe several months, their behavior,
at least the positive symptoms decrease,
they look like they're getting better and better.
And maybe after a six month period of time
or a year's period of time
they come up for re-evaluation
by the institution and the legal system
and they let them loose.
And they get on a bus and go home.
Now, we hope that there are some community health interventions going on
where they might pick them up and make sure they try to take the drug.
But most people don't like taking these drugs.
There are some negative side effects I'm about to talk about
and they don't go well with the alcohol
and there are some other kinds of problems
where they don't like to take the drug.
And so quite typically they'll quit taking the drug.
Six months later they're displaying the symptoms again.
They're recommitted, they're sent back to the mental institution,
they're there for another six months or two a year,
they're on the drugs, they get let out, they go home again,
they quit taking the drugs and there's this cycle
where they're cycling in and out of the institution.
Part of the, it's good news that we have fewer people in mental institutions
but it's kind of bad news that we don't have a way
of supporting the folks who are getting out of the institutions
better than we do so that we keep them on the drugs.
A major side effect of traditional antipsychotic drugs
is a movement disorder, several kinds of movement disorders,
the most serious of which is called tardive dyskinesia.
Tardive dyskinesia is a relatively permanent disorder
that affects the movements of the face,
tongue, hands, feet.
I remember the first time I saw somebody with this,
it was back about the time that these drugs were first being used
and this fellow had just gotten out of the institution,
it was a relative of a neighbor and he was visiting
and it scared me to death.
I was fairly young at the time, I'd never seen somebody like this
and he would have these extreme grimaces on his face
where his mouth would open up and he would have this
sort of frightening into a kid at least,
look on his face and he couldn't control it
and it was a major side effect.
At that point they were still trying to figure out
how much of these drugs to give people
and the problem is that these typical drugs
work on dopamine as the neurotransmitter substance,
that's the substance being released into the synapse
and somehow they're having a good effect
on the positive symptoms of schizophrenia
but dopamine is also one of the major transmitter substances
that controls movement for us
and so it's not surprising that if you're messing around
with the dopamine in the synapse
that you get movement disorders of one form or another.
Not everybody gets these disorders
but a large enough proportion of people do
that it's a real problem
and the disorders once they get fairly severe
often don't go away.
Within the past decade, about a decade and a half,
I'm sorry, about a new kind of antipsychotic drug
has been invented called an atypical antipsychotic drug.
The first one of those was clausaryl.
I'm not sure whether you've heard of clausaryl.
It is a particularly effective drug.
It seems to get rid of the positive symptoms
and it also seems to have some effect on the negative symptoms
which the traditional antipsychotic drugs did not have.
So it's good in that way
and it also is good in that it does not
because it does not work on the dopamine system.
It does not have these negative movement side effects
like tardive dyskinesia either.
Unfortunately, it does have one bad symptom
and that is that there's a problem with red blood cells
that is affected by clausaryl
and because of that, it's called agranulocytosis
and there's a drop in white blood cells
and we need our white blood cells because they fight infection
and so it only occurs in about 1% of the cases
but it's a kind of deadly thing that happens when it occurs
and for this reason, people on clausaryl
end up having to have a lot of blood tests
to make sure that they're not getting agranulocytosis
and insurance companies in particular don't like that
because they end up spending $45,000 a year on blood tests
for these folks and so that influences to some degree
what kinds of medications are prescribed.
Fortunately, there are some other atypical antipsychotic drugs
that have been invented that don't have this side effect
of agranulocytosis and the drug companies are very active
in looking for new atypical kinds of drugs
and I think there's great hope for that, for the future.
Let's move on now and talk about antidepressant drugs.
There's kind of an old-fashioned version of antidepressant drugs
that were first used in the 1950s
called monoamine oxidase inhibitors, or for short, MAOs
and these inhibit an enzyme in the synapse that helps break down
serotonin and norepinephrine.
Those are two more transmitter substances
that are having their effect in the synapse
and so there's an enzyme there that breaks down
these two transmitter substances.
There are also tricyclic antidepressants,
they've been around for a while also,
and they operate by inhibiting the reuptake of both norepinephrine
and to some extent serotonin
and they are still used to some degree.
But a lot of these earlier kinds of drugs,
the antidepressant drugs have been replaced
by what are called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
So in fact what that means basically is serotonin,
which is being dumped into the synapse,
you inhibit the reuptake and so there's more serotonin
left in the synapse to affect the downstream neuron.
So that's how they have their effect.
It's called SSRIs and they're exemplified
by the drug that was released in 1988 called Prozac.
I'm sure everybody's heard of Prozac.
Lots of folks take Prozac, there are other drugs
like Paxil and Zoloft that are also used
but Prozac fairly quickly became
one of the biggest selling drugs that exist.
These SSRIs block the reuptake of only serotonin
and for that reason they're more widely subscribed,
they're prescribed and they have fewer side effects
and one good thing is that they're also not fatal
when they're overdosed the way the earlier drugs were.
There are several other antidepressants
that are on the market that block both serotonin
and norepinephrine and these are sometimes
called SNRIs and there are others such as Wellbutrin
that are really not related to either of those things.
While the recent generation of antidepressants
are quite effective, they are sometimes prescribed
inappropriately for those without serious
depressive disorders.
In fact, for a while there was the fear
that people were taking these things just to feel better
when they were perfectly normal and didn't have any problems.
There's also a problem with a possible link
to teenage suicide and perhaps even adult suicide
that it's been known for some time
that there may be a darker side to these drugs
in terms of suicide.
There was an article that was just published earlier this year
in which adults, it was found that adults
taking one of these antidepressant drugs
or one of the several available antidepressant drugs
were twice as likely to attempt suicide
as adults on a placebo, on a sugar placebo.
And partly for that reason recently it's been required
to put a label on the side of these
although the label is pretty much pointed at more youthful users
but it's probably true for adults
that people ought to be watched very closely
because of the possibility of suicide.
Now before we get too excited about that
we should understand that at least for severe problems
with depression it is safer to put a person on the drug
than not, particularly if you watch them.
And the actual incidence of successful suicides
has dropped since these drugs came into effect.
The real message is probably that we shouldn't use these drugs
and misprescribe them for rather mild conditions.
We ought to be using them for what they were designed for
and that's for major depression
when there in fact is a threat of suicide to begin with.
Part of what may be going on with the suicide
is that you have this person who is so depressed
that they've been unable to accomplish almost anything
including suicide
because they can't just get up the energy to even do anything
and then you put them on the anti-psychotic drug
and they're suddenly released enough
that they are able to do something
and one of the things they're still not at the point
where they've gotten rid of their suicidal thoughts
and they may go ahead and try to commit suicide at that point.
That's why especially when they start on the drug
they need to be carefully watched.
Let me move on to talk for just a minute
about the anti-anxiety drugs.
Originally, barbiturates were used for anti-anxiety purposes
but they're quite dangerous as a class of drugs
and they're seldom used today except to control seizures.
In the 1960s, tranquilizers came into being.
These are called benzodiazepines.
That's the technical name for them
although we know them as things like Valium and Milltown
and that sort of thing.
These are the most widely prescribed for anxiety symptoms
and they're particularly effective in lower doses.
Lots of people take these drugs.
We know that anxiety from looking at the classification systems
is one of the major classes of mental disorder
so it's not surprising that there are many, many prescriptions written for these
and in general they're fairly safe when taken at a prescribed level.
When they're over-prescribed or overtaken
they can be addictive and cause withdrawal symptoms.
Finally, let me just talk a minute about lithium.
For the manic phase of bipolar disorder
lithium is sometimes used.
Lithium was discovered in the 1940s in Australia
but it was not widely used in the U.S. until about 1970
probably because nobody can make much money off of lithium.
It's a kind of a naturally occurring chemical.
Nobody can patent it.
It's there and so partly for this reason
it didn't get a lot of marketing until about 1970.
It's unclear why lithium works to control mood
but it is very effective in cases
and in about 70 to 80% of cases
people show improvement for their manic phase of bipolar disorder.
However, it also can be highly toxic
and the dosage must be carefully monitored.
A good deal of what happens early on in bipolar disorder
is trying to establish the levels of medication
and trade off of the antidepressive drugs
with the anti-manic drugs such as lithium.
And there are some newer drugs
that are now being used for the mania phase
of bipolar disorder as well.
So today we've had a quick little tutorial
on the workings of neurons and how they talk to one another
and the effects of transmitter substances.
Then we've gone over several different kinds of drugs
the anti-psychotics, the antidepressants,
the anxiety drugs, and looked at some of their effects
and how neurotransmitter substances are used
with these particular kinds of drugs.
Thank you.
