Lecture 14 Talking Therapies, Psychoanalysis
This lecture is part of the series I'm doing on the various therapies.
You'll recall after we went through the mental disorders, we then started talking about
therapies and we said that those therapies were based upon what you assume the problems
were that caused the mental disorders.
And the first set of therapies that we have just finished talking about, the physical therapies,
were based upon the notion that therapies should change the physical part of the person,
either through drugs, through the changes in neurotransmitter substances at the neuronal
level or through actually changing the structure of the central nervous system.
So we talked about, last time we talked about electroconvulsive shock treatment and we talked
about psychosurgery and the possibility of genetic interventions as well.
Well, if you don't think that the problem is caused at the biological level, if it's
not a biochemical or physiological kind of problem, it would seem to be foolish to do
something at the physical level.
Maybe sort of like you have depression and they give you an appendix operation or something
like that.
There's no correspondence.
So if you think that the problem is due to sort of the psychodynamics in your life and
the kinds of things that happen at the unconscious level and inappropriate thoughts, then you
should try to correct it at that level.
And that's what the folks who do psychotherapies, that's how they try to treat these particular
problems will also in the future talk about behavior therapies where the assumed problem
is one of learning.
So today we're going to begin talking about the psychotherapies.
Now the term psychotherapy is a generic term.
It refers to kind of all the talking therapies.
Psychoanalysis is a term that refers to a particular type of psychotherapy.
It's the one based on psychoanalytic theory that Freud invented, and we're going to talk
today a great deal about the techniques that Freud invented for doing therapy.
There's another term I might be using, and that's psychodynamic therapy.
Psychodynamic therapy includes psychoanalysis, but it includes some sort of offshoots of psychoanalysis
that are also based on psychoanalytic theory.
And so it's a bit more generic term than psychoanalysis, than classic psychoanalysis, but it's still
using the psychoanalytic model for the most part.
So if I use that term, you'll know what that means.
Now let me do just a quick review of psychoanalytic theory, since we're basing this therapy on
psychoanalytic theory.
You will recall from the lecture I gave on psychoanalytic theory, we said that one of
the major emphases of Freud was that there's an unconscious level, and it's that unconscious
level that is driving most of our behavior.
And that causes a problem, because by definition, if it's unconscious, we don't have access
to it.
So how do you help somebody when they have a problem that you and they don't have access
to?
And so that's a great deal of what Freud tried to do with psychoanalysis, is invent ways
of trying to get at the unconscious level.
You'll recall at the unconscious level, we had all of these conflicts and all of these
problems because we have conflicts between the life force and life energy of the libido,
struggling with the death force or the death instinct, and that the death instinct, in fact,
since it can't indeed produce death, it turns toward aggression and that sort of seething
down there.
And then we have the conflict between the id, which is our natural wanting to operate
on a pleasure principle, and it's trying to get us to do things, and we have diametrically
opposed to that.
We have the superego that is saying, no, you can't do those things, you've got to follow
the rules, and we have the ego come along, and it's kind of acting as the referee and
trying to carry around an image of who we are in order to give some stability to this
whole process that's seething under there.
The id is mostly working at the unconscious level.
The superego and the ego work both at the unconscious level and at the conscious level,
to some extent.
But you can see what the problem is.
The problem is we have all of this conflict, largely at the unconscious level, and we don't
have access to it.
So that was kind of the conundrum Freud was in and had to solve a way to find a way to
get to the unconscious level.
Again if we picture the iceberg with this 90% at the unconscious level and the water
level being the censoring mechanism keeping us from access to the unconscious level, what
you want to do is weaken this censoring mechanism so that from time to time something from the
unconscious level can slip across the censoring mechanism and enter the conscious level where
you do have access to it and where you can deal with it.
So that's the whole notion behind what we're trying to do in psychoanalysis, is find the
causes of the conflicts and the other problems at the unconscious level through these techniques.
Now if you recall when I talked about Freud, he started out using hypnosis and that is
used to some limited extent still by some psychoanalysts.
But Freud kind of gave that up and didn't use it very much after his initial infatuation
with hypnosis because he thought that with hypnosis when the person was in the hypnotic
state that they were not able to deal with the problems at a fully emotional level, that
he had somehow bypassed the censoring mechanism and gotten to the unconscious, but then because
their conscious level wasn't active at the time they weren't able to express the emotions
to feel the emotions that are based upon the conflict.
If you can't feel the emotions based upon the conflict then you don't have what's called
catharsis.
Catharsis is a process whereby you work through your emotions as you discover what their causes
are and the release of this emotion makes you a healthier person and he thought that
this was not going on with hypnosis and for that reason he decided that instead of talking
to the patient under a hypnotic state he would talk to the patient while awake.
But he wanted to set it up so that the patient was likely to not be inhibited by the presence
of the therapist and so that is the classic picture that we talked about in the beginning
of this course where you have Freud sitting over here in a chair where the patient can't
even see him and the patient is lying on a couch somewhere looking at the ceiling completely
sort of detached and Freud is sitting over there very quiet with a pad and pencil making
notes but seldom interrupting the patient.
What the patient is asked to do is to freely associate, to use free association.
That simply means that the patient starts talking about a particular thing, Freud might
have started off the patient, well tell me about your mother and then the patient starts
to talk and Freud may not say anything for the next 30 minutes and the patient begins
to talk and the patient is supposed to freely associate any thoughts and feelings that come
to his or her mind as they're lying there on the couch.
And so they may talk about their mother for a while and then their childhood and that
leads into their father and their school experiences and on and on and on and they're encouraged
to talk not only about their thoughts but also their feelings.
Alright, this is free association and you may at first glance when you see that say
well I don't see how that's going to work, why would that have any impact?
Well you might try it yourself, if you've never been in a therapeutic context I would
encourage you to try this one time just to see how it works and I'd encourage you not
to do this in public.
People will think there's something a bit wrong with you if you do it in public.
So go into a closet somewhere, go where somebody can't see you or when nobody's home and lie
down on your own couch and just start talking with free association.
Start with your mother if you want and talk for 20 minutes and I think you'll be amazed
at the kinds of things that come out.
You'll be saying things that you never knew, thoughts and feelings that you never even
knew you had, even without somebody there.
Now you don't have somebody there to catch these things and write them down but you'll
get some of the flavor of what goes on here because you'll discover that the censoring
mechanism will begin to break down a little bit and some things will come popping up
through there that you never expected to deal with even in that little 20 minute session.
So free association turned out to be a very powerful kind of technique and one that's
used not only in psychoanalysis but in a lot of the other talking therapies as well.
Alright another thing that is sometimes used is dream analysis.
Dream analysis was an important kind of thing that Freud invented as well.
In fact he wrote a whole book on dream analysis.
Even the general notion is that your censoring mechanism is kind of worn out as you're having
a dream or it's numbed to some extent when you're asleep.
It's not nearly as active and able to censor all the material from the unconscious mind
and so the unconscious mind gets to play a little bit in the brain while you're asleep.
Now depending upon how threatening the stuff in the unconscious mind are it may play to
only a certain degree.
There is what's called the latent content of a dream which is different from the surface
or manifest content of the dream.
If I told you what dream I had last night I would be telling you the manifest or the
surface content of that dream.
What the psychiatrist would do at this point is try to determine what the latent content
of the dream was.
What these things really mean.
That's why people training in psychiatry take full courses in dream analysis.
Dream analysis 101, dream analysis 102 where they learn how to do these kinds of things.
There are certain common characteristics of dreams.
For example, flying is often considered to have a sexual connotation to it and have something
to do with your sexual behavior.
Snakes are often phallic symbols and there are other symbols that come through in a symbolic
way that represent certain kinds of things.
One of the important abilities of a psychoanalyst supposedly is being able to analyze these
symbols and figure out what they stand for in your particular dreams.
Some of these are idiosyncratic.
You may have certain things that occur in your dreams that are meaningful to you and
the psychiatrist would listen to this.
You may have a female character in your dream who recurs and the psychotherapist may end
up deciding that that represents your mother.
For example, your mother is an important person in your life and while at the unconscious
level you may have some resistance to dealing with your mother and all the concepts associated
and the conflicts associated with your mother by representing your mother as a different
person in your dream, you're able to deal with this at the conscious level.
Dream analysis was very important.
Again, the important thing is to pick up these nuggets as they come through.
I think a mining analogy is a good one that you're doing a lot of digging down there at
the unconscious level and you're hauling a lot of stuff out and from time to time a
nugget will pop through that's an important kind of thing and the therapist is supposed
to note that.
You can see why therapy takes a long time.
Classic psychoanalysis in fact lasts for years and years often with three sessions a week.
Classic psychoanalysis was obviously very expensive and a lot and very intensive and
you'll hear this from people like Woody Allen who talks about being psychoanalyzed all the
time and his whole life has been one of psychoanalysis.
For him most of his movies are based upon the experiences he has when he's being psychoanalyzed
in these sort of classic ways.
You can see also why insurance companies are not very thrilled with supporting people going
to a psychoanalyst that's costing them $130 an hour three times a week for the rest of
their life.
We'll see later on that some of the more modern psychodynamic theories have backed off a little
bit on that very intensive kind of thing but you see it's necessary because we only get
a nugget from time to time and it takes a long time to get a good idea of what's going
on at the unconscious level.
Projective tests are sometimes used.
A projective test is a test where you show somebody an ambiguous stimulus and then they're
supposed to tell you something about it, what it looks like or make up a story about it
or something like that.
The case you're probably most or the test you're probably most familiar with is the
Rorschach ink blot test.
This is an ink blot that's made often also in color not just black and white.
That was originally made by having some smear of ink that was folded in on itself and then
opened up so it's symmetrical which has some advantages because people often see biological
things in this ink blot and biological things tend to be symmetrical so they may see a bat
with the wings sticking out on the side on this ink blot.
The Rorschach ink blot test is used by a number of psychiatrists.
There are those who doubt both its reliability and its validity although recent versions
are a little bit better in terms at least of reliability because they have tightened down
the kinds of standards that are used for analyzing people's responses to these although it's
still somewhat controversial.
And it depends for example, let me give you an example of what the psychiatrist might
do.
The psychiatrist might determine whether or not you're using the whole blot.
So you see this thing and say that looks like a bat to me so you've used the whole blot
or you may pick out a piece of it and describe that and that would be meaningful to the psychiatrist
according to the standards of the test.
They should interpret it differently if you're looking at the whole thing versus looking
at just a detail of the test.
There are other kinds of criteria that are used that are supposedly to tell you something
about the condition of the patient.
Another one is a thematic apperception test.
In this case they show you a picture of something and you're supposed to make up a story about
that picture.
So you may see a woman looking kind of sad directly at you in this picture.
It's a drawing, not a photograph, but it's got a lot of detail in it and you're supposed
to make up a story about this.
So you might be making up a story about your mother and how she's looking at you that way
because she's very disappointed in you because you just misbehaved and you get the idea.
You make up a picture and again the therapist would try to interpret that picture and try
to figure out what the various conflicts are that are seething at the unconscious level
based upon the interpretation.
The general notion here is that the sensory mechanism is not wise enough to be like the
psychiatrist and figure out the underlying meaning of these stories and these descriptions.
So it lets you get away with describing something that if it knew the underlying meanings it
would protect at the unconscious level.
I already mentioned hypnosis which is sometimes used.
Another thing that is sometimes but not very frequently used is word associations where
I might have a list of words I would give you and I ask you to say the first word that
comes into mind as I say these words.
So I might say car, you say tire, leaf, tree, mother, evil, wait a minute, I don't think
that's a common associate of mother and somehow there's a problem there with that associate
you got to jump on your censoring mechanism you said it so quickly the censoring mechanism
didn't have a chance to sort of cut it off before it reached conscious level that's
the general idea or it could occur something like this car, tire, leaf, tree, mother, Alice
and all the ums indicate that there's the censoring mechanism jumped in their heavy
duty and knows that there's something at the unconscious level associated with mother
that it really doesn't want you to deal with at the conscious level so it shuts you down
for a period of time that would indicate that there's a problem again and that the psychiatrist
should help you investigate that problem.
All of these things are techniques that are used to try to get some idea of what's going
on at the unconscious level.
Now this doesn't happen all at once there are various phases that happen during psychoanalysis.
At first and in the first several sessions and maybe even a little bit longer depending
upon how the rapport is being established the psychoanalyst is going to try to establish
some rapport with you.
It's very important the kind of rapport you have with your psychoanalyst or with a psychotherapist
in general.
I sometimes when I'm talking to my students about psychotherapy recommend that they go
interview people for this.
It's kind of intimidating because here you are going to this doctor who's all knowledgeable
and you're a person who has problems and you're kind of intimidated and you walk in there
and the assumption is you're going to keep coming back to this person and that you're
having to pay big money or your insurance company is having to pay big money to this
person and so you're a bit intimidated and the last thing you want to do is reject the
therapist.
I say you ought to reject the therapist if you don't feel comfortable.
You're the consumer in this situation and I think you ought to go to several therapists
because the relationship you have the rapport you have with the therapist is so important
in this situation.
So I would recommend that people first of all find out maybe calling their state psychological
association or something like that to determine how that therapist, what kind of therapy that
person does.
Are they a psychoanalyst, are they psychodynamic, are they cognitive, are they existential?
Some other therapies we're going to talk about.
Figure out what approach you think would work best with you and then go talk to these people
and try to establish some rapport and see whether that's the person you want to spend
some time with as you're doing therapy.
Unfortunately, in some cases nowadays the insurance company will decide who you go to
see and it's a little less likely that you get the choice in the matter.
But if you do have the choice, I think you ought to make sure you have good rapport.
That's the very first step in psychoanalysis and also in all types of psychotherapy.
Once rapport has been established and you start talking about some of these problems
in psychoanalysis, the next thing that often happens is there's some resistance because
it's tough and your censoring mechanism is trying to keep you from having to deal with
these kinds of problems.
And so it's resisting and it may force you to resist.
And so as you start to talk about some problem that may be pretty deep-seated and for which
you have established good defense mechanisms against dealing with this problem, you may
tell the therapist, oh, well, that wasn't really a meaningful problem or changed the
subject on the psychotherapist.
The psychoanalyst should stop you at that point and say, now, wait a minute, why are
you changing the subject?
Let's talk about this problem because you're developing a resistance or it may even show
up that you come late to the therapy session or you don't show up at all for the therapy
session because at some level you just don't want to deal with this problem.
So all of that would be some indication of building up some resistance to dealing with
the problem and that's a naturally occurring thing fairly early in therapy.
Repression is a powerful kind of thing and it wants to keep this repressed down at the
unconscious level.
The next thing that sometimes happens and that should happen in psychoanalysis is some
form of transference.
When you have transference, what happens is that you transfer to the therapist some of
the aspects of relationships that you have with significant other people in your life.
So if your mother, your father, your spouse, your children, you may start treating the
therapist as if the therapist is your spouse, for example, and you start playing the same
kinds of games with the therapist that you play with your spouse, the same kind of verbal
back and forth, shutting them off, accusing them of not caring for you, whatever the particular
issue is with this significant other person in your life, and you start dealing with the
therapist as if this were the therapist's problem.
You transfer these characteristics to the therapist.
The therapist recognizes that this is going to happen.
Again, a natural part of the therapeutic process and it should occur in order for progress
to be made and for some look at relationships and how they're established.
The therapist should, in recognizing this, should resist acting like your spouse or your
mother or whoever it is that is the original person where this transference came from.
And the therapist is trained to do this kind of thing, and here's where we have some ethical
considerations too.
You may hate the therapist at that point because you hate this significant other person at
some deep level, and you may react to the therapist with hate or deride the therapist
or love the therapist.
And here's again where we can get into some serious trouble if the therapist is not properly
trained.
If you look at a lot of movies and other things like the Sopranos and the television shows
where there are therapists involved, often you'll see the client falling in love with
the therapist at a certain point and they indeed end up having a sexual relationship
with each other.
This is not supposed to happen, and it seldom happens in the real world because therapists
are trained psychoanalysts are trained to keep this from happening, to recognize it when
it's happening, to understand it's part of the therapeutic process, and if they act on
these impulses, it's one of the worst things that they could do in terms of the therapeutic
process.
It just destroys the therapeutic process.
And so they should resist this strongly, and if they don't, they should be thrown out
of the profession.
And in fact, there are boards, both the American Psychiatric Association, the American Psychological
Association, that deal with ethical complaints like this all of the time.
And so if a therapist is treating the client this way, there is no room for that person
in therapy.
And people should be aware of that.
So the therapist, if acting appropriately, resists whatever this is, either the hate
or the love that's being created here, and tries to avoid bad counter-transference where
the therapist begins acting like the person that is the person in your life for which
this transference occurred, and instead uses counter-transference to try to stop this transference
that's going on, and try to show that this relationship is a different relationship,
and that the relationship can be rebuilt appropriately, and the therapist helps you with that.
This is one reason why psychoanalysts in particular, and psychiatrists, all of them, have to undergo
therapy themselves before they can practice therapy.
So they know what their own problems are, and how they interact with people, and that
helps them to avoid these kinds of problems when they happen in transference and counter-transference.
All right, once these patterns are broken so that there's no longer these inappropriate
kinds of interactions with the therapist, the general notion is that that will help
with your interactions in daily life.
The therapist tries very hard to help you establish appropriate relationships with people.
That's one of the goals of psychoanalysis.
Now, there are some more modern psychodynamic therapies that are around today, and they use
some of the same basic principles of psychoanalytic theory, but they break away from traditional
psychoanalysis in certain ways.
They tend to be less intensive, and partly for self-survival reasons, because, again,
insurance companies are not going to pay for this kind of thing.
But they also think that they don't have to deal quite so much with the underlying unconscious
dynamics down there, all the conflict and so forth, because they are spending more time
talking about actual relationships, and they spend a lot more time doing that than talking
about the inner conflicts that a person might have.
And so it doesn't take as long to do that kind of thing.
You can rebuild quicker, because you don't have to have as many of these nuggets to understand
all of the unconscious level.
So they tend to want to know about the unconscious, but not in nearly the detail that a classic
psychoanalyst would.
Sometimes psychotherapies are combined.
We have already talked about drugs, and psychotherapies are combined with drugs.
And for some kinds of disorders, the combination of those is superior to either one.
For example, for depression, we know that some form of psychotherapy and some form of antidepressant
has better outcome than either one used individually.
So while I'm talking about the physical therapies and the psychotherapies, if they're completely
distinct from one another, they're often used in conjunction with one another, because psychiatrists
sometimes think that the person has problems caused by the environment, but also problems
that are at a physiological level as well.
So you have to treat them at both levels.
So today we've begun talking about psychotherapies, and we spent all of our time talking about
psychoanalysis in particular, and just very briefly about some other psychodynamic therapies.
And we saw that psychoanalysis is based upon psychoanalytic theory, how the purpose of psychoanalysis
is to understand what's going on at the unconscious level, and how Freud invented techniques for
trying to get to the unconscious level one way or another.
And some of those techniques were free association, that wears out the censoring mechanism, and
also some other techniques like dream analysis, in some cases, projective tests, sometimes
hypnosis and word association.
And we looked at some of the things that typically happen in psychoanalysis, establishment
of rapport, some resistance to investigating the kinds of things happening at the unconscious
level, some transference where you start treating the therapist as if that were an important
person in your life, and then counter-transference and talking about how to establish new relationships.
And the next time we're going to talk about some other forms of psychotherapy and spend
some time on that.
Thank you.
