Lecture 19 Emotion What do we measure?
In this lecture, we're going to talk some about emotion.
Last time we talked about motivation, and motivation and emotion are very much linked
in terms of even the definition of motivation and emotion.
Sometimes emotion is seen as kind of the byproduct of motivation.
And emotion is particularly difficult for psychologists to study.
The problem is, of course, that emotion is a private event.
Sometimes I tell my students that for something to be scientifically studied, it has to be
repeatable, observable, and testable.
That's sort of the rock test of science.
It has to be repeatable, observable, and testable, and the problem with emotion is it's not observable.
At least I can't crawl inside you and feel what your emotion is.
It's a little bit like wondering whether other people have the same experience of red
when they see it that you do.
In fact, what I see is red, you may see as green.
You call it green, I call it red, but in fact it may be the same thing.
How do we ever know?
You can't really crawl inside of me and see what my experience is of red.
In a similar manner, you can't crawl inside of me and actually know what I'm feeling.
And so we have to infer these things.
And much of the study of emotion has had more to do with trying to determine what to measure
than much about the content of emotion.
And what we're going to talk about today in this lecture is all of the attempts to measure
emotion.
Then in the next lecture, we're going to talk some about some of the theories of emotion.
So today, we're going to look at some measures such as facial expression.
Is facial expression a good place to go to try to get a measure of emotion?
If that's not a good one, how about self-report?
What if I asked you what emotion you're feeling?
Is that a better way to determine what your emotions are?
So we'll look at some self-report and we'll look at some data on a particular self-report
having to do with happiness.
We'll also look at some physiological measures exemplified by the polygraph or the lie detector,
which measures certain physiological indexes of emotion.
And another physiological index is pupil size.
How large is the pupil and is that a good measure of emotion?
We'll even look at vocal tremors as a possible measure of emotion.
These have all been attempts to try to determine how to measure emotion, which is a very complex
kind of thing to attempt.
So let's first talk about facial expressions.
Now when I do this in my class, I do a demonstration in which I have a number of cards.
And these cards have various emotional names on them, such as happy, sad, disgusted, angry,
fearful, confused, and satisfied.
Now I take these cards out into the class and I take a student, volunteer, or sometimes
I just grab the student and say, here you are, look at this card, may say sad on it.
Now I want you to display that emotion on your face for the class, don't use your body,
but display that emotion and I want the people to guess what emotion it is.
And I've told the class what these possible emotions are, so they'll take a look at this
student's face and then they'll mark down whether it was sad or they thought they were
happy or disgusted or some other emotion.
And I do that for each of the emotions and then at the end I ask them, I tell them what
the classifications were, what the specific emotions were that they were looking at and
find out how accurate they were at that.
And what I discover is that they're pretty good at that, especially for the ones like
happy and sad.
Some of them are a bit more subtle, like disgusted, exactly how do you display being disgusted
or satisfied, let's say.
So they're not always perfect at those, but for the basic ones they are pretty good.
That's what the research shows as well.
There's considerable research on facial expression and the general finding is that people are
pretty good.
I do photograph actors who are displaying emotions and then I show those photographs
to a wide cross-section of people.
People are pretty good at picking out what emotion they're displaying.
And in fact this seems to be somewhat universal.
You can go across cultures and see this as well.
So they took pictures from this country and took them to New Guinea, back in the days
when there were folks in New Guinea who had never seen a Westerner, and showed the pictures
to those folks.
And while they were there they also took pictures of people in New Guinea, they'd say, somebody
just stole your pig, what would your facial expression be, and then they'd take their
picture and bring it back to this country.
And they discovered that people were pretty good at this.
There are a few idiosyncrasies here.
In some Asian countries surprise is shown by sticking out the tongue and we have a very
different meaning for that.
But for the most part there seem to be some pretty good universals.
And maybe that's not too surprising.
A newborn baby after all, you don't have to teach it how to smile.
It knows how to smile and evolution has probably built that into the newborn baby to keep the
mother from killing it early on.
So some of these in fact are probably even built into us.
So facial expressions can be kind of good as a measure of emotion, but they can be bad
as well.
Because we can cover them up, we can block them.
If you're a good poker player, you want to cover up your emotions so that people don't
see what you might be holding in your hand.
So that's the skill of the poker player, but we also have the skill of the actor.
And what the actor can do is simulate emotions.
In fact, that's how we got the pictures in the first place, was to have the actor simulate
the emotion.
I could stand here, for instance, and one of the things again I do in front of my class
is say, now I'm going to think of something that makes me very happy or very sad.
And I want you to figure out which it is.
And I stand there with my best poker face on, trying to have no change in my emotion,
then ask them whether they think I was happy or sad.
They usually think I'm sad.
I guess my poor face looks more sad than it does happy, and it's base rate.
But they then don't know, actually, usually I'm thinking of something happy, and I can
cover it up.
So facial expression certainly isn't the royal road to emotion that we would like to have.
We would like to have something that we can measure far better than that.
One attempt to do this is to have people self-report so they can say what they're feeling.
And that can be done, for example, in a questionnaire where you tell me something about your emotion.
Ed Deener has collected lots of data on the particular emotion of happiness, and he has
the most voluminous sources of data that you will ever see in psychology.
In one of his studies, he had 1.1 million people from 45 nations, and he asked them
to indicate on a 0 to 10 scale how happy they were.
And he found that most people report that they're pretty happy.
And he found a mean response on this 10 point scale of 6.75, where 0 is extremely unhappy
5 is neutral, and 10 is extreme happiness on the high side.
And if you look at the graph from his research, you will see that there are hardly any data
points below 5.
Almost nobody indicates they're less than neutral in terms of being unhappy.
And most people are considerably above that.
There are some people almost up to 8.5 on that graph.
So people are generally reporting that they're pretty happy.
The only exceptions to that seem to be hospitalized alcoholics, newly incarcerated inmates, new
therapy clients, South African blacks under apartheid, and students living under political
suppression.
Other than that, most people are pretty happy.
It's really a very strange kind of thing.
If you look at people who have just won the lottery, you might think those people would
be extremely happy, and they are for a few months, then they drop down to about where
the rest of us are.
You might look at somebody who's just become a quadriplegic, who's been in an automobile
accident, and at first they're, of course, very unhappy when this happens.
If you go back a year or so later, they're nearly as happy as everybody else.
It is rather surprising how robust we are.
Maybe Freud was right with his defense mechanisms and our ability to lie to ourselves enough
to be relatively happy.
At least that's what the research shows.
One of the things that's surprising is that some of the variables that you would expect
that might affect happiness don't affect it very much.
For example, if you asked fairly young people, if I asked my students about old people, are
they generally happy?
Over half of my students would say, this is what the research shows, that they think old
people are probably not very happy.
In fact, older people are just as happy as younger people.
Isn't that an amazing finding?
I find that amazing.
What about men versus women?
Are men happier than women?
No.
Are women happier than men?
No.
They're about the same.
How about rich versus poor?
You might certainly think that the rich people would be happier.
But in fact, if you look at the statistics on that, and you can look at them various ways,
they've looked at the different countries, for example, and how rich the country is as
a whole.
The exception of a few very poor countries, where the standard of living is such that
the person makes less than $8,000 a year, if you eliminate those countries, and that
then includes most of the rest of the countries, there is no correlation between the average
income in that country and how happy the people report themselves to be in that country.
At the country level, people apparently are not driven by money in terms of being happy.
If you look at the amount of money people make, and you can look at that, for example,
for the whole country, over the last 50 years or so, there's been an increase in people's
average income, even by corrected inflationary dollars in this country.
If you look at people's happiness over that period of time, there's been no increase in
happiness.
Remains relatively flat with a slight downslope, but pretty much flat across that time.
Then if you look at individual cases about people and their particular income, and whether
those people report that they're happier or not, there's not much difference.
It turns out that the blue collar worker getting on the bus to go to work is pretty much as
happy as the fellow getting into his Mercedes and going to his high class job.
They're about the same in terms of happiness.
It's a rather surprising thing.
What does make a difference?
Well, one thing that makes a difference is how many reported friends that you have.
Those with more reported friends tend to be happier.
Whether you're married or not, that makes a difference.
People who are married, regardless of sex, report being happier than those never married,
divorced, or separated.
And there doesn't appear to be a difference in men and women on this dimension.
There's been some theory that married women are more unhappy than married men.
But in fact, they report about the same levels of happiness.
If you look at the chart for men and for women, there are really no differences in terms of
being married.
One other thing that predicts happiness is how religiously active you are.
People who report being more religiously active are generally happier.
This is simply defined by how many times that you attend a religious kind of observance.
For example, those who attend less than monthly report about 28% in terms of reaching a certain
level of happiness.
Nearly 31%, nearly weekly 35%, weekly 39%, and several times a week 47%.
So religiosity, at least going to a religious community, makes a difference.
Now we're not quite sure whether or not it has to do with the religion itself, or whether
this is part of having a community.
Because the people who go to these kinds of things have kind of a built-in community and
probably have more friends, so there may be some confounding with that particular variable
as well.
All right, so on the whole, in terms of self-report for happiness, we can collect data.
This has the drawbacks of all self-report.
You don't know whether people are happy.
We still haven't crawled inside those people's brains to determine whether or not they're
happy.
We have to believe them when they tell us that that's the case.
There is some corroborating evidence.
If you ask the people around them how happy they think they are, that's usually pretty
well correlated with self-report.
So perhaps that's a good indicator, but we still don't have a very good measure of emotion,
and we certainly don't have a good measure to distinguish one emotion from another.
So let's start looking at some other possibilities.
There are various physiological measures that could be used to try to determine something
about emotion.
And one of these, which you're probably familiar with, is the polygraph or lie detector.
The polygraph or lie detector is reputed to be able to distinguish between somebody
who is telling the truth and somebody who is lying, and that should be a fairly big emotional
difference, at least one would think, whether you're telling the truth or lying and the
kind of emotion you would feel when you're telling the truth or lying.
Polygraph, poly means multiple, and so we're doing multiple graphs essentially.
And these were done literally on a graph with an ink pen in the past.
Nowadays we have sort of computerized polygraph machines sometimes where this can be done
on a computer.
But in general what you've seen in movies is probably what is happening, where you have
several different pens that are leaving a line on a piece of paper as it moves by.
And it's measuring four different kinds of things.
One is the respiratory rate, that's how what your breathing rate is like, and so you may
have a line that's going up rather slowly and down rather slowly across the chart.
Blood volume, which is something like blood pressure, and very much correlated with blood
pressure, pulse rate, so how frequently your heart is beating, and galvanic skin response.
Now the galvanic skin response you may not be quite so familiar with, this has to do
with the conductivity or resistivity of the skin.
So if I put an electrode on two places on your skin, perhaps on your fingers, and you're
in a sweat, if you're in a sweat, sort of speaking, you are producing something like
salt water on your skin, salt water tends to be a good conductor, and so it would indicate
that you're passing quite a bit of electricity between one electrode and the other.
If you're cool and dry, then you're going to offer considerable resistance to this electrical
current and the current will go down.
And so this is also graphed on this polygraph.
Alright so you take these indicators and what a trained polygraph operator is supposed
to be able to do is look at these indicators and from the pattern determine whether or
not the person is telling the truth or lying.
Can they do that?
It's difficult to, of course, do that kind of research to find that out, but there has
been quite a bit of research that's been done.
Most of it is in the laboratory and the polygraph operators don't like it because they indicate
that it's in an artificial situation and often with sort of minor crimes that you've staged
in the laboratory, which are very different from major crimes where a person might be
going off to jail.
So there's some criticism of this, but in general the research shows that polygraphs
may be a bit better than chance, but they're far from perfect and they're probably nowhere
near what the polygraph operators claim of up around 90% or so.
Again you can make two kinds of errors from this.
You can say somebody's lying when they're telling the truth or you can say somebody's
telling the truth when they're in fact lying.
And so there are problems with the polygraph and probably for that reason polygraphs are
usually not admissible in court unless they're agreed to by both sides.
Because of the problems with the polygraph there have been attempts to make the polygraph
a little bit more accurate.
One of these is a guilty knowledge test procedure.
In a guilty knowledge test instead of saying, proposing a question like did you murder Mrs.
Smith, in which case you say yes or no, and from one pattern the polygraph operator would
have to determine whether that was a lie, instead of doing that we make up a test much
more like a multiple choice test.
And so the person has a number of opportunities to make a response and they actually just
repeat the alternatives.
Suppose you were investigating a crime where a jewelry store was robbed and some diamond
rings had been stolen and you had a suspect in there and you wanted to question the suspect.
Instead of saying did you steal these diamond rings from the jewelry store, you might set
several questions up and say okay we have you in here investigating you for a particular
crime.
Was that crime bank robbery?
Was that crime a rape?
Was that crime a robbery of jewelry or was that crime arson?
They would have to repeat all of those, bank robbery, rape, arson and so forth.
And so now you have four of these patterns with the measures that you're taking with
the polygraph and all the polygraph operator has to do is find out which of those patterns
has the biggest response on it.
And then you might ask another question, okay it was a robbery that we're investigating.
Was this robbery a robbery of a convenience store?
Convenience store.
Of a bank, bank, of a jewelry store, jewelry store and so forth.
You get the idea.
In this case again you look for the next question maybe it was a jewelry store or what was taken?
Was it money?
Money.
And so forth.
So you do about ten of these questions and statistically it gives you a lot of power because to get
all ten, a change in all ten alternatives would be very unlikely unless the person had
guilty knowledge of the crime.
So all of this is to try to make the test a little bit more reliable from these physiological
measures and then it even has some problems.
They may have the guilty knowledge without having committed the crime.
They were sitting next to Joe at the bar last night and Joe told them all about the robbery.
So they have guilty knowledge when maybe they didn't even commit the crime.
So there are some problems with it and this certainly doesn't entirely fix up the lie
detector.
And the rather surprising thing is that from these physiological indexes that we do such
a poor job of telling the difference between even the large state of lying and the emotions
involved with telling the truth.
Other places that have been investigated, a fellow named Eckhart Hess in the 1970s noticed
that pupil size might have something to do with emotions.
The story goes that he was lying in bed one night and reading a magazine, heard various
versions of the story but I'll tell the one that probably is the most placid.
He was an autobahn guy and liked pictures of birds.
So he was sitting there looking at pictures of birds and his wife was next to him, looked
over and said, my Eckhart, what large eyes you have.
He says, what do you mean?
He says, well your pupils are dilated.
He says, well I'm enjoying looking at the pictures of birds but like most of us who
would have just rolled over and gone to sleep at that point, he said, aha, that's interesting.
I wonder if the pupils have something to do with emotions.
So he went back to his laboratory, got a male graduate student and got a deck of cards
and on a few of the cards he had some pictures of some women in a state of undress and he
watched the student's pupils as he showed him these cards and sure enough when he got
to the cards with these women on it, the pupils dilated.
He says, aha, maybe we have found the royal road to emotion here and he convinced the
guys on Madison Avenue, the ones who are very concerned about this kind of thing, see if
you can tell people's emotions, that gives you a lot of power especially if you're in
marketing or advertising, it allows you to say what people like and what they don't like.
So he convinced them to fund his research and it was crewed at first because he had
to use a 16 millimeter camera and actually measure these things by hand.
Nowadays you can plug this all into a computer and a computer will automatically measure
pupil size for you but what he reported from this research after doing it for a while was
that the pupil indeed dilated when people were viewing things they liked and constricted
when they were viewing things that they didn't like and that excited people although there
were several problems with this.
One problem is that people had a difficult time replicating his pupil constriction work.
He would show people pictures of dermatological conditions for example where people didn't
look too healthy and their pupils would constrict, that's what he reported but people couldn't
get that to replicate for them.
Another problem is they could get it to replicate the pupil dilating the things people liked
but apparently the pupil also dilates the lots of other things as well.
I've actually done some experiments myself with pupil dilation and I can get you to dilate
your pupils by doing the following kind of thing.
So here are some memory items and I give you words to remember so I might read off seven
words for you to remember and as I read these off if I'm measuring the size of your pupil
the pupil gets larger for each of the words I'm reading off until it's fairly large and
then I say now I want you to recall these words and as you recall the words the pupil
gets smaller until it goes back to about where it was or I could have you do math problems.
I say I want you to add up this column of numbers and as they're adding up more and
more of the numbers the pupils dilate and when they say what the sum of the numbers
is the pupils constrict again.
So in fact apparently what the pupils are doing they're not telling you so much about
emotion, they're telling you more about information processing.
So it's not surprising that they would also react to emotional things as well.
Indeed that graduate student probably was processing more information with the playing
card with the woman on it than the playing card that had the king of hearts on it.
He'd seen lots of kings of hearts, he didn't have to process much information and maybe
he hadn't seen the other picture so he's processing a lot of information.
So it's not surprising that Hess would have come to that conclusion but it now looks like
what the pupil is telling us about is information processing and it's used in cognitive psychology
to try to get some indication of people's information processing.
One other thing that has been looked at in terms of a physiological measure of emotion
is a thing that for a while was called psychological stress evaluation or PSE.
Now psychological stress evaluation has to do with vocal tremors.
If I record your voice and run it through an apparatus that will look for vocal tremors
of at about 10 hertz, 10 cycles per second, this apparatus can pick up these vocal tremors
and the general thinking is that the more of these vocal tremors you have, the more emotional
you are and in particular it might be emotion having to do with stress.
And they have used this in various ways.
I remember back at my former university the criminal justice department was so thrilled
when they saved up enough money to buy one of these machines and they could measure psychological
stress evaluation.
It's been used on tapes such as the Oswald tapes from the Kennedy assassination to try
to determine his guilt.
It's been used on the Watergate tapes to try to determine whether people are telling the
truth or not on those tapes and it sounds quite intriguing.
There's only one problem with it and that problem is it doesn't work.
The research on this shows that it really has no predictive capabilities and that's
a real problem of course.
It doesn't stop people from continuing to look for physiological indexes.
There are people, there's a company out in Colorado that if you send them a 30 second
TV spot that you're going to use for advertising, they will get a group of people together in
the room, 100 people perhaps, and hook them up to a galvanic skin response measuring device
and as they show this commercial, the people will respond in certain ways and their galvanic
skin response will change.
This company says that it can measure how well people like the commercials.
Whether or not that's true, I'll leave that up to you.
I have my serious doubts that that's the case.
However, there's still considerable research underway that tries to find valid measures
of emotion because it would be so important if we could do that, if we could actually
step in and figure out what you're feeling about things.
Corporate sales and marketing would just love to have something like this where I could
evaluate advertising copy and evaluate the way they feel about my product.
People are going to continue to look for measures of the Royal Road to emotion, but currently
we're still in the position of not having a very good measure of emotion.
What we've done today is think about emotion a little bit.
Notice that emotion is a private event and so it's very difficult to measure.
We've looked at some possible ways of measuring this.
One of these is facial expression and looked at the fact that we can make some distinction
about various facial expressions people have, but it's certainly not the best measure because
people can hide their facial expressions or simulate facial expressions.
We can ask people about their own emotions, have them do self-report, and we have done
some research along those lines, particularly with respect to happiness.
Finally, people have looked for various physiological measures of emotion, such as the polygraph
or lie detector, such as pupillary response, which we've seen as probably has more to do
with information processing than emotion, and such as the psychological stress evaluator,
which turns out to be essentially useless for measuring emotion.
That's the first part of emotion, where we're trying to figure out what to measure.
In our next lecture, we'll look at some theories of emotion.
Thank you.
