Lecture 20 Emotion Theories
This is our second lecture in a two lecture series on emotions.
You'll recall in the last lecture we talked about emotions and the definition of emotions.
We talked about how difficult emotions are to study because they're private events rather than being public events.
And you'll recall that we also talked about the various ways that have been attempted to measure emotion
and how difficult that is because we cannot crawl inside the person's head and try to find out what their emotions are.
Nevertheless, this hasn't stopped psychologists from trying to study emotion and come up with theories of emotion.
And so what we want to do today is talk about four kind of older theories of emotion.
And then we'll talk about a more modern theory of emotion today.
And we'll also talk a little bit about some of the modern work on brain scans and the location of emotions in our central nervous system.
And finally we'll talk about the kinds of things that will be necessary to account for in putting together any good theory of emotion.
So that's what we're going to try to do today.
First let's go to kind of some old theories of emotion.
And these older theories have to do pretty much with the relationship between the stimulus, the physiological reactions to emotions,
the feeling of emotion and where that comes from, and also the overt behavior in response to whatever the emotional feeling is.
The first theory of emotion really isn't a theory at all.
It's really kind of common sense.
It's what we kind of implicitly assume when we're talking about emotion.
And in order to talk about this, I'm going to use a person walking through the woods and seeing a bear and then what happens after that.
So the person's walking through the woods, sees a bear, and what we normally think happens, if I asked you to describe what happens next,
you would probably say, well, the person becomes afraid of the bear because the bear is threatening.
And so then the person runs away from the bear, and as the person is running away from the bear, they have a lot of physiological reactions to it.
Their heart starts to pound, they start to be breathing faster, adrenaline is being pumped into their bloodstream, and so forth.
So that's the way people usually think these things happen.
So first of all, we have a stimulus.
That stimulus then evokes an emotion, and following the emotion and due to the emotion, we have physiological reactions to the situation,
and we have behavioral reactions of running away in that situation.
So that's what we normally think happens when we have an emotionally occurring event.
And I'll kind of call that common sense.
Now that was what people thought for a long time, until a couple of folks came along and challenged this.
And the two people who challenged this, William James, who's a very famous American psychologist that we talked about earlier on in this course,
when we were talking about the history of psychology, and Carl Long, who's from Denmark.
And in the late 1800s, these people were thinking about emotion.
They proposed that something different happened, and this is usually called the James Long theory of emotion.
They say you're walking through the woods, you see the bear, and when you see the bear, you start to run away from the bear.
You have the physiological reactions happen, the pumping of the heart, the adrenaline, and so forth.
And they said it's due to the physiological reactions that you get the emotion, and the emotion is due to the physiological reactions.
Now at first that may seem like a kind of silly way to envision what's going on here,
but if you think about it for a minute and sort of introspect about what might have happened to you in certain situations,
you might be able to see some validity to this.
As I think back on certain kinds of things that have happened to me, I remember one time when I was in New Mexico
and I was hunting doves out in the desert, and I was standing there with my shotgun and I'd shot a bird and it was down somewhere
and I was looking around for it on the ground, and I was standing there with my gun in my hand when I heard behind me,
and I turned around and there was a rattlesnake coiled up right behind me about a foot and a half away from my leg,
ready to strike. I was calm, cool, and collected, showed no emotionality at all, swung around with my gun, blew the rattlesnake apart.
Don't do that rattlesnakes are good unless they're threatening you, but I thought that it was either the snake or me,
so I shot the snake and then I felt my heart pounding and blood rushing and all the kinds of physiological things that happen when you have emotion,
and it's at that point that I felt the emotion. Prior to that, I was kind of calm, cool, and collected.
Now that seems to add some credence to this proposal that perhaps the emotion is due to the physiology.
It was not until I had the physiology that I felt the emotion in its full force.
I remember another incident. I was teaching up in Maine one summer and was driving my little sports car around out in the country
and came up over this hill and over on the other side of the hill was a kid who was kind of crossing the road with his bicycle,
and I slammed on the brakes and slid around at a 360, came to a stop, again kind of calm, cool, and collected,
and at that point after the car came to a stop and I knew everybody was safe, my heart started pounding,
I felt the adrenaline rush, and then I felt the emotion.
Okay, again, introspectively, it seems that the emotion followed the physiology.
So this doesn't seem too out of line with what James and Long were proposing.
There are a couple of problems with it. The timing isn't quite proper.
I mean, it does take a while for the physiological reactions to take place, and maybe the emotion doesn't wait that long,
although in these cases it seemed to. A more serious problem, however, with this is the fact that we have lots of different emotions.
Depending upon how you want to count them, if you look up in the dictionary emotional words, you'll find at least 100
and perhaps as many as 200 or 300 in the dictionary. We have a lot of different kinds of emotions.
A little bit later we'll talk about perhaps how many kinds of emotions that we have,
but surely at least we have 10 or 12, even basic primary emotions.
And if we're going to attribute the emotion to the physiology and say the physiology caused the emotion,
then it must be the case that we would have all sorts of different physiological patterns that would correspond to each of the kinds of emotions.
I mean, that would be a necessary kind of prediction.
And as you look at the physiology, you don't find those kinds of patterns.
Basically, we have two different kinds of patterns for our physiology.
One pattern is basically for flight, getting away when we're threatened, and another one is for fight,
putting up our dukes and standing there and trying to react to the emotional stimulus.
So those two basic patterns have slightly different physiological reactions from our autonomic nervous system.
Our autonomic nervous system, for example, puts out adrenaline in one case and nor adrenaline in the other case.
And those seem to be the only really gross differences in our physiology,
and we certainly don't have the subtle differences in our physiology that would be required for these subtle differences in our emotion.
So that's a major problem with the James Long theory of emotion.
In the 1920s, a couple of other fellows came along and proposed a different theory of emotion.
Walter Cannon is one of them, and you may recall Walter Cannon from a previous lecture when we were talking about hunger pangs and contractions of the stomach.
Cannon was the one who had one of his subjects have a balloon put into his stomach and as the balloon contracted, that's Walter Cannon.
And he also was interested in emotion, obviously.
But also a fellow named Philip Bard, who simultaneously proposed a different theory of emotion,
which is now usually called the Cannon Bard theory of emotion.
They said what happens is you're walking through the woods and you see the bear,
and the bear sets off a general arousal in the arousal system of the brain, which they thought at the time was the thalamus.
We now know perhaps it's something else. We'll talk about that a little bit before this lecture's over.
But they said in this general arousal system the thalamus then gets our central nervous system aroused,
and then there are messages that are sent upward to our cortex where we do our advanced thinking,
and at the cortex level we then know what the emotion is,
and also messages simultaneously sent down to the physiological systems to the autonomic nervous system to get it charged up to be responsive at a physiological level.
So these things happen simultaneously and are set off by a general arousal system in the brain.
So you see the bear, the thalamus gets excited, the thalamus sends a message upward to the cortex, and that's emotion,
and sends a message downward to the physiological systems to get them going, and we also then react as well.
Well, we know now that something like that must be going on.
There must be some sort of general physiological arousal, although the place of that's probably more like either the reticular activating formation in the brainstem,
or some other, perhaps the hypothalamus, or some other area of the brain.
But perhaps they're right at least about this general arousal, but part of their problem is that they can't explain the various emotions either.
So you now have this general arousal, but how do you know what the emotion is that goes to the brain?
How does the brain decide what kind of emotion to have?
And that's a problem with their theory.
In the 1970s, Stanley Schachter came along and with some help from a fellow named Singer, so it's sometimes called the Schachter-Singer theory,
although it's also sometimes just called the cognitive labeling theory.
I've also heard it called the jukebox theory of emotion as well, and we'll see why that is in just a minute here.
What they suggest is that you're walking through the woods and you see the bear, and much as Cannon and Bard suggest,
there's a general arousal that occurs at that point, and this general arousal then has to have a label attached to it,
and that label depends upon the situation or context.
And in this case, because it's a bear and you're in the woods and that bear is threatening, the label is one of fear,
and I must be afraid of this bear because of that particular situation or context, and so that's the emotion that you feel.
So they are suggesting that you have sort of a generalized activation that occurs, and the specific emotion that's based upon that activation
has to do with the situation or context or even label.
That's why it's sometimes called the jukebox theory of emotion, because you take your dollar and you put it into the jukebox
and you pick your song and that's the song you get and you can get any song you want to for that dollar.
So you put in your general physiological arousal and then you pick a label due to the situation or context,
and that's the emotion that you feel.
So this is the cognitive labeling or shactor-singer theory of emotion.
That's what they propose.
And I think that the best way to try to talk about this is to describe in a little bit of detail an experiment they did to show that this was the way things work.
They brought subjects in for this experiment and used a cover story that these subjects were going to be given a drug that might affect their vision.
And it took a while for the drug to take effect and so that they had to wait for about a half an hour in the waiting room until their vision was going to be tested.
So they would then take the subjects and inject them with a particular drug.
The committees that look at these kinds of things were a little bit different back in those days and so I'm not sure they get away with doing that today,
but nevertheless they injected these people and they injected them with one of two things depending upon the condition that they were in.
In one case, they injected them with epinephrine.
Epinephrine is a substance similar to adrenaline that gets you sorted just generally physiologically aroused and so they injected them with that.
And another group they injected with a saline solution, a neutral solution, what's sometimes called a placebo.
And they didn't know, of course, what they were injected with.
They then were asked to wait in the waiting room.
And as they were sitting there in the waiting room, the person next to them would do various kinds of things and the various kinds of things were all preplanned.
This person was actually what sometimes in psychology experiments called a confederate or a shill, if you will.
This person was trained by the experimenter to act in a particular way.
The confederate was instructed to either act in sort of an upper manner or a downer manner.
An upper manner, he would sit there and he was working on his homework and he'd wad up a piece of paper and throw it into the waste can and miss and pick it up and try a hook shot.
There was a hula hoop in the waiting room and he'd pick up the hula hoop and start trying to do the hula hoop and generally acting in a sort of upbeat manner.
In another condition, the confederate would act in a very different manner.
And he would sit there, he's doing his homework and he'd look up and say, why are we having to sit here?
What a waste of time this is. I've got better things to do with my time than this.
I don't know why they're having me do this.
And he would complain and grumble and eventually even, I think, get up and leave the room.
Now the question was, what effect would the confederate's behavior have?
And how would that interact with the particular drug that the person had?
And what they discovered was that if the person were generally physiologically aroused with the epinephrine, that the confederate's behavior would have more effect,
either up or down depending upon the confederate's behavior than if a person had had the placebo, the saline solution.
Those people were affected a little bit, but not nearly as much by the confederate's behavior.
And this was judged by the person filling out a questionnaire after they had been sitting in the waiting room.
Actually their vision never was tested, but they would fill out a questionnaire as to their mood and what they were feeling like.
And this was taken as support for this particular theory.
So they put in their quarter, they gave them this injection of epinephrine,
and then you could pick your mood depending upon the situation or the context of it.
And the person could be made to feel more elated, more energized, or more down depending upon the behavior of the confederate.
So that seems to be some good experimental proof of this particular theory.
And maybe you've also had some experiences in your life that might support this theory as well.
For example, suppose that you had a fight with your mate somehow, and you were very angry at your mate,
and you would scream and yell at each other, have a little spat as people do sometimes, and be very angry.
But then suppose you settled this argument, and now you're feeling very loving toward one another again.
According to this theory, you might feel more loving toward the other person than if you had never had the fight in the first place.
You got this general physiological arousal going at which you labeled as anger at the time it happened,
but now you relabel it and say it's not anger, it in fact is love.
And you feel closer to the person than you would have if you had never had the argument in the first place.
Another example of this is I used to be a stock car driver.
I did that for 12 years, rather strangely for a professor, on a short dirt track kind of stock car racing.
And I remember one time where I was racing in this race, a 20 lap main, and was coming around the fourth corner,
and I was leaving the race, and that didn't happen a whole lot, and so I was pretty happy about that.
And somebody banged me in the back end at about this time, spun me out.
Everybody passed me, went under the checker flag, and I pulled into the pits, and I was angry as could be.
I slammed down my helmet and started yelling at my pit crew, did you see what happened out there?
That person spun me around, I was ready to win the race, he banged into me, what's wrong with that?
Here I am, angry as can be. They said, wait a minute, what are you, why are you so angry?
That guy got black flag, you won the race, and then I felt elated.
I felt more elated than I would have if this incident hadn't happened in the first place,
and I just won the race without the incident.
Again, I got generally physiologically activated by being angry, and then took off the label of being angry,
and now because I won the race, I was in fact quite elated about that.
Let me give you one other kind of example of that.
There's a fellow, this story may or may not be true, I'm not quite sure, but this fellow is a bachelor kind of guy,
and he was dating and he would date various women, and one of the routines he would follow,
he lived in Colorado Springs in Colorado, and it's a lovely place,
and what would happen, he would take his date for a ride through the mountains in the evening when it's dark,
and at a certain point in the road, he knew the road very well, and he would come around the corner,
flip off his lights, go screaming around the next couple of curves,
he's meanwhile terrified, cowering over in her seat, and he comes to a stop overlooking Colorado Springs
at this beautiful view of the lights of Colorado Springs, and turns to her and he says,
my dear, when did you decide you were in love with me?
She's sitting over there, heart pounding, adrenaline rushing, she's scared to death,
and he relabels it from being scared to death to being in love with him,
and she says, you're right, I am in love with you, with the new label, she felt it very strongly.
Well, whether or not that actually happened, I think it's a good illustration of this particular theory.
Let me tell you about one more experiment that's been done that kind of supports this theory as well.
In this experiment, they had people fill out a questionnaire,
and they had an interviewer who was actually filling it out for them,
and they met this interviewer in one of two different places.
In one case, they met the interviewer on a swaying bridge over a chasm,
and so they were standing there, and this interviewer was filling this out,
and it was a fairly frightening kind of situation,
versus another situation where the interviewer was standing on a solid low bridge over a stream
that didn't appear to be unsafe at all.
And so the interviewer filled out the questionnaire,
and I should tell you that the interviewer was a fairly attractive woman,
and all of the subjects in this experiment were men.
And at the end of the experiment, the interviewer said,
well, in case you have any further questions about this experiment, here's my number,
and you can give me a call and ask me those questions.
The experimental question was how many of the men would call her for a date, actually,
after the experiment was over,
and they discovered that more of the men who were on the swaying suspension bridge
called her than those on the low bridge.
Again, the general notion was they got physiologically activated by the fear of standing on the bridge,
and then relabeled that as being attracted to the experimenter.
All right, let's move on and talk for a minute about a more recent theory of emotion.
And this is one that has been proposed by a fellow named Jonathan Haight.
And Haight says that there are two different kinds of emotions.
One kind is the self-interested emotions.
Those are the kind that we're usually familiar with.
Those are ones that have to do with our own selves being angry at somebody
because they did something to us.
Those kinds of emotions, undoubtedly, according to Haight,
would have evolved as good adaptations for our survival through evolution.
But there's a different kind of emotion that evolved also,
which he calls the moral emotions.
And these moral emotions have to do less with our own selves.
In fact, the moral emotions, he claims we have no stake in the particular triggering event.
That's part of the definition of a moral emotion.
So you may be watching about a famine in a country where they're getting a lot of aid,
but because of corruption in the government,
the people in that country are not getting the food that they need.
And so you might get angry when you hear this report
because of the corruption in the government and not getting the food to the people.
Now, it's got nothing to do with you. You're not going to starve to death.
So it's not really a self-interested emotion, but it's a moral emotion.
And that might motivate you to do something about this,
like contribute more to an agency that's trying to get them food
or to contact your congressman or something like that.
All right, these moral emotions, hate claims,
are based upon a concept called reciprocal altruism
that we're going to talk about considerably more later on in the course.
Let me give you just sort of a brief overview of reciprocal altruism at this point.
Back in the days of the adaptation period,
when our ancestors were trying to get along out on the plains
and they were in a hunter-gatherer society,
suppose you come back one day and you've killed a particularly large animal
and you carry it back into the village
and you have too much meat there for you and your family.
And you have no way to store it. You don't have a refrigerator.
You don't have a way to put this meat away.
In fact, you decide that you will share the meat with other people in the village.
So you provide for your family and share the rest of the meat.
Why would you do such a thing?
According to the theory of evolution, which is very self-centered,
why should you ever give something to your competitors?
Well, the reason is reciprocal altruism.
You give them to your neighbors.
You give the meat to your neighbors this week.
Next week, your neighbor comes back and has had a good kill
and you didn't get anything that week.
You're expecting that your neighbor will reciprocate
and give you some of his or her meat the next time.
In order for reciprocal altruism to work,
it has to follow certain kinds of rules.
There has to be true reciprocity.
They have to reciprocate.
And there are emotions, apparently, that have been set up
to make sure that this kind of thing happens.
One family of emotions proposed is the other condemning family.
These emotions include such things as contempt, anger, disgust.
And these have to do with the punishment of cheaters.
Somebody didn't give me food back when he had it,
although I had given him food the week before.
I'm angry at him. That's an emotion.
Another set of emotions are the self-conscious emotions.
And these include things like guilt, shame, and embarrassment.
And this is to motivate us to avoid cheating.
I don't share my meat the next week
when he's given me meat the week before.
I feel guilt about it.
Another set of emotions have to do with other suffering emotions,
such as compassion, sympathy, empathy.
And these have to do with being motivated to help those who have been wronged.
So I know the neighbor shared with me,
but I didn't share with somebody else who had been in this reciprocal arrangement as well.
And so I hurt for this other person.
And then the other praising emotion, such as gratitude or awe,
and this is to reward the altruists when they do, in fact, reciprocate.
So these kinds of emotions, according to hate at least,
are there for moral purposes and are evolutionary adaptations
that support the notion of reciprocal altruism.
So part of what we have to do in our theories of emotions
is account for some of these built-in evolutionary behavioral predispositions as well.
Let's just take a minute or two to talk about some of the modern brain imaging work
that's been done on emotion.
We know that emotions have to occur somewhere in the brain,
and so they've done quite a bit of brain scanning
using functional magnetic resonance and other kinds of brain scan techniques
that look at what areas of the brain are activated under certain conditions.
So they might set up a condition where you would feel a particular emotion
or even look at a picture of somebody else feeling a particular emotion
and ask what area of the brain has been activated.
And for the emotion of fear, one of the places that's apparently activated quite reliably
is the amygdala.
The amygdala is an area deep in the brain just above the brainstem
and a very old part of the brain, very deep in the brain,
not toward our cortex, which is our more modern brain.
And that's not surprising because, in fact, emotions are fairly early adaptations
of other animals besides humans, in fact, have emotions,
so it's not surprising that it's that deep in the brain.
The amygdala also sends messages to other areas of the brain,
such as the hypothalamus,
that apparently cause a lot of the physiological reactions to be set off in the brain.
We know, however, that the amygdala is not just the sole source of fear,
because we know that people who've had their amygdala damaged can also feel fear,
but it is some of what happens with fear because if they've had their amygdala damaged,
they also cannot interpret even other people having fear under those conditions.
The amygdala is also apparently activated by some positive emotions as well,
so it's not just the source of fear either.
We're just beginning to understand, through this kind of work, where the source of emotions are.
So in any modern theory of emotion, we're going to have to include a number of different kinds of things.
For one thing, we're going to have to know something about the stimulus,
and that's not surprising.
What's kicking off the emotion?
We also have to know something about how different emotions affect various portions of the brain,
and the brain pathways, like we were just talking about a minute ago.
We also have to know something about the situational context, as was proposed by Schachter,
because that has something to do with emotions.
We also have to know something about the survival value of the emotions as well,
as in sort of the modern theories that have to do with evolutionary theory.
And finally, we have to be able to account for why emotions are also modifiable as well.
So what we've done today is talk about some theories of emotions.
We looked at four kind of older theories of emotions,
and those theories had to do in particular with how the stimulus reacts with our feeling of emotion,
the physiological reactions, and the behavioral reactions.
We looked at a more modern theory that has to do with using evolutionary adaptations in our theories of emotion.
We looked just very briefly at some of the brain scan work that can tell us where the site of some of these emotions are.
And finally, we talked a little bit about what a modern theory of emotion would have to have.
Thank you.
Thank you.
