Lecture 21, Psychoactive Drugs, Processes, Stimulants
In the last couple of lectures, we've been talking about emotions and some theories of
emotions. I think it's appropriate then in this lecture and the next to move on to a
topic of psychoactive drugs, because in fact that's what psychoactive drugs are. The purpose
of psychoactive drugs is to change somehow our emotions. So what we're going to do in
this lecture, today we're going to talk about the frequency of usage of various psychoactive
drugs. We're going to talk about whether or not the usage of these drugs is a heredity
determined kind of usage and how they interact with people with mental illness. We're going
to define some terms with respect to psychoactive drugs, the term psychoactive drug in the first
place. Also terms such as tolerance, physical addiction, withdrawal, and psychological addiction.
Then we're going to talk about how drugs have their actions on the body. And finally,
today we're going to talk about stimulants as a class of psychoactive drugs. In a future
lecture then, in the next lecture, we're going to talk about the other classifications of
psychoactive drugs. Now for most of us, it's not a matter of deciding whether or not we're
going to use a psychoactive drug. Most of us do use psychoactive drugs. Last night for
dinner, I had a glass of wine with my dinner. Why did I do that? I did it for the psychological
effect of it. I felt a little bit better. I like the taste of wine too, but I like the
feeling I get with wine as well. I also yesterday afternoon, as I recall, had a Coke. Coke had
caffeine in it. We're going to talk a little bit about caffeine today. I've given up coffee
in the mornings, but for many years I drank coffee in the morning for its psychological
effect of making me feel kind of up and alert due to the caffeine in it. So for most of us,
it's not a matter of are we going to use these drugs, but which of the ones are we going
to use. And that's true of the population as a whole. Even for illicit drugs, if you
look at the population, 42% of the population of people who are 12 years of age and older
report during their lifetime that they have used an illicit psychoactive drug. Now this
is self-report, and so you have problems always with self-report data knowing how true it
is. About 13% of people report that they have used an illicit drug in the last year, and
about 7% report to having used an illicit drug in the last month. Among high school
seniors, they report illicit drug usage too, and it's changed over the years. In 1975,
31%, about a third of high school seniors reported using an illicit drug. This decreased
to about 1992, when only about 14% were reporting this, but it's again climbed and it's now
up higher over a quarter of the high school seniors report using an illicit drug. Now
most of this for high school seniors is marijuana, and we'll talk about marijuana in our next
lecture. 23% of high school seniors report using marijuana, and cocaine accounts for
about 2% for high school seniors. Another way to do this, instead of asking people what
drugs they use, is to look at emergency room problems with various kinds of drugs, so you
can look at what classification they came in with, what drug they were having problems
with when they were admitted to emergency departments and hospitals. And if you look
at this, the largest category is cocaine related substances of about 193,000 reported
nationally. Followed by marijuana or hashish with about 110,000, heroin related episodes
accounted for about 95,000, and methamphetamine or speed related episodes accounted for about
15,000 admissions to emergency rooms. And the largest increase in this in the last,
in the recent past at least, between 1990 and the year 2000, was in marijuana hashish
related episodes. There was an increase of over 600% going from about 15,000 up to about
110,000. That's a bit surprising. It surprised me when I looked at that, partly because marijuana
and hashish are not particularly life threatening because they're not depressants. Usually you
see this for depressant drugs that people get into trouble with. But it may be due to
the fact that the active ingredient in marijuana has increased so dramatically in the last
decade or so. We'll talk about that when we get to marijuana.
If you look at usage trends, what the trend line looks like, cocaine and crack usage has
actually been trending down a little bit over the past several years. Heroin has generally
increased a bit in recent years. Marijuana, as I mentioned earlier, peaked in the late
1970s in terms of its usage, and then decreased until the early 1990s, and has increased again
over the, since that period of time, although there's some indication that it's now flattening
out. Methamphetamine or speed has a fairly low but fairly stable usage, although there's
some indication of recent upward trends. I know in my state in North Carolina there's
a very large increase in meth lab busts by the police, and it looks like this year is
going to be the largest year yet. It would not surprise me if in the last couple of years,
for which we don't have very good statistics yet, there has been an increase in methamphetamine
use. Ecstasy, which is also sometimes called MDMA, the use of this is fairly small compared
to other major drugs, but its use is apparently spreading to some extent outside of raves
and club usage where it has most frequently been used. If you look at family studies for
drugs in general, in terms about how heritable the use of drugs is, it looks like it has
a fairly high heritability component with calculations of heritability from twin studies
of approximately 50%. So if you find one person who has a particular drug problem and then
look at their twin, their twin is likely to have a drug problem as well, about 50% of
the time. If you recall from when we talked about mental illnesses, for example schizophrenia,
it's about 50% for the twin studies as well. And speaking of mental illnesses, how about
drug abuse or substance abuse and mental illness? And there is considerable what's called co-morbidity,
meaning that they often occur together. The lifetime prevalence percentages for substance
abuse, for example, amongst schizophrenic patients is about 47%. It's extremely high,
so the typical schizophrenic patient about half the time also has a substance abuse problem.
For bipolar disorder, it's even higher at 56%. And for major depression, it's about 27%.
And drug use is also one of the reasons why you often get non-compliance in terms of other
drugs for these patients. They get it put into a mental institution, they often are
put on some sort of a drug program, they come out of the mental institution, and they want
to have either alcohol or an illicit drug, which does not act properly with the drug
they're taking on their therapeutic regimen. And so, in fact, they give up taking the therapeutic
drug.
Okay, let's talk about psychoactive drugs and exactly what we mean by psychoactive drugs.
These are any chemical substance that's ingested in the body for its desired psychological effect.
So here we're looking for a psychological effect, not necessarily a medical effect. And there
are several other terms that are used to describe psychoactive drugs. One of these is drug tolerance.
With drug tolerance, you need increasing amounts of the drug in order to get the desired effect.
So it's not unusual for, in fact, after a person has gotten considerable tolerance for
something like an illicit drug like heroin, for them to be taking the amount of the drug
which might have originally been lethal to them once tolerance has developed.
Physical addiction or dependence refers to the person needing a drug for the body to
feel and even act normally. So once dependence has occurred, if they don't get the drug,
the body will not act normally. The way it doesn't act normally is that it gives them
withdrawal symptoms, which is a third term. Withdrawal symptoms occur as a result of physical
dependence when the drug is abruptly withdrawn. And these may include, depending upon the
drug, lots of different kinds of things, like nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dizziness, chills,
headaches, and even in extreme cases, death. There are some drugs that it's very dangerous
for the person to go cold turkey and be taken immediately off the drug without having some
tapering off, including alcohol, in fact. When somebody comes off of an alcohol addiction
and they go through withdrawal very often, the person has to be watched very closely
because it can, in fact, lead to death. Psychological addiction is also present in many drugs. Psychological
addiction refers to the need to engage in the lifestyle, the drug culture associated
with a particular drug. And the person does not feel emotionally normal without these
kinds of activities. And this is often a problem when a person goes in for treatment, to a
treatment center, for example, where they would go in, get off the drug from a physiological
point of view so that their physiological addiction is no longer there, but then go
back onto the street or go back into their drug culture and once again get hooked on
the drug for psychological reasons. And there's nothing that says that psychological addiction
isn't as strong as physical or physiological addiction to the drug.
And nearly all psychoactive drugs produce their effects by changing the processing of
transmitter substances, the chemicals that allow neurons to communicate with each other.
In a previous lecture I talked, at least briefly, about how neurons communicate with each other,
but since again we're talking about drugs, it might be instructive for me to do a very
quick review of this for you. Basically, the central nervous system is composed of neurons
which, when strung together, they form the nerves and these are the communication lines
that allow the processing of complex information in us. Now these neurons are extremely small,
but they're quite intricate and you have generally what's called a presynaptic neuron, followed
by a synapse which is a space between neurons followed by a postsynaptic neuron. And what
happens is in the presynaptic neuron that neuron will fire based upon what happens upstream
of it and as it fires in the impulse, which is both chemical and electrical, travels down
this neuron, it reaches the end of the neuron, the presynaptic neuron, and it will often
release a transmitter substance into the synapse. And this transmitter substance then will enter
the synapse and bathe the postsynaptic neuron, the downstream neuron, and kind of like a key
fits in a lock, if the neurotransmitter substance released by the presynaptic neuron fits into
this lock, into this receptor site of the postsynaptic neuron, it will cause that postsynaptic
neuron to be more likely or in some cases less likely to fire. If the transmitter substance
does not all get absorbed by the downstream neuron and fit into a receptor site, it may
be reabsorbed into the upstream neuron, the presynaptic neuron, and go back into the neurotransmitter
supply of that presynaptic neuron. And so the drugs, what drugs do, they can do a number
of different kinds of things. They can cause an increase in the amount of neurotransmitter
substance released by the presynaptic neuron, that's one thing that they can do. Another
thing that they can do is fill receptor sites in the postsynaptic neuron that otherwise
would be filled by that transmitter substance and make the postsynaptic neuron less likely
to fire by having its receptor sites already filled. And a third thing that they can do
is block the reuptake of the neurotransmitter substance back into the presynaptic neuron.
So those are the basic ways that drugs work on our central nervous system. Just to give
you an example, heroin increases the amount of dopamine, which is a neurotransmitter substance,
released by the presynaptic neuron. And because of this, it makes the postsynaptic neuron,
has opiate sites, and the heroin fits into those opiates, or the dopamine fits into those
receptor sites and makes it more likely to fire. The reason methadone works, which is
an artificial drug, is that it occupies opiate receptor sites in the postsynaptic neuron
and fills those sites up and keeps the heroin produced dopamine from filling those sites.
So you see somehow how these drugs work at the micro level at least. Now when you have
these drugs affecting the neurotransmitter substances, they can affect a whole pathway.
And there's a pathway called the mesolimbic dopamine system. And this is a pathway that
runs all the way from the brainstem in the very lower part of the brain, through the
nucleus cubins, and all the way to the frontal cortex. So it runs from the brainstem through
the midbrain all the way to the frontal cortex, where we do our advanced thinking activity.
This mesolimbic dopamine system is normally used for basic drives, such as the desire
for food, drink, and sex. But with prolonged drug usage, this pathway changes and adapts
to the drugs. And it can even change the gene expression, such that the pathway develops
tolerance and a persistent withdrawal symptom when the pathway is not properly energized
by the drug. And this pathway is now known to be the general source of addiction, of physical
addiction, with drugs. And that's only been found out within the last about half decade.
Okay, now I would like to move on to talk about one of the subclassifications of drugs.
And that's the stimulants, or what are sometimes called uppers in the street name. And it's
a good description of them, because in fact they do provide heightened feelings of awareness
and alertness. They do make the user feel more up. And these drugs, some of them are
also called speed. And again, that's probably a pretty good term, because they make you
feel like you're speeding up somehow. Your thoughts come more quickly, you're more awake,
more alert. Now one of the stimulants is amphetamines. Amphetamines used to be prescribed as a medicine.
In some cases it still may be, but it used to be prescribed for some fairly benign kinds
of conditions and used for things like weight loss or depression. And it was relatively safe
when prescribed that way, although people would often go to multiple doctors and get
multiple prescriptions and be taking too much of amphetamines. It is seldom prescribed for
those kinds of conditions now, because it's considered kind of too dangerous for that.
Amphetamines operate by depleting a naturally occurring transmitter substance in the body.
In this case, again, it's dopamine that we're talking about. And it does this both by releasing
more dopamine from the presynaptic neuron and also by blocking reuptake into the presynaptic
neuron as well. So the dopamine gets used up more readily when a person is taking amphetamines.
And partly because there are limited supplies of dopamine in the body. Once these supplies
are used up, the user needs to get more and more of the drug to wring out the last little
bit of the dopamine available in the nervous system. And this produces a tolerance and
an addiction to the drug. So the person will typically go on this drug, and if they're
an experienced user, will use the drug for a day or two and wring out the last little
bit of dopamine that's available. And once it's gone, the person comes crashing down
and gets into a vicious cycle where they then start becoming depressed and paranoid.
They may lock themselves in a closet even and not eat enough because it also suppresses
the appetite in the person, become paranoid, depressed, sleep for a long period of time,
wake up feeling completely wrung out from lack of dopamine, need to start taking the drug
again to get whatever dopamine's left in the system, and they will then begin this cycle
of going from a high of the amphetamine to a very low and depressed state as the dopamine
runs out. As this kind of thing happens with heavy use of amphetamines, this can lead
to major changes in the personality depending upon where in the cycle the person is. If
the upper part of the cycle, lack of attention, lack of care for themselves and for other
people in the downer part of the cycle to things like depression. And it can also lead
to certain medical conditions as well, such as high blood pressure, strokes, fatal heart
problems as well. Today there's an even more dangerous form of the drug, and this is called
crystal methamphetamine, or sometimes in street parlance called ice. This is usually smoked
by the user, although it can be taken in other ways, it can be taken in through the mouth
or even injected, and this leads to a more rapid rush than amphetamines. Amphetamines
are typically taken in pill form, leads to a more rapid rush and can cause even more serious
addiction. This substance is usually made in laboratories, home laboratories, out of
everyday substances, such as cold medicine. As I'm giving this lecture, my state legislature
is debating how to control a pseudofedron, which is a very common cold medicine because
people are going in buying vast quantities of this in order to make methamphetamines in
their home laboratories. Another drug that has a similar in a chemical sense to
amphetamines is ecstasy, which is also called MDMA, and this is a designer drug that's
sometimes used at rave parties where there's a lot of dancing and feeling up and parties
that go in through the night and it's reported both to stimulate the user, sorry, and to
give heightened sensory experiences as well. Another form of a stimulant is cocaine.
Cocaine is a drug that's extracted from the coca plant and cocaine blocks the reuptake
of dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin, and so as it blocks those, it uses up those
particular transmitter substances, although the most important one apparently for cocaine
is dopamine. In fact, you'll hear dopamine. I've referred to it a number of different times
here. Apparently dopamine is the particular transmitter substance that is common to most
of these kinds of drugs, and that's why this pathway is a dopamine pathway that I talked
about a little bit earlier here. With cocaine, the chemical effects are similar to
amphetamines, as I mentioned. Cocaine traditionally has been taken through the nasal membranes by
inhaling it, and more frequently nowadays it's used in its freebase form, which is called
crack. That's called crack partly because that's the way it sounds when it's smoked in a crack
pipe because it's made up of crystals that, as they burn, give a crackling sound. This
produces an even quicker and stronger effect and leads to even stronger addictions than
the more classic way of taking cocaine. Cocaine can be very dangerous, even for first time
users from a medical point of view. You may remember a case a number of years ago of Len
Byas, who was a basketball player in the ACC, very, very talented fellow. It was drafted
by the Boston Celtics, and they were looking forward to a long career with him, and he
was using cocaine and suffered a heart attack and died as a very physically fit, active young
man. So heart attacks and strokes can result from the use of cocaine as well. Caffeine is
a mild stimulant, and it's probably the most widely used psychoactive drug in the United
States, because caffeine occurs in a lot of different kinds of substances, immediately
coming to mind, of course, is coffee. That's what most of us think of being able to get a
little caffeine fix in the morning from our coffee. But it's also found in tea, and it's
found in many soft drinks as well. It's also found in chocolate, and in many prescription
drugs as well. They'll put in some caffeine, because it seems to help the action of that
particular drug. Caffeine is relatively safe, although it can be mildly addictive, and withdrawal
symptoms can occur. Sometimes people go into the hospital for surgery, and they'll get in
in the morning and be prepped early in the morning, and get ready for the surgery, and
be in surgery, say, in the morning into the early afternoon, and not come out of their
general anesthesia until perhaps late in the afternoon. And as they come out, they feel
terrible, and they just feel they have headaches, and they don't feel good. And some of that
effect for many people is a withdrawal from caffeine, because they haven't had their caffeine
all day long. They weren't in their normal routine and forgot about having it. So that,
in fact, is a withdrawal from caffeine that they're feeling. In terms of heavy caffeine
users, this can increase the risk of heart problems and high blood pressure and miscarriages.
And so very often for pregnant women, they are asked to reduce their use of caffeine.
Nicotine is also a stimulant. It's a poison found in tobacco, as you undoubtedly know.
And while it is a stimulant, some smokers report that they actually find it calming for them.
And probably a pretty good reason for this. Smokers tend to be more stressed out to begin
with, and they are stimulated by tobacco. But what then happens is that as they've not
smoked for a few minutes, 15 minutes, a half an hour, they don't realize it, but they're
going through withdrawal symptoms at that point from nicotine. And so when they light
them, the nicotine stops their withdrawal symptoms, and their withdrawal symptoms are
causing them some distress. And as those symptoms are relieved, they get a calming effect from
that cigarette, even though it, in fact, is a stimulant. Nicotine can be addictive. I
think that's pretty well known. There was a lot of debate about that some years ago.
It is agreed by everyone now that it does have physical addictive effects, and tolerance
certainly develops as well. Withdrawal symptoms can be severe, and secession from nicotine
use can be as difficult as getting off of heroin.
Medically speaking, smoking, I hope everybody at this point knows that from a medical point
of view, there's an increased risk of various kinds of cancers, heart disease, stroke, breathing
disorders, and also health problems from secondhand smoke as well.
So what we've done today is begin a two lecture series on psychoactive drugs. We tried to
define what a psychoactive drug was for you, tried to talk a little bit about the frequency of
usage of drugs in general and of the various categories of drugs, talked just a little bit about
the heritability of drugs and drug abuse, and also how it interacts with mental illnesses.
We tried to define various terms such as tolerance, physical addiction, withdrawal, and psychological
addiction for you. We talked about the general effect of drugs both at the micro level in
terms of the synapse and neurotransmitters and in terms of the brain pathways, and finally
we talked about the various subcategories under stimulants for drugs.
Next time we'll continue this two lecture series and talk about the other classifications of
drugs and some of the effects of those psychoactive drugs. Thank you.
