Lecture 23 Social Psychology, Influence and Reciprocity
This lecture is the first lecture in a two lecture sequence on social psychology.
What we're going to do today is define social psychology for you.
Talk about three of the major sub areas of social psychology.
And I will give you an example of an experiment from each of two of those areas
just to give you some idea what goes on in those areas.
And then we're going to spend the rest of this lecture and
next lecture on one of those sub areas of social psychology on the topic of
influence.
And we're going to look at detail at a book written by a social psychologist
on the topic of influence.
Social psychology is a very broad area in psychology.
Goes without saying that we're social beings.
There are other animals that are social beings, but
probably no other animal that has the complexity of social interactions that we
have.
With most of the other animals, those behaviors are fairly stilted and built in.
We do all sorts of things at a social level.
And the definition of social psychology itself will show you how
extensive our abilities as social beings is.
Social psychology, to give you a definition,
is the scientific study of how people think about influence and
relate to one another.
Think about influence and relate to one another.
So the first sub area is social thinking, what we do in terms of thinking.
These are the thoughts about ourselves, perhaps the roles that we take in life.
I might think of myself as a man.
I might think of myself as a professor.
I might think of myself as a religious person or not a religious person.
There are all sorts of roles that I think about myself.
My beliefs and judgments, the behavior and attitudes that people express,
and one's thoughts about social situations as well.
Let me give you one example from the thoughts about social situations.
There's a concept called attribution, an attribution theory.
It has to do with when we're looking at somebody else's behavior,
to what do we attribute their behavior to?
And there are at least two things that we can attribute their behavior to.
One is referred to as internal attribution.
That is, I would assume that you're doing what you're doing because that's the way
you are.
And in fact, that's what your personality is like.
That's what your talents and abilities are like.
That's internal to you.
That's what's promoting your behavior.
As opposed to the opposite of that, which is an external attribution.
I might say you're acting that way because the situation you're in
is forcing you to act that way.
For instance, if you wanted to look at me and say, well,
now I know you're a department head of a department of psychology.
Why is Martin a department head?
Well, one could say, well, he's a department head because he's on a power trip.
He's a person who likes power, and that's why he's a department head.
Or you might alternatively look at me and say, well,
he's a department head because he's in a department of people who are really
looking for someone to give them service.
And that they think he would be a good department head, and
they pressed him into service as a department head.
In the first case, you're attributing it to some internal reason.
And in the second case, you're attributing it to the fact that I'm in a situation
that has made me into a department head.
So those would be very different kinds of things.
And particularly in the American culture, we tend to make a fundamental
attribution error, and that is to look at somebody's behavior and
assume that it's an internal attribution.
We assume an internal attribution.
We say they're doing that because that's the way they are,
rather than an external attribution.
There are other cultures where that is less so the case.
There's been some work with Asian cultures.
And if they show a picture of a fish out in front of a group of other fish that
are all swimming in the same direction, and you ask an American what's going on
in that picture, they'll say, well, this one fish is leading the other fish.
That's an attribution of an internal kind of thing.
It's the leadership qualities of the fish.
If you ask people in an Asian culture, they'll often say those fish are chasing
the other one.
In other words, it's a situational external attribution in this case.
So that just gives you sort of an idea of what's studied in terms of thinking.
The second category is social influence, which includes conformity and
persuasion.
And we're going to cover persuasion and influence extensively in the rest of
this lecture and in the next lecture, and also group influences.
And then the third category in social psychology is social relations
that includes topics such as prejudice, aggression,
attraction, intimacy, altruism, and conflict.
And we're going to talk about a lot of those topics a little bit later on,
especially in evolutionary psychology.
But let me for just a second here talk about how you might go about the
studying of prejudice.
One way would be to ask people whether or not they're prejudice.
And if you do that, especially in today's politically correct climate,
most people will deny that they're prejudiced at all.
So suppose you're going to look at prejudice with respect to African Americans.
And you ask people, most students at today's university will say, no,
no, I'm not prejudice at all.
Yet if you put them into a situation, let me just describe an experiment where you
might be looking at determining whether or not there's prejudice that's there.
Suppose I had you as a subject in an experiment, and
I gave you a button on the left and a button on the right.
And I said, I'm going to show you various stimuli.
And these stimuli can be either a word or a picture.
And if the word is a pleasant word, such as the word peace,
I want you to press the right key.
And if the word's an unpleasant word, like cancer, press the left key.
And then sometimes you're going to see a picture.
And if the picture is of an African American, I want you to press the right key.
And if the picture is of a Caucasian person, I want you to press the left key.
Now, if I do that, I would discover that in the condition where you are pressing
to one for one response, say the right key to pleasant, in terms of the word,
and to Caucasian, you would be faster.
And on the other hand, obviously, you're pressing it to unpleasant,
and African American or black picture.
You would be faster under that condition than if I reversed it.
So that you're pressing pleasant along with African American,
and unpleasant along with the Caucasian pictures.
And that's some indication from just how quickly you press the button,
that in fact, perhaps you are associating the African American picture
more with unpleasant things and the Caucasian picture more with pleasant things.
So that's the kind of experiment that might be done.
Now, I should point out that there are other possibilities in here as well
that I don't want to go into.
But this is the kind of thing that you might do in social psychology
if you're studying prejudice.
Okay, let's then go to that second part of social psychology,
social influence, and in particular, persuasion.
And let's look extensively at what somebody has to say about persuasion.
So a fellow named Robert Chaldini,
and he's a social psychologist at Arizona State University.
And he's written one of the most influential books on the psychology of persuasion
that's called Influence, the Psychology of Persuasion.
And this book has been a big seller for a number of years now.
And part of the reason it's interesting to folks is it's kind of a trade book,
which means that it has some real science in it.
He talks about experiments that he's done
and that other people have done on the topic of persuasion and influence.
But he also talks about topics that are of interest to everyday people.
In researching this book, he not only did these kinds of experiments,
but he decided he wanted to know something about what happens
in terms of influence and persuasion in the real world.
And so for three years, he went out and got various kinds of jobs in sales and marketing.
He would use an assumed name and look in the newspaper
and apply for a job, say, selling encyclopedias.
And he would go take all of the training necessary to be an encyclopedia salesman
or a used car salesman or some other kind of job as well.
And so he includes a lot of this in the book as well
to show the practical experience of people who are in the business
of trying to persuade other people
and then tries to link that up with the kind of research he's done on this topic as well.
Now, Chaldini claims that we just do not have enough time in our lives
to completely analyze every situation that comes along.
And so what we have to do is take some shortcuts,
what are sometimes called heuristics.
And these are ways of looking at situations that allow us to analyze a situation
at only a minimal level and still decide what to do.
And in order to illustrate this, he talks about some research that ethologists have done.
Ethologists study usually animals and they study the behavior of animals.
And let me give you an example of a particular behavior that Chaldini cites.
Mother turkeys are good mothers. They take care of their baby turkeys.
They keep them warm by sitting on them and using their feathers to keep them warm.
They protect them from enemies. They feed them and so forth.
So they're good turkey mothers.
They're good turkey mothers as long as the turkey chicks are doing the appropriate kinds of things.
And the most appropriate kind of thing is to say cheap, cheap.
And so the mother listens for cheap, cheap. She knows that's her turkey chick,
gathers it under her and treats it very nicely.
If the turkey chick stops saying cheap, cheap, she may in fact push it away
and not treat it as if it's her own.
Now, a pole cat is a natural enemy of a mother turkey.
And the pole cat, if it gets near a mother turkey,
the mother turkey will start squawking and jumping up and down and feigning attacks at the pole cat.
And that's natural behavior for the mother turkey.
If you take a stuffed pole cat and start pulling it toward the mother turkey with a string,
the mother turkey will get very upset unless you put a tape recording in the pole cat
so the pole cat goes cheap, cheap.
If you do that, the mother turkey will take the pole cat, stuffed pole cat,
gather it under her just like it's her chick, and will treat it just like it's her chick.
Now, isn't that a stupid thing for a mother turkey to do?
Well, Chaldini says that what's going on here is that animals have certain sign stimuli.
These are certain signaling devices that set off fixed action patterns in them.
And in this case, the cheap, cheap is enough to set off this mothering fixed action pattern in the mother turkey.
Other animals show the same kind of thing.
You can take a male robin, and if you take a bunch of red feathers from the breast of another robin
and wad it up into kind of a ball and get it anywhere near the male robin,
he'll start to attack this thing.
Apparently, the red breast is enough, it's the sign stimulus in this case,
to set off a fixed action pattern of attack.
You can take a real male robin and cover up the red breast,
and the male robin won't even be interested in it.
So, again, you have the sign stimulus.
And you say, well, that doesn't happen in humans, does it?
Well, let me give you an example of where this might happen in a human.
There was an experiment they did in a library where there was a line for people to use the Xerox machine,
a copying machine.
And what they did was have certain people come over, other students,
and train them such that they would come up to the front of this line,
and the person next in line waiting to use the machine,
and they would say, excuse me, I have five pages.
May I use the Xerox machine?
Because I'm in a rush.
Rather nicely, 94% of the people would allow this person to cut in line in front of them,
and use the machine.
However, if they left off the, because I'm in a rush,
and only asked to use the machine,
they only got compliance around 60%.
You might say, well, I can understand that.
It's because they gave them a reason.
They said, because I'm in a rush.
But they did one other condition,
and they would come up and say, excuse me, I have five pages.
May I use the Xerox machine?
Because I have to make some copies.
If they did that, they got 93% compliance.
No difference from when they gave a real reason.
I mean, because I have to make some copies.
Well, duh, of course.
Why else would you be in a line to use a copy machine?
So what people are apparently looking for is simply the word because.
They don't analyze it carefully.
Say, is this a valid reason?
It's a sign stimulus.
They said because, and so they must have a good reason to do this.
So it's set off a fixed action pattern of compliance,
okay, well, you can use the machine then.
So Cialdini says that we have all sorts of cases like this
where we are, we have just too much information to process out there.
So we use these shortcuts, these heuristics,
and it may even be at the level of having a sign stimulus.
It sets off a fixed action pattern
that we cannot modify very easily.
Now, he then goes on to say that there are
at least six of these triggering mechanisms that are very powerful.
And I'm going to talk about those six mechanisms
and some of the research that supports those mechanisms.
We're going to talk about one of those mechanisms
in the rest of the lecture today.
But before I get there, I want to describe a situation
that I have been in, much like Cialdini did in his situations,
because I applied for some jobs too back when I was in college
and needed some money in the summer.
I applied for some different jobs.
I remember going on a training session for girl years in psychopedia.
In fact, I didn't like that one at all.
Applied for another one and went for a training run
for this particular sales job.
Let me describe this for you, because I will then come back
in the rest of this lecture and in the next lecture
and try to link up some of these triggering mechanisms
with what they were teaching me to do in this sales situation.
I showed up, they told me to dress in a coat and tie,
look nice, get my hair cut,
and I showed up for this kind of thing,
and they paired me up with a fellow who took me out
on one of their house calls.
And what we were doing is trying to sell DECA record players.
This is back in the days of record players.
And this is back in the days where record players,
in fact, were in consoles that were fairly nice pieces of furniture.
And DECA, the story was that DECA was just trying to get into
the record player business, that they had been a name in making records,
but they were trying to get into this business.
And so what we did was load up this record player
and go off to this house.
Now, they had made an appointment for us at this house
and guaranteed that people, that if they kept this appointment with us,
that they would get a free gift.
So we took the record player, came up, knocked on their door,
and when they opened the door, we handed them a free woman's shaver,
so shaving her legs and that sort of thing,
which probably cost the company eight bucks or something like that,
presented that to them as a gift to them
for allowing us to be able to come into their home.
We then took the record player in, set it up,
handed them some records to sort through,
to pick records that they would like.
We complimented them on their home, how nice it looked,
the place it was, how well decorated it was,
and complimented them on the records that they were picking.
Oh, that's a fine record.
We'll put that on so you can listen to it.
We, meanwhile, plugged the machine in,
sat down and said,
now, doesn't this machine really look nice in your house?
Wouldn't you like to have a machine like that,
and waited for them to say yes?
And wouldn't you like to have a machine like this in your house?
And don't those records sound good?
Guys, it just makes this room come alive, doesn't it?
Yes, it does, they say, and they say yes over and over again.
It's part of one thing that we're looking for.
And then we go into our little spiel saying,
now, this is a record player,
and Decker's trying to get into the record player business,
and we're pretty new with this kind of thing,
so what we want to do is try to get record players placed in the community
in certain nice homes like your home.
And in order to do this,
we're going to give you a special deal on this,
because we're not going to ask you to pay us any money for this record player.
What we want you to do is give us names of other people,
you know, in the community,
who will allow us to come into their homes
and demonstrate this record player for them.
And maybe we can place some of these into their homes as well.
And we will give them a free gift like we did you.
And for everybody who agrees to allow us to come into their home,
we will give you credit for that person's name.
And if you come up with only 27 people
who will allow us to come into their home,
this record player is absolutely free for you.
Now, surely you have 27 friends, don't you?
Of course you have 27 friends.
In fact, let's start making up a list.
We can put a few folks down here right now.
So if you were going to make up a list of people we would call
and try to make an appointment with, who would be on that list?
Oh, John Jones. Okay, we'll write John Jones here.
Well, who else?
Mary Smith? Okay, we'll put Mary Smith down here.
And we did that for a while.
See, you already have five, six, seven people here on your list.
You're well on your way to having this free record player in your home.
If you sit and think for a while, surely in another hour or so,
you could come up with 27 people
who would allow us to come into their homes
and demonstrate this record player for them.
Okay, so that's what we did.
Then we tried to get them to sign the contract, of course.
In this particular case, there was a...
the fellow was an old truck driver,
and he was sitting there,
and at the end he sort of broke up our sales pitch and said,
well, I suppose I don't get any names.
What's this thing going to cost me?
He said, well, surely you'll come up with 27...
No, not.
Suppose I don't get any names.
What's this thing going to cost me?
He said, well, it says here in the contract it cost $275.
Now, this was a number of years ago.
In today's dollars, we're talking $1,500 or something like that
for this record player,
which was way overpriced for the record player.
In this case, they didn't go for the deal,
and we had to take the record player back.
Now, another thing, at the end, we said,
by the way, if you sign the contract today,
you can keep this record player right here in your home.
If you don't do that, this is our last record player,
and we have to make some other calls,
and we're not sure when we can get another one in.
It might be a week or two
before you could even get a record player in that case.
Those are the components of the thing.
Now, I'm going to refer back to those things
as we go through these various triggering mechanisms
and try to identify how these triggering mechanisms
were used in that little story.
Let's move on to the first triggering mechanism,
which is called reciprocation,
and this is a powerful tendency to owe favors
to others who've done things for us.
Now, we've talked about this a little bit
in this course already.
We've talked about reciprocal altruism,
in fact, at several points in the course.
You'll recall that when we talked about emotions,
we talked about some moral emotions
that were based upon reciprocal altruism.
So we already know that reciprocity
is an important possible triggering mechanism
and probably built into us
because our ancestors' survival
depended upon a sharing of limited resources.
And even today, we're quite good at keeping score
on to whom we owe favors
and who owes us favors.
We're good at recognizing people's faces,
remembering what they did for us
and remembering what we need to do for them.
And there are several pieces of research
that point up to reciprocation as being important.
In one case, this person sent out about 100 Christmas cards.
Suppose you sent out 100 Christmas cards
to people you didn't even know.
What kind of response do you think you would get?
Would everybody ignore you?
In fact, if you put a return address on it,
lots and lots of folks send you back Christmas cards.
They have this sort of need to reciprocate,
and they seldom will say,
well, who are you?
Why did you send me a Christmas card
on their return Christmas card?
They'll just assume you've done something nice,
sent them a Christmas card, they ought to reciprocate.
Very powerful kind of mechanism here.
Let me describe a little experiment that they did.
They brought some folks in and told them
that they were going to have to judge some artwork,
kind of an art appreciation kind of thing.
And the two subjects did a little bit of that,
and then were asked to wait for a time-out period
of 10 minutes in the waiting room.
And meanwhile, one of the subjects got out,
left the room and came back with two cokes
and said, the experimenter told me I could go get a coke,
so I got you one while I was out there.
Here, have a coke.
Well, I thank you, that's very nice of you.
Then they went on and finished the rest of the experiment.
Now, at the end of the experiment,
the fellow who went to get the coke,
who in this case is another Confederate,
like we've talked about previously,
would say, by the way, I'm selling raffle tickets for a car.
These raffle tickets are 25 cents apiece,
and the more tickets I sell,
the more chance I have of winning a prize myself.
So how many of these tickets would you be interested in buying from me?
And then the person would buy as many tickets,
and that was the dependent measure.
How many tickets would the person buy if they were given the coke
or in a second condition where they were not given a coke first?
So the coke puts them into a reciprocal kind of situation
of having to do something good for the other person.
And it turns out that in this case,
that the person who was given the coke
would buy twice as many tickets as the other person.
And in fact, this is back in the days where coques cost 10 cents,
and so the person would buy 50 cents worth of tickets
rather than 25 cents worth of tickets.
So there was considerable leverage in this case
from the reciprocation.
I'll give you another everyday practical example of this.
It doesn't happen quite so much anymore,
but the Hare Krishna Society was having a difficult time
getting enough money to support their religious activities.
You may remember the Hare Krishna's is wearing robes around
and shaving their heads and dressing in a rather unusual manner
and dancing and singing and so forth.
And they would ask people for money,
and people were not very forthcoming with money.
So they devised a technique where they would buy flowers,
and they would appear at an airport or something like that,
and you're walking through the airport,
and this person walks up to you and hands you a flower
and say, well, thank you.
Why did you give me that?
Oh, we're just, this is a present for you.
Just a flower to make your day brighter.
Oh, well, thank you.
That's very nice of you.
And by the way, we're also trying to collect some money
for our society.
Would you be interested in making a contribution?
Oh, well, no, here's your flowerback.
No, that flower is for you.
That's a gift to you.
Oh, well, okay, here's a couple of bucks.
And walk on down the hall and throw the flower in the trash can
and get on my plane.
I didn't want a flower before I was going to get on my plane
to begin with.
And the folks in the Hare Krishna Society knew that,
and they follow folks down the hallway,
pick the flowers up out of the trash can,
take them back and reuse them as well.
Now, what they did here,
they discovered this very nice little mechanism.
I give you a present, and you feel obligated to reciprocate some.
Even if you didn't want the present,
you feel obligated to reciprocate.
Even if you don't like the person.
In the previous study I talked about with the Coke.
They asked the people whether they liked the other person
who had brought them the Coke.
And even if they said they didn't like them,
they were just as likely to reciprocate.
So it's a very powerful kind of thing.
We feel it necessary to reciprocate,
or else we feel guilty.
People feel like they owe you something
if you do something for them.
And in fact, this is so powerful
that you can even use it
when you don't give somebody something.
Imagine this.
Somebody comes up to you,
as they did to students on this particular campus,
and said,
we're the member of a counseling,
county counseling society,
and we have juvenile delinquent kids
that we're trying to help.
And we would like for you to be a big brother,
big sister to a child,
and spend two hours a week
for the next two years with this child.
Could you do that for us?
Would you be interested in doing that for us?
And the typical person,
only 17% would agree to that.
And they,
which is not surprising, I think.
It's a big, big commitment.
They generally say, no, no, no, I'm sorry.
I can't do that. I'm too busy.
Well, I'm sorry you can't do that.
But we do have another opportunity as well.
We're having a trip to the zoo
for juvenile delinquent kids this Saturday.
And we need some chaperones
to chaperone a group of juvenile delinquent kids
around the zoo.
Could you do that for us just two hours on Saturday?
Oh, well, okay.
I guess I can do that for you.
A much higher percent said they could do that for them
than if they didn't first ask the question
about being a big brother or big sister.
All right?
The fact that they turned down the first offer
made them feel like they had to reciprocate
because they couldn't comply with the first offer
and it made them more likely to comply with the second offer.
Even though nothing had ever been given to them.
So this is a case of the power of reciprocation
even when you do not give somebody something else.
So this is the first of these kind of fixed action patterns
that can be set off by triggering mechanism
and reciprocation is a very powerful kind of mechanism.
So what we've done today,
we introduced the topic of social psychology,
gave you sort of the three sub-areas of social psychology
and gave you an example of an experiment
associated with two of those areas.
And then we went off on a third of those areas
having to do with influence and persuasion
and have just begun to talk about one of six possible
triggering mechanisms for trying to influence people.
In the next lecture, we'll talk about the other five
of those triggering mechanisms.
Thank you.
