Lecture 24 Social Psychology, Additional Mechanisms
This lecture is the second in a series of two lectures on social psychology.
Last time, if you'll recall, we talked about social psychology in sort of the three major sub-areas of social psychology.
And then we said that we were going to spend most of our time talking about just one of those areas,
and that has to do with persuasion and influence.
And in order to do that, we are referring extensively to a book by Robert Cialdini that talks about influence
and talks about it not only in terms of its scientific basis, but in terms of its practical basis in the real world.
And he uses a lot of examples from the real world.
And if you'll recall, what we said last time is that he proposes that there are certain triggering mechanisms.
There are six in particular that he proposes as being very strong triggering mechanisms
as much as a sign stimulus and set off fixed action patterns in people.
And that we do this because we have a limited cognitive resource, if you will.
So we don't like to think about things.
In fact, we don't have the opportunity, we don't have the energy and the time to think about every little problem that comes along.
So we use shortcuts or heuristics in order to do this, and that's what these triggering mechanisms are.
And then last time I told a little story of my own about a sales experience I had with record players,
and I'm going to refer to that story again in today's lecture as well.
And then we talked some about reciprocation or reciprocity as the first of these triggering mechanisms.
And I'm not sure I did it at the end of that lecture, but I would like to talk about reciprocation just for a minute more
and refer it back to the story I told.
If you'll recall with reciprocation what we do is we feel obligated to respond when somebody else gives us something
or provides a service for us.
And in the case of the story I told with my sales experience, I think there's a very obvious one,
and that is we gave them a little gift at the beginning of our home call there.
We gave them a woman's shaver.
And that gift should have made them feel obligated to respond in a particular way and perhaps by our product.
So that's reciprocation.
Today we're going to talk about several other, the other five of these triggering mechanisms.
The first of these is commitment and consistency.
So we'll talk about that.
Social proof, which is being led by other people to demonstrate how we should act.
Another one is liking the fact that people do things for those that they like.
Authority, where those in authority tend to be able to get people to do things.
And finally scarcity, when there's a scarcity of a particular product or service, people are more likely to want it.
So we're going to go through and talk about those five additional triggering mechanisms
and talk about some of the research and also some of the practical implications of these mechanisms.
So the first of these is commitment and consistency.
And this is simply the tendency to behave consistently once you've made a commitment of some sort.
There's a corollary to that is that you are even more likely to behave that way
if the commitment is a public commitment instead of just a private commitment.
Let me give an example of that from a race track where there are people betting on horses.
In this particular study what they did was follow people around at the race track
who were about to bet on horses, ask them who they were going to bet on
and how confident they were that this horse would win.
And what they discovered is that they were not real confident prior to the bet.
But once they'd gone up to the betting window and placed their bet afterwards,
if they asked them the same question, maybe it's a minute later,
and they are far more confident now that this horse is going to win.
Why is that? Well, it's fairly obvious.
They made a commitment by buying a ticket for this horse to win.
And so now, keeping in line with that, they increased their confidence
that this is going to be a proper decision.
In social psychology, this is also sometimes called cognitive dissonance,
that once we have done the cognitive calculation and made a commitment for something,
if we are now behaving in a way different from that, it causes cognitive dissonance,
an unpleasant feeling in us until we got our behavior in line with the particular commitment that we've made.
Now, this has been used even before people knew much about this scientifically.
People were aware in the practical sense of commitment and consistency.
The Chinese who ran prisoner of war camps during the Korean War used this extensively.
Up until this time, prisoners of war were generally mistreated.
If you go back to the Second World War, for example, prisoners tended to be much more mistreated,
but the Chinese decided on a different kind of policy.
And so they did not physically mistreat the prisoners of war.
But what they did was try to get them to make statements about their beliefs.
And they might start out very small, for example, to say something like,
do you think that the United States is always right?
Well, of course, people, I don't think that the United States is always right.
I think any rational person would think that perhaps there are some errors made sometimes.
Well, how do you think that they're not always right?
And what ways do you think that they're not always right?
And once they say, well, there are two or three things,
well, what we'd like for you to do is write that down, if you will.
And so put down the ways that you think perhaps the United States is not always right.
And so they would write that down.
And then they would perhaps a week later ask them to elaborate on this list a little bit
until they could finally write a whole essay about what was wrong with the United States.
Now, you might think that this would not be that effective.
And in fact, they didn't even have to go that far.
In some cases, they could give them material that they had written about the United States
and about communism and simply have them copy down this material.
And the act of copying it down, once it's in their own handwriting and they can see it
and they put it down there, that in some respects, even if they were coerced into doing this,
is a commitment on their part.
And they have to get their behavior and their beliefs in line with this commitment
that they've made by writing it down.
And so the upshot of this during the Korean War
was that people were very much astounded that these former soldiers
who had been trained to give only their rank, name and serial number
were writing this propaganda that was anti-American.
And people said, how could they do this to our soldiers
who are trained not to respond to this kind of thing?
But it was these very simple procedures based upon commitment and consistency.
Once they made a commitment, they had to somehow get their beliefs and behavior in line with it.
So that's one example of commitment and consistency.
Let me give you a couple of others here.
Toy stores do an interesting kind of thing around Christmas time.
Part of the problem that toy stores have is that they don't get much sales in January and February.
People have spent all their money on Christmas presents in December
and then they have this tremendous lag in January and February.
Well, if you've ever tried to buy a present for your child in December,
you may discover that a very heavily advertised toy in a very popular toy
is understocked at the toy store when you go in to buy it in December.
So what happens is your kid is watching TV,
Dad, Dad, I'd really like to have this toy.
Okay, well, that looks like a reasonable toy.
We'll get you that for Christmas.
Dad goes to the toy store.
It's out of stock, sir, I'm sorry.
Well, he's got to buy something for Christmas, so he buys something of equal value
and then presents that at Christmas time.
And then come January, they start advertising this understock toy again,
and the kid says, Dad, you promised that you would buy me this toy.
He's saying, you made a commitment to me,
and now I expect you to be consistent and follow up on this commitment.
Say, oh, well, guys, yeah, I did.
So you go back to the toy store in January,
which is what they were trying to get you to do,
to buy this toy that you couldn't get during Christmas.
And the toy stores don't make mistakes about this.
This is a kind of a national policy that toy companies use to try to get people
to buy toys in January and February.
Hung juries, they've studied jury behavior.
And one of the best ways to get a hung jury,
that is a jury that can't reach a decision,
is very early in the deliberations once they get into the jury room
to have the foreman say, OK, let's have a vote.
Everybody who's in favor of guilty, hold up your hand.
Everybody who's in favor of innocent, hold up your hand.
And now you have, depending on the size of the jury,
you have seven people who think that it's guilt
and you have five people who think that it's innocent.
And the problem is, you have just asked them to make a public commitment.
They held up their hand.
Now they got to stick by their story and get their behavior and their beliefs
in line with the commitment they just made.
As opposed to saying, let's take a straw vote.
I'm going to pass around some slips of paper
and just write down guilty or innocent.
You can get the same effect.
And in this case, they don't have to make a public commitment.
And in that case, they are much more likely to at least have a possibility
of changing their opinion once they get into deliberations.
Another example of this is programs that do things like weight reduction
and smoking secession.
One of the typical kinds of things that you have people do in these programs
is write down a target weight, let's say.
You come in, you think you're 15 pounds overweight, subtract 15 pounds,
and you write that down on a slip of paper.
You act of writing it down itself as a commitment.
And what is even more effective is if you not only write it down so that you can see it,
but you stand up in front of the group and tell them what your target weight is.
You've now made an even public commitment to it,
and your behavior is more likely to follow in this case.
Let me give you just one more practical example.
I once went into to buy a card, a new car dealership,
and I knew exactly what I wanted to get,
and I negotiated with the salesperson,
and I knew kind of what the car cost them,
and so we negotiated down to a particular deal,
and I even recall he had me write down the number
and say, I will offer you this amount for this car.
And I thought the deal was done.
He said, oh, that's great.
Now, let's start filling out the paperwork for the car,
and so I started filling out the forms,
a sort of public commitment, writing it down,
and after we had that pretty well done,
he said, now I'm going to go just check with the sales manager
and make sure we can sell you the car for this price.
And so he took it into the sales manager.
I waited about three minutes.
He came back out with kind of a sheepish look on his face
and handed me a slip of paper from the sales manager,
who I'd never seen yet, and said, come on, Mr. Martin,
you know we can't sell the car for this.
We'd lose $400 if we sold you the car for this.
How about this price?
And now I'm into a negotiation
that I didn't even know I was going to be in,
and so I'm expected now to make a counter offer.
In fact, I didn't.
I stuck with my offer, and I bought the car for that offer,
but it was a very strong feeling now
because I had made a commitment to buy the car.
In my mind, it was already my car.
I was thinking of how it would look in my garage
and driving down the street with it.
I'd filled out the paperwork.
I was committed to it.
It was my car at that point.
And so now we're just talking about the details.
They may do that with your trade-in value
or something like that as well,
where you agree on the deal,
and then the person takes your trade-in car out
for a test drive and comes back and says,
we really can't offer you what the salesman told you
for that car.
We'll give you full Blue Book value for it, though,
and that's only $400 less.
Well, again, you've made the commitment,
and you buy the car.
And again, they're not doing this
by making mistakes and errors.
They're doing this as a strategy.
So that's commitment and consistency.
Again, one of those triggering mechanisms,
once they push the right button,
click and whir, and your fixed-action pattern
comes off just like they expect.
Let's talk about another one, social proof.
Social proof just basically says that
you do what other people do,
and other people's behavior tells you what's appropriate to do.
So you behave in the same way that they're behaving.
A practical example of that is laugh tracks
on television shows.
If I asked you,
do you like those laugh tracks on television?
You say, no, I don't like those.
In fact, if you ask lots of people,
they say, no, I hate laugh tracks.
They insult me.
They make me think that because they're turning up
and down a laugh track on a machine,
and yet they continue to keep those laugh tracks on there,
and they do it for very good reasons.
It's a triggering mechanism.
If everybody else is laughing at it, it must be funny.
In fact, they'll even put more of the laugh on the lamest jokes
in order to get people to think those are particularly funny.
And they know that this is a way of leading you
to believe that you should be laughing as well.
I mean, you're not thinking about this consciously.
This is one of those triggering mechanisms again.
You may have heard about the case of Catherine Genovese.
Catherine Genovese, back in the 1960s, I believe it was 1964,
was living in Queens, New York,
and was coming home from work one day,
and as she was approaching the apartment where she lived,
she was attacked by somebody, a knife-wielding fellow,
and he attacked her and stabbed her once or twice,
and she started screaming and yelling,
and people in the surrounding apartments came to their windows,
turned on their lights, looked out,
and the fellow who was attacking her got scared away and ran away,
and she was lying there and couldn't move because she had been stabbed,
and then the people started turning off their lights,
and the fellow came back again ten minutes later
and started stabbing her again,
and she started screaming and yelling,
and people came to their windows and the fellow ran away again,
and then he came back about ten minutes later
and started stabbing her again and finally killed her,
and this took about 35 minutes for the entire act to take place.
And it was pretty much ignored when it originally happened.
There was a little tiny piece in the paper,
but a week later, a reporter was interviewing the police chief in New York,
and he thought the reporter and the police chief were talking about different cases,
and the police chief started talking about this Catherine Genovese case
and said, you know, I just don't understand what happened there
because we've discovered that there were 38 people
who were witnesses to this thing and nobody called the police,
and we don't understand why that is.
And so the upshot of this, the reporter knew a story when he heard it,
and so he now reported this,
and it became part of the popular culture,
and people were then trying to figure out why this happened,
and the whole idea of apathy,
our society has now gone apathetic,
particularly in the big cities and there are problems like this.
Well, some researchers got ahold of this,
and they discovered that it wasn't really just general apathy,
that in fact people were apparently going on each other's behavior.
Nobody was calling the police.
They didn't call the police.
Nobody seemed to be particularly upset,
and so they started to act like other people through social proof.
There are a couple of researchers,
Bibb Latinay and John Darley,
who decided to make a research career out of this.
This was in the late 1960s that they did most of their research,
and what they did was study bystander apathy,
and they tried to find the conditions under which people will and will not help,
and they would sage particular kinds of things.
Somebody falls down on the street, is lying there unconscious,
will people stop and help this person,
or smoke is coming out from under a door,
will people report seeing the smoke come out from under the door,
and under what conditions will they do it?
And what they found is the very counter-intuitive notion
that the more people are around,
the less people are likely to report this.
Sounds like you would be safe in crowds.
The rule is that you're less safe in crowds.
The condition under which you are most likely to have somebody help
is if there's one other person around,
that person then takes responsibility for it
and stops and tries to help in some way.
So this whole notion, they're doing it through social proof.
As they look around and see how other people are reacting to the situation,
they say, well, those people must know something that I don't know,
or who am I to do something different from those other people.
But if they're the only one there, they are more likely to actually help.
So this was a general finding and surprised a lot of people.
Let me just talk about one other thing under social proof here,
and that's a topic of suicide.
When a famous person commits suicide and it's reported in the paper,
rather surprisingly, people have looked at figures
and discovered that other people commit suicide.
In fact, once this is reported in the paper,
in the next week, nationally, there are 35 additional suicides
for a particular suicide that was reported in the paper.
Each suicide begets, in the next week alone,
35 additional suicides, and even more in the next month.
If you look at the figure on this,
people, for the next month, the increased frequency is there as well.
And apparently what people are doing is social proof.
If this person committed suicide, it must be all right to commit suicide.
Perhaps even more surprisingly,
not only are suicides increased by this report of a suicide,
but automobile accidents increase,
and even commercial airline deaths increase.
And people have hypothesized various things to explain this,
like, well, people are sad and they're more depressed and so forth.
But after looking at this in some detail,
the researchers who have studied this
have concluded that it's not that they're more depressed or anything like that.
It, in fact, is the case that these other people are committing suicide by automobile
or even by airplane that the pilot is committing suicide
as a copycat kind of suicide.
And this, again, is an example of social proof.
So that's another triggering mechanism.
Let's move on to the one that's called liking.
And I'm not going to spend much time on this.
It's a fairly obvious one.
If we like the person who's trying to get us to do something,
we are more likely to do that thing that the person is trying to get us to do.
Tupperware parties are a good example of this.
Tupperware discovered very early that if they get people to hold Tupperware parties
and invite their friends to those parties,
they will sell more product than if they try to sell them in stores.
And the major reason is they use the other triggering mechanisms as well.
They give out little gifts at the beginning of it for reciprocity.
They get people to stand up and say how well they like the product.
That's a commitment and consistency,
or that social proof and commitment and consistency.
But the major factor here is liking,
because they get somebody who's a friend of yours to give the party.
And if you like this person, you're more likely to buy the product.
And they have found that to be an extremely successful way of doing it.
Amway also uses this kind of procedure as well,
where you are buying from a friend.
We also know that physical attractiveness,
that you are more likely to like somebody who's physically attractive.
And if you look at, there was a study that they did in Canada,
where they looked at candidates for political office in Canada.
And they rated them on how attractive those candidates were.
And they discovered that the attractive candidates
were two and a half times more likely to get people's votes
than people who were not so attractive.
And yet when they interviewed the people who voted,
73% of those people said,
no, no, that had nothing to do with my vote.
And yet it lined up very nicely with their attractiveness.
Defendants in court proceedings.
Attractive defendants tend to get lighter sentences than other folks do.
It's no mystery why defense attorneys try to clean up their clients.
You'll see somebody who's arrested and come in looking disheveled
and the hair is long and they've got facial growth on the,
they've got a beard and their clothes look terrible.
And then you see them show up in court.
It looks like they just came from the stylist,
the barber shop, with a nice suit on and that sort of thing.
They dress them up so people will like them.
They know that people get lighter sentences in that case.
Hippies and straights.
In fact, back in the 1970s,
they had people asking for money from somebody, just a dime.
And they discovered that if somebody who was dressed up as a hippie
walked up to another hippie and asked for money,
they were far more likely to get it.
Or if a straight walked up to another straight
and they were far more likely to get it
than when they were at cross purposes.
So all of this has to do with liking, attractiveness,
people who are like us as well.
We tend to do things for people who like us.
Authority.
This is an extremely strong one.
Those in authority tend to be able to get people to do something for them.
There's a classic experiment in psychology
done by a fellow named Stanley Milgram,
back in shortly after the war,
the Second World War in this case,
where they were worried about the fact,
how did in the German army,
how did they get these people to behave in such a way
that the holocaust happened?
How did they get them to do that?
Was it just because they're a commanding officer
told them to behave in this way?
And so what Milgram did was set up an experiment
at Yale University where he would bring people in
and he would bring two people in at a time
who answered an ad in the newspaper.
And he would say,
okay, now we're doing an experiment on memory here
and we want you to learn pairs of words.
And one of you is going to be the learner
and one of you is going to be the teacher.
And he flipped a coin and one person was selected to be the learner
and put into a room and the learner sat there
and was put into a device
that could administer an electrical shock to the person.
And then the teacher went into the next room
and the teacher was told to read a word
and wait for the response
and if the response was the wrong one to flip a switch,
which would administer a shock to the learner.
And in front of the teacher was a panel
with a whole bunch of switches.
I believe there were 30 of them starting out at 15 volts
and going up to 450 volts and eventually XXX
and it was labeled severely dangerous at the top
of the panel of switches.
And so the experiment began,
the experimenter standing behind the teacher
to make sure he was doing this properly.
And so the learner would miss a word
and the teacher would give him a shock.
And then as this went on up through about 100,
the learner would start to moan a little bit
every time he got a shock at 100.
He'd say, ouch, that hurts.
Don't do that anymore.
Yeah, I have a heart condition.
And then up around 200,
the learner would start to scream and yell
and say, I don't want to do this anymore.
Get me out of here.
I'm not going to do this anymore.
And then as he went on further, he would scream,
stop, I'm not even going to answer the questions anymore.
And then he'd be silent for the rest of the time.
He was banging on the wall and other kinds of things.
And the question is, how far would somebody go
in terms of giving the shock?
People predicted that maybe only 2% or 3% of the people
would go all the way to the top in giving the shock.
And the amazing finding was
that almost 2 thirds of the people,
between 60 and 65% of the people,
depending upon the condition,
would shock them all the way to the end.
Now, the learner, to ease your mind,
was not getting any shocks at all.
This was all set up so that the person
was the teacher, was the one being tested
to see how far he would go,
how long he would obey authority.
And it was discovered that you could get somebody to do this.
And the authority may have been Yale University,
although they also ran it outside of Yale University
at a much more rundown kind of research laboratory.
They still got 50% of the people to comply.
They could get fewer people to comply
if they had to be in the same room
with the person they were shocking.
And to hold their hand down on the shocking apparatus,
that would get them to comply a little bit less,
but still a lot of people did this.
Or if you removed the experimenter from the room
and he was just talking by the telephone,
they would shock a little less frequently as well.
And most strongly, if you had other people in the room
who refused to do it,
then the person would also refuse to do it.
But now we're getting back into social proof here.
So that's authority.
There are other ways of looking at authority too.
It's one of the reasons I don't use doctor in front of my name
under usual social events,
because I don't want people treating me like I'm doctor somebody.
People rate their professors as being taller than other people
because professors tend to have some authority to them.
The kind of clothes that you wear make a difference.
People will honk their horns less at luxury cars than rundown cars.
All sorts of reasons are shown for authority.
Scarcity is the last of these,
and I don't want to spend much time on this.
If an item is scarce, people are more likely to buy it.
You may have noticed that auctions,
the auctioneer will often hold up one item and say,
now what am I bid for this and he'll get the price up
and then he'll find a lot of these items
where he can pull them out and sell them to everybody
at that particular price.
If it's only one, people will bid higher for them.
This last year, the flu shots ran out
and people were standing in line for long periods of time
for flu shots because they were now very scarce.
That's an example of scarcity.
As we go back to my original example from the sales kind of thing,
let's very quickly go into where we got commitment and consistency.
Commitment and consistency,
we got by having them pick out the records, for example.
That was kind of a commitment.
We tried to build a yes tree. Doesn't that sound good?
Wouldn't you like to have this? Yes, yes, yes.
Where eventually they'll have to say yes to the big question,
will you buy this from us?
Social proof, well, your friends recommended you for this
and they're very happy with their product,
so they already bought it.
Liking, we tried to be nice.
We tried to dress well for authority.
We tried to portray some sense of authority.
And if you recall at the end,
we also said that we will give you this record player right now,
but you might have to wait a couple of weeks
if you don't take the deal right now,
so there's some scarcity as well.
So we used all of these kind of triggering mechanisms
in that sales call.
So what we've done in the last two lectures
is look at one little piece of social psychology
having to do with influence and persuasion.
And we've gone through six triggering mechanisms
that might influence people
and get them to behave the way we want them to behave.
Thank you.
