These lectures are part of the Great Courses series they are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled Psychology of Human Behavior, Part 3.
Uptr. 25, Simple Learning, Classical Conditioning.
This lecture will be the first of a three lecture sequence on learning.
Learning is an extremely important topic in psychology.
For about 50 years or so, it was the major topic in psychology.
So let me go back a minute and just remind you of the history of psychology
that we talked about a little bit in an earlier lecture.
You will recall that about 100 years ago, behaviorism took over psychology
and was the major paradigm in psychology.
John Watson, who is kind of the father of behaviorism, came along and proposed that
we were essentially blank slates, a notion that had been around for many centuries,
and that if we were blank slates, then all that we are is what we learn during our lives.
If there is nothing built in, after all, then we are a product of our sensory experiences
and our environment, and this blank slate is written on by our experiences and environment.
And that's just another way of saying that learning takes place and we become who we are
because of learning.
And if that's the case, then learning is the primary thing that you should study in psychology.
And that was really the position of the behaviorists.
So what we're going to talk about today is one simple form of learning, classical conditioning.
And we're going to talk about the concepts in classical conditioning, some of the details
and the terms, the conditions under which classical conditioning takes place.
We're going to talk about the time course of events with classical conditioning.
And we're going to talk about stimulus generalization and discrimination,
which are concepts in classical conditioning.
And finally, we will talk a little bit about behavior therapies and remind you how classical conditioning
is used in behavior therapies and also how some of the principles of classical conditioning
can be violated and you can still have learning take place.
In subsequent lectures, the lecture following this one, we're going to talk about operant conditioning,
which is another simple form of learning and talk about the conditions under which operant conditioning occurs.
And in the third lecture in this series, we're going to talk about more complex forms of learning,
things like concept formation, the learning of language,
and ask the question, can complex learning be built up out of the simple building blocks
of simple learning, like classical and operant conditioning?
So that's where we're going to go over this three lecture series.
And today, we're going to talk about classical conditioning.
You may recall that we talked about classical conditioning when we were talking about behavior therapies,
and I gave you a brief introduction to it at that point.
Today, I want to go into much greater detail about classical conditioning.
And I want to start by telling you a story of Ivan Pavlov.
Pavlov was a Russian physiologist, not a psychologist.
He denied to the end that he was a psychologist,
even after he became one of the most famous psychologists in the world.
He denied that he was a psychologist.
He lived from the mid-1800s until 1936,
and did most of his work around the 1910 and thereafter, at least as psychology work.
He did very good physiology work as well.
In fact, he won the Nobel Prize for his physiology of digestion.
Well, the story goes something like this,
and it depends who you listen to to know the various details of the story.
But he was interested, as I say, in the physiology of digestion,
and part of that has to do with the production of saliva.
And so he did his research on dogs,
and he would fisculate dogs,
put a fiscula into their salivary gland,
and from this, it's like a little tube,
he could collect saliva samples from the dog.
In order to get the dog to produce saliva,
he would blow meat powder into the dog's mouth.
So the dog had another tube that went into its mouth,
and meat powder could be blown in there with a little puff of air.
And this all worked very nicely until one day,
so the story goes, the equipment malfunctioned.
Perhaps somebody forgot to fill the meat powder container,
or perhaps the equipment somehow otherwise malfunctioned.
But they didn't notice it right away,
because what would happen is that the equipment would click and whir,
as it usually did, and blow the puff of air into the dog's mouth,
and yet there was no meat powder,
and the dog would produce saliva.
And the dog would do this for a period of time,
and then the drops of saliva generally decreased and decreased
until the dog wasn't doing that, and they checked the equipment,
and they discovered that the meat powder had not been delivered
reliably to the dog.
Now most of us would say, oh, I'm having a bad day,
guys, why does this always happen to me?
Fill up the meat powder container,
let's get on with our research.
Pavlov didn't do that in a very serendipitous way.
He said, wait a minute, isn't this interesting?
The dog was producing saliva when there was no reason to produce saliva.
The dog wasn't getting the meat powder anymore.
Something must be going on here, some sort of learning.
The dog must have learned to associate the click and whir of the equipment
and produce saliva.
And this was the first notion of the idea of classical conditioning.
Now it's probably unfortunate that it's called classical conditioning,
because that doesn't tell you very much about what's going on here.
It's sort of like classical music, what exactly does that mean?
But it is the term that's used for it, so I will use it here.
And so what Pavlov in his subsequent career did
was try to find out the various details of classical conditioning,
what makes it occur, what's the timing of events,
what kind of stimulus can you use, and so forth.
And the way you've probably heard of Pavlov beyond this
is the ringing of a bell instead of the click and whir of the meat powder.
So I may switch to talking about the ringing of a bell instead,
because that's what most people associate with Pavlov.
In classical conditioning, then, what we have is we have a previously neutral stimulus,
in this case the bell or the equipment noise,
and it's paired in time with another stimulus,
a stimulus that does bring about a particular response,
and in this case it would be the meat powder,
and that then that automatically evokes the response.
And then the unconditioned stimulus comes to bring about the response
after it's repeatedly paired with the conditioned stimulus.
Let me give you those terms.
The conditioned stimulus is a stimulus that is previously neutral,
for which there's no response.
The conditioned response is the response that's given to the conditioned stimulus.
The unconditioned stimulus is the stimulus that automatically brings about the response
and the unconditioned response is that response to the unconditioned stimulus.
So in our case here, what's the unconditioned stimulus?
That's the stimulus that automatically brings about the response,
so that would be the meat powder.
Below the meat powder in any dog's mouth, they produce saliva.
You don't have to condition somebody to do that.
And so an unconditioned response occurs in an unconditioned state.
The conditioned stimulus in this case would be the new stimulus that originally does not
bring about the response, the click of the equipment or the ringing of the bell.
You ring a bell for any dog and the dog does not produce saliva.
The day after conditioning does the conditioned response or the conditioned stimulus bring
about the conditioned response.
So those are important terms.
And in order to talk more about those terms, I'm going to give you several other examples
of classical conditioning.
You'll notice with all of these examples that the response is of an involuntary nature.
And usually if you're trying to distinguish between classical conditioning and operant
conditioning, one way to distinguish them is that you're in classical conditioning usually
talking about an involuntary response, something like the production of saliva or fear or skin
conductivity or something like that, as we'll see in these subsequent examples.
Let's take the case of Little Albert, who was a young boy.
This is a case that John Watson was an experiment that he did.
And I remember John Watson as the father of behaviorism.
What he did was take Little Albert, this young boy, and he presented him with a white laboratory
rat.
Now, you might think the kid would be afraid of the rat, but he's not.
It's a cute little animal, actually.
Laboratory rats are these nice little white furry things.
And Little Albert liked this rat.
But John Watson, being kind of a fiend as an experimenter, he presented the white rat
to Little Albert and then came up behind him, and the usual story is told that he slammed
symbols together behind Little Albert, scaring him very badly, and Little Albert started
to cry and show fear.
It wasn't really symbols, it was actually a big iron pipe that they hit with a hammer,
but it produced a very loud noise and scared Little Albert.
And the upshot of it is that after several pairings of this, whenever the white rat was
presented to Albert, he would show fear and crying.
And so classical conditioning has occurred.
What are the various stimuli and responses in this case?
Well, if we want to know what the unconditioned stimulus is, you would ask the question.
In the unconditioned state, what brings about the response?
The response is fear and crying in this case.
The unconditioned stimulus, you'd sneak up behind any kid and produce a loud noise,
and you'll get fear and crying.
So the symbols or the striking of the iron pipe that was loud is the unconditioned stimulus
bringing about the unconditioned response.
The conditioned stimulus in this case is the white rat.
It was previously neutral or actually perhaps slightly positive.
You paired up the white rat with a loud noise, and after a time, the white rat would have
bring about fear and crying.
So the white rat is the conditioned stimulus and brings out about the conditioned response,
which is fear and crying.
The unconditioned and conditioned responses are, for our purposes, not distinguishable.
They're essentially the same kind of thing.
Technically, there are some differences, but I don't want to go into that kind of detail.
Let's take another everyday situation.
You have little Susie and Mom who are home alone, and a lightning storm occurs.
Now little Susie thinks the lightning storm is pretty neat.
It's sort of like fireworks.
She's not afraid of the lightning, but Mom's afraid of the lightning because Uncle Harry
was hit by lightning and killed in their family, and so Mom has always been terrified of lightning
storms.
She's afraid she's going to get hit by lightning.
So Mom starts running around the house sort of screaming and yelling and hiding under
the bed.
Susie gets very upset about this behavior on Mom's part, and we come back five or ten
years later, and there's another lightning storm.
Susie's now older, and we discover that Susie is now terrified of lightning storms as well.
Susie has been classically conditioned in this case.
What's the unconditioned stimulus?
In the unconditioned state, what would it bring about fear and crying in Susie?
Mom's behavior, what?
Mom starts acting weirdly and running around the house and hiding under the bed.
That upsets Susie.
So that's the unconditioned stimulus as Mom's behavior.
The unconditioned response would be fear and crying to Mom's behavior.
The conditioned stimulus would be lightning, which was previously neutral, but has now
been paired up with Mom's behavior, and so now the conditioned stimulus of lightning will
produce fear and crying in Susie, in which case that's the conditioned response.
All right, let's do one more, because I want to refer to this one at a later point in the
lecture, and this is a laboratory experiment.
Suppose you came in as a subject for this experiment, and we hooked you up to an apparatus
that would give you a mild electrical shock.
Now, this is not the kind of shock we were talking about with the Milgram experiment.
This is a shock that's slightly painful, but not particularly painful.
So we hook you up to that apparatus, and then we also hook you up to a galvanic skin response
machine.
This galvanic skin response machine measures the conductivity of the skin.
You may remember in a previous lecture when we talked about the polygraph that they essentially
measure your galvanic skin response.
It's a measure of how aroused you are.
When you're aroused, you tend to conduct electricity a little bit better.
You're in a sweat, and your skin, the characteristics of your skin change.
So we discover that when we put you in this apparatus and shock you, that we will get
a change in the galvanic skin response, indicating that you're somewhat aroused from the shock.
And then what we do is we shock you, but just before we shock you, we sound a thousand hertz
tone.
A thousand hertz tone is a thousand cycles per second.
Sound something like, do, and then we shock you, do, shock you, do, shock you.
And then we sound the tone by itself, do, and we discover we get a change in the galvanic
skin response, much like you had been shocked.
At this point, you've been classically conditioned.
What's the unconditioned stimulus in this case?
Well, in the unconditioned state, what brings about a change in the galvanic skin response?
The shock does.
So that's the unconditioned stimulus, bringing about the change in the galvanic skin response
is the unconditioned response.
We've paired up now the unconditioned stimulus with the thousand hertz tone.
This tone was previously neutral.
If we hadn't conditioned you and just sounded the tone, we would see no change in the galvanic
skin response.
But now after conditioning, we can sound the tone, which is now the conditioned stimulus.
And that brings about the response, the conditioned response of the change in galvanic skin response.
All right, so those are several examples, and those are how you use the terms conditioned
stimulus, unconditioned stimulus.
Now classical conditioning does not typically occur in one trial, but it requires multiple
trials.
And so we can look at what happens with multiple pairings of the conditioned and unconditioned
stimulus, and see what the strength of the conditioned response is with multiple pairings.
So if we have a graph, and on the horizontal axis, we have the number of pairings of the
conditioned and unconditioned stimuli.
And then on the vertical axis, we have the strength of the response.
We can see what happens with pairings of the conditioned and unconditioned stimulus.
So let's go back to Pavlov, and we're pairing up, say, the sound of the bell with the meat
powder.
If we put a dog in the apparatus, and we've never paired them up, so we have zero pairings
on the horizontal axis, and we look at the strength of the response, we're not going
to get any response, no drops of saliva to the bell to begin with.
We now take a dog, and we do it for five pairings.
So we have the conditioned stimulus paired with the unconditioned stimulus for five
times, and we look at what happens on the sixth time, and we discover we do get a response.
Maybe we get five or six drops of saliva in that case.
Take another dog, do 10 pairings, and see what the strength of the response is, and
perhaps we're now getting seven or eight drops of saliva.
Do it for 15 pairings, and we look again, now we're getting perhaps eight or nine drops
of saliva.
So we have a function that starts out rather steeply, and then tends to level off as the
dog is learning the classical conditioning, having the classical conditioning experience.
Now what we call this function is acquisition.
The dog has acquired the response, and so it's also a learning curve, but in classical
conditioning it's called acquisition, this initial increase, and then a flattening off.
And after acquisition has taken place, we can say that classical conditioning has occurred.
Now let's try something different.
At this point, let's no longer pair the conditioned and unconditioned stimuli.
At this point, we will just present the conditioned stimulus by itself a number of times, and
this is the equivalent of what we talked about with Pavlov when the meat powder ran out.
So in this case, we're going to sound the bell repeatedly, the conditioned stimulus,
but not pair it with the meat powder.
And as Pavlov found, what we would expect to have happen here is that the response would
continue for a while, and then would begin to die off and eventually completely die off.
Now die off is a good term because what we call this in classical conditioning is extinction,
which is dying off.
So we can say that extinction has occurred.
By presenting the conditioned stimulus by itself a number of times, the response has
become extinct, or it's also sometimes called it's been extinguished.
So now we're not getting any response anymore, we're back down to zero responses.
Let's let a little time pass, perhaps we take the dog out of the apparatus for 10 minutes,
bring it back in, put it back into the apparatus, and then we ring the bell again.
We present the conditioned stimulus again.
What do you expect would happen?
Rather surprisingly, we get the response again.
It's almost like we're at the end of acquisition and that extinction had never occurred.
So we get a nice full blown response again, perhaps producing seven or eight drops of
saliva to the sound of the bell.
Now if we continue to present the conditioned stimulus by itself a number of times, you'll
get a re-extinction and it will occur even quicker this time.
That recovery of the response is called spontaneous recovery because apparently spontaneously
the response recovered.
And then we can get spontaneous recovery after that as well, but it'll be smaller and smaller
each time.
Now with classical conditioning, there are some other things that you can do as well.
You will discover that the animal or the person is conditioned not only to the conditioned
stimulus, but to stimuli that are similar to the conditioned stimuli.
So we take Little Albert, who is afraid of the white rat.
Little Albert might also be a little bit afraid of white powder puffs and a fellow with a
white beard and become upset a little bit at those.
And what we can say about this is that it's a process called stimulus generalization.
That Little Albert has generalized his fear of the white rat to other white fluffy kinds
of things.
We plotted this where we have the conditioned stimulus on the horizontal part of a graph
and look at the strength of the response.
We'll get a big response to the conditioned stimuli, but if we plot other things that
are similar to the conditioned stimulus, we'll get some response there as well.
Let's go back to the case where we classically conditioned somebody to the shock and to the
tone.
We can have the 1,000 hertz tone, which produces the large response, the change in the galvanic
skin response, and then we can sound other tones as well.
So we sound a 500 hertz tone instead of do, it's do, and we discover we get some response
there as well.
Some change in the galvanic, not as strong as it was for the conditioned stimulus, and
a 2,000 hertz tone, do, and we get some response there and a 10,000 hertz tone and so forth.
So we can plot this, it's kind of a conical function peaking at the conditioned stimulus
but having some strength to stimuli that are similar to it, and that's called stimulus
generalization.
Now there's another process called stimulus discrimination that we can produce, and that's
a narrowing of this conical stimulus generalization function, and in order to produce that what
we would do is continue to present the conditioned stimulus and pair it up with the unconditioned
stimulus, but the other stimuli we would no longer pair with the unconditioned stimulus.
All right, so we sound the 1,000 hertz tone, do, shock, the 500 hertz tone, do, no shock,
the 10,000, or the 2,000 hertz tone, do, no shock, the 1,000 hertz tone, do, shock, and
so forth.
We continue to present a number of different stimuli, but only the conditioned stimulus
do we pair with the unconditioned stimulus.
Under those conditions we will narrow the stimulus generalization function down considerably
to the point where we're now getting mostly responding to the conditioned stimulus and
very little responding to the other stimuli, and when we do this we can say that we've
gone through a process called stimulus discrimination.
The person or animal has learned to discriminate the conditioned stimulus from other stimuli
and has narrowed this function down.
All right, now I want to go back and talk just briefly about behavior therapies that
we discussed in lecture 16, and in that lecture we talked about in particular systematic desensitization.
If you recall what we did in that case was produce a hierarchy of anxiety producing events
and have images of those events, so if a person is claustrophobic we had somebody in a fairly
large room all the way down to somebody in a foot locker going from not very anxiety provoking
to anxiety provoking, and then we would then pair that with a relaxed state.
What we're trying to do there is use classical conditioning to achieve a pairing that will
get rid of the phobia.
Perhaps we should go to the case of the little boy if you recall who was jumped on by a big
dog and scared to death and he developed phytophobia, and in this case what has happened is that
the dog scared the child and the dog is now associated not only the big dog who jumped
on him, but he's also done some stimulus generalization and other dogs are in this generalization
curve as well, and so he has some response to other dogs as well because of stimulus
generalization, and what we want to do in our therapy is get the boy so he's not afraid
of dogs again, and so we do this by subjecting him to classical conditioning, and perhaps
we have him sitting there eating an ice cream cone while we present various dogs to him,
and we systematically desensitize him for other dogs.
Now it's probably alright if he's still afraid of great big vicious dogs, that conditioned
stimulus is probably appropriate for being afraid of, but we don't want him to be afraid
of all dogs, so we in fact put him through what might be considered a discrimination
task where we present all these other kinds of dogs, but make sure we don't pair it up
with the unconditioned stimulus of being attacked by dogs, and so what we've done with
behavior therapy is extinguish his fear of the other dogs, so he has only a fear if
any is left of big vicious dogs.
So that's what we have done in behavior therapies, we've used these principles of classical
conditioning in order to do that.
Alright now this is where I stopped the lecture typically some years ago, but I think it's
important to point out that classical conditioning simply does not explain all of that kind of
learning even.
Let me describe something that happened to me, at one point when I was young and in
high school was very nervous about a particular band tryout I was going to have to do, and
I was home alone and got hungry, and I'd never eaten ravioli, and so I got out a can of ravioli
and ate the whole can of ravioli, and I thought it was pretty good, and so I opened up another
can of ravioli and ate the whole can of ravioli, so I had two cans of ravioli, and it made
me sick.
I thought that that was, I just about 20 minutes, 30 minutes later my stomach hurt, became nauseous,
this was terrible, and to this day I will not go to a restaurant and order ravioli.
That was enough for me, and what's interesting about that is it violates a lot of the principles
of classical conditioning that we just talked about.
For example, I got sick but I didn't get sick for 20 or 30 minutes afterwards, and usually
with classical conditioning we assume or we have to set up conditions where we have the
conditioned stimulus and the unconditioned stimulus paired up closely in time, so we
ring the bell and we present the meat powder.
We don't ring the bell and wait 20 minutes to present the meat powder, if we did that
we would never get classical conditioning under those conditions, and yet in this case
I had the conditioned and unconditioned stimulus separated by 20 or 30 minutes, and yet I became
classically conditioned to now avoid ravioli.
A second principle of classical conditioning that we've apparently violated in this example
is the fact that you typically have to have multiple pairings of the conditioned stimulus
with the unconditioned stimuli, and what we've done here is simply have one pairing.
It happened in one trial, I only ate the ravioli once, I only got sick once, and that was enough
to produce classical conditioning, which again seems to be a bit of a violation of the usual
principles of classical conditioning.
Now, John Garcia who has studied this kind of classical conditioning or this violation
of classical conditioning has done this in the laboratory, my eating ravioli isn't enough.
What John Garcia did was take a rat and he would have this rat eat a certain kind of
thing, in this case perhaps saccharine in water, which is a sugary tasting substance,
and then he would inject the rat with a mild poison so that the rat would get sick.
And the rat would get sick about 20 minutes later, and yet the rat then would avoid saccharine
when given a choice of drinking water that had saccharine in it, usually rats will drink
the saccharine water instead of just the plain water, but the rat after this experience would
drink the plain water and avoid the saccharine water.
So apparently this rat through classical conditioning has learned to associate the saccharine with
getting sick.
Again this seems to violate the conditions of classical conditioning.
I think this is important because it points up what evolutionary psychologists are contending
nowadays, and that is that we have far more learning, even simple learning, than is the
case with simple classical conditioning, or what we're going to talk about in the next
lecture, operant conditioning, that we have modules for all sorts of different kinds of
things, like a taste diversion module that doesn't operate under the same rules that
other kinds of learning rules require, like in the case of classical conditioning.
And I think that this is an important recognition.
Let me go back over what we've talked about today.
We talked a little bit about how learning is the cornerstone of psychology according
to the behaviorists, because we are what we learn according to the behaviorists.
And then we today talked about classical conditioning and the conditions under which classical
conditioning occurred.
The pairing of a conditioned stimulus with an unconditioned stimulus for a number of
times until classical conditioning occurs.
We talked about the time course of events where you get learning through acquisition,
extinction when the pairing no longer occurs and the conditioned stimulus is presented
by itself, and then spontaneous recovery if some time passes and the conditioned stimulus
is again presented.
We talked about stimulus generalization, the fact that we have some responding to stimuli
that are similar to the original conditioned stimulus, and how we can get stimulus discrimination
by extinguishing the responses to the similar stimuli.
And then finally we talked about how classical conditioning is used in therapy, and also
how there may be other modules other than simple classical conditioning learning modules
that we carry around with us.
Thank you.
