Lecture 29 Memory, Memory Aids and Forgetting Theories
This lecture is the second in our series on memory.
If you recall last time, we talked about ways of assessing memory, in particular recall,
recognition, and relearning, and showed that how much you remember is very dependent upon
the way you assess memory, and then we talked some about illusory memory, how we can add
things to our memory that never occurred, and that brought up the whole idea of having
memory being a constructive process, rather than a process where we put in a high fidelity
recording that gets degraded over time.
So we talked about false memories and Elizabeth Loftus' work there.
Today, we're going to move on and talk some about memory aids, what are sometimes called
mnemonics, the ways to improve our memory through things like chunking, imagery, and
mediation, and then at the end we're going to talk some about some theories of forgetting,
why it is that we forget, and in particular we'll talk about decay theory, interference
theory, and consolidation theory.
So that's where we're going today.
So first I want to talk some about ways of improving your memory, memory aids, or mnemonics.
Those are synonyms for each other, mnemonics simply means memory aids.
And there are folks who teach this kind of thing.
My first exposure to that was a book by Harry Lorraine and Jerry Lucas called The Memory
Book that came out some 30 or so years ago.
At the time Jerry Lucas was a professional basketball player in the NBA, a famous center
and a very good player.
But one thing that Jerry liked to do is, I have no idea why, like to memorize long passages,
for example a whole page of the New York phone book, and demonstrate his memory prowess.
And he met Harry Lorraine, who knew something about these mnemonic devices, and together
they published this book.
Harry Lorraine is still doing this, I gave you his website at the end of this lecture
in your study guide, and you can go to his website and see the kinds of things he does.
You'll also sometimes still see him on infomercials, on television, advertising his memory systems.
In this book Lorraine and Lucas claim that we have sort of lost our way, and that we
don't teach memory anymore in the schools.
That memory was taught for a long time over the centuries, but for some reason we don't
consider a fundamental skill, like reading and writing.
And so we don't teach it in the schools, and they think that we ought to do that, because
they think people can be taught to improve their memory by quite a bit.
And they look at this historically to some extent too.
Back in the days before books and printing presses, and even paper and pencils, people
had to remember things in the oral tradition, so they didn't have a lot of memory cues to
tell them how to remember knowledge.
And so they had to pass this knowledge down from generation to generation, by remembering
it and telling the next generation about this knowledge.
So people became great orators, and they made up ballads, which were songs that conveyed
information in them, and people had to remember these things.
And so they used certain devices in order to remember these things.
Historically some of the devices, there's a process called the method of loci, or the
method of loci, and loci has to do with locations.
And with this particular technique, if you're trying to remember a speech, for example,
you might picture walking through your house and the various locations in your house.
So you go in the front door and you're in the foyer, and there's your grandfather clock
and your rug inside the door, and you can picture that.
And you put the first thought in your speech at that location, and then perhaps you walk
into the living room.
And in the living room, you have the second thought in your speech, and then perhaps you
go into the hallway.
Perhaps your third thought in your speech, and then you go into the dining room at your
fourth thought in your speech.
So the way you organize and remember the ordering of things in your speech is by taking an imaginary
walk through your house and remembering each of the parts of the speech as you go through
your house.
Today's saying, or an expression people use, well in the first place, that comes from the
method of loci, where in the first place is, in fact, your foyer, where you walked in,
and that's the first thing that you're going to say in your speech.
There are other techniques that they teach in this book that I'm not going to go into
today.
For example, if you want to remember numbers, you can convert those numbers to phonemes,
to sounds, put those phonemes together into words, and then put the words into sentences.
If you want to remember a long stream of numbers, you remember a sentence and then decode it
for the phonemes, and you can come back with the numbers.
So they teach a number of these memory techniques.
We're going to talk just about three of these today, three mnemonic devices, and then we're
going to have a demonstration or two where we demonstrate how you might use these devices.
The first one is called chunking or clustering, and this means we simply take information
and group it together to form another chunk or cluster.
You may wonder why we need to do this.
The basic reason is that our short-term memory is limited.
We have short-term memory, which is the kind of memory we use for about 30 seconds to a
minute.
If I give you a phone number to remember, and you want to remember it long enough to enter
it into your cell phone and make it a call, you would put it into short-term memory, and
if you don't want to remember it beyond that, because you're not going to use it again,
you would not rehearse it and try to get it into long-term memory.
So you use short-term memory, but short-term memory is limited.
A very famous paper in psychology was by George Miller called the magical number seven plus
or minus two, some limits on our capacity for processing information.
And what Miller was claiming here is that our short-term memory as well as some other
processes are limited, and we cannot exceed seven plus or minus two items.
Now I think he was being a bit generous, because if you look at some of the research, it may
be more like five plus or minus two, and most of us have trouble remembering nine things,
which would be seven plus two.
So I think a more practical notion is perhaps five plus or minus two.
But that seems to be about our limit on our short-term memory.
However, he says that's the number of items in short-term memory, but items is kind of
an ambiguous term, and an item can be a single word or an item can be a chunk of information
as well.
So if we can take individual words and chunk them together, for example, we might be able
to remember more things.
If I read you a list of words to remember, the following list.
Tuna, oak, rose, pansy, cod, willow, trout, tulip, pine, elm, azalea, bass.
And then I wanted you to free recall those words back to me, like we talked about in
the last lecture, so you can recall them in any order.
I would discover that you pick out, and you noticed as I was reading the words, that there
are various kinds of fish in the list, for instance, so you'd probably try to pick the
category fish, and recall that chunk of items, which in this case would be tuna, and cod,
and trout, and bass, and then you might try to recall the various kinds of trees, in which
in this case you'd come up with oak, and willow, and pine, and elm, and then the kinds of flowers,
which was the third category.
So what you've been able to do, and what you would naturally do, we don't have to teach
people to do this.
I did my dissertation on this topic, in fact, about how people chunk and cluster items, and
we have indexes, quantitative measures of how people chunk and cluster items.
People do this very naturally, where they form categories, and each of the categories
are only three categories, so that's easy to remember, it's fish, and trees, and flowers,
you can remember that, and then once you're queued by that category, you come up with
a chunk of items, in this case four items, which are exemplars of that particular category,
and so you can take that relatively long list and break it up that way, and remember it
better.
Again, we do this kind of naturally, if you asked me somebody's phone number, where I'd
say, well it's one, five, one, three, two, three, one, five, two, seven, eight, you can
hear me coming out with those natural chunks of the phone number, I would have trouble
even giving you that phone number to a metronome, one, five, one, three, because that's not
the way I stored it, I stored it in chunks and clusters.
All right, so we do this kind of naturally, and some of the best experts use this.
There's an undergraduate student who participated in a psychology experiment at one point, and
this experiment had to do with how people do remember strings of numbers, so they would
give single digit numbers about one every second, so you'd hear seven, three, five,
two, five, eight, four, now say that back to me, and I'm terrible at that, I would give
you maybe five or six at the most, and that'd be it, this fellow could do 20, 25 numbers
that way, and they were astounded at this, and they actually hired him on the spot and
spent a year studying how he did this kind of thing, and it turned out what he did, he
was turning these numbers into track running times, he was a runner himself, and so he
would remember that's a good time for the 400 meter race, or that's a good time for
the 100 meter dash, or this is a good time for a 1500 meter race or something, he had
these stored away, the records and all of that sort of thing, so he would take three
digits or four digits, convert it into a running time, and simply remember the running time,
and so if he was trying, if he could remember, let's say six or seven running times, each
of which contained three to four digits, you can see how he could get up to that number
of items.
After it turned out, he could even form these into hierarchical systems where he had certain
chunks at different levels, I'll talk about that in a minute, and that helped him to,
in his memory, and he eventually got up to about 70 or so items, being able to remember
them that way.
Let me mention chunks or clusters and hierarchical systems, because in a hierarchical system
you take these chunks and clusters and put them on different levels, let me give you
an example.
This is a lecture on memory, and if we take the last lecture in this one and see how it
structured and try to structure that in your mind, at the top, the top node would have
memory, because that's what the whole lectures are about.
The next thing we did is talk about ways of assessing memory, and we talked about three
of those, recall, recognition, and relearning, and then we talked about illusory memory,
and we talked about, remember that list that had the word sleep, or didn't have the word
sleep in it, and then we talked about Loftus' work and made two points under that, and then
we talked about memory aids today, and we're starting with chunking and clustering, then
we're going to talk about imagery, and then we're going to talk about mediation, and finally
we're going to talk about theories of forgetting, and talk about decay, interference, and consolidation.
Now you'll notice in that hierarchical structure, in no place do I go over three or four items,
and I do that on purpose. When I construct my lectures, I try to make sure I don't in
any chunk or cluster exceed short-term memory, so that people can remember these kinds of
things. Sometimes my students get bad advice about how to take notes for a lecture. They're
told every time you hear a key term, write it down, and then write down the definition
of it. Well, if they do that in my lectures, they'll often end up with 23 or 24 key terms
with definitions. So now I have a list of 24 things, and that doesn't fit into short-term
memory at all. It's really, I think, a terrible way to take notes, because it doesn't acknowledge
the kind of limitations we have on our memory systems. So what I would encourage them to
do is do what I just did for you. Look at the hierarchical structure of the lecture,
and if you do that and understand that, then you won't exceed your short-term memory requirements
at any point in the lecture. Now, as a professor, it's up to me to make sure I let them see
the hierarchical structure, and I encourage my students, if they don't understand, where
something I'm talking about fits into the lecture, to hold up their hand and say, wait
a minute, Dr. Martin, I don't understand. How does this fit in? Is that a way of assessing
memory you're talking about here, or what exactly, how does that fit in? Because that's
my job, is to make this structure clear to them so that they can use their short-term
memory appropriately. All right, so chunking and clustering is very important. A second
mnemonic device is imagery, and this is simply forming a mental picture of the kind of thing
that you're trying to remember. Now, we remember pictures a whole lot better than we remember
things like words, and that's not surprising. If you look at evolutionary history, and if
evolutionary history for human-like ancestors is four or five million years old, we've only
had language for a couple of hundred thousand years, and so for most of that history, we
were remembering images of things, not language, not words, and so we're better at doing that
kind of thing. You've noticed this undoubtedly, if you go to somebody's house and they want
to show you pictures of their vacation, and they have this stack of hundreds of pictures
of their vacation, and you're looking at it, and then they get mixed up and show you a
picture you've seen before, and say, oh, I saw that picture before. If they had showed
you about 300 words, and then showed you a word which is a repeat, you probably would
not be able to pick that out. We are just better at remembering pictures, probably because
it's a good evolutionary adaptation, and the memory experts say that the more bizarre the
picture, the better we remember it. Psychological research is kind of mixed with respect to
whether or not how bizarre it is is important. When I'm employing one of these memory systems
using imagery, I think how bizarre it is is important, and when we go through our demonstration
in a minute with a grocery list, I will use how bizarre it is to try to remember some
of those grocery list items, and you'll see what I'm talking about. In my class, I often
will try to remember students' first names. I teach a class that typically has 200 students
in it, and so I only do this for the first couple of rows, and I must admit I don't
know all my students' 200 students' names in my class, but what I do on this particular
day is go across the front row and then the second row, and try to remember everybody's
first name fairly quickly, and I can usually get up to about 15 names by doing this. The
way I'm doing it for the most part is using imagery, so I get the first person and maybe
it's John, and there are a number of ways I can do it. I look at him, I can use a Biblical
character of John, for example, or maybe he looks like John Lennon or John Travolta or
something like that, a famous character, and I picture him as that, dressed like that person,
if it's a Biblical character, maybe I picture him dressed in a robe or something like that.
The next person may be Bernadette. I think of Bernadette Peters, a famous star on Broadway,
or if you don't know Bernadette Peters, perhaps you don't know anybody named Bernadette.
You can convert it to some other meaningful kind of thing, Bernadette, for example, and
picture this person burning a debt, an IOU that they're holding or something like that.
As we go down, Michael and other kinds of things, Sarah, perhaps, I can think of Sarah
Bernhardt, which is a famous character. I have a niece named Sarah with bright red hair.
I might picture this person with bright red hair. I form an image, and for each of those,
it helps me recall the person when we get there. So that's the way I use imagery and
that kind of demonstration. A third mnemonic device is mediation, and mediation is very
simple. What you do is simply have a stimulus you want to associate with a particular response,
and you bring something to bear between them. Medi means between. So you bring something
to bear between those two things to help you hook them up, and we'll demonstrate that
in just a minute. If you, say, are a native Spanish speaker, and you then learn English
and go to college and want to learn German, you may use English to mediate between Spanish
and German, because that's the way you learn it. Okay, so mediation is another one of these
mnemonic devices. We'll take just those three mnemonic devices and have a couple of demonstrations
of that. I already talked about how we use imagery for learning names. Let's suppose
that we're going to go to the grocery store, and we want to buy a list of 10 items, and
we want to do it in order. We want to be very efficient, and we know how the grocery store
is laid out. So we make up our list, and we want to buy the following items. Milk, bread,
cookies, ice cream, carrots, steak, cereal, pizza, butter, and cheese. Now if you just
heard that list, and I had you try to repeat it back to me in order, I think you'd have
a difficult time with that. Maybe you could come up with the first three items or something
like that. But let's very quickly use some of these techniques and see if we can remember
at least part of this list. Let's use the little poem, sometimes also a song for kids.
One is a bun, two is a shoe, three is a tree, four is a door, five is a hive, six is sticks,
seven is heaven, eight is a gate, nine is wine, and ten is a pen. At least that's the
way I know it. You may have a slightly different version of that. But what we're now going
to do is we have one, and we already have a ready associate for that, one is a bun.
And now we want to associate milk with one, and we're going to use bun as a mediator
to do that, and we're going to form an image. So we have one is a bun, and we want to picture
bun with milk. Now we could form a sort of everyday image. Here's a bun on a plate with
a glass of milk next to it. But the memory expert says let's make it a little bit more
bizarre. So let's picture a sea of milk out there with buns floating in the sea. And you
can make those buns any kind of buns you want to, and make the picture as bizarre as you
want to as well. But once you picture it, once you get a good image of that, you don't
have to rehearse it anymore. You don't have to say one bun is, it's there. And now you
can't get rid of it. Don't think of buns floating in a sea of milk. It's sort of like not picturing
a pink elephant. In fact, a lot of the memory problems are problems because we can't forget,
not because we can't remember, and people would like to forget things. Well, you can't
forget some things. You can't picture, you can't forget that picture I just gave you.
Two is a shoe. The second thing, let's see, the second thing on the list is bread. Alright,
you might picture, oh, a shoe stuffed with bread. So we wad up the bread and stuff it
into the shoe. Again, picture it. You can get rid of it. You don't have to rehearse it.
Three is a tree, and we have cookies. Picture a tree with an Oreo cookie tree. So we have
this tree with Oreos hanging all over it. Again, picture it, get rid of it. Four is
a door. We have ice cream. Maybe we picture ice cream being slapped up against the door
and dribbling down the door. Five is a hive. Carrots. Picture those little bees flying back
each carrying a carrot back to the hive and so forth. We don't have enough time to go
through the entire list here, but that gives you an idea of how you would do this. And
once you have the list, and you have all of these pictures, when I do this with students
in my class, we then go through it and very, they have it all. And they have it all the
next day. And they have it all the day after that. Once they have the pictures and use
these mnemonic devices, they are amazed how well they can remember them. So these mnemonic
devices are a good way of trying to improve your memory. And if you do have memory problems
especially for names and faces, for items on a list, I would encourage you to use these
memory devices to try to improve your memory. The last thing I want to talk about today are
some theories of forgetting, why it is that we forget. And the first theory of forgetting
we already talked about a little bit because it's the usual conception of memory. And that's
called decay theory. The general idea is, and this is what people thought about memory
for centuries, is that when we remember something, we have a memory trace that's left in our
brain somewhere. And so we store this high fidelity recording away as a memory trace,
and then over time, time conspires against this memory trace, and it tends to decay or
to fade away. And it's simply the passage of time then that causes us to forget, according
to this theory. Well, we certainly know that the passage of time does cause us to forget.
Remember when we were talking about assessing memory, one of the first things we did was
plot time along a horizontal axis and proportion remembered across the vertical axis. And we
saw that for free recall, for instance, we went from 100% in four days down to about
half of that, and then it kept on going down from there. So we do know that people do forget
with the passage of time. But as time goes by, that's not the only thing that goes by.
And this brings up the second theory of forgetting. This is interference theory. Interference
theory says that we forget things because other things interfere with the memories. And
naturally, as time passes, other interfering activities happen to us. Let me give you an
example from an experiment. Suppose I had you learn a list of words, like the list that
we talked about in the last lecture, of say, 12 words that I have you try to learn. And
as we saw from my students in the last lecture, that might take you six or so trials in order
to learn this list perfectly. So you learn list A, let's call that list A. And then I
have you learn list B, another list of words, different words, and I have you learn it to
criterion as well. So that's also 100%. So you learn that to criterion. And then I test
you on list A. I forget about list B at this point. I just test you on list A. Now I take
another group and I have them learn list A, but rather than learning list B, they rest.
For the same length of time, it took the other group to learn list B. And then I test this
group on list A as well. I would discover that the second group does better than the
first group. The group that learned list B does more poorly than the group that rested.
And how would I explain that? I'd have to explain it by interference. I couldn't explain
it by decay because the same amount of time occurred between list A and test of list A
for both groups. So it can't be decay that's going on here. It must be something like interference
if there's a difference in the group. So the thing that interfered after they learned list
A. I could do it in a slightly different way. Suppose I had you learn list B first and then
learn list A after that and then tested you on list A. And then for our other group, what
I'd have them do is rest before learning it, then learn list A and then be tested on list
A. So list B occurred prior to list A. In that case, again, the group that rested would
do better than the one who learned list B first. So the interfering activity doesn't
have to even necessarily come after. It can come before the learning as well. But what
interference theory says is regardless of whether it comes before or after, it interferes
with the memory of that material. Now we can't do the critical experiment we'd like to do.
And that is have interfering activity without the passage of time. That would be the way
we would do an experiment to find out whether or not it's just interference or whether the
passage of time also contributes to it. But you can't do it. They've tried doing things
like having a student learn some material, sleep for eight hours and then test them on
the material versus a student who learns the material, goes about his daily activities
for eight hours and then is tested on the material. But again, sleeping doesn't shut
down interfering activity. You dream and other cognitive activities happen there. So you
can't have the passage of time without some interference, nor can you have interference
without the passage of some time. So you can't do the critical experiment to see whether
it's just interference or whether decay is part of it as well. The third theory of forgetting
is consolidation theory. This is the only theory that predicts a little bit better behavior
after the passage of some time. It says it takes a while for the memory trace to consolidate
to be driven into the point that it can't be interfered with. An example of this from
the laboratory, if you take a rat and you have it learn a maze and right after it learns
the maze, you give it a fairly severe shock, a shock that's strong enough that it will
interfere with its having learned the maze. And you take another rat and have it learn
the maze, and 20 minutes later you give it the shock. And you take another rat, have
it learn the maze, and an hour later you give it the shock. And the question is, at what
point does the shock no longer interfere with the learning that occurred? The rat that shocked
immediately afterwards loses a lot of its learning. If you wait 20 minutes, it doesn't
learn very much of its, forget very much of its learning. And an hour is no different
from 20 minutes. So these data tend to indicate that it takes about 20 minutes, at least
in the rat brain, for memory traces to consolidate. In the human brain, we're not quite so sure
we can't do this kind of experiment on a human. If you look at naturally occurring events
with humans, like traumatic events, perhaps you go to your morning class and then you
go out and you get hit by an automobile and have a head injury or something like that.
If you look at the amnesia from that head injury, it would likely be for the most recent events,
and it may wipe out the whole morning, but you'll remember everything that happened the
day before. That would be an indication that it took some time for this memory to consolidate
and the traumatic event interfered with the consolidation of the memory.
Okay, so what we've done today is talk about some memory aids. We talked about how effective
some of these aids are, like chunking and clustering, the forming of items and putting
them together in order to bypass the limitations of short-term memory, the fact that we can
only contain perhaps five to seven items in short-term memory. We talked about imagery
and the fact that we remember images better than we remember words and material that's
more symbolic, like words. We talked about mediation where you can bring an item to bear
between a stimulus and a response and help hook those items together. We gave you a demonstration
of how mediation and imagery work in terms of remembering lists of items, and finally
we talked about theories of forgetting, why we forget, including decay theory, which predicts
that we forget simply because there's time passing, interference theory, which says that
we forget because there are interfering activities that occur either before or after the thing
we're trying to remember that interfere, and consolidation theory, which says that it takes
some time for a memory trace to consolidate so that it can't be interfered with. So that's
our lecture on memory. Thank you.
