Lecture 31, Perception, Finding and Organizing Cues
This is the second lecture in our two lecture sequence on perception.
So recall that last time I spent considerable effort trying to convince you that we are
not in direct contact with the external world.
What we do is pick up cues as to what's out there and form an internal model and that
sometimes these internal models are wrong or that we can have multiple internal models.
So if we're doing this constructive process of forming an internal model, it might naturally
occur to you, well, how do we know how to organize these internal models?
How do we know how to put these cues together?
And that's the first topic we're going to talk about today.
Following that, we're going to ask a question about, well, what kinds of cues do we use to
form our internal model?
And we're going to take the example of depth perception and look at the kinds of cues that
are used in depth perception in terms of forming an internal model.
And finally, we're going to ask the question, is this whole perceptual process of forming
an internal model, is that a built-in process?
Is that something that is built into us at birth or is this something we learned during
life or is it some combination of those things?
And so that's the third thing we're going to consider today.
That's our agenda.
So the first question, if you recall, is how do we organize these cues that we pick up?
What is the way we organize those cues?
And there are several schools of thought about this.
The oldest one is called the Gestalt School of Thought.
And the Gestalt School said that we use several built-in principles, so they come down on
the side of perception being built in, that we have built into us principles by which
we try to organize the world and organize these cues.
They had a lot of demonstrations of these principles.
Let me just give you a few of these principles that they proposed.
And in your course guide, you will see a couple of figures that exemplify this, but I can
pretty well describe the figures, I think.
One principle is the principle of proximity.
And to illustrate that, what I have in your course guide is a couple of a line of dots.
And you'll see these dots looking like they're pairs of dots.
So you have two dots kind of together, little space, two more dots, a space, two more dots,
a space, two more dots.
And if you ask people what they see when you show them this, they won't say, say, I see
a line with dots.
They'll say, I see a pair.
I see pairs of dots because they're in the same proximity, because they're nearer to
one another.
They organize them together, and they form those as objects.
Gestalt, the word gestalt itself kind of means that the sum is greater than its parts.
So in that tradition, the sum is a pair of things, not the parts themselves.
A second principle is the principle of similarity.
And I illustrate that by having again a series of dots, but some of them are open circles
and some of them are closed circles.
So some of the dots are just outlines of dots.
And I put those in a line as well.
And so I have a pair of solid dots followed by a pair going across the line of open dots
followed by a pair of solid dots and open dots and solid dots.
The principle of similarity says that we tend to organize things that are similar to one
another as holes.
In other words, we take the parts and form holes in our internal model of those parts
based upon whether or not they're similar to one another.
Another good example of this, I think, is if you look at a newspaper photograph that's
done in half-tone.
If you've ever looked very closely at one of those newspaper photographs, you'll notice
that it's made up of little dots.
And what you see are dots of varying shades.
And what we do when we look at the photograph, particularly at a distance, we don't see the
little dots anymore.
We organize all the dots that are of approximately the same shade together and see that as the
surface of an object.
And so you can get a picture of a person out of these little dots and just changing the
shades.
You may remember back in the days when computers were not quite as popular and we had printers
that tried to make pictures out of letters.
And people did computer art using letters to make that art and now they'd have a photograph
or they'd have a picture of somebody's face that looked like a photograph and they would
do it by having the eye made out of all little o's and then they'll have another part of
the face that's made out of L's.
And the difference in shading, we would organize things that were similar together as parts
of the photograph and that illustrates, I think, the principle of similarity, too.
The principle of closure says that we tend to take incomplete objects and close them
up by filling in what's missing.
So the way I have illustrated this in your guide is that there's a full circle with a
little gap at the top in the circle.
And if I ask people what they see, they'll say, I see a circle, ignoring the gap.
And they tend to close up that gap and make it a whole object.
And we do that automatically if you have a printer problem, let's say, that one of the
letters on your printer has a gap in it.
You close that up.
You might read a whole letter printed this way and never notice that some of the letters
have a gap in them.
So we tend to close things up.
And again, from an evolutionary point of view, that would have been an important thing to
do because often we see objects that are covered up by other objects and parts are missing.
And so we nevertheless assume it's a full object.
So that's the principle of closure.
I'll give you one other principle, and that's the principle of good figure, that we tend
to take figures and make them into good figures like squares and circles and straight lines
instead of assuming that they're not good figures.
And in your guide, I show you a square overlapping a circle, and you see that as a square overlapping
a circle, although you could interpret it a different way.
You could say, well, it's a square with one corner of the square, a little arc cut out
of it, and you have a circle with one quadrant of the circle cut out of it as well.
And if you put those two things together, it would form the same figure as a circle overlapping
a square.
And yet we see it as a circle overlapping a square according to the Gestaltists because
of good figure.
And you can even pit one of these against another one.
For example, you can have a line of dots that's going vertically and another line of dots
that's coming over from the side at an angle where the last dot in that second line is
actually closer to the dots in the vertical line and ask where that dot fits.
Does it go with the vertical line, or does it go with the line that's coming in as an
angle?
And most people would see it as part of the line coming in as an angle because it forms
a good figure.
It forms a straight line with that, and it's a little off line for the vertical one.
So you can even pit these things against one another.
So that's what the Gestaltists did.
They had a lot of demonstrations, and people were impressed by their demonstrations, but
unfortunately that's about all that they had.
It didn't lead to very much experimentation.
People would say, aha, isn't that interesting when they saw the demonstration, and they
would have some feeling that perhaps that is the way they organized the world because
they believed the demonstration, but in fact it didn't tell them much more than that.
A long later came the folks who proposed perceptual constancies as the way we organized the world.
And the ones who are proposing perceptual constancies say that very early in our lives
we learned that there are certain constancies in the world, certain invariants in the world,
and they then use these invariants, these rules, to form internal models.
For example, size constancy.
That in the real world, objects do not capriciously change size.
That if I get closer to you or farther away from you, you don't believe suddenly I'm
a Macy's balloon and have blown up much larger than I was before.
In fact, you say, well, I know that people don't change size that way, so you must have
gotten closer or farther away from me.
And the way you know that is that solid objects don't change size.
Sometimes we're wrong about that.
When I was an undergraduate student, I replicated somebody else's experiment, and had somebody
come into the room and I'd have them sit down, and they were about 25 feet away from my display
that I had invented.
And on the display, there were two, what I told them, were disks, yellow disks, and
I wanted them to tell me how far apart those disks were as I moved the disks closer to
them or farther away from them, how far apart the disks were from one another.
And they would give me estimates, oh, I think it's a half a foot now, I think it's a foot,
I think they're the same distance away from me.
In fact, these were not disks at all.
These were balloons, and I'd set it up under fairly dim lighting conditions and violated
some of the other, as we'll see in a minute, cues of depth perception, so that in fact
they thought that they were disks, the lighting was such and the distance was such that it
looked like disks to them, and as soon as they knew they were disks, they knew that
they couldn't get larger or smaller, they had to stay the same size, so any interpretation
of a change in how large they are had to be interpreted as a change in distance from
the observer.
In fact, they were getting larger and smaller because these were balloons, and I'd built
an apparatus with the little bellows underneath where I could push a lever and make the balloon
get larger or smaller.
So they were wrong in that case, it's a visual illusion because I was violating an assumption
of size constancy.
Size constancy is a similar kind of thing.
If I pick up an object in space and I rotate it, take my hand, it looks like kind of a
flat surface when I point it directly at you, when I turn it sideways, it looks more like
a line.
You could say, aha, he's got this trick hand he brought with him today, and it's changing
shape on me, or if you walk around a table, at one point the table looks like a rectangle
at another point, like a parallelogram, at another point you get down at the surface
of the table, it looks like a line.
You could say, aha, that table is changing shape, but in fact we know that solid objects
tend to have shape constancy, and so we interpret them that way.
Similar kinds of things could be said for brightness and color.
I won't go into that in as much detail, but as you take a shirt, for example, and go from
out in the sunlight into a darker room, you might see that shirt change color, but we
don't interpret it as a color change.
We assume that there's color constancy, and it must be a change in the lighting conditions
and the same kind of thing for brightness.
So for all of these, what they're proposing is that we learn certain kinds of rules as
we are experiencing the world, and fairly young in life, we learn that these rules hold up
pretty much, and so we make assumptions of size constancy, shape constancy, brightness
and color constancy, so we have perceptual constancies, and these are the rules that we
use to form our internal model, and these are learned rules.
A third school of thought has been recently proposed by Dale Purvis, who I mentioned last
lecture.
He's a professor at Duke University, and I sent you to his website in the last lecture,
and Purvis says that humans have evolved certain perceptual modules, and so he is contending
that some of perception is built in.
He also contends that some of it is learned, and that what happens is these perceptual
modules take advantage of certain statistical properties of the world around us, for example
the property that usually things are lit from above, because you have the sun up there that's
lighting them, and in ancestral times where they didn't have artificial lighting, it was
a pretty good assumption to make that things were lit from above, so a number of our assumptions
have to do with lighting from above, and some of the illusions you'll see on his website
have to do with violating those kinds of assumptions, and that we take these statistical properties
that have built in perceptual modules for us and tune them by experience with the environment,
and that's how we organize the world according to Purvis, and this theory is allowed in to
explain a lot of things about shades and coloring in the world.
So those are three ways that have been proposed for how we organize our internal model.
Let me move on to what kinds of cues we might use to organize our internal model, and let
me go to the topic of depth perception.
So the basic question is why do we see some things as farther away from us than other things?
Why is it that you see me standing at the podium as closer to you than the stuff on the wall,
the pictures on the wall, and the window on the wall behind me?
There's some reason that you see me as closer, and there may be multiple reasons, and you
may pick up a number of different kinds of cues in forming your internal model, and there's
certainly depth to our internal model.
It would be very important for our ancestors to have built depth into their internal model.
If you're going hunting and throwing a spirit an animal, it's a good idea to know how far
away this animal is from you, and so it's not surprising that our internal models usually
contain depth.
The question is what kinds of cues do we use to form this internal model that contains
depth?
Now there are two different kinds of cues that we use.
One kind of cue, we call a monocular cue, means that you can get this cue using only
one eye, mono-ocular eye, so using a single eye, and some cues require two eyes, or obviously
called binocular cues in that case.
And when I have my students do this in class, I usually have them guess what those cues
are, and most of them can come up with quite a few of the cues fairly readily.
On the monocular side, these are the ones using one eye.
What becomes apparent quite readily is size, relative size, and we mentioned that when
we were talking about size constancy.
So things that tend to be closer to you tend to be larger, and we know that pretty well.
If kids are drawing pictures even at a young age, if they're trying to put some depth in
their picture, they'll make closer objects larger than objects that are farther away.
Again, as I move toward you or away from you, you would figure I must be closer to you if
I'm larger, and being a person, you know approximate size of a person, so you would know an approximate
distance away from you that I would be.
So a fairly obvious one is relative size.
A second cue is, again, a monocular cue, is interposition.
Something becomes interposed between the observer and some object that they're seeing.
If I were at some distance, and you were trying to figure out, and I held both my hands up,
and you were trying to figure out which one is closer to you, it might be difficult for
you to figure out which one is closer to you until I progressively put my hands closer
together, and one began to cover up the other one.
Then it becomes quite apparent which one is closer.
The one that's covering up the other one is the one that's closer to you.
So solid objects tend to cover up other solid objects, and we can tell how far away they
are from us by whether or not that object is getting covered up.
Again, a fairly simple kind of cue.
A third cue, which is a monocular cue, is accommodation, or what we would more colloquially
refer to as focus.
Accommodation has to do with the change in the lens in order to keep whatever object
we're looking at in focus on our retina.
Our eye is somewhat like a camera, in that it has kind of a box like a camera does, that's
the eyeball.
On the back of the box is the film, which is the retina, and on the front of the box
is a lens that focuses the light rays on the retina and tries to keep those in focus on
the retina.
The lens, unlike a camera, usually on a camera, the lens will move forward or backwards to
keep the thing focused on the retina.
For our eyeball, what happens is that the lens actually changes shape.
It's a flexible kind of an arrangement, kind of like has onion skins on it, and there are
little muscles attached to the lens to make it pooch out or flatten out in order to keep
an object in focus on the retina.
Those little muscles feed information to our brains, and they tell us what shape the lens
is in, and we use that information, this information about accommodation or focus, to tell how
far an object is away from us.
This operates within about 20 feet is where this operates best, because like a camera,
once you get out past 20 feet to infinity, there's not much change in focus.
If you have a camera where you adjust it yourself, you can look down and see that the adjustment
between infinity and 20 feet is not much of an adjustment.
The adjustment between 2 feet and 4 feet is a huge adjustment, and the same is true
with accommodation for our lens, so we have to change the shape of the lens quite a bit
for objects that are close to us, and so that's where this cue works best.
One other cue for monocular vision, and that has to do with relative motion or movement.
As we move around in the world, as I would move back and forth, I would see this podium
changing its position with respect to the world.
You may have had this happen, you're a little kid, you're lying on your mother's lap, you're
trying to sleep at night, the car is going down the road, and you look outside the window
and say, mommy, why is the moon standing still?
And she gives you some answer like, well, that's because it's so far away.
What she's telling you is something about relative motion or relative movement.
The trees are whipping past the window, the fields and the farms are going past more slowly,
and way out in the distance the moon is standing still.
As you move around in the world, objects that are closer to you tend to pass by you faster
than objects that are farther away from you, and we use that as a cue of depth perception.
It was a big breakthrough in the movies when Disney figured out how to do this by having
objects that are farther away on one transparency and objects that are closer on another transparency
and the very closest object on another transparency, and then with their animation, they could
take a picture, turn a crank, have the close objects move fast, the middle objects move
slowly and the far objects not move, and give people a feeling of depth perception due
to relative movement or relative motion.
So those are the monocular cues.
Binocular cues include retinal disparity.
That's the fact that you have a disparate picture on the two retinas.
We have two eyes, and so we have two pictures that we're taking, and there's a difference
in those two pictures.
One way I like to illustrate this is to have people hold out their arm and keep both eyes
open and line their thumb up with something in the distance.
If you line your thumb up with something in the distance and then close one eye and the
other eye, you can see that your thumb is in a different place on each of the two pictures
for each of your eyes, and you'll be lined up with one eye and not lined up with the
other eye.
People tend to have a dominant eye, and that's one way of figuring out what your dominant
eye is, but then you can pull in your thumb, do the same thing, and figure out what the
distance is as you close one eye and then the other, and if you pull in your thumb to
half an arm's length, you'll see a much greater difference in the two pictures than you do
if your thumb's out at arm length.
Now we do lightning calculations in our brain.
Fortunately, we don't have to know the formulas for trigonometry in order to do these calculations,
but it's an amazing feat that we do to do these kind of triangulation calculations and
figure out how far away that object must be if there's a difference, a certain difference
in the picture, and we do that imagine a person playing racquetball and trying to figure out
how far away the ball is, chasing down the ball.
We're just very quickly doing this kind of calculation.
One other, rather minor one, for binocular is convergence.
We have two eyes, and we're trying to keep the picture centered on our two retinas.
As something gets closer to us, we have to steer our eyeballs inward until we're looking
kind of cross-eyed, and the muscles that are steering our eyeballs feed information to
our brain as well.
So these are all cues of depth perception that we use to try to form our internal model.
We have a brain that's built so that these cues of depth perception are put together
automatically and form an internal model with depth.
It's an amazing process.
The final thing I want to talk about today is whether or not this process of organizing
the cues and forming an internal model is built in or whether it's something that's learned,
what's sometimes called a nature-nurture question.
Now when we talk about evolutionary psychology, we will see that nature-nurture questions
are kind of naive questions, but let's at least look at some data that might indicate
whether perception is built in or learned.
The experiment we would want to do, of course, is to take a baby and keep it in a black box
until it's old enough to tell us what it sees and then ask it what it sees.
Well, the ethics committees won't let us do that, but we can do some other kinds of things.
We can take a newborn baby that's one day old, put it down on the floor and have it
on a bed and have it looking at two objects, one that has broad stripes on it and the other
piece of paper that has a gray surface, where the average contrast, the average shading of
those two pieces of paper is the same.
And then we look at the baby's eyes and see what the baby's looking at.
Fortunately, the baby has a preference.
He likes stripes better than he likes gray surfaces.
But the fact that he's looking 70% of the time at the striped surface and 30% of the
time at the gray surface tells us at least that the baby can tell the difference between
the two.
So, unlike what my grandmother told me when I was young, that little baby's vision is
all blurry and they can't see anything for a number of days, that's not true.
Newborn babies can tell the difference between broad stripes and gray surfaces.
That seems to indicate that some of perception must be built in because a day old, they haven't
had a chance to learn the differences between those surfaces.
Another piece of evidence that can tell us something about whether it's built or learned
and that falls on the built inside is if you take a baby and put it on what's called a
visual cliff.
Now you have to wait in this case till the baby is old enough to crawl around a little
bit.
And this visual cliff is a glass table and on one side of the table you have something
like a checkered tablecloth right under the glass surface and you have a board down the
middle of the table.
You put the baby on the board so it looks if the baby looks over at that side like there's
just not much drop off under the table top.
On the other side you put this checkered tablecloth down low on the floor so it looks like there's
a bit of a cliff off the board on the other side.
And you set it up so there's no reflections on the table top and that sort of thing.
And then you get mom to try to call the baby over to one side or the other side and you
discover that the baby will be very reticent to crawl off the deep side of the table, crawl
off the shallow side of the table and that tells you that at least at this age the baby
can tell something about depth.
And one of the problems is the baby's been alive for a while, maybe he picked that up
by learning.
You can take a sheep and have that sheep born and immediately put it in a dark place and
a day or two later that sheep is walking and you take it out of the dark place and the
first thing it ever sees in its life is this cliff and you put it on the board and you
see which side of the board it goes off of and the sheep will go off the shallow side
almost all the time.
And apparently can see depth perception and that's some indication that babies when they're
walking and sheep must be at least have some built in depth.
You can also plug in single cell recording devices, a little tiny needle that you can
plug in at the neuron level of the visual system.
And if you do that in animals, this has not been done in humans, but in animals you discover
that there are receptors at a fairly peripheral level just near the retina that are already
analyzing certain kinds of data.
So that you present a dot of one size and the neuron will fire, you present a smaller
dot the neuron won't fire or you present a slanted line at one angle and the neuron will
fire at a different angle and the neuron won't fire or you present something that's moving
in a particular orientation and the neuron will fire, but if it's moving in a different
orientation the neuron won't fire.
That's some indication that we must have neurons built in that are telling us rudimentary information
about perception.
So all I've told you so far sounds like perception is built in, but there's some counter evidence
as well.
One way to find out whether it's built in is see whether people can relearn their perceptions
and one way they've done this is to have people wear inverting lenses.
If you have people wear inverting lenses where it turns the world upside down, the question
is how quickly can they adjust to this?
If perception is learned they ought to be able to adjust fairly readily and people can.
Unfortunately they throw up for a while because it makes them dizzy and that sort of thing,
but within a week or two the person is acting like the world is turned back over and subjectively
they report it's like the world is turned back over.
So apparently they can be re-taught, which indicates that perhaps they learned it in
the first place.
You can also look at people who've been congenitally blind from birth.
This is our black box experiment, but it happens in the real world where people have some disorder
where they can't see and then you give sight recovery to the blind.
And when you do this the question is do they immediately use their perceptual system or
do they seem not able to use the system?
And what seems to happen is they're not very well able to use the system.
They find it very disturbing in fact and if you give them a test like you walk up and
you say this is a circle and this is a square and then you hide one of them and just show
them one, is this the circle or the square?
I don't know.
Okay, let's do it again.
Here's a circle, here's a square.
You hide one and show one to them, is that the circle or the square?
I don't know.
And it takes them a long time to learn that very simple task.
Now there is some possibility that we're making a bit of an error here because there are principles
if you don't use it you might lose it.
Nevertheless, that tends to indicate that perhaps learning is important in perceptual development.
So like any good nature-nurture question we've discovered that it points to some degree to
learning and to some degree toward built-in.
And it's probably some combination of those things as Purvis has suggested with his theory.
So what we've done today is talk a little bit more about perception and we've talked
about whether perception is built in or whether it's learned as one of the things that we're
interested in.
We've talked about what kinds of cues people use in forming internal models and we've talked
about what kind of organizing principles do people use in forming their internal models.
Thank you.
