Lecture 32 Evolutionary Psychology, Basic Concepts
With this lecture, we're starting a three lecture sequence on evolution.
And we talked about evolution a little bit earlier in the course and gave you some of the basics.
But today what I want to do is talk about some more basic concepts with respect to evolution
and review a few of the ones we talked about before.
I also want to talk about some of the myths of evolution and then tell a evolution story
largely from the point of view of Desmond Morris who wrote a book, an early book on evolution.
In subsequent lectures in lecture two, we're going to talk in much more detail about altruism and mating concepts in evolution.
And in the last lecture, we're going to talk about war, family dynamics and food from an evolutionary point of view.
Now it's unusual that evolution has not had much influence on psychology until the very recent past.
After all, we've known a lot about evolution. Darwin published his book over 100 years ago, more like 150 years ago now.
And yet psychology has pretty well ignored this.
Some of the early psychologists, when we talked about them in our history of psychology,
folks like William James and Sigmund Freud did acknowledge evolution and thought that part of our being was built in.
Freud, for example, when he proposed that we have an id, the id was a built-in behavioral tendency operating on the pleasure principle, if you'll recall.
And that certainly was something that was built into us according to Freud by evolution.
But then a revolution occurred in psychology and the behaviorists came on board.
And with the behaviorists came the notion of the blank slate and the fact that everything is learned and there's almost nothing built in, if anything at all, in humans at least.
And this was a widely accepted point of view coming out of psychology and the behaviorism tradition, out of philosophy to some extent, out of education, out of sociology.
If you want to read a little bit more about this pervasive influence of the blank slate, I would point you toward a book that's listed in your bibliography,
and at the end of this lecture in your course guide by Stephen Pinker called The Blank Slate, The Modern Denial of Human Nature.
It's a fairly recent book, which was a big bestseller, and he goes into this not only from the point of view, even though he's a psychologist of evolutionary psychology,
but he looks at why politically this has been an important idea of the blank slate.
Psychology itself came out of philosophy departments academically and often ended up in colleges of education in the early years.
And then later joined College of Arts and Sciences as a social science and was associated then with sociology and anthropology.
All of those disciplines looked at the human as a blank slate.
So it's probably for this reason that evolutionary thought had little to do with psychology until the most recent years.
And it was a couple of zoologists and biologists who sort of brought it to the forefront.
Although he doesn't get much credit from the academics, I think Desmond Morris, who was a zoologist, was one of the most important people.
In the late 1960s, he published a book, The Naked Ape, which we'll refer to quite a bit in this lecture that brought the notion of human behavior at least being partly determined by evolutionary adaptation.
And then E.O. Wilson, who I've mentioned earlier in this course, also published a book later than that that he's a biologist, again pointing out the fact that there may be some evolutionary adaptations that are built into humans.
And then in the 1990s, evolutionary psychology came along and it is having, I think, a profound influence on psychology at the moment.
Well, let's go back and look at what Charles Darwin said and very briefly review the rudiments of evolution.
He said that there are really three requirements for evolution to take place.
One is heritability. Somehow people have to pass their genes from one generation to the next generation.
And this is done through asexual cell splitting and then in those animals that have sexual reproduction through sexual reproduction.
Darwin was a bit mistaken about how this happened. He thought it was a blending kind of process that occurred.
And he was not aware, apparently, of Gregor Mendel's work on genes and genetics indicating that this heritability was done through particulate matter rather than through a fluid kind of process.
Nevertheless, he knew that somehow there had to be heritability.
A second requirement is to have genetic variability occur.
And this occurs through either mutation, through accidents of heritability, or through sexual reproduction, the contribution of two parents, and that can also create variability.
So we have to have some variability occur.
And then finally, we have to have some selection occur as well.
And this selection, as we've noted earlier, can be artificial in the form of breeding or this selection can be done through survival of the fittest, which is what Darwin suggested.
So that animals who tend to be successful, both in terms of survival and in terms of reproduction, are selected and they tend to carry their traits through their genetic material on to the next generation.
Now there are several myths with respect to evolution that we should counter.
One of these myths is that you can inherit acquired characteristics rather than inheriting characteristics that are built into the genes so that you can inherit something that you learn, for example.
And that is a myth.
It's caused some problems in science when people have tried to suggest that you can inherit acquired characteristics, but the characteristics have to be carried in the genes themselves.
The second myth is that you can inherit only physical characteristics and not behavioral characteristics, but there's no reason in particular why you can't inherit behavioral characteristics as well.
And we see this kind of evolution all the time.
The squirrels on my campus, my home campus, we have lots and lots of squirrels and they are fearless.
You can walk right by them a foot away and the squirrel will not move around at all.
Those squirrels have evolved on that campus, not being hunted, and so they do not have the usual characteristics of being fearful of humans as a squirrel would be in the woods where they're hunted by predators all the time.
So you can inherit behavioral characteristics and even humans can.
A third false belief is that of genetic determinism, and that says that behavior is either due to nature or due to nurture, that it's either built in or that it's learned.
And as we will see in these lectures, and if you do any reading at all in evolutionary behavior, you will discover that it's almost always an interaction, that we have certain kinds of things built in and we have certain kinds of things that we learn.
It's the interaction of those two things that causes our behavior.
A final myth is the naturalistic fallacy.
And the naturalistic fallacy says that if a behavior is built in, then it must be natural and that's the way it should be.
And people sometimes on the political side are afraid of evolution because they think that people are supporting the naturalistic fallacy who are saying that, well, just because it's a natural kind of behavior, that must be the way it should be.
And as we'll see as we go through this, that is certainly not the case, that we get all sorts of mismatches where a particular behavior has been built in that was perfectly appropriate during ancestral times and was a good adaptation during those times but is no longer a good adaptation for us.
There's a mismatch of the environment of our ancestors and today's environment.
And so it certainly can't be the case that because it's natural, that's the way it should be.
Now I would like to go over the archaeological paleontological and genetic kind of record of how we got to be the way we are and the context in which our ancestors evolved.
And so let's go way back about 200 million years ago when mammals were first starting to evolve.
They evolved 200 million years ago and it was only in about 85 million years ago that some of these evolved into primates.
And these primates lived largely in the forests and probably led a nomadic way of life where they moved from one place to another in the forest as food supplies were depleted and they had to move on.
About 35 million years ago our ape ancestors apparently evolved and all of these numbers you can add a million years or so here and there.
The latest paleontological records change these things from time to time.
But about 35 million years ago apes evolved, at least ape ancestors evolved.
And then about 10 million years ago the forests began to disappear and these ape ancestors of ours had to change in ways that allowed them to compete successfully with the plains animals.
And these plains animals were already highly evolved to fit into that environment.
So if you picture this ape that's been living in the forest moving from place to place, eating largely fruit and nuts and other kinds of food and when it runs out moving on to a new place,
kind of living in this proverbial garden of Eden if you will, in the forests and surviving rather successfully.
And now the forests begin to disappear and this ape in order to survive is going to have to go out and compete with these plains animals.
The plains animals are very different.
There are some who graze, who are able to with their digestive system break down cellulose which this ape is not able to do at all by having multiple stomachs and cuds and that sort of thing.
And there certainly is not enough evolutionary time for this ape to evolve as a plant eater, a grazer at least.
Or the plains animals are also carnivorous meat eaters, but those carnivorous meat eaters are very different from the ape as well.
Having sharp claws and teeth and strong jaws and high speed to chase down game animals and that sort of thing.
There are excellent predators that have evolved over millions and millions of years to be this way.
And now this ape has to go out and try to compete with these animals.
And that was quite a problem for the ape.
And so the apes had to kind of make an evolutionary decision.
Now it's not like Planet of the Apes where they're sitting around actually discussing this,
but an evolutionary decision where their ancestors will survive if they make certain,
if those ancestors that have certain adaptations will tend to survive.
About five to four million years ago, again depending upon how you look at the data,
our ancestors evolved the ability to walk on two legs.
And among the many reasons why this adaptation might have been important was to free up the hands.
And these were truly starting to be our real ancestors at this point.
Alright, during this phase then our ancestors had to do certain things in order to be competitive with the plains animals.
And certain kinds of changes had to evolve with these ancestors.
One important change is a process that's sometimes called neotony.
And this is a process whereby at birth the organism is far less developed than other organisms would be.
For example, if you look at a shark, when it's first born, a shark is very old as an animal
and has been the same for many, many years, those baby sharks come out looking just like the parent sharks.
And they're already attacking. In fact, they've probably eaten about half their brothers and sisters
before they're even born because they already have these built-in abilities to attack and that sort of thing.
So they're ready to go when they're born.
By contrast, a human baby is kind of an inept blob when it's born.
It can't do much of anything.
It certainly wouldn't be able to survive on its own, nor will it be able to survive for at least five and maybe ten years.
And so this whole process of neotony where the baby is born with far less brain size,
say, than even our close relatives, chimpanzees.
But what this allows the developing organism to do is do a whole lot more learning.
And certainly psychologists don't deny that learning occurs and is a very important kind of thing.
And the process of neotony has allowed the organism to take in as much as possible during its early development.
The second thing that happened at about this point is that the brain size increased dramatically.
We know that the brain size has something to do with our ability to process information
and do intellectual kinds of activities that are required for survival.
Another thing that apparently happened at about this time was pair bonding.
That is that a man and a woman had to come together and form a pair bond in order to rear this inept offspring.
So you have this offspring that's now unable to take care of itself.
You have to have two parents around because the mother is pretty well tied up with lactation and taking care of the infant.
And you have to have a father involved who also can supply a lot of the goods that are necessary for survival.
And so this pair bond became very important.
And certain kinds of things had to evolve in order to make it more likely that this pair bond would stay together.
And we'll talk about some of those before we're through today.
Another change that occurred about this time is that meat had to replace some of the vegetarian diet.
So that the animal became omnivorous.
So it was partly a plant eater and partly a meat eater.
And then cooperative hunting had to occur in order to get meat supplies.
And this cooperative hunting required men to go out together and to cooperate with one another in order to accomplish this.
And finally, the nomadic way of life that our early ancestors had had to be replaced with a territorial existence as the animals moved on to the plains.
And so our ancestors became territorial instead of nomadic.
So all of these changes kind of set up a context for looking at some interesting questions with respect to evolution.
And now I'm going to move on to Desmond Morris' book, The Naked Ape, and talk about three things he talks about in this book that he thinks makes humans unique and asks some important questions here.
The first one is not quite so important.
It's a bit frivolous, but I think it's an interesting way of using the evolution story to try to explain some of the way humans are.
And this doesn't have to do with our behavior, but it has to do with our physical structure.
And his book was called The Naked Ape.
And so one of the first questions he asks is, why are we naked?
Compared to the other apes, now we're not entirely naked.
We do have a little hair on our bodies, but certainly with respect to the other apes and even our close relative apes like the chimpanzee and the bonobos, we have very little hair on our bodies.
And so he asks that question.
And so you have to consider these questions within the evolutionary story and say, what adaptive value do we have from being relatively hairless?
And there are a number of possibilities that he considers, several hypotheses.
One possibility is that it has to do with cleanliness and disease.
If you take an ancestor that has traditionally moved around in the forest and had a nomadic way of life, then this ancestor by moving from time to time doesn't have to do much in terms of cleanliness.
In fact, if this ancestor is going to take care of its bodily waste, doesn't have to worry much about that, falls right out of the trees and you don't have to do much about it.
If you take that ancestor now and move it to a territorial existence, you have a very different situation where you have to take care of some of these kinds of things.
Now, if you have hair all over your body and you're trying to take care of some of these cleanliness kinds of problems,
you can imagine that the hair will contribute to certain kinds of diseases.
And the ancestors that tended to be hairier would tend to be more disease prone and less likely to pass their genes on to the next generation.
And if that's the case, then those who had less hair would be more likely to pass their genes on and these ancestors would get progressively less hairy.
It even might be due to fleas because fleas, the way fleas work is that they are kind of parasites.
They attach themselves to a host animal like your dog and they jump off your dog, lay their eggs and then when the eggs hatch,
the little new fleas jump back on your dog and are carried around.
Now, if you take an ancestor who has a nomadic way of life and has fleas, the fleas jump off to lay their eggs,
the ancestor moves on and doesn't have to worry about flea infestations.
If you now take that ancestor and put them in a territorial existence, that ancestor may have problems with fleas
and that may contribute to certain kinds of diseases and sicknesses and lack of survival.
So that was suggested as a possibility.
Another possibility that was suggested is that nakedness might lead to more satisfying sex.
It's just kind of more fun to rub two bodies together when they're covered with skin than when they're covered with fur
and that this might have contributed to successful pair bonding.
So that has been suggested as a possibility as well.
A third possibility that's been suggested is that there was an aquatic phase
that rather than the ancestors immediately moving into the plains to compete with those animals,
that perhaps our ancestors move toward the coastal areas.
And it's even been suggested that our ancestors might have been moving back to the water,
much like the dolphins and the whales who are mammals that once lived on the land and moved back into the water.
Perhaps our ancestors, in order to compete, were moving back into the water.
Obviously, if you have a fur coat on coastal areas where you're trying to compete
by going out and wading in the waters and picking up your food with shells and that sort of thing,
having a fur coat would not be a very good adaptation.
So losing the hair might have been an important adaptation.
All of those have been suggested, but the most widely accepted version of how we became relatively hairless
is to cool us down, especially with long distance running.
Apparently, our ancestors, because they were relatively slow,
they couldn't chase down their game in a 30 second period of time,
like a lion or a tiger sitting there waiting for the game to come by
and then putting on a burst of speed and grabbing the gazelle and bringing it to the ground.
Our ancestors were not able to do that at all.
They were rather slow, walking on two legs.
They couldn't run very fast, but they could run long distances,
at least if they got rid of the fur coat.
So it's been suggested that becoming hairless was an important adaptation for cooling down.
Humans can outrun almost all other animals, including animals even like horses.
Again, not very fast, takes them a long time to do it, but humans run long distances
and that's probably the way our ancestors hunted.
But again, you can't do that with a fur coat.
So by getting rid of the hair and developing instead subcutaneous fat tissue,
much like a wetsuit that a diver might wear,
and then by being able to perspire and turn ourselves into evaporative coolers,
we became very efficient at cooling ourselves down.
And that's the most widely accepted version of why we are the naked ape.
Now let's talk about two things that are a bit more serious.
One is sex and one is aggression before we end today.
And Morris asks why humans are the sexiest of the apes, and we most assuredly are.
If you look at the physical structure of humans,
a lot of what we have is for making sex more fun.
Let me give you just a couple of examples on the structural side.
Why do women have breasts?
Well, you might say, well, women lactate, so they have to have something to produce milk.
Well, so do chimpanzees, but you don't see chimpanzees with breasts.
Why do we have these physical protuberances outside the body?
And Morris suggests that that's because it makes sex more fun.
Why do we have earlobes?
It's not to make hearing better.
Perhaps earlobes are for sex as well.
Why do we have puckered lips that are sort of permanently puckered?
Chimpanzees make fun of us and take their lips and turn them inside out
when they're around humans to try to imitate the human.
They think we look pretty funny with our permanently puckered lips.
Again, perhaps that's because it makes sex more enjoyable.
Why do we have face-to-face sex for the most part amongst humans?
Again, perhaps because it makes it more enjoyable.
And it's suggested that maybe part of the reason we lost our hair as well.
So all of these structural changes, but we have other changes as well,
such as behavioral changes that make sex more fun as well.
One of them, of course, is the constant receptivity of the woman.
In most animals, the female is sexually receptive only after ovulation takes place,
at which time she can produce offspring.
And the rest of sex is sort of a big waste of time if it happened in the other animals.
Why do humans have situations where the woman is sexually receptive all of the time?
It certainly makes sex more fun.
We also have things like the privacy of the sex act.
Well, according to Desmond Morris, all of these things were for the purpose of making sex more fun.
And for strengthening the parabond.
That sex is kind of at least one of the glues that holds together the parabond.
If we didn't have constant receptivity of the female,
the male might be running off looking for it elsewhere during the time that she's not ovulating.
And that would not be positive for holding together a parabond.
So he contends that sex is for the most part for holding the parabond together,
at least the way humans have sex.
Now we can get into some kind of problems because of a mismatch of the current environment
with these evolved tendencies.
These tendencies probably evolved in a situation where there was a territorial way of existence.
And so the males would gather together and form a coalition to go out hunting.
The women would be left behind.
The males would come back, each going to their own territory, enjoy sex, and that would be it.
Well today, of course, that's not the way we live.
We are constantly men and women running into one another,
sending out sexual signals to one another because we meet in our workplaces.
We meet in all sorts of different places, not in our little territories.
And that can cause us problems.
And Morris suggests that this is part of the reason why we do have some current problems
with our parabonding, because this sexual behavior is left over from ancestral times
that were different than today's times.
The final thing I want to talk about today has to do with aggression.
And he asks the question,
why have humans brought themselves to the brink of annihilation in terms of aggression?
When he wrote this book, it was still at the end of the Cold War period
where we were thinking that perhaps we would wipe each other out.
Everybody was sitting there with their nuclear weapons pointed at one another.
And the question is, why is that the case?
Those who believe in the blank slate would suggest that,
well, because we teach our children war, that's why we have war.
What Desmond Morris said, and he was one of the first people saying that,
is that aggression is natural, particularly for animals with strong male competition,
as is the case with humans.
So aggression is part of our being.
The way we used to have aggression is one male on another male,
and they would use their fists and bang on each other a little bit
until one said, wait, wait, uncle, uncle, I give up.
And then the other one would quit banging on him with his fists,
and that's the way we had aggression.
We didn't kill each other nearly to the extent that we do nowadays,
at least according to Desmond Morris.
And what he says is, that's not the way we kill each other anymore.
We kill each other now with technologically advanced weapons,
all the way from the invention of the arrow,
all the way through guns to intercontinental ballistic missiles,
where we now can kill each other at a distance,
and we don't have built-in behavioral mechanisms against killing each other with these weapons.
There's no way to say, uncle anymore, if you're not face-to-face with the person you're killing,
and if you're using advanced technological advances, weapons.
Amongst the animals who have killing weapons, like sharp teeth and claws,
they generally don't kill each other,
and they've developed ritualized ways of fighting,
where they'll go toward one another back and forth until one of them gives up
and lowers his body and says, essentially, uncle for an animal,
and that's an indication that the fight is over.
But we don't have ways of doing that with our modern killing weapons,
and Morris suggests that if you want to solve this kind of problem,
you can't naively say, well, let's not teach war anymore,
but what we have to do is develop social ways through society and culture
of having these inhibitions about using our killing weapons on each other,
because they're not built-in to the human.
So today we introduced evolution.
We talked about some of the principles of evolution and the requirements of evolution,
and then we talked some about how evolution has fit within psychology.
We also talked about some of the myths with respect to evolution.
We told a story about sort of the environmental context of evolution,
and then we used Desmond Morris's writings to talk about three particular issues
with respect to evolution, the naked ape, the sexy ape, and the aggressive ape.
In the next two lectures, we're going to go into much more detail about evolutionary psychology.
Thank you.
