Lecture 34 Evolutionary Psychology, War, Family, Food
This is our third lecture on evolutionary psychology.
In the first lecture we talked about some of the basics of evolutionary psychology,
and in the second lecture we talked about two particular topics that might,
that light might be shed by evolutionary psychology, that's altruism,
and we also talked about mating behavior,
in particular the difference in mating behavior between men and women.
Today I want to talk about three other topics
and hope that evolutionary psychology can shed some light on these.
The first topic is aggression, including homicide and war.
The second topic that we're going to talk about is family, including parenting,
and also the kinds of conflicts we find in families.
And the third topic is eating behavior,
and perhaps we might be able to explain some of the modern problems with obesity
with respect to eating behaviors through understanding them from an evolutionary perspective.
So those are the three topics for today.
So let's start out with aggression.
Given that violent crime and warfare are concerns of the modern world,
is there anything we can take from the evolution story that might help us to understand those things?
Well first of all, both men and women are aggressive to an extent,
but by and large men are far more aggressive,
they certainly commit more homicides than women do to a great degree.
Now why is that?
We considered this a little bit in the last lecture,
and discovered that men would be more aggressive and engage in more conflict
because they are the less choosy of the sexes,
and so for part of the reason at least is the fact that they are trying to gain access to women,
the women being the choosier,
and we know that men, not only human men, but males in the animal kingdom,
when the female is choosier, the men are more aggressive and are differentially larger.
We're a bit larger than women,
but if you look at other species you'll find males sometimes almost twice as big as the women,
and those are very aggressive and combative males typically in those species.
After all, every time one man has access to more than one woman,
another man has access to no women,
and so this is a very competitive kind of world out there,
especially in ancestral times because we believe from a lot of evidence
that during ancestral times there was a lot more polygony involved.
There were a lot more men who had access to women, to harems,
and there were a lot more men who had access to no women,
and under those circumstances one would predict a great deal of aggression.
And this evidence is even supported by some of the genetic findings.
If you look at genes that are passed down through mothers versus genes that are passed down through fathers,
you find that those passed down by mothers are more variable than those passed down by fathers.
And the explanation for that is that more women contributed to these genes than was the case for men.
There were fewer men who were creating more offspring than there are women who created offspring,
and we can see that even in the genetic record.
And this is some support for our contention that there was considerable more polygony in the world.
There's actually, we like to nowadays in the western world think that most folks are monogamous,
or at least engage in serial monogamy, if not straight monogamy,
but in fact if you look at the various societies in the world and count the number of societies,
there are a larger number of societies, even today, that engage in polygony,
then have monogamous relationships as their primary type of relationship.
And so this probably was the way things happened.
We also know that about the time that civilizations were starting,
especially in the early civilizations,
men often had, the highest rulers had access to many, many women.
There are some rulers who fathered as many as 500 to 1000 children
by having lots and lots of wives and concubines and that sort of thing.
So there's a lot of evidence of this, and that points up to the fact that there would be a lot of aggression
and conflict in such societies.
Martin Daley and Margot Wilson published a book called Homicide,
which has become quite a famous book,
and they studied a number of cities in Canada and also the city of Detroit in this country,
and they looked at who kills whom and why.
And one of the things that they found is that, as we mentioned before,
men are much more likely to commit homicide,
and the ones most likely to commit homicide are unmarried men and unemployed men.
And that's what you would predict from this theory of competition.
Unmarried men because they're desperate and don't have access to women,
and unemployed men because they don't even have the resources that would be required to attract a woman.
And so these guys are pretty desperate and compete with each other
to the point where they sometimes murder each other.
Another finding from this that would be predicted is that the men are most likely to commit murder
when they are in their peak reproductive years, in their mid-twenties, in fact,
and that homicide rates fall rather dramatically thereafter.
Right now in the United States, we're in a situation where the rates of crime and homicide in particular
have dropped off rather markedly in the last decade.
And the best explanation for that is not that police forces are doing a better job,
that we're doing a better job with our laws or anything like that.
If you just look at the demographics of our society,
we have a smaller proportion of males in their mid-twenties than was the case a decade ago,
and that probably explains most of the change in the crime statistics.
If you look at police reports, Martin and Daley did this in their book, Homicide,
and try to find out why people kill each other, men in particular,
the major reason that men kill each other in the police reports, they just say,
well, it was for no reason at all that they were standing in the bar
and the one guy insulted the other guy and the other one got mad
and they started yelling at each other and somebody pulled a knife or a gun, and that was it.
And it was for no reason at all. Well, actually, it was for a great reason.
The reason has to do with status and reputation.
And by being insulted, that lowers your status in the eyes of the other folks around
and especially for these desperate men who want status more than anything else
so that they can attract women, this is a terrible insult to them,
and those are fighting words when it happens.
Now, it seems a bit weird in our current society,
maybe this person in the bar doesn't even know anybody else in the bar.
Now, why should I be concerned if somebody insults me in a bar when I don't even know anybody there?
Well, our genes don't really know what the circumstances are.
Our genes are left over from ancestral times.
And if you picture the way our ancestors lived, they lived in groups of about 60 to 100 at the most
where everybody knew each other.
A third of the people were probably kin and knew each other that way.
And the women that were available were in that group.
And so it was very important to have status in this group.
And you didn't want to be insulted by anybody in this group.
And so our genes are set up to have behavioral predispositions
to considering these fighting words and engaging in aggression
when somebody denigrates our status.
And that's apparently what's happening in these situations.
The leading cause of homicides of men on women is sexual jealousy.
And again, this would be predicted.
You remember from our discussion in the last lecture,
the worst thing that can happen to a man is to be providing resources
to genetic offspring that are not his.
And this happens more frequently than we probably like to admit.
Even in today's society, when they do genetic testing
to see how often the purported father is the father of the child,
in about 10% of the cases, the father is not the biological father of the child.
I find that an astounding kind of statistic, even in our society.
And in ancestral times, it was probably even a larger number.
So the result of that behavior is men want to guard their spouses very carefully
and want to make sure that their spouses do not engage in infidelity
so that they would be in this terrible position of providing resources
for genetic material that's not theirs.
So sexual jealousy is one of the major reasons why men aggress on women,
both in terms of spouse abuse and in terms of homicide.
And this also occurs when the woman leaves the man as well.
And they're in an estranged situation as you're reading the newspaper
in the next few months and you read about a man attacking a woman somehow
and often the woman's lover, the O.J. Simpson kind of scenario,
notice that it's probably due to sexual infidelity,
at least a suspected sexual infidelity,
or else the woman has just recently left the man.
Women don't usually kill other women, but they are aggressive.
They're more likely to be verbally aggressive
or to assault other women by calling them names.
And the favorites are calling them in some form of being ugly
or some form of being promiscuous, calling them a slut.
And you can see why this would be the case.
Remember what the man saw as the most desirable characteristic in the woman,
and that's beauty.
And beauty was important because it was associated with fertility.
One thing one woman might want to point out about another woman
is that she doesn't have this beauty.
She's ugly.
And the other thing, of course, it's important that we were just talking about,
is fidelity.
And so she calls her a slut.
She says, you don't want to be associated with this woman.
She's not going to be faithful to you.
And so she's bad that way.
So that's the way women are more likely to attack each other.
Humans, and to some extent chimpanzees,
are the only animals to form male coalitions
for the purpose of engaging in warfare.
We used to think it was just humans,
but there's a fairly recent report of chimpanzees,
male chimpanzees banding together and going out into the woods
and hunting down a male chimpanzee from another group
and actually tackling this chimpanzee and beating it to death,
which begins to look a little bit even like human warfare.
One of the things that philosophers proposed as a precursor to psychology
was the notion of the noble savage.
That is that if you just left people alone,
they would be peaceful and that they would not engage in warfare
and aggression, that we have to teach each other warfare and aggression.
And this was fairly widely accepted not only by the philosophers,
but by many of the early sociologists and anthropologists as well.
Margaret Mead became famous for looking at a particular culture
and claiming that they were a very peaceful culture.
But it turns out that this is not really the case.
There's a fellow named Napoleon Shagnon,
who's one of the most famous anthropologists
and perhaps infamous anthropologists as well,
for a reason I'll talk about in a minute.
What Shagnon did was study the Yanamama population of the Amazon,
and he studied them over a long period of time
and wrote one of the most beautiful books by an anthropologist
about this particular culture.
And he lived with them and studied them.
And one of the things he discovered is that these people are far
from being noble savages, even in their pre-state civilization,
that the men in particular engage in great amounts of aggression
and warfare on other groups in the forest.
The average man has participated in a killing.
The majority of men have,
and approximately, kind of depends how you count,
10 to 20% of men are killed by other folks in these cultures.
And that knocked down the noble savage concept.
Anthropologists didn't like that very much,
and in fact, Napoleon Shagnon himself was censored
by the American Anthropological Association.
It was only a couple of weeks ago
that the American Anthropological Association
withdrew this censure of Shagnon.
They accused him of genocide
and of spreading measles among this group
to study how the measles killed off the group.
It was totally false,
but it probably came out of this general reaction
to the fact he had challenged the noble savage concept.
Okay, even among neighborhood gangs,
sort of the equivalent today of tribal warfare,
we know that the biggest things that they fight over
are status and access to women.
Let's move on to the second topic,
which is family dynamics and what goes on in families.
And first, let's ask the question,
who cares for the children?
And there's a fairly simple answer to that question.
Mothers care for the children to a far greater degree
than men do across all cultures.
This is not something that's just in this country,
where it gets complained about a lot,
but it's true across the world in all cultures this is the case.
There are probably some fairly good reasons
why this is the case.
For one thing, fathers, as I just was mentioning a few minutes ago,
are less certain that the children are theirs.
So when they're caring for the children,
they may be wasting their resources,
or there's some probability at least
that they are wasting their resources when they do that.
A second reason might be that the...
Let me say one other thing about that.
You may notice that when you have a new child,
that the father walks into the room,
and the mother and all the mother's relatives
immediately start saying how much the child looks like the father.
I've had a couple of children,
neither one of them I thought looked much like me.
I usually don't think the children look like adults at all.
But I was assured, as is always the case,
by everybody how much this child looks like me,
and that's something that obviously ought to happen.
They want the father to believe that it is indeed his child.
A second reason why fathers might not take care of their children as much
is that they have other fish to fry.
They might be able to maximize their reproductive potential
outside this pair-bonded relationship as well.
So they may have other interests other than just the ones in the pair bond,
where the mother's interests are pretty much within the pair bond.
Let's talk about a slightly different family dynamic issue,
and this has to do with step-parents.
What happens with step-parents?
Because now you have a parent who's not biologically related to the offspring.
What would you predict would happen with step-parents?
Well, you'd predict that there might be some problems there, wouldn't you?
In fact, there aren't step-parents in much of the animal kingdom.
And amongst lions, for example, if a lion takes over a new kind of female lion,
and she has some young lions, what are cubs are they called?
Then it's quite likely that the male will kill those cubs.
He doesn't want to adopt them as step-children.
In humans, we, of course, do adopt step-children by marrying.
And one might expect, however, that those children would be in some peril.
And indeed, they are.
Again, in the book Homicide, they looked at the likelihood
that step-children would be harmed particularly by their step-fathers,
and they found that those children were more likely to be abused
and more likely to be killed.
In fact, step-fathers kill their non-biological children
at between 40 and 100 times more than their biological children would be killed.
I didn't say 40% to 100%.
I said 40 to 100 times more likely to be killed.
Now, you might think that's a terrible, terrible situation,
and all these poor step-children.
I would also point out that for both groups,
the homicide rates are below 0.1%, so less than a tenth of a percent.
This happens, but mainly because we are very unlikely to kill our biological children.
Very unlikely.
That's why when you see it in the newspaper,
it's quite striking when a mother kills her children, for example.
It's in the headlines because we find that so unusual.
It goes so much against what evolutionary theory would predict.
So there is some problem with step-fathers,
and that's what would be predicted by evolutionary theory.
Let's talk about one other family dynamic situation,
and that's conflicts in families,
particularly conflicts between children and parents and children and children.
If we go back to looking at how related various members of the family are,
you'll recall that parents are related to their children by 50%.
And so if I'm a parent, I, in fact, am a parent, and I have two sons,
each of them is related to me 50%.
They ought to share equally because they're both equally valuable to me.
They're both containing 50% of my genes.
So why don't you guys share that item, that food?
Let's split it down the middle, each of you get half.
It sounds good to me.
It doesn't sound good to them.
It doesn't sound good to them because that's not what their relationship is.
They're related to each other to themselves at 100%.
They're only related to each other at 50%.
So what do they think the split ought to be?
I think if I'm one of the children,
I think I ought to get twice as much as my brother if that's the case
because I'm related to myself 100% and related to him only 50%.
Now that conflict will break down when they're challenged by other folks
who are not related to them.
Then, of course, the brothers will stand up to each other
if they're 50% related to the other person
and not related to the attacker or the other person who's challenging them at all.
So all of this is very well predicted by relatedness
and going back to Hamilton's rule of saying,
what should the family dynamics be in terms of relationship?
So if you have trouble with your kids and you say,
I don't understand why these kids can't get along,
well, it's all built in.
I mean, it's exactly what you would predict from evolutionary theory.
And I shouldn't say it's all built in
because there are obviously environmental considerations as well.
And we sometimes do favor some children over other children,
but at least at the base rate level,
this is quite predictable by evolutionary theory.
It's even predictable some of the conflict in terms of breastfeeding
and how long a baby ought to be breastfed
because from the baby's point of view,
where, again, the baby's 100% related to himself or herself,
they think they ought to be breastfed forever.
They don't care whether the mother wants to stop and have more kids
and the mother, on the other hand,
feels that when the cost to her exceeds the benefit to the child,
then she ought to quit breastfeeding and get on with it and start rearing a new baby.
And so there's, again, this conflict about when this should happen.
This has been plotted in curves,
and you can show that the mother wants to stop earlier than the baby wants to stop.
Let's move on to the third topic here,
and that has to do with eating behavior.
And we know from recent figures that about two-thirds of the U.S. population is overweight
and about a third of the U.S. population is obese.
Now, why is that?
And that's a fairly recent phenomenon,
and I think we can point out from evolutionary theory why this happens
and why it's a fairly recent phenomenon, even.
First, we have to understand a few concepts.
For one thing, we have a set point that tries to control our weight for us.
And this, again, comes out of an evolutionary adaptation
of trying to keep enough weight on you that you can survive during lean times.
And so this set point sits there, and when you get a lot to eat,
it keeps your weight down, but when you're not getting much to eat,
it changes your metabolism enough to try to maintain weight.
So you have enough reserves that when famine comes along, you can do all right with it.
So we have this set point that we're fighting to begin with.
And that's one of the main reasons people have trouble dieting and losing weight
because the set point keeps working against them as they're dieting.
Perhaps what's more important from an evolutionary point of view
is that in ancestral times, fat was kind of like our refrigerator or our freezer.
That's where we stored our food supplies.
Not having refrigerators and freezers where you could do this,
there wasn't anywhere else you could store food.
So you stored it in your fat supplies.
And that's part of the reason why women generally carry about twice as much fat as men do
because they have to also have food supplies for developing offspring
during the prenatal period as well.
So they do carry additional fats on their bodies
for the very important reason of providing these during the prenatal period
and also during the period of lactation,
which in ancestral times probably lasted three or four years.
Now, if you were going to build an ideal machine for ancestral times,
you would build it in so that fats and sugars and carbohydrates just tasted wonderful, wouldn't you?
Because whenever you run across this stuff,
since times were tough a lot of the time in the ancestral period,
you would want to carry as much of this reserve as you can.
Where do you get that reserve? You get it from eating fatty things,
you get it from eating sweet things and from eating carbohydrates.
So it's not surprising that we are built so that we love these things.
I fully well admit, I mean, I love bacon.
I would put lots of fat in bacon.
Tastes wonderful, doesn't it?
And I would put fat and bacon on my hamburgers
and you'll notice that we are doing that.
I remember 30, 40 years ago, you wouldn't go into a hamburger shop
and get bacon on your hamburger,
but the food producers know that people love this stuff,
so they put it right on there.
They add fat to things.
The people who are breeders have made our animals much fatter.
There's a bit of a trend back the other way now,
but for a long time you wanted a highly marbled steak.
What does that mean?
That means that you can get as much fat into this thing as you can.
During ancestral times, even meat was game meat.
And if you've ever had venison or something like that,
one of the problems with cooking venison is you've got to keep the thing moist
and you've got to add fat to it to keep it so that it tastes pretty good to you.
Venison has very little fat, less than 5% fat.
A good beef cow will have 45% fat in its meat,
and it's been bred to be that way.
So there's this big mismatch between what happened in ancestral times
and what's going on today.
Sugar, where did our ancestors get sugar?
Well, they got very little sugar.
They would get sugar every now and then.
They might run across a beehive or something like that
and be able to get some sugar.
And perhaps they got a little sugar with their fruits and that sort of thing,
but they didn't have the sugar the way we do.
Boy, do we have cheap, refined sugar.
And do we use it a lot?
The average person eats two-thirds of a cup of sugar a day in our society.
Two-thirds of a cup of sugar.
That's a huge amount of sugar, probably more than our ancestors would get in a month.
And we eat it in a day.
Is it any wonder that we have these kinds of problems?
If you look at fat and carbohydrates in today's diet,
they make up about 90% of today's diets.
And judging from a lot of evidence from ancestral times,
the ancestral diet probably contained about 60% of fats and carbohydrates in their diets.
So that's one of the reasons we have problems with obesity.
We have this mismatch between today's society and ancestral times.
Not only in the amount we eat, but in our activity levels as well.
Our ancestors were probably about as fit as Olympic athletes.
And they had to be, because every day they were out there hunting for the men,
and sometimes the women, and gathering food and walking miles and miles
to get the food and carrying it back on their backs and their heads,
along with carrying their babies along with them.
It was tough times, and these people were extremely fit.
Now, they weren't fit because they wanted to be fit.
I mean, they didn't think about going to the gym and working out.
That was the last thing our ancestors would do is go to the gym and work out.
What did they do when they didn't have to be out there hunting or gathering?
They were couch potatoes.
They lay back. If you want to be somebody's ancestor,
you don't go out and waste a lot of energy doing things that don't contribute
to your survival and your reproduction.
What you do is save your energy and use it only for survival and reproduction.
That's the way to become somebody's ancestor, not by wasting energy.
And so we're built to be couch potatoes.
We have behavioral tendencies that say,
if this is not contributing to your livelihood,
then lie back, forget about it, enjoy yourself.
And that's left over from ancestral times.
And so we have to think about going to the gym.
We have to think about going out and running.
It's not built into us to do it that way.
Okay, so I hope you found this interesting.
Today we talked about a couple of topics.
One was aggression, conflict, and war.
And talked about whether we can learn some things by taking a perspective from evolution.
We talked about family, rearing kids.
We talked about the conflict in families and can some of those be explained by evolution.
And then finally we talked about eating behavior and activity levels
and tried to see whether we could explain some of the problems
we have in today's society in evolutionary terms.
Thank you.
