Hey everyone, this video is gonna be a little bit different from what I normally do here.
While I normally do a deep dive into some odd figure or issue that I find funny and
connect that to some broader sociological idea like a cat proudly presenting a dead
bird to its owners, in this video we're gonna get serious and take a step back to tackle
the real issues that we as a species face.
We're going to be talking about the deceptively simple, yet for that very reason all the more
revolutionary text down to earth with Zac Efron.
In Mark Fisher's book Capitalist Realism, he, I'm just gonna level with you, I took
too long making my last video and I've got a couple extremely research heavy videos
coming up so I thought for this month we could just relax and talk about something
extremely funny and dumb.
If you're here to learn about sociology and history then come back in March, but for
the rest of you let's all just relax a little bit by putting our brains in the microwave
and hitting defrost.
Just a heads up, I don't really do media criticism much so if this turns out bad, I'm
sorry.
On the bright side, if I mess this up, maybe people will finally stop comparing me to left
tube heartthrob Big Joel.
Oh how we love our beautiful king Big Joel, you'll all cry, we're in hell is nothing
but a slimy rat, you'll jeer.
I'm gonna be honest, I have not been getting much sleep lately.
Down to Earth is a show about Zac Efron and his friend slash, I guess mentor, Darren
Alwine, traveling the world and having a great time doing fun activities, seeing beautiful
places and enjoying amazing food.
At the same time, they're doing all of this as a way to use Zac's massive platform to
spread awareness about climate change.
On the one hand, the show presents a prime piece of escapism, especially in a year when
those fun things are impossible, it's nice for us to just relax a bit and watch these
two big dumb men enjoy a world which is for the time inaccessible to us.
On the other hand, the explicitly stated purpose of the show is to be a call to action for
viewers to stand up and personally take actions to fight against climate change for the sake
of preserving human life on Earth.
There's a weird tension between these two themes, we're shown Zac and Darren interviewing
a climate scientist from the London School of Economics who explains the need for bold
political action to prevent climate catastrophe.
And then their next stop is to go ride the world's largest tunnel slide.
As we'll see, Down to Earth constantly presents us with these types of dichotomies which it
brings together in a way that both highlights and muddies them.
By the way, totally unrelated, but back when I was in university talking about muddied
dichotomies was my go-to way to bullshit an English essay?
You see, these two loose themes are presented as opposites, except in the cases when they
aren't, which means that any holes in my argument only serve to strengthen my case.
We see the same narrative tension play out again through the two hosts of the show, Zac
and Darren.
Again, a dichotomy is presented and then subverted as the show brings together two seemingly
opposite visions of masculinity.
On the one hand, we see a force of good who is tragically flawed by his own naivete manifested
in the himbo.
On the other hand, we see the himbo's dark inverse, the villainous grifter.
Zac Efron is the main host of the show and also a massive idiot.
He does honestly strike me as nice and well-intentioned, but oh man, he is not smart.
He has a lot of really great dumb guy moments, which are honestly some of the best parts
of the show.
Like, in the Costa Rica episode, a guy explains how they burn their sewage as a form of fuel
and Zac says it looks like burns like the Olympic torch.
Or in Italy, they go to Sardinia, a town with an unusually high number of people over the
age of 100.
Zac spends the day with a 97-year-old guy and is super impressed by the fact that the
guy fought in World War II.
He served in World War II as a pilot and later, he was a shepherd.
But like, he fought for Italy?
We actually just spend like half an episode showing how cute this little old fascist is.
If you live long enough, you end up living several different lives.
Well, I obviously have no proof of this.
I am certain that there was a point when Zac thanked him for his surface and they had to
cut that out in post.
Oh, this sweet old man just loves the carnival.
Apparently, when he was young, he was involved in something called the March on Rome.
Zac's hymn bonus comes out in full force, though, when in a bunch of the episodes he
learns about sustainability by getting a tour of like a big public works facility, like
a geothermal power plant or a water treatment center.
The way this plays out is that the person giving them the tour will just be some civil
servant who, while I'm sure they're good at whatever their actual job is, they aren't
interesting.
And so, to compensate, the show focuses on Zac, who will either get bored or, say something
weird, or best of all, sometimes he'll just get rowdy.
Like, when they go to a lab in Peru that researches potatoes, Zac watches them do an experiment
with liquid nitrogen, which he doesn't really pay any attention to, but then gets them to
pour the liquid nitrogen over his GoPro to see if it still works.
There are also a few points where you wind up feeling pretty bad for Zac.
He talks about how he lost a big part of his childhood by having to grow up in the public
eye.
And when they go to Italy and learn all about this town where people live abnormally long
lives, a subject which I think is legitimately pretty interesting, Zac's big takeaway is
just that it's okay to eat carbs sometimes.
And it's like, damn, this guy has not had any control over his life since he was like
14.
While Zac is pretty naive and misguided, he is basically a force of good on the show.
Darin Olien, on the other hand, is a very different animal altogether.
Darin is a health and wellness expert that Zac heard on a podcast and decided to make
a show with.
I love the fact that they're just so open about how the show feels completely like the
type of thing Zac and Darin decide to do at 7am after being out all night on coke.
Anyway, Darin's one of those ripped health guys who looks like he could be anywhere between
30 and 60 years old and he's the fucking worst.
In terms of his role as like a character on the show, I would describe Darin as a deeply
malevolent presence.
While Zac has plenty of faults, I'd say that he comes off as a pretty genuinely nice
guy whenever he's on screen.
Darin on the other hand, while he isn't often just a straight up jerk, he's sort
of a stern no-it-all and it's not very pleasant to watch him.
My personal headcanon is that Zac is in a sort of MK-Ultra-Manchurian-Candit situation
and Darin is his handler.
Darin's actual deal though is that he's basically a health food expert slash influencer, you
know, a grifter.
Some of you may also be unfortunate enough to know him as the co-creator of Shakeology,
a meal replacement protein shake that's sold by the fitness company Beachbody, which is
a pyramid scheme.
Weirdly, Down to Earth doesn't really talk much about Darin's scientific background
as a Shakeologist.
Instead, Darin's deal is that he's all about alternative healing and superfoods, which
he wrote a book on called SuperLife.
In his book, he makes a lot of really sketchy health claims and like, he's really shitty
about it too.
Organic blackberries cost double the normal kind?
How does that compare to the price of chemotherapy?
How does burning out your insides with toxic chemicals and destroying your immune system
and puking out your guts and losing all your hair stack up against spending $3 more on
that organic produce?
In the show, Darin takes every opportunity to talk about how whatever they're eating
is actually a superfood, to a point where the term becomes completely meaningless.
In fact, at one point, he even gives the game away by saying that something being a superfood
basically just means it's more healthy than a doughnut.
So superfoods, Darin, is your kind of specialty, right?
Yeah.
What does it mean?
It's really about per bite, let's call it.
Having more micronutrients in them that, say, eating a doughnut would have, right?
You could technically say everything we're eating right now is superfoods.
It's funny because Darin's job is supposedly being a superfood hunter, meaning that he
finds obscure and exotic health foods and sells them to Westerners for obscene prices.
But if almost any food they eat on the show is a superfood, it seems like we don't really
need to buy Darin's incredibly overpriced Brazilian nuts.
Regardless, the show really tries to sell this fiction that these two guys are best buddies
on a road trip together with lots of fun scenes them just riffing in the car.
But like, these guys don't seem like friends, do they?
Have you met my friend Chris Kringle?
When I brought presents.
Have you seen my ring, dear?
Have you seen my cookies?
Hey, Zach, do you want a sand surf?
It's called sandboarding.
Sand surfing.
Sandboarding.
Sandboarding.
Do you feel like sand surfing?
In the words of Owen Wilson?
Wow.
Wow.
Wow.
Wow.
Wow.
That's rude.
Honestly, I can really feel for Zach here because Darin seems like the absolute worst person
I could possibly imagine taking a road trip with.
His vibe is kind of a combination of new age spiritual guy and bro-y jock, but in a way
where he just combines the absolute worst aspects of both.
In the second episode, they go to France and once they cross the border, Darin asks them
to pull over so that they can do this.
It's something I like to do when I hit another country, just to feel the earth, like just
like take the shoes off, feel the earth, get grounded, feel the pulse of the earth.
And so they just have to get out barefoot on the side of the road to feel the earth.
A little bit later in the same episode, while they're in the car, they start talking about
how Zach's able to cry on demand.
He shows how he's able to do that.
And then this happens.
Kind of sad, isn't it?
It's kind of sad.
It's kind of a little sad.
Well, yeah it is.
It's kind of sad.
I just can't imagine a worse guy to spend time with than someone who's going to force
you into participating in all their obnoxious white guy spirituality bullshit, but also
no homo's his friend for showing emotional vulnerability.
A good way to really show the difference between Zach and Darin would be to look at the pranks
they pull on each other.
Pranks are a good thing bros love doing to each other, right?
And since these are some very normal bros, I'm sure it'll be great.
Zach really, really loves pulling pranks, which is very funny because he's bad at them.
So he'll do these really bad, poorly executed pranks and then just explode laughing in a
way that's completely disproportionate to the small inconveniences caused.
That's a nice try.
Happy birthday to you, to the Camu Camu Gods.
We got you so good!
In contrast, Darin has sort of a running gag throughout the show where anytime they come
across a goat he makes Zach milk it while he stands over him menacingly and laughs.
And then at one point he literally commands Zach to drink the milk and he does.
Obviously comedy is very subjective, I don't know if I could say that one is necessarily
better than the other, but those are definitely very different kinds of pranks.
Another good example of the contrast between these two visions of dumb guy would be in
episode 5 when they go to a lab in Lima that has a walk-in freezer that's negative 20
degrees celsius so they have to put on winter coats when they go in.
Zach bundles himself up and then jumps around a bunch freaking out about how cold it is
whereas Darin leaves the jacket open and when they leave the freezer he says that he actually
liked it in there.
To be honest here I'm not sure if this is actually that funny or if I've just been
staring at this for too long but this feels like such a weird flex but okay thing.
I live in Canada and while it's not the coldest where I live it usually dips down to negative
20 for maybe a week every winter.
I can definitely say as someone who's been a cigarette smoker being in negative 20 for
a few minutes with an open jacket isn't pleasant but it's also not impressive.
Darin saying that he liked it feels like something that like a little kid would brag about.
Like it's not an accomplishment to have done that but I also don't believe that he
enjoyed it.
Another really funny thing is how much product placement there is in the show.
In literally every single shot everything Zach is wearing is RVCA.
The best part is that they do things that you should obviously not be wearing skater
clothes for.
In the last episode they hiked through ankle deep water in the Amazon rainforest and Zach
looks so uncomfortable.
There's also funny stuff like how whenever they plan what they're going to do there's
a shot of Darin using his phone to book the activities on TripAdvisor or they'll act
like they're experiencing all these exotic traditional customs but are just incredibly
clearly staying at Hilton hotels.
Apparently I'm not a Viking until I do a fire and ice massage back at the hotel.
If you want to be a real Icelandic Viking you have to go in here into the cold tub and
then you can go a little bit into the hot water.
There's also just so much pseudoscience in it.
Then we see muddy dichotomies at work where the way they'll bring up all their bullshit
claims will be by first explaining some extremely basic pop science fact and then following that
up with a pseudoscience claim as if it naturally follows.
You got to get the electromagnetic connection to the earth again to help your circadian rhythm.
Well it turns out the circadian rhythm really is a thing.
It's basically your internal clock and one more thing water in motion produces negative
ions which are known to relieve stress, reduce tension, fight depression, and increase energy.
They also do this by talking to a mix of actual experts and then also just Darin's grifter
friends as if they're equally credible.
Like they'll talk to scientists and experts in their field and then also a beekeeper who
thinks GMOs kill bees and a British influencer who claims going vegan cured all her diseases.
The second episode is all about Zach and Darin learning that actually water is really important
and so they talk to the deputy mayor of Paris who blows their fucking minds by telling them
that public drinking fountains exist which like that's a good message I guess but then
they also talk to a water sommelier who looks exactly like how I pictured a water sommelier.
He says a bunch of dumb stuff about how water with high mineral content is medicine which
it isn't.
This is like considered a healing water in Germany so this has so many mills to solve
that this actually has an impact on your body now.
And then he also says that drinking filtered water is bad for you because the water will
go looking for nutrients and suck them out of your body which is very much not true.
Calcium, magnesium, potassium, silica all these amazing minerals what your body actually
needs.
When you would drink pure water, water will look for minerals and it will find minerals
in your body.
So that means it pulls out of the body and you're losing actually minerals by drinking
water.
It is a real thing that drinking distilled water which doesn't have any minerals and
it can be bad for you if you aren't getting those minerals from other food but like this
guy is saying this to convince people not to trust tap water.
Also this scene is weird, he gets in the try a bunch of different expensive imported bottles
of water and at one point says that specific water is really rare and Zach is like really
excited by that.
And this is a water nobody else can access in America.
That's my favorite.
There's also a funny moment in the Italy episode where a researcher talks a bunch about how
harmful fad diets and ignorant influencers are and the whole time he's talking, Darren
is just looking at him like he's going to murder the guy.
Because now anybody can have 20 million followers and give him some crazy ideas.
But you'd be surprised how many of your colleagues...
I know how many of my...
I'm not surprised.
I don't know, it just feels like if the purpose of the show is to get people to understand
the reality of climate change, they maybe shouldn't have spent so much time talking
to the types of people who look like they sell crystals and claim that they cure cancer.
Which is obviously ridiculous.
Everyone knows Blackberry's cure cancer.
Oh yeah.
Yo, honestly, water is life.
Now, I'm going to dive into some of the ways that the show is problematic, but I should
also say that I always want my videos to be somewhat accessible for people who don't
necessarily agree with me.
And whenever I talk about this stuff, I always hear a conservative troll in my head criticizing
me for being too woke or whatever.
I'm not too worried about that here though, because A, fuck them, and B, this show is
fucking awful, and there's nothing funnier I can think of than some conservative loser
getting pissed and then walking around barefoot or joining a pyramid scheme to own the libs.
If a bunch of trolls wind up becoming diehard down to earth fans despite me, I'm going
to count that as a win.
It's kind of like how when everyone started talking about how white people with dreadlocks
should stop doing that, and a bunch of conservatives had to pretend that those people are actually
really cool, just like, yeah, I actually love the fact that you can smell them from miles
away and they're constantly mooching other people's weed.
That's actually cool as hell.
So with that out of the way, let's get into it.
Down to earth has a really weird way of exoticizing anywhere they go that's not in America.
Every time they introduce a new place, they describe it as like, in the middle of nowhere
in Europe.
We're on a small Nordic island, we're deep in the jungles of Central America.
To this European island, we're going to visit a small island in the Caribbean.
We're somewhere in Europe, we're in Europe, in a highly populated area.
Even though they're like half an hour outside of Paris.
It feels like they're trying to do Orientalism, but failing because they're too dumb.
This comes out most clearly in how down to earth handles its episodes in Latin America.
Now, Latin American politics are often pretty complicated and are rarely discussed correctly
even in more competent American TV shows.
And so naturally, I had some concerns about how the two dumbest men alive would handle
these sensitive issues.
The way they did handle it was by literally never speaking to anyone who wasn't American.
When they go to Costa Rica in episode three, their guide is a guy named Stephen Brooks,
an American expat who runs a hippie resort called Punta Mona and teaches classes on
permaculture through his school Ecoversity, which he claims brings the youth to Costa
Rica.
Brooks' background is that after graduating college, he inherited $38,000 from his grandfather
and used it to buy a ton of land in Costa Rica, which he now lives on.
He then started his resort in school with some more money that he received from his parents.
I learned all this from an article on a website called TrustCouncil.com, which is a company
that helps people set up trust funds.
In the article, they use Brooks as an example of why giving your kids their inheritance before
you die, as his parents did, can allow them to invest it better.
When Zach and Darren first meet Brooks, he gets them to try freshly picked cacao seeds,
which are used to make chocolate.
And when they eat it, Brooks goes on a rant about how most people are so disconnected,
they don't have any understanding of the actual ingredients that go into their chocolate.
Isn't it amazing that chocolate is like the most sacred thing and like everybody's loving
chocolate, but most people have never even seen where it comes from.
People are just disconnected.
Disconnected.
How are we that disconnected though that you don't know that chocolate is this?
It's like true, but also most cacao isn't picked from a tree in a rich guy's garden.
It's farmed by people, sometimes children, who are paid next to nothing.
Well, next to nothing in money.
Obviously, they are rewarded handsomely with a feeling of deep connection to the ingredients
that go into chocolate.
Brooks then takes them on a tour of his beautiful home, takes them to a school for the children
of expats, and then to his resort.
The resort is only accessible by boat, and while they ride over, Brooks talks about how
he originally decided to move to Costa Rica to help the locals learn to farm more sustainably.
I wanted to see if there was a better way to do things.
All it is is design.
The banana plantations are just unfair design.
It's unfair to the people.
It's unfair to the earth.
It's unfair to the wildlife.
As he says this, the camera pans over the Costa Ricans operating the boat, who are the
only non-white people we see for the entire episode.
There's also this very weird moment where the hippies from the resort come out to meet
them on the beach, and at first Zach thinks there are a bunch of girls, but then realizes
that some of them are guys with long hair, and that makes him actually uncomfortable.
Open, that's going to happen.
A bunch of girls coming out.
There's like a bunch of chicks just walking out.
Oh, some of them are long-haired guys, though.
What's going on?
S-O-S.
Lastly, they visit a wildlife sanctuary, who are doing important work, as Zach says.
As more of this untouched jungle is destroyed by man, the indigenous wildlife is greatly
displaced and harmed.
Worth noting, though, that indigenous people have also been harmed by deforestation, and
in fact, in recent years, several indigenous activists have been killed by settler farmers
over land disputes.
So maybe we can give them a bit of a cinema sin there for never once interacting with
a single person who was actually born in the country they're learning about.
The second fucked up depiction of Latin America is in the last episode where they go to Peru.
The episode straight up opens with a joke that Zach is going to get eaten by cannibals.
Human cannibalism still remains a common practice in a few parts of the world.
Luckily, this episode has nothing to do with cannibalism.
Which, I mean, isn't a great joke to make when you're an outsider getting to experience
indigenous religious rituals.
But hey, you know, comedy is all about pushing boundaries, and frankly, I think it's about
time someone knocked indigenous Peruvian shamans off their silver pedestal.
Jesus fucking Christ.
The first part of the episode is Darren and Zach going into the rainforest to forage for
superfoods.
Just like in Costa Rica, the guy showing them around is a white American expat, and all
the people working for him and operating the boat are not.
There's a really fucked up part where Zach says how out on the Amazon River there's
no signs of civilization.
Just as the camera pans over a bunch of people's houses.
We've left any semblance of civilization.
Here on the Amazon River, we're surrounded by nature as far as the eye can see.
The parts where they go foraging for superfoods aren't really interesting, but it is very
funny how unbelievably stoked Darren gets over some Camu Camu berries.
Woo!
Ha ha ha!
Camu Camu!
Woo!
Ignore the crazy white guy.
This is like the first kill, Zach.
Mmm.
Like, he's so giddy to be in his element and no one else seems to care.
So this is a super resin.
Cuts, burns, scrapes, lesions.
You don't eat it?
No.
Well, you can eat it.
Wow, I wish I had this when I typically have lesions.
I never know what to put on my lesions.
You really get the feeling that by this point everyone on the crew is pretty fucking sick
of Darren?
It's too valuable.
I'm gonna...
No.
I don't trust your catch.
Lastly, they go to an ayahuasca clinic run by, you guessed it, an American white guy.
And I just want you to close your eyes for a second and picture what you think a white
guy running an ayahuasca clinic looks like.
He was this guy, right?
And admittedly, the guy does seem like a pretty sweet person.
I was in a bad way.
I was a heroin addict.
I was pretty much spiraling down, came down, drank ayahuasca five times with a shaman and
never did heroin again.
But not only that, like, realize the roots of why I wanted to do heroin.
The shaman said, you know, you have the potential to be a healer and this is your path.
And if you want, you can come down and live with me and I'll teach you.
But also, maybe they could have shown his mentor in the show instead of just guy who
looks like he got banned from our radiohead and then doxed the moderators.
Zach also mentions how ayahuasca has become a major source of tourism for Peru.
Ayahuasca tourism is a huge thing.
People come from all over the world to get special rainforest treatments from camps in
the Amazon jungle like this one.
But doesn't go into how increased demand from tourists has actually led to shortages
of ayahuasca for indigenous people who need it for traditional religious rituals.
So ultimately, where does this leave us?
A lot of critical pieces I've seen about Down to Earth cut the show some slack for ultimately
being well-intentioned since they are trying to raise awareness about climate change, but
I got news for you.
I'm not, baby.
I'm coming for you, Efron.
The mad dog is off the leash.
I think that what's so striking about how the show talks about fighting climate change
isn't just that it views it as a personal responsibility and not a matter of systemic
change.
While that's obviously bad, Down to Earth definitely isn't unique there.
What stands out to me about Down to Earth is how the show weirdly doesn't even tell
people to do little things like taking the bus, recycling, or consuming less.
Instead, just like how Darren's health advice centers around buying overpriced blackberries
or leveraging your mortgage to sell protein shakes, Down to Earth's call to action is
all about fighting climate change by consuming expensive products.
Ultimately, fighting climate change stops being a tangible political struggle and becomes
commodified into a component of a luxury lifestyle.
It kind of reminds me of when notorious Canadian dark Kimbo Justin Trudeau showed up to march
at a climate change protest.
The fact that the most powerful person in my country could show up and join in chanting
for systemic change shows how that had stopped being a call for radical political goals,
but instead had become something more akin to a wistful prayer.
By the way, I'm quoting Frederick Jameson there, I still have not read Capitalist Realism.
Hey everyone, thanks so much for watching.
I hope you enjoyed our little detour into the world of Himbo-Dumb.
This was a lot of fun to do, normally my videos have a bit higher production value and a lot
more research, and I'll be getting back to that next month, but this was a lot of fun.
Big thank yous to Jose for lending me his beautiful voice and to Chill Goblin for helping
me out with the script.
And a big, big, big thank you to all of my wonderful patrons who allow me to do this
instead of having a real job, and if you want that for me too, consider becoming a patron.
Well, cool people have done that, so maybe you should too.
Christopher Tubbs, Jasmine Wellner, Eric Walker, Bean the Ruse, Isaac Slatton, Hannah
Gaiacomin Rose, Beth Solman, Comrade Fox, Royal Road, Weapon X Reject, Makubus Goobus,
Rachel Ann, Megan Glenn, Sarcasm Jaime, Giorgia III, Niels Abelgard, Charles Acala, Buzz
Killer, O'Death, Heather Boning, Dr. Thembo69, Thys and French Fries, Daniel Jocelyn, Slythers,
Jay Frazier Cartwright, Mosh Zombie, Ramsey Bargoody, Caleb F. Fales, Alec J. Radecky,
Marina Dove, H. Johnson, Bill Nibbs, Julia Sores, Cameron Hussein, Becca B, Just Oh No,
Kevin, Cody Stevens, Tony Wise, Morgan, Sean McIntyre, Max Goranson, Alfonso, Jacob Friedman,
Raiden Sims, G. Purr, Casey Kutniak, Jubion, Nick Corpius, Ruby, Jamie, Baron Galgritta
F. Crystal Crona, Kenzie G., Clement Schatzkopf, Arnaz Colling, Kells, Julian, What's Therapy,
Alistair Butler, Roderick Plass, Retro and Chill, Caitlin Hunt, Eric Prochnow, Miguel Crespo,
Kahntaught, Kevin Ritter, Mackenzie Lyre, The Magpie Magus, Emma Nay, Tyler Ulrich,
Trenton Coleman, Phil Argeria, Rob Rory, Max Elford, Shiloh Sojourner Sacks,
Thomas Brereton, Maddie G., Sif, Maurice Robert, Anis 23, Gamp, Relaxo, Tim Hoffsummer, Nemo,
Comrade Tsai, Isokun, Mitch Kennedy, Glitter Trash, E. H. Sawyer, Lucas Mulhall,
rioting pacifist, Trucks Young, Cafe Softy, Bruni, Red, Eric Petten, Russell Gilchrist,
Kahnika, Dylan Robinson, Benek G. Spicer, The Silver Samaritan, Simon, Carey M., Thomas Swords,
Alexandra Fales, Kristen, Subsystem of Society, Communist Android, Christina Davis, QTA 10,
Ron Doofdad, Jack Crawford, Judd from Splatoon, Lonely Party, Eggsboss, Kennedy, Lola Lean,
Christian Balhuas, Muppet Mistake, Good Poon Hates Cops That Solid Poon Then.
Thank you all so so much for watching and peace out.
