In these uncertain times, the most important thing is for us to pull together and help
each other out.
We here at We're in Hell don't just see you as valuable viewers, but valuable members
of our family.
As such, it's important to us that we continue to provide you with the reverent leftist video
essays now more than ever.
Our team members are working around the clock in crowded quarters with minimal ventilation
in order to ensure that we deliver exceptional content to you and record earnings to our
shareholders.
Because remember, we're in Hell, together.
Hey everyone, for this video I'm going to be talking about crappy, I mean essential
jobs.
And this is going to be a fun video because of all the topics I've covered on this channel,
this is for sure the one that I am the most qualified to talk about.
I've worked every bad job, which you can probably tell since I have that thing where
I look like the physical manifestation of minimum wage.
I look like I was evolutionarily designed to say, would you like to add a drink to that
and make it a combo?
The crappy job that I had for the longest time was working at a Canadian fast food chain
called Peter Pit, which I've worked at all throughout university.
For those of you who don't know Peter Pit, you're going to be shocked to learn that
it's not a particularly authentic Middle Eastern restaurant.
Peter Pit is the type of place that sells suvlaki shawarmas with honey mustard in southwest
seasonings.
This isn't helped by the fact that they're in the Subway genre of fast food places, so
customers just pick from all the toppings and hubristically design their own monstrosities.
Peter Pits are also notoriously terribly run.
My boss was a very nice lady who had absolutely no idea what she was doing.
One time, another employee stole like 200 bucks from the register.
When my boss found out about it, she was furious, she was like, yeah, you know, 15, 20 bucks
goes missing, that's fine, but 200 is too much.
It's a very strange experience to have your boss tell you that you're allowed to steal,
but only a little bit.
The literally shittiest job I ever had was working at the Canadian National Exhibition,
also known as the X, which is basically like a big fair that happens every summer in Toronto.
I was 16 years old and cleaning public bathrooms.
The funniest bullshit boss thing I've ever seen happened on my first day there.
Me and all the other teenage genders were sent into like a big room and the general
manager got on stage and gave us a big speech.
At the beginning of our day, we'd all been given a package with a bunch of forms and
information and a notebook.
The general manager says, listen, you know, this is a thankless job that you have, but
it's important.
Yes, like most times if someone's talking to you, it's because something's gone wrong.
You're not going to get a lot of thanks, but it is really important what you're doing.
But here's the silver lining.
If you see anything going on, anything messed up happens, you got this notebook.
You can write down anything you want in that notebook.
If someone sees you and says, hey, what are you writing?
Give me that notebook.
You say, no, I don't have to because the general manager told me not to.
I want to be clear here that it's not like we would hand in that notebook if we need
to report something or anything.
He was just telling us that we were allowed to have a diary.
The worst job I ever had, though, was working as a server at a fancy members only yacht club.
It was a really classy place.
I used to have really long hair.
I had to cut all off to work there, which was probably a good thing, right?
When you're a dude with a ponytail, it can only go one of two ways.
It's either dragon shirts or maybe he paints.
I remember during my first week, I messed something up and this guy's steak wound up
taking longer than it should have.
I brought it to him.
I apologized.
And he gave me a lecture on how if I don't change my ways, I'll be a failure for the
rest of my life.
And the thing that was so messed up was he wasn't mad at me.
In his mind, he was doing me a favor.
This dude walked away from that like, man, that kid works hard, follows my advice and
gets a little bit lucky.
Maybe he too could inherit his parents' company.
And I should give some context on this place.
There are two yacht clubs in Toronto.
One was founded by the Jews and Catholics that weren't allowed to join the place that
I worked at.
So it was a classy joint, right?
There wasn't a lot of riff-raff.
This is true.
My grandparents weren't allowed to join this place because they were Jews.
And so the whole time I was working there, I had this fantasy in my head where at some
point one of the people there would be like, oh, do you sail?
And I would go, no, but my grandparents did.
And they'd go, oh, were they members?
And I would go, no, they were Jews.
Of course, that never happened because they don't talk to the help.
I remember there's this one member, this woman was the absolute worst, like this woman owned
the pyramid scheme that was at that time ruining my friend's life.
Like, do you know what I mean when like your friend posts on Facebook or something being
like, I've got a great opportunity for anyone who's trying to make loads of money working
from home as your own boss and you're just like, oh, Rachel's about to lose a lot of
money.
This is the woman who was taking Rachel's money.
And the thing is, she wasn't even that bad.
The problem was her daughter, her daughter was the absolute worst.
So like she was this little girl, she was allowed to order anything she wanted off of
her parents' account.
The one rule is she was only allowed one glass of pop.
After that she had to like switch to milk or water or something.
And so I was serving her and at one point she asked for a glass of pop and then she
asked for a refill.
And yeah, I'm not great at confrontations, but it is a 12 year old girl.
Like I thought I could handle it.
So I was like, oh, you know, like I'm sorry, you're not allowed, you're not allowed a second
glass of pop.
And she just snaps.
She's like, why not?
It's like, you know, it's bad for you.
It's bad for your teeth.
It's going to turn your teeth yellow.
And then she said, the coldest shit I've ever heard.
She just goes, my teeth are brighter than your future.
And like, I didn't know what to say there, right?
Like I wanted to have like a cool comeback, but I kind of just said the first thing that
came to mind, but it didn't come out right.
I was just like, oh yeah, well my grandparents were Jews.
So why am I bringing all this up?
Well, I think that over the past 10 years or so, there's been this trend towards lionizing
hard, shitty, dangerous work, a trend which has been kicked into high gear recently as
countries move towards reopening the economy and lazy good for nothings like public school
teachers are shamed for not wanting to put themselves and their students into harm's
way in order to take one for the team.
And by team, I do mean the stock market.
We have all the people, the store clerks at the peak of the pandemic checking out hundreds
and hundreds of people.
We have the incredible frontline health care workers, PSWs, doctors, nurses, through the
peak of the pandemic dealing with COVID patients, we have truck drivers, we have manufacturers
that are in production lines.
And now it's time the teachers step up, everyone else is sacrificed.
Those who oppose reopening or don't want to be going into a dangerous workplace will
get attacked by people who will invoke this heroic image of essential workers, saying
grocery store workers have been working through all this and now it's public school teachers
turned to put themselves in danger too, which is very strange because the people saying
this do not give a shit about the safety of grocery store workers.
In order to understand this, I think we first have to look at the idea of the Protestant
work ethic and I know what you're thinking.
Sam, why are you making this a complicated research essay?
Just talk about the shitty jobs that you've worked in a funny way and turn this out quickly.
Thoughtsline's done this a bunch and sure, would that be an easier video to make?
Yes.
Would my channel do better if I uploaded videos super regularly?
Absolutely.
But would my subscribers prefer that to an in-depth research essay?
Of course they would.
But there's something you have to understand here.
This channel is called We're in Hell and we aren't in hell unless I am.
The Protestant ethic in the spirit of capitalism by Max Weber is a seminal piece of sociological
writing.
Basically, Protestants believe that if you exhibit garbage, useless traits like asceticism,
hard work, and frugality, that's a sign that you're going to go to heaven.
And so, Weber argues, Protestants have a greater work ethic because of the symbolic meaning
that their religion places on these mundane interactions.
This went on to form the basis for the sociological theory known as functionalism.
The theory is actually called symbolic interactionism, that was just a joke for the sociology heads
in the crowd.
What am I doing with my life?
Now, long time viewers of the channel might know that we here at We're in Hell have
a bit of a standing beef going with the bourgeoisie.
Yo, I will crush any small business owner in a debate, but while some of us might definitely
take issue with the idea that capitalists work for their money, if you go back to very
early capitalism in Europe, the newly emerging bourgeoisie class sure as shit did more to
work for their wealth than the old aristocrats did.
So while the shift towards capitalism is happening in Europe in the 16th century, we started
to see an expansion of the types of people who could become rich.
But one issue for these early hustlers was that the Catholic Church was not down since
they had very negative views of the pursuit of wealth.
Which to be fair, there is some truth to that, but also if you're saying that to justify
a feudal society where you just so happened to wield an insane amount of power, being
the guy who lives in a huge building made out of gold and priceless art telling people
they should care less about money isn't a great look.
Fortunately for these hungry entrepreneurs, around the same time a new sect of Christianity
was heading the scene, founded by 16th century hustle culture influencer Martin Luther.
Unlike Catholicism, Protestantism provided a theological justification for capitalistic
wealth accumulation by making work the central way for you to demonstrate your virtue.
In Protestantism, you don't want to work really hard so that you can make a ton of
money like a greedy sack of shit.
Instead, you want to make a ton of money because that's evidence that you work really hard,
which in turn is evidence that you're going to go to heaven.
Welcome to the Church of the Grind, baby.
As Jesus said to those stones, let's get this bread.
This all went on to have a massive impact on early American culture.
Through the Protestant work ethic, hard work isn't just something that's like good to
do for yourself, but instead is a virtuous calling for God and a good deed to do for
your community.
Another key thing here was the relatively looser glass system in America.
Something Weber noted is that the Protestant work ethic relies on there being social mobility,
since if your position in life can't be changed, then it's not your responsibility and there's
no point in you working harder to improve it.
But as anyone would know if they've read a David Brooks article about how anyone born
after 1993 can't work hard, all they know is McDonald's charge their phone, twerk,
be bisexual, eat hot chip, and lie, the Protestant work ethic did not stick around.
But rather than society going to hell in the mid-90s, I would argue that this change started
a bit further back in the industrial revolution.
While sure, industrialization led to all sorts of amazing technologies and efficiencies,
it also kind of crushed people's ability to take artisanal pride in their work.
There's nothing very fulfilling about being a single cog on an assembly line full of other
cogs, right?
And this whole thing kind of left people feeling, I don't know, like some kind of alien or something.
And importantly, before industrialization, how hard you worked would have a direct impact
on the quality of the good that you would put out, and therefore a correlation to getting
more of that cash money.
Whereas if you're just working on an assembly line, it's not like your community is going
to find out that you're working twice as hard as the people on either side of you.
And so as work became less and less fulfilling, a shift was made, not to make work better,
but rather to have people work fewer hours and to not view work as something where you
would get fulfillment in and of itself, but rather to view it as a means to an end of
getting the money you need so that you can enjoy the remaining 16 hours of your day.
And one of the big effects of this was the rise of conspicuous consumption.
Now if people can no longer tell how hard you work based on the product of your labor,
instead you have to signal how hard you work by buying flashy shit.
And then we run into another problem, which is the rise of inequality.
As we talked about earlier, the Protestant work ethic does not work unless there's social
mobility.
But over the course of the 19th and 20th century, inequality in America skyrocketed.
So now, not only does your shitty job alienate the ever-loving fuck out of you, but it's
pretty obvious that it's not going to get you rich either.
And here's where things kind of get interesting.
Thank fucking god.
Because if you're stuck in the underclass, buying expensive stuff to show off your work
ethic doesn't really scan, does it?
Like, we all know that this blue-collar shrub isn't rich, so buying a bunch of shit that
rich people buy just comes off as showing off that he's bad with money.
So what do you do?
Community has long since been destroyed, and so no one has an intrinsic sense of identity.
And so instead, you buy your identity.
Through the act of consumption, identity has become a project which is completed through
the acquisition of signifiers.
And throughout the 21st century, I think that the most interesting identity to be commodified
is that of working class.
Okay, odds are, if you're one of the people in America with a pickup truck, it ain't
a luxury, it's a way of life.
And chances are, you're not making your money pushing a pencil or hand modeling.
You're actually working for every dollar and need your truck.
This is, interestingly, a pretty recent phenomenon.
Throughout the 20th century, working class people appeared in ads as proms, never as
aspirational subjects.
Now, this all relates to a concept by Michael Shudson called capitalist realism.
And no, I'm not talking about the Mark Fisher book, I am the only leftist on YouTube who
has not read that.
I'm just quirky like that, I'm not like the other video essayists.
Shudson's concept came from him looking at a different art movement called socialist
realism.
And when I say that, art movement might be a little bit generous since socialist realism
is literally just communist propaganda.
Which I mean, hey, like I have some self-awareness here, I can't hate.
But socialist realism specifically refers to government-funded utopian art meant to depict
the world not as it was, but as the socialist governments wished it to be.
Shudson argued that the capitalist equivalent to capitalist realism would just be advertisements,
you know, idealized fantasies depicting the world as capitalists would like it to be.
The question then is, and I'm so sorry that this is such a long-winded video just to get
to this point.
But what does it say when capitalist realism is turned inward to depict dangerous and alienating
labor?
All those like bullshit ads where corporations say that we're all in this together and
it's time for workers to make the ultimate sacrifice to keep the economy going.
It all reminds me of a man named Mike Rowe.
What if it's really safety third?
Right?
Now, I mean, really, what I mean to say is, I value my safety on these crazy jobs as much
as the people that I'm working with.
But the ones who really get it done, they're not out there talking about safety first.
They know that other things come first.
The business of doing the work comes first.
The business of getting it done.
Mike Rowe is a former opera singer turned TV host and a mascot for blue collar hard work.
In the shows he hosts, like Dirty Jobs and Deadliest Catch, Rowe shows the joy of working
a crappy, dangerous job for an honest day's pay.
Through this, he's also become a spokesperson for tough guy, masculine-coded products like
dope-ass trucks for real men who work for a living.
This thing is 5,000 pounds of, hey, can I give you a hand with that?
And oh yeah, guess what?
As well as working for the vampiric ghouls, the Koch brothers, er, sorry, Koch brother,
David Koch was tragically slain last year with a cancerous stake to the prostate.
And he's up there jamming with Hendricks.
The funny thing about Rowe's shows like Dirty Jobs is, as much as they claim to valorize
hard work, they very rarely center the actual workers.
Instead, Rowe is walked through a day of work by the owner.
Dirty Jobs would be a very different show if it was actually just a day in the life
of the worker.
That would literally just be undercover journalism.
As Gabriel Winnent writes,
While they deal in a rhetoric of working-class heroism, they systematically push the human
beings whose labor they nominally valorize to the margins.
They both awaken the set of largely nostalgic desires of work before neoliberalism, and
they re-enact in each episode the dynamics of class power by which work has been destabilized
and workers made invisible.
The company's narrow profit margin and resulting harsh labor conditions appear as an adventure
rather than the stuff of a muckraking.
In other words, the show's protagonist and subject is capital.
The workers are props.
Another example of this is this ad made by another one of Rowe's employers, Walmart.
This July 4th, let's think about what it means to be independent, to be free.
That's what built manufacturing in America and it's what will rebuild it.
You can see it happening in small towns where factories are pumping life back into communities
and we are once again calling the shots.
So enjoy the holiday and then let's go to work.
Remember that that ad was made by the company that has done more to destabilize labor in
America than probably any other organization, well arguably except for leftist infighting
on Twitter.
Why is no one talking about left on left violence?
During the 19th century an art movement emerged called social realism.
And look, I realize this is getting pretty confusing with all the different types of
realisms.
I have nowhere near enough control over the naming conventions of art movements but let
me tell you, when the revolution comes there are going to be a lot of changes.
Probably the most famous piece of social realism, again different from socialist realism, is
American Gothic.
And while we probably don't think about it this way when we see that image now, social
realism was actually a very radical art movement meant to capture the lived experiences of
the downtrodden.
The subjects of beautiful realistic paintings on massive canvases were supposed to be wealthy
aristocrats in epic scenes, not the working poor.
This was a radical shift meant to draw attention to poverty and the sources that caused it.
But just as the meaning of American Gothic has shifted from a critique of provincialism
to a celebration of American hard work, Winnent argues that shows like dirty jobs and ad campaigns
all about gritty hard work have appropriated the aesthetics of social realism into capitalist
realism.
It has appealed to creative destruction and capital mobility, costumed in overalls and
spoken through a ventriloquized working class.
Under the fetishism of commodities, the manner in which market exchange hides the labor congealed
in the product eats its own tail.
In this new mode of salesmanship, the very appeal of the product, whether in jeans, a
car, or a television show, rests explicitly on the labor that it is advertised to contain,
though this labor becomes distorted and mythologized in the process of going on display.
It's funny to think about what people must think crappy jobs are like if they're just
basing it off of the media and have never worked at one.
I notice this all the time with those awful vice videos about chef's nights out, where
they paint these awesome epic pictures of how dope it is to be a fucking line cook.
Almost every job I've ever had has been in the restaurant industry, like I've been in
the shit as a line cook before.
Before March, I was working 40 hour weeks giving myself carpal tunnel and screaming at
people who took too long to peel an avocado.
God, I miss it.
On the Vox-owned website Eater of all places, there's a really interesting article about
the amazing Netflix show Salt Fat Acid Heat, where they point out how the amazing artisans
the host Samin Nasrat talks to depict a fantasy of unalienated labor.
While Eater argues that this is radical and subversive, I disagree.
I think that for most people, this fantasy of unalienated labor will remain just that,
a fantasy.
I don't want this video to just come off as work bad, because work not bad, fulfilling
work good.
If you do take away nothing else from this, please just don't die for your shitty job.
Hey, thanks for making it to the end of the video, hope you enjoyed it, and I hope all
of you watching this are having a happy and healthy Labor Day and aren't being screwed
over by your job.
I know September 7th isn't the real Labor Day, real Labor Day is May 1st, but we can
pretend and if anyone is watching this on a day other than Labor Day, you're literally
committing a crime right now and I hope that you rot in prison.
Anyway, this video was possible thanks to my wonderful patrons, especially Communist
Android, Evan, Olivia Staltenberg, Erica Shulinsky, Alfonso, Cody Stevens, Christina
Davies, Sip, QTA 10, Mosh Zombie, Christopher Tubbs, Ron Doof Dad, Jack Crawford, Gay Vocalizations,
Jacob Friedman, Graydon Sims, G. Perr, Casey Kudniak, Judd from Splatoon, Vigito, Maurice
Robert, Jubion, Rachel Ann, Nick Corpias, Ruby, Tony Wise, Bequin, Jamie, oh boy, Beren
Golgrita, Beren Golgrita, AF, Fristel Prona, nailed it, Lonely Party, Ramsey Barguti, Kenzie
G, Slytheres, Alex Arcudy, Eggs Box, Kennedy, Donovan Ekstrom, Gam, Lowe Aline, Meals Adelgard,
Christina Bollhewis, Muppet Mistake, Morgan Groban, Megan Glynn, Relaxo, Comrade Fox,
Clement Chutscock, Toby Robbins, Caleb P. Fales, Tim Hoffsummer, Tishal T., William
Rowe, Nemo, Good Poon Heats Cox, that's solid Poon then, Jesus, Alec J. Radecki, Arnaz
Colling, Kells, Jesse Nyland, Mr. Awesome, Be Cool, Comrade Sy, Beth Solman, John Price,
and Isso Koon.
Thanks so much for watching and bye-bye.
