Newspapers and magazines carried feature sections on him as one of the intellectuals of the
New Age.
I couldn't believe that anyone who wrote these articles understood what he was saying
in his book.
I had my doubts they had even opened it, but such things were of no concern to them.
All that mattered was that he was smart enough to write a book that nobody could understand.
It made him famous.
The magazines all came to him for critical pieces.
He appeared on television to comment on political and economic questions.
Soon, he was a regular panel member on one of the political debate shows.
Those who knew him had never imagined him to be suited to such glamorous work.
Everyone thought of him as the high strung academic type, interested in nothing but
his field of specialization.
Once he got a taste of the world of mass media, though, you could almost see him licking
his chops.
He was good.
You didn't mind having a camera point at him.
If anything, he even seemed more relaxed in front of the cameras than the real world.
We watched his sudden transformation in amazement, the man we saw on television wore expensive
suits with perfectly matching ties and eyeglass frames of fine tortoise shell.
His hair had been done in the latest style, he'd obviously been worked on by a professional.
I'd never seen him exude such luxury before, and even if he had been outfitted by the network,
he wore the style with perfect ease as if he had dressed that way all his life.
Who was this man, I wondered when I first saw him?
In front of the cameras, he played the role of man of few words.
When asked for an opinion, he would state it simply, clearly, and precisely.
Whenever the debate heated up and everyone else was shouting, he kept his cool.
When challenged, he would hold back, let his opponent have his say, and then demolish
the person's argument with a single phrase.
He had mastered the art of delivering the fatal blow with a purr and a smile.
On the television screen, he looked far more intelligent and reliable than in real life.
I'm not sure how he accomplished this.
He certainly wasn't handsome, but he was tall and slim and had an air of good breeding.
In the medium of television, N'Bora Wittea had found the place where he belonged.
The mass media welcomed him with open arms, and he welcomed them with equal enthusiasm.
What a bunch of utter, postmodern, neo-Marxist drivel.
In this video, we're going to talk about Jordan Peterson.
Hey everyone.
This video is, in the loosest possible sense, a sequel to the second video I ever made called
Jordan Peterson as a Fraud, part one, Bill C-16. Extremely catchy title, I know.
I made that video almost three years ago, and at the end of it, I said that I was going to make
a second one where I'd read a bunch of Derrida and debunk Peterson's arguments about postmodern
neo-Marxism, and I'm not doing that. I'm sorry, everyone. I'm sorry, Dr. Peterson.
I know you're watching this. Better professors than you at the University of Toronto tried and
failed to make me read Derrida when I was a student there, so honestly, what hope did you possibly have?
I had a lot of trouble writing this script, and I think, if I'm being honest, it's because
Jordan Peterson is kind of responsible for me starting this channel. I went to school with
both of his kids from elementary through high school. I studied at the University of Toronto,
studying English and sociology, specifically focused on critical theory, and so after graduating,
on the day Donald Trump got elected, I was disillusioned, underemployed, and not sure what to
do with my life, and then I started seeing this kermit motherfucker who looks like the villain from
Half-Life blowing up for rebranding William Lynn's Paleo-Conservatism, and I just thought,
okay, let's fucking go. For anyone who's never heard of Jordan Peterson before, just go. It's
not too late for you. You could just close this video and go on enjoying your life with
absolutely no knowledge of all beef diets, medically induced commas, or incestuous lobster
kink play. You could be so happy. Okay, now that those freaks are gone, let me go through a bit
of a recap before we move on to the main event. Jordan Peterson is a psychology professor at
the University of Toronto, and even before he became famous, he was an extremely popular lecturer.
A friend of mine took his course in first year and described him as exactly what he'd imagined
an eccentric university professor would be like. Like, they'd watch Pinocchio in class,
and Peterson would pause it to run to the front shouting shit like, there, that's the great
father! Coincidentally, that is also what his kids say whenever they look at their bank accounts.
Another fun fact is that Peterson had always been an avid supporter of the free exchange of ideas.
In his lectures, he would apparently offer to debate anyone who disagreed with anything he'd
said, just in the lecture hall surrounded by all the other students who adored him. This is a minor
thing, but it is also so fucked up. Like, disagreeing with your professor as a student is already
really intimidating. Just imagine some 18-year-old nervous to talk to the guy who has so much power
over their life, and he's just like, hang on, I want to get all your peers here to watch me own you.
Peterson initially rose to fame when, in the fall of 2016, he released a series of videos to his
YouTube channel voicing his opposition to Bill C-16, a bill which would add trends and gender
non-conforming people to the list of groups protected by the Canadian Human Rights Act and
the Criminal Code. I talked about this in my original video about him, but in case you'd
rather not watch it because it's bad, here's a brief recap. Also, it's funny, like, the two videos
of mine that get lots of negative comments are my first two, debunking Jordan Peterson and Ben Shapiro,
and it's a weird experience because I hate those videos too, but for extremely different reasons.
Like, all the comments are calling me a lib cuck, and I'm just like, the editing looks like garbage.
Anyways, Peterson's worries about the bill infringing on free speech have been completely
debunked by the head of the Canadian Bar Association. Also, it's now almost five years later, and no
one's been arrested for misgendering people. Peterson, of course, insisted that his objection
was in no way motivated by bigotry, although he did also say in his now taken-down video titled
Professor Against Political Correctness, Part One, Fear and the Law, that the reason he didn't trust
the Premier of Ontario at the time was because she was a lesbian. So the reason I think the Ontario
Human Rights Commission is an emblematic institution in this regard is partly because
I think that the social justice warrior type activists are overrepresented in the current
provincial government, or the current liberal provincial government, and I can't help but
shake this, I can't help but manifest the suspicion that that's partly because our current
Premier is lesbian and her sexual preference, and that in and itself doesn't bother me one way or
another. I don't think it's relevant to the political discussion, except in so far as the
LBGT community has become extraordinarily good at organizing themselves. From here, Peterson became
wildly popular and his career skyrocketed. To me, I think a lot of this success comes from him being
for a lot of his fans their first time experiencing a charismatic humanities professor.
Peterson wrote a wildly popular self-help book called 12 Rules to Life and toured the world
giving talks. For a while there, he was like the run the jewels of right-wing events,
an indie breakout featured at just every festival. This all took a toll on Peterson's health. In
late 2016, following the advice of his daughter, Michaela, he began a strict all-beef diet. In 2019,
his wife was diagnosed with cancer and Peterson, in order to cope, had the dosage of his anti-anxiety
medication increased. He then suffered a paradoxical reaction in early 2020 and finding all other
treatments ineffective, his daughter Michaela took him to a Russian rehab clinic where he was placed
into a medically induced coma. I want to be very clear here that while Jordan Peterson is a bad
person and quite often hilarious, addiction is an illness, not a personal failure, and I don't
think that he should be mocked or called a hypocrite for this. And now Peterson is back with 12 more
rules. First of all, I've seen people say that this is some low effort grift and he just shat
these out because he needs money for stakes and Soviet art. Oh yeah, another weird side thing
with Peterson is that his house is filled with communist propaganda. This is partly because
he thinks that he's owning the libs by buying Soviet art. That's cool. And then I thought it was so
funny. I just couldn't stand the irony of this, the world's most capitalistic enterprise. It's
eBay, right? It's just free trade. That's all it is, right? Unregulated free trade. Now I could buy
Soviet art that is so funny. So I could buy like Karl Marx posters on eBay discounted. It's like,
yes. Even though capitalism is workers selling their labor to the owners of the means of production,
not just commerce. But also Peterson, having grown up in the Cold War, has an existential
fear of communism. And so he covers his house in their iconography to like remind himself of that.
Now I am not a clinical psychologist, but this strikes me as some pretty fucking weird behavior.
Like imagine you went over to someone's house and there were just pictures of spiders everywhere.
So you were like, oh, do you like spiders? And then they go, no, they terrify me.
If ever happens, get the fuck out of that house because someone dressed as a spider
is going to drop a net on you. Anyway, while people are probably right to be a little bit confused,
since Peterson did write in the intro of his last book that he only wanted 12 rules because too
many rules leads to tyranny, both these and his last 12 rules came from a Korra post, which he is
ridiculously proud of, in which he wrote 42 rules to life. So buckle up people because we still have
18 more rules coming. Now on to this book. Personally, I find Peterson's writing style
really annoying. When he's speaking, he has this disorganized way of talking where he'll sort of go
off on tangents that I do actually find really engaging. He has this way of making anything
he talks about feel like you're listening to someone who's excited to explain something
complex that they're really interested in. His writing is done in the exact same style though,
which to me is very irritating. I always hear people say how he's extremely careful in his
speech and I never agreed, since to me careful speech means conveying as much meaning as possible
in the fewest number of words. Having read his book, I think I now understand that for Peterson,
speaking carefully means making a point and then including an exhaustive list of examples in which
that point is true, as well as any instances in which it isn't. So like I had always seen this
tendency in his speech as him just rambling, which again, I always found pretty charming,
but not very precise. Reading it in his book though has made it very clear that this is an
intentional choice and also, this is just my opinion here, makes the book really unpleasant to read.
There are many reasons, for example, why people are poor. Lack of money is the obvious case,
but that hypothetical obviousness is part of the problem with ideology. Lack of education,
broken families, crime-ridden neighborhoods, alcoholism, drug abuse, criminality and corruption,
and the political and economic exploitation. When you're visited by chaos and swallowed up,
when nature curses you or someone you love with endless, or when tyranny rinses asunder
something of value that you have built, it is solitary to know. Mental illness, lack of the
life plan, would even fail to realize that formulating such a plan is possible or necessary.
Low conscientiousness, unfortunate geographical locale, shift in the economic landscape,
and the consequent disappearance of entire- Rural 2 analyzes a centuries-old alchemical image,
relying on several stories, ancient and the marked proclivity of those who are rich to get
richer still, and the poor to get poorer. Low creativity slash entrepreneurial Rural 8 focuses
on the vital importance of aesthetic experience as a guide to what is true. These are but a few of
the manifold problems that generate poverty. But this video is not going to be about Peterson's
new book. Maybe I'll make one of those in three years. If you're interested in that,
I'd recommend checking out Cass Ares, who has a PhD in psychology and reviews Peterson's work
in detail on her channel. Instead, for this video, I want to zero in on one specific issue,
the idea of Jordan Peterson as an intellectual. A common critique I hear all the time, including
from people I generally really like, is that Jordan Peterson isn't a real intellectual,
or maybe worse, that he's a sign of the decline of the public intellectual.
I saw one really funny article that talked about how horrible it is that Peterson is considered
a public intellectual, but if you look at Albert Einstein's Wikipedia page, it doesn't call him
that. It's like, I don't know, it's Wikipedia, go fucking change it if it's bothering you so much.
The way this criticism then goes is that they'll usually say something to the effect of,
Peterson knows what he's talking about with psychology, but he's completely wrong when
he steps out of his field. And like, that's true. Peterson has pretty regularly demonstrated a total
lack of understanding of the Canadian legal system, postmodernism, Marxism, just to name a few.
And lots of his critics, myself include, have used this to say that he's a bad intellectual.
But really, stepping outside your field of expertise is kind of what public intellectuals do.
The economist John Maynard Keynes once said that the job of the public intellectual is
To perform at one and the same time the tasks appropriate to the economist,
to the financier, to the politician, to the journalist, to the propagandist,
to the lawyer, to the statesman, even, I think, to the prophet and to the soothsayer.
The concept of the public intellectual dates back to France in the 1890s when Captain Alfred
Dreyfus was wrongfully convicted of treason and sentenced to life in prison for allegedly
leaking military secrets to the Germans. Two years after his initial arrest in 1894,
new evidence came to light that showed that Dreyfus was innocent and that the real culprit
was a major named Ferdinand Esther Hazy. And while you might think that this would have
exonerated Dreyfus, due to the nature of French law at the time, this was actually a pretty tricky
and nuanced issue. You see, while Dreyfus was innocent of the crime he was convicted for,
he was unfortunately guilty of being Jewish. And so in accordance with the French legal system at
the time, the army suppressed all evidence against Esther Hazy, forged legal documents to show his
innocence, and then exonerated him in a trial which lasted only two days. Just basic French
law stuff, really. The Dreyfus affair, as it came to be known, completely divided French society
between those who supported the release of Alfred Dreyfus, who came to be known as the Dreyfusards,
and those who supported the army, and also anti-Semitism, known as the anti-Dreyfusards.
I'm just kidding, by the way, lots of the Dreyfusards were also anti-Semites.
This polarization and debate was largely sparked by an open letter titled Gécues by French writer
Emile Zola. Zola, along with a group of authors, academics, and journalists, came together to
advocate for the release of Dreyfus. This is largely seen as the first time intellectuals emerged as
a unified class. The class was soon given the name intellectuals, funnily enough as a pejorative
used by the anti-Dreyfusards who were pissed off at these elitist libs deciding that they knew what
was best. I mean, what gives these eggheads the right to tell the French people not to imprison
an innocent man because of his religion, as Patrick Behr writes. In spite of their political
differences, both Dreyfusards and anti-Dreyfusards attributed roughly the same meaning to the concept.
For both, intellectuals were a diverse group of people that included journalists,
novelists, and university professors who intervened publicly in the name of abstract
principles such as justice and equality, who portrayed themselves as a progressive force
in line with Republican values and who saw themselves as suspicious of and invariably
in opposition to the state. Now, the Dreyfusards were correct, and I don't want to diminish the fact
that a lot of them, especially Zola, were being incredibly brave. Zola's letter is actually
pretty badass in kind of an Aaron Sorkin way, except Zola actually challenged the powers that be.
He addressed his open letter to the President of France and was just a huge dick in it,
specifically in the hopes of getting sued for libel, since that would force the French government
to provide proof that Dreyfus was guilty, which they couldn't do because there wasn't any.
Regardless, I think the anti-Dreyfusards unintentionally raised a bit of a good question.
Why do journalists, authors, and academics receive this special role in our society?
It's weird, right? Like, why are those specific professions special? What I think it stems from
is that the only thing that they all had in common was that at that time, success in those
fields translated to access to a mass audience, or as Barrett puts it, they all had access to the
intellectual means of production. Barrett points out that even from the beginning there were some
problems with the idea of public intellectuals. The biggest issue is that even with the Dreyfus
affair, the intellectuals who spoke out about the intricacies of the court case weren't legal
experts, and while they were correct, they could have just as easily been wrong.
The Dreyfusard intellectuals presented themselves as experts, but not because they
had any special information or expertise. They weren't lawyers and were working off the same
information that the rest of the public had. What they claimed gave their perspective more weight
was that unlike the regular people who were just as informed about the cases they were,
the intellectuals were smart. And hey, I'm not saying that these people or their contemporary
counterparts weren't smart. Probably the most classic example of a public intellectual Jean-Paul
Sartre, and that dude was smart as balls. I mean, have you read Being in Nothingness?
That shits a certified banger, baby? I mean, I haven't read it because my brain's as smooth as
glass washing up on the beach, but smart people say it's smart, so... But like, there are smart
people everywhere. Like, I know people who wash dishes for a living who've read, I'm sure,
at least as much philosophy as Peterson, a dude who, despite having made a career speaking about it,
hadn't read Marx until he needed to debate a communist raccoon.
What I did instead was return to what I regarded as the original cause of all the trouble, let's say,
which was the communist manifesto. And what I attempted to do, because that's Marx, and we're
here to talk about Marxism, let's say. And what I tried to do was read it. I read it when I was
18. It was a long time ago, right? That's 40 years ago, but... Which, like, same, bro. I'm phoning this
shit in too, but still. I'm sure it's also just a totally random coincidence that Sartre has remembered
as this revered public intellectual, but Simone de Beauvoir isn't. It's probably not something
that's worth talking about until at least towards the end of this video. The issue here, though,
is that the authority of public intellectuals kind of begs the question. We should take them
seriously as authorities because they're taken seriously as authorities. In other words, you
could say that their authority is seen as justifying itself. And to quote Peter Kropotkin,
that sucks. Well, I'm not saying necessarily that public intellectuals all have to perfectly
follow the principles of anarchism. I mean, no one's perfect. It's a little weird that these
people are enforcing this very old and elitist hierarchy while supposedly, at least in the case
of the Dreyfusards, fighting for progressive values in the hope of liberation. It's like,
where do they get off acting like they're so perfect that they get to go around pretending
they're these noble warriors fighting for justice in our s- wait a second. By now, you might have
noticed that some of this criticism sounds an awful lot like the kind of thing you'd see a guy in
Oakley's film himself ranting about in his car saying that celebrities have no business telling
people who to vote for or that cancel culture took away Lola Rabbit's big naturals. And
when we hear these types of criticisms, I think a lot of people, myself included in this, will say
how, wow, I don't get my politics from celebrities and don't think that you should either. If someone
has access to a big platform, it's basically good if they use that to spread a good message.
But like, this is more a matter of making the most of a bad situation. In my ideal society,
I would not want people to get their, like, political education from award show acceptance
speeches. Obviously, people should only be getting their politics from YouTubers.
But although I think very often these conservatives don't really care much about
reexamining whose voices are amplified and rearranging society to become more egalitarian,
but rather just want anyone with a progressive message to shut up,
I do, however, think that there is something to this line of criticism.
Meanwhile, I couldn't stand the sight of him, imprint or on TV. He was a man of talent and
ability to be sure, I recognize that much. He knew how to knock his opponent down quickly and
effectively with the fewest possible words. He had an animal instinct for sensing the direction
of the wind, but if you paid close attention to what he was saying or what he had written,
you knew that his words lacked consistency. They reflected no single worldview based on
profound convictions. His was a world that had been fabricated by combining several one-dimensional
systems of thought. He could rearrange the combination in an instant, as needed. These were
ingenious, even artistic, intellectual permutations and combinations, but to me,
they amounted to nothing more than a game. There was any consistency to his opinions. It was the
consistent lack of consistency. And if he had a worldview, it was a view that proclaimed his
lack of a worldview. But these very absences were what constituted his intellectual assets.
Consistency and an established worldview were excess baggage in the intellectual mobile warfare
that flared up in the mass media's tiny time segments, and it was his great advantage to
be free of such things. He had nothing to protect, which meant that he could concentrate all his
attention on pure acts of combat. He needed only to attack, to knock his enemy down. Nabooru Watea
was an intellectual chameleon, changing his color in accordance with his opponents, ad-libbing his
logic for maximum effectiveness, mobilizing all the rhetoric at his command. I had no idea how
he had acquired these techniques, but he clearly had the knack of appealing directly to the feelings
of the mass audience. He knew how to use the kind of logic that moved the great majority.
Nor did it even have to be logic. It only to appear so as long as it aroused the feelings of the masses.
Trotting out the technical jargon was another forte of his. No one knew what it meant, of course,
but he was able to present it in such a way that you knew it was your fault if you didn't get it.
He was always citing statistics. They were engraved in his brain, and they carried
tremendous persuasive power, but if you stop to think about it afterwards, you realize that
no one had questioned his sources or their reliability. These clever tactics of his used
to drive me mad, but I was never able to explain to anyone exactly what upset me so. I was never
able to construct an argument to refute him. It was like boxing with a ghost. Your punches just
swished through the air. There was nothing solid for them to hit. I was shocked to see even sophisticated
intellectuals responding to him. It would leave me feeling strangely annoyed. And so,
Naboorah Watea came to be seen as the most intelligent figure of the day. Nobody seemed
to care about consistency anymore. All they looked for on the tube were the bouts of intellectual
gladiators. The redder the blood they drew, the better. It didn't matter if the same person said
one thing on Monday and the opposite on Thursday. Now, let's take a step away from what public
intellectuals are and instead focus a bit on how they operate. One of the key things they tend to
do is form groups. We can see this with the Dreyfusards in France, the Frankfurt School in Germany,
and with the intellectual dark web now. By the way, a pack of intellectuals is actually called a
TED Talk, or to use the scientific term, a way for rich liberals to assure themselves that they
deserve to occupy an elite section of society in spite of their supposedly progressive values.
For anyone blissfully unaware, the intellectual dark web, or IDW, is a loose collection of
right-leaning public figures, including Ben Shapiro, Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris,
Breton Eric Weinstein, Joe Rogan, and Dave Rubin, as well as some more periphery figures,
such as Douglas Murray, Christina Hoffsummer, Stephen Pinker, Gad Sad, and Lindsay Shepard.
The main architect behind the IDW, as well as the guy who coined that simply epic name,
is Eric Weinstein. One very funny thing about Eric is that he gets really defensive anytime
someone claims that the IDW has lost relevance.
But what's really interesting about Eric is how he talks about the
aims of the intellectual dark web. Weinstein says that his goal is for the IDW to become a
communal sense-making platform that will replace the traditional media. For one thing,
I have to admit, I severely underestimated Eric Weinstein. I never thought he'd come up with
a more cringe series of words than intellectual dark web. But anyways, this doesn't just mean
amplifying the voices that supposedly aren't being featured on the mass media, because what a
tragedy it is that Stephen Mullen, you can't discuss race science on CNN. But Eric's ambitions
are greater than that. He doesn't just want to be featured on mass media, he wants to replace it,
and for the IDW to become a dominant to use his term sense-making platform, which will curate
what news people do and don't hear.
You see this again with Jordan Peterson's efforts to create a database of Marxist
and postmodern professors who he wants to blacklist.
Hopefully that would mean that the pseudo disciplines such as women's studies, which never
had a methodology that was credible to begin with, and I would put in the same classification all
the ethnic and racial studies groups that are popping up on campuses like mad under the guise
of true disciplines in which they're not in any sense of the imagination, or any sense of the word,
but also increasingly the social sciences and the general humanities that have been corrupted
quite terribly by the postmodern doctrines. I thought, well, maybe it would be good to see if
the funding could be cut for them. Anyways, new real peer review picked up where they stopped
and has been publishing abstracts like mad from these crazy postmodern journals, which are journals
only in name, and so I started to pull out key words. Well, I'll tell you a little bit about
that game in a minute. I started to pull out keywords that were emblematic of the, let's
call it the postmodern cult, and then I thought I'd generate a questionnaire that parents of
university students and late stage high school students and freshmen in university and maybe
second year students could use as a guideline so they could look at the course descriptions and
check off word frequency from the postmodern list and decide that if the course was part
of the postmodern cult that they should maybe just not take it, but then I got a real interesting
email from a guy, I won't tell you his name yet, but who's a computer programmer and he put together
an AI system to parse apart postmodern, the postmodern lexicon automatically and he set up
a website now where students can feed in course descriptions of any sort and it will spit out
whether or not they're postmodern. This is one might say odd behavior for a man as supposedly
worried about free speech in academia as Jordan Peterson, but it's because the goal here isn't
for these renegade academics to be included, but rather for them to be the ones who do the
excluding, they don't want equality, they want power. For one thing, I think this explains the
IDW's claims that they're these censored and ignored underdogs, but it's because the members
are all podcasters, youtubers, journalists, authors, and academics who just aren't the types
of people who tend to get much airtime on the mainstream media to begin with. More like
lamestream media, am I right folks? Shit, that was good, has anyone ever said that before?
This also brings me to another big factor in all of this, the changing media landscape.
I think this is kind of why you'll see these boomer think pieces lamenting the death of the
public intellectual. It's because while we've hung on to this image of public intellectuals as
like learned men of consequence debating ideas, authors, academics, and journalists aren't really
the ones who shape culture anymore. As public intellectual, Jurgen Habermas points out,
this isn't so much because there aren't smart people anymore, but rather that newer types of
media require a degree of self-promotion that traditional academics aren't typically suited
for. And while Habermas was just talking about TV, this has become even more of an issue with the
internet and social media. In Barrett's paper, he talks about positioning theory, a school of
analysis that focuses on the ways in which, in this case, a speaker's position affects their
message. For example, if someone is speaking on television, that might confer a greater sense of
authority, but also limits what they're able to say. The same is true of academic journals.
Generally, authoritative platforms come with the downside of limitations on what you're allowed
to use them for. But Barrett notes, a little optimistically I would say, that the internet
has disrupted all of this. There aren't really any gatekeepers anymore if you're talking on a
podcast or YouTube. I should know, I've had people say that I'm some kind of expert in sociology,
and while that's very nice, I should be clear that if you took out all the jokes, most of my
videos would basically just qualify as a B plus undergrad research essay. Also, a really funny
thing I noticed while researching this video is that there's tons of scholarly literature about
the idea of public intellectuals, because academics fucking love writing about themselves. But
everything written from like 2010 to around 2015 or so is extremely optimistic about the
role of the internet in democratizing information, and then everything after 2016 is fucking blackpilled.
But I think this is something that the IDW has really used to their advantage. As Curio points
out in their amazing video on the subject, the intellectual dark web is actually an amazing
description of these people, since in addition to being cringe as fuck, they're able to present
themselves as authorities by using all of the aesthetics of classical intellectuals without
the pesky downside of having to be held to any of the classical standards. Ben Shapiro is a lawyer
in his 30s who tours college campuses debating freshmen. Sam Harris wrote a laughably bad book
about philosophy. Whatever the fuck it is Dave Rubin and Tim Pool do, it certainly isn't journalism,
and Jordan Peterson constantly says things in interviews that are hilariously wrong.
Habermas wrote that the authority of intellectuals comes from the fact that they're held accountable
not just by the general public, but by fellow experts in their field.
For the good reputation of an intellectual, assuming she has one, is not based primarily on
celebrity or fame, but on a standing which has to be acquired in her own field, whether as a
writer or a psychiatrist at any rate in some specialist field, before she makes a public
use of her knowledge and reputation. When she contributes arguments to a debate, she must address
a public composed not of viewers, but of potential speakers and addresses who are able to offer each
other justifications. And the intellectual dark web responded, says who. I should also say here
that this isn't me arguing for closing off academia. There's been a movement in sociology,
for instance, where scholars have argued that they should become private intellectuals only
writing for other sociologists, and I obviously think that this is a completely wrong approach.
Jordan Peterson had an initial presence on YouTube because he would upload all of his
lectures for free, which is genuinely a really cool thing to do. What I'm arguing for here
is a greater cynicism towards the authority of these people calling themselves intellectuals,
especially when the only gatekeeper is YouTube's algorithm. Now let's take a step back here to
figure out how the project of the IDW operates. One thing they love to bring up is how diverse the
group is. Purely ideologically speaking, of course. While the individual members of the
intellectual dark web hold a variety of views ranging from paleoconservatism to neoconservatism
to libertarianism, they're united by a common hatred of political correctness, cancel culture,
post-modernism, contemporary progressive social movements, trans people and Muslims,
or as they call that, reasonable thinking. I think it's interesting here to point out
the way that the IDW and Peterson in particular work to present their arguments as natural.
The idea that one of the driving forces between history is hierarchical struggle is absolutely true,
but the idea that that's actually history is not true because it's deeper than history,
it's biology itself, because organisms of all sorts organize themselves into hierarchies.
The post-modern neo-Marxist Antonio Gramsci viewed history as a struggle between
ways of viewing reality. Moving away from the Marxist concept of false consciousness, the idea
that the reason the working class doesn't act in its best interest is because they've been tricked.
Instead, Gramsci argued that that's not only kind of condescending, like if someone isn't
supporting your cause, it's probably not the best to say that it's just because they're suckers,
but also this misses that people don't often decide what they believe by objectively looking
at their finances. I mean, do you have any idea how many Chinese puzzle boxes I've bought since
the start of the pandemic? Every surface in my room is covered with them, none of which I've solved,
and this is not because it's rational or economically sound. No, no, no, very much the opposite,
but it'll have all been worked at once I finally solve one. Instead, as Kenneth Burke later put it,
people use a narrative to make sense of their material conditions and base their beliefs off of
that. This relates to Gramsci's ideas on common sense, which ironically are actually really
confusing and there's a lot of disagreement about what he meant. Like, every scholarly paper on it
is like everyone else who's written about this is a dumbass, but what he actually meant was this.
I mean, the guy did write all of this while in a classic case of cancel culture run amuck he was
imprisoned for opposing Mussolini, so maybe we should cut him a bit of slack there. In that sense,
you could say he was the Jordan Peterson of his time. Gramsci, without going too into it here,
described common sense as the assemblage of truisms accepted within a particular social world,
and dude was not a fan. He basically thought that common sense was contradictory and usually dumb as
hell, but that the intellectual's job was to criticize common sense and take the couple
kernels of truth at the core of it and use those to create a new philosophy to challenge the dominant
one. I would argue, though, that far from challenging common sense, the members of the IDW
try to justify it by inserting themselves into it, claiming to be such reasonable thinkers,
and insisting that all their views are just what's natural. Peterson goes harder into this than I
think anyone else I've ever seen, from his lobster dominance hierarchies to his somewhat
infamous debate with Sam Harris, in which he argued that God is real because religion is
evolutionarily beneficial, and truth is whatever is evolutionarily beneficial. I don't want to
be too hard on him here because I'm not making this up. He blames his poor performance in that
debate on having drink an apple cider and gone a month with no sleep. Jordan Peterson hates and
fears apple cider so much he's probably going to cover his house with giant portraits of it soon.
But I mean, come on, we've all been there. I've said absolutely ridiculous shit after
drinking saltfights, but the thing is Peterson does not seem to have let this go and brings it up
in current interviews, so yeah. This is part of why it's really useless to try to debunk him.
Peterson's operating on a level of pure ideology where he thinks that things can be factually
true but still wrong if they don't fit his idea of what's evolutionarily advantageous.
And just for the record, for all the shit Derrida gets, if you open up one of his books,
you might find erotic Socrates fan fiction, but you won't find any of this shit. I am not aware
of any philosopher postmodern or otherwise who goes as hard as Peterson does in redefining truth
to suit their own interests. Part three. Yep, we are doing parts now. I just decided that those were
parts one and two back there. And if you don't like it, fuck you, I changed my mind. This is part
four, part four, burn it all down. So knowing what we do now, I think we can come to a better
definition of what a public intellectual is. In a paper by Lambrose Fatsis, they argue that a
public intellectual isn't so much a job as it is what Fatsis calls a space for opinion. Also,
I know that was an incredibly pretentious thing to say. Don't worry, it gets so much worse.
It's kind of like how a worker isn't a member of the proletariat because of the specifics of the
job that they do, but because of the circumstances surrounding that work. In the same way, public
intellectuals aren't defined by any specific quality or type of thinking, but just that people
listen to them. And Fatsis argues that that sucks. In Gramsci's critique of intellectuals, he notes
that it's impossible for them to be detached observers as some like to claim to be. And so
we need to always see any truth bombs and hot takes made by public intellectuals as inherently
a product of their material and historical circumstances. But Fatsis goes a bit further.
Our whole idea of intellectuals is as these philosopher kings talking down to regular people.
And so if something like their class can seep into their ideas, why wouldn't their elitist
position? So yeah, maybe public intellectuals are just a bad thing, period. Like, one issue of
them is obviously diversity. I mean, of course, it almost goes without saying that almost all
public intellectuals are white and even more are men. But also, there are other types of smart
people besides academics, journalists and authors. What if we heard from different types of artists?
Why are authors so special? What if we valued lived experiences a bit more? Why is a homeless
person's opinion on the state of homeless shelters not taken at least as seriously as that of some
guy with a PhD in an unrelated field? I want to be very clear here. I'm not saying get rid of
smart people or don't listen to experts, but honestly ask, why is it good for us to just have
designated professional smart people? I know it's kind of scary, a world without think pieces
and TED talks, a world where professors can no longer turn the dislike they feel towards their
trans students into a lucrative career, a world where we maybe place more value on the intelligence
of regular people. But I think in spite of all that, it might be a world worth considering.
Okay, but also I should still be able to do this as a job, though, because
Why are there so many cultural Marxists in Hollywood and online?
They are bad people who threaten the good ones. They threaten the West, which is mine.
So we've been told and demand to believe it, I'm never wrong, just eat meat.
Someday we'll find them, the cultural Marxists, the fascists, the grifters and me.
Who said that everyone gets dignity now? What an entitled flaw.
For those postmodernists who tear family down, to change all the words they ought.
What's so amazing that keeps them all blazing, despite our polite bigotry?
Someday we'll find one, a cultural Marxist, the fascists, the grifters and me.
Most of us might as hell proclaiming a postracial era.
Have you been half asleep, and have you heard voices? I've heard them calling my name.
The voices that castigate you for your failures, but why would I feel shame?
I've heard it too many times to ignore it, but still ignore critical race theory.
Someday we'll find them, the cultural Marxists, the fascists, the grifters and me.
After all, after all, after all, after all.
