Hi everyone, sorry for the delay in putting out this video.
Today I'm going to be looking at a few topics, but for a jumping off point, we'll be looking
at the newest intellectual voice of the right wing, Kanye West.
Kanye's MAGA allegiance was prefaced by a visit to Trump Tower last year in which he was apparently
That was drugged the f*** out, bro. I was drugged out. I was on opioids.
Checks out. This was made explicit more recently with a series of tweets where Kanye fanboyed
out over Trump as well as conservative commentator Candace Owens and even hinted at a love for our
boy Jordan Peterson. This move has garnered a lot of hate from Kanye's old fans while also
opening a market of new fans such as Alex Jones, Ben Shapiro, Charlie Kirk and even Marco Rubio.
I don't know anything about Kanye West's new album other than I guess he premiered it out there in
Wyoming and invited a bunch of people. He's an interesting guy. Actually, he's in the middle
of that push-a-tea and Drake fight because Drake comes from that whole thing is so complicated.
Bottom line is I haven't heard it, but I know it's out there and it's the first work I think he's
done solo in a couple years. He's been writing and doing other stuff, so I look forward to hearing
it at some point. Maybe they have it down at the White House. They got an advanced copy.
Yeah. I have to admit, I do find myself agreeing with Rubio here. Having very much enjoyed all
of the music Kanye's been putting out so far this summer. That said, it seems like he's turned
into something of a reactionary, so Papa's gotta do what Papa's gotta do. Killer Mike is next.
In order to clarify his views, Kanye appeared for an interview at the headquarters of TMZ. In
the interview, he said some wild shit, most notably.
Man, when I first saw this clip, I thought there was some context here. Nope, you just jumped right
in there, eh? Another big single from the video was this part.
Man, imagine thinking that slavery was a choice, but liposuction wasn't.
One thing I've been noticing with all of this has been all the conservatives suddenly standing
for Kanye. Let's watch as Sargon of Akkad praises Kanye's interview.
This is another very good observation by Kanye. Yes, these people do operate with feels over
reels. And that's really the
crux of all of this, is that Kanye feels oppressed by the Black victim narrative.
He is a phenomenally successful man, and I just want to point out that he genuinely
should be an inspirational figure to young Black men. And honestly, he is actually a
fantastic role model. He is a father and husband, a successful man who is out there doing what he
thinks is right following his conscience in the world. We need to start being worried about
ourselves and stop being worried about what other people think, and we have the right to free thought.
If the Black community is lucky, then Kanye West's words are literally going to echo through it.
This is exactly the kind of advice that my father gave to me, and that I will give to my son.
If you start thinking about love, and start feeling love, and thinking about forgiveness,
then you can overcome things. This is such good advice to the Black community,
I don't even know where to begin. How about this part which Sargon seems to skip over in his video?
I was going to stand on this chair right now, right? You know why I'm not standing on the chair right now?
Do you all remember an Oprah Winfrey moment? What do you all remember, Oprah Winfrey? Who is that?
Tom Cruise. He was in love, right? He jumped on the couch, and what happened? Now he's crazy.
So because of that, I'm not going to hop on my coffee table.
He's all the Scientologists.
Does that, okay, that makes him crazy?
He's a little bit.
Okay, so you're more crazy to be a Scientologist. So Scientology is a lesser religion than any other
religion, right? They believe in aliens. Wait a second. Scientology is a lesser religion than
any other religion. That's what you're saying? It's not believable.
Yeah, Sargon was a little bit quiet about the whole Scientology thing, eh?
I have to admit, one piece of Shadden Freud that I've been able to gleam from this whole thing
is all these conservative chuds learning a very hard lesson that a lot of Kanye fans have known
for a long time. To quote Marilyn Monroe, if you can't handle me at my...
Someone comes up and says something like, I am a god. Everybody says, who does he think he is?
I just told you who I thought I was. A god.
Then you don't deserve me at my...
The spirit of the people of Southern Louisiana and Mississippi may end up being the most tragic
loss of all. George Bush doesn't care about black people.
Anyway, dunking on Kanye's side, the thing I found most interesting about the GMZ interview
was Kanye's response when one of the reporters confronts him for what he's been saying. Let's watch.
It's because Kanye, you're entitled to your opinion. You're entitled to believe whatever you want.
But there is fact and real world, real life consequence behind everything that you just said.
And while you are making music and being an artist and living the life that you've earned
by being a genius, the rest of us in society have to deal with these threats to our lives.
We have to deal with the marginalization that has come from the 400 years of slavery that you
said, but our people was a choice. Every day we have to walk into that truth while you choose
to say things that, to be honest with you, dawg, are nonsensical. You want to think freely?
That's fine. I'll come back your free thought with my free thought because mine is grounded in
a reality that I have been giving and a reality that I'm going to change, but I'm not going to do it
by pretending that the enemies are on the same team as me. And frankly, I'm disappointed, I'm
appalled, and brother, I am unbelievably hurt by the fact that you have morphed into something
to me that's not real. That's the way I feel. Stand on all the coffee tables you want to stand on,
say whatever you want to say, but don't throw a stone, then hide your hand like the rest of us
are just going to swallow it. Yay, be yay. I'm off it forever. Do you? But remember,
the life that I live is as a real person, an actual person. Now, the thing is, he said some,
he said grounded in reality. This reality has been forced upon us. It is a choice. Just like when
I said slavery is a choice. The reality, we can make our own reality. We can talk about history,
but not too long. We need to talk about- There, that last bit, that really stuck out to me.
Before Kanye starts regurgitating conservative talking points about personal responsibility
in black on black crime, he takes things in a bit of a metaphysical direction. It seems Kanye's
dismissal of structural and material inequalities that persist for people of color is grounded in a
sort of post-modern Robert Anton Wilsonian conception of reality itself as a social construct,
perhaps best encapsulated by Wilson's claim that the border between the real and the unreal is not
fixed, but just marks the place where two rival gangs of shamans fought to a standstill. It honestly
is a little refreshing. After all, if you're going to insist that systems of structural oppression
built into the fabric of our material and social existences are simply choices,
why not follow that to the logical conclusion and say that all of reality itself is a choice?
To explain this, I want to look at one of Kanye's influences, classic hip-hop head Scott Adams.
For those of you who don't know, Scott Adams is the men's rights activist, libertarian hypnotist
responsible for Dilbert. Adams spends much of his time publishing self-help books and
responding to criticisms on Twitter by showing pictures of his abs and his hot girlfriend.
You know, like a cool guy who fucks. Adams regularly releases periscope videos entitled
Coffee with Scott Adams, which he intros by reading Dilbert comics that he's currently working on.
All right, so if any of you haven't seen today's comic, I'll read it to you.
Starts off with Tina going in and talking to Dilbert and Tina says,
are you going to the department meeting? Dilbert says, yes, as soon as I plan my route.
Dilbert goes on to say, I have seven co-workers who I need to avoid on the way.
Three are non-stop talkers. The other four ask me for something every time I see them.
I've mapped their likely locations and I'm working out an avoidance path. Yes,
I think I can do it. Is that my name on your list of employees to avoid? I didn't say it was a perfect
system. All right, so I just wanted to test that out. Cool, cool, cool, cool. Adams made a video that
was very obviously meant to catch the attention of Kanye West. What was the big news of the week?
Kanye West, who is famous for saying things like George Bush doesn't care about black people,
for getting on stage with Taylor Swift and making a statement that Beyonce should have won and that
probably racism was part of the voting. So somebody who has strong credentials,
what did he tweet? He tweeted, I like the way Candice Owens thinks. Seven words.
And he ripped a hole in reality. Kanye knows history doesn't repeat. He's not a prisoner
of the mind. He knows that the problem is not the solution. I don't even know what his preferred
politics would be. I'm not even sure what party he would run for if he ran for president at this
point. He did something that you could rarely see. He actually just altered reality. He just made
the entire conservative Twitter sphere just go something like this. It's like your head just
went and he just freed a lot of people from a mental prison. Kanye, in seven words, unlocked a
mental prison and is bringing you to the golden age. Beyond just flattering Kanye, the two main
points of Adam's video were, first, the cause is not the solution, essentially meaning that it's
limiting if you're looking for a solution to a problem to only look at the problem itself and
not other avenues for the solution. This isn't the worst point if you're applying it to, you know,
something that you're working on yourself, but Adam's instead uses this line of reasoning to
pat white people on the back for being kind enough to end slavery.
When slavery was the problem, you could say that, you know, white people were essentially
the problem for slavery, right? And it required white people to do something massively different
for slavery to go away. So in this case, the problem and the solution were very similar.
It was white people. White people were the problem, white people had to change.
Then move fast forward to the civil rights era. Again, even though everybody was involved in
the civil rights, right, you know, all the, every, every group and gender and everybody was involved
in that, but the people who had to change the most, the people who had to pass laws, etc.
were white people. So white people were kind of the problem and white people were kind of the
solution to Adam's other point is that history doesn't repeat itself. The point, similar to
the first one, is that it can be limiting to rule something out simply because there is no precedent
for it. And if you don't do that, you open yourself up to a lot of more other opportunities, such as
do you know what happens if you think that history doesn't repeat?
Then you can become president of the United States without ever being a politician.
If you believe the history repeats, you don't even try. President Trump is not in a mental prison.
Did he think that North Korea was unsolvable? Nope. Did he think he couldn't negotiate trade
deals? Nope. He didn't think that. Did he think he couldn't give people nicknames and win an election
that way? This is where I think Kanye gets a lot of his dismissal of historical and material issues.
Coming back to Kanye's slavery comment, I don't think Kanye thinks that slavery was a choice.
Perhaps a more accurate, but nevertheless unsettling expression of Kanye's views
can be found in the interview he did with Charlemagne Lagarde the same day as the infamous TMZ
That was the moment that I wanted to use Bitcoin and I saw Harriet Tubman on $20 bill.
Why? It's like when you just see like all the slave movies, it's like why you gotta keep reminding us
about slavery? Why don't you show us, put Michael Jordan on the $20 bill?
Kanye doesn't think that slavery was a choice. He thinks that dwelling on historical circumstances
which continue to this day to disadvantage people of color is a choice and in fact itself a form
of slavery. It should go without saying but this is YouTube so here we go. This line of thinking is
almost certainly a result of Kanye's success and while yes on a personal level it is good to
focus on your own agency, the fact that some people of color are able to succeed does not
disprove the fact that there are massive structural factors that cannot be fixed simply by choosing
a different reality or believing in yourself. This brings me to the meat of my argument which is
self-help as applied to political ideology. In a previous video on Jordan Peterson I got
some flak for disparaging him for being something of a self-help guru. Let me be clear here that I
have absolutely nothing against self-help as it applies to individuals. Hell, I've gotten depressed
and found it super helpful to organize my room. My issue is with this type of advice being applied
to macro-level political issues such as when Peterson dismissed the political activism of the
60s i.e. the civil rights and anti-Vietnam war movements as kids waving paper on sticks. In
interview with Alex Jones Adams professes his love for self-help and explicitly calls it a right-wing
virtue and when talking about Trump it becomes clear that Adams's admiration for the man is
based largely on the power of positive thinking. Literally one of his favorite things to bring up
about Trump is that his childhood pastor was Norman Vincent Peel the author of The Power of
Positive Thinking and in his appearance on Sam Harris's podcast Adams's defense of Trump
seems purely out of admiration for Trump's will to power. The same thing is even more so the case
for Kanye. Kanye's plainly said that he doesn't follow politics and his support for Trump is more
than anything emotional. This is confirmed by T.I. during a breakfast club interview where he
talks about his meeting with Yeh. Or how about here listen to how Kanye talks about Trump with T.I.
I don't really think that that was hyperbole. The half of Trump's policy that Kanye seems to
disagree with is his policies while the half that he agrees with is literally just his success.
I want to take a second to be very clear here that the point of this video isn't just to dunk on
Kanye for being inarticulate and reactionary. I think that especially looking at Adams this is
a pretty generalizable phenomenon. So what? At this point while I hope I've done a good enough
job to clearly lay out what the ideological through line is between Kanye, Scott Adams,
and the right more generally. Some of you may find yourself asking why this is a particularly big
deal aside from it potentially leading to the election of a senile crypto fascist of the most
powerful position in the world. I mean, hell, he's kind of weird, but Scott Adams generally comes
off as a pretty reasonable dude. Watch him here as he calls out Stefan Malinu for claiming that
it's discrimination that college professors don't hire more conservatives.
Another thing, of course, that the Democrats say or the leftists say that they're very much
into diversity, but they relentlessly don't hire non-leftists. Sorry, that's a double
negative. It's a little tough to thread that needle. But I think a study just came out in
the certain faculties in American colleges and universities. It's like nine to one
Democrats to Republicans, which means that they're not really that much into diversity of thought.
And so the question then becomes, okay, well, if you're not really into diversity of thought
in that when you have the power, you only relentlessly hire people who are kind of photocopies
of your own meme set, if you're really into diversity, then why don't you push for more
Republicans in college campuses? So that says, okay, well, diversity is not really a big issue.
So then why would they be so focused on diversity if they don't push for it or enact it
in areas where they actually have some significant control?
Well, keep in mind that discriminating against ideas is expressly allowed, if not encouraged.
So from your perspective, since you would like to see presumably more conservative thoughts,
it seems to you like that's unfair that people are discriminating against ideas.
But indeed, it's all we do. I mean, we discriminate against ideas in every realm
all the time. And it's the one thing that we're probably better off for.
To see how this can get more sinister, we'll have to journey deep, deep, into the wife's
parents' basement of one of the key figures of the so-called intellectual dark web.
I'm speaking, of course, of the gorilla himself, Mike Thurnevich.
In his Breakfast Club interview, T.I. said that Kanye needs a translator to get his ideas across,
and perhaps Adams, the Kanye West of libertarian newspaper or comic strip authors,
is no different. Let's sit back and watch as Thurnevich explicates Scott Adams' thought
process for us. So it is all connected, because you can't do what I do if you're not
reading books like this, you know. You can't, if you don't be yourself as an architect to reality,
then you're going to walk down the roads other people walk down. The other people
have built, and you want to build your own roads. Another thing Kanye said that, you know,
is going to ring a bell, Kanye said, you live in the past, you're always in the past.
Adams built on it. I've talked about that too. Here's what I mean. When people bring up things
about me from years ago they don't like, I will pass the polygraph saying that it isn't even true.
People go, that's it. You ever notice people want to try to drag me down with things from
the past that they claim happened? If you put me on a polygraph and said Thurnevich,
why did you say this to do this? I would say, well, I don't know what you're talking about.
Never said it. You're a liar. No, I didn't. The past isn't real. The past exists in your mind
as images and constructs, but it's no different than a film. And by the way,
science has proven that most of your memories are false.
This has been, you can go read the science of it. Science has even proven, you know,
the whole where were you when JFK died? If it's a real strong memory, you're going to remember it.
That's actually been proven false. It doesn't matter where were you when 9-11 happened,
your memories are false. And I can show you in a very easy way that your memories are false.
Well, how do you do that? Think about a significant time that happened in your life.
For example, when 9-11 happened, maybe you won something. Just imagine that for a minute.
And then describe the picture, you know, draw a picture of what is happening.
Draw a picture, explain it, visualize it in your mind. Well, you know what you just did?
You viewed yourself in that image. Did you understand? If I told you, remember where you
were when 9-11 happened, you wouldn't look at yourself because you don't look at yourself.
You would be looking at other people. Your image would be a description of everything seen outside
of you. But instead, because this is the way your memories are constructed, you actually saw yourself
in a movie. So then if memories are false and memories no different than a movie,
why don't you just create a new movie? Do you understand? Because if you believe which is false,
but if you believe Newtonian physics and you believe the future is dictated by the past,
then what you must do is you must reconstruct your past. You have to reinvent and people go,
what? Blind yourself. No, it isn't because your memories are false. This is easily proven. So
you're not lying to yourself because your memories are false because we're evolved to lie to ourselves
about our past. Any memory you have, no matter how honest you're trying to be, you're going to be the
hero, you're going to be better, everybody else is going to be dumb just the way it is.
So if you start from the proposition that your memories are false anyway and you want to change
your future, then you just reconstruct your memories and then suddenly you're living a different future.
So what is it? Well, that connects to Scott Adams's lecture in Kanye, right? If you have a view of the
past, which is negative, I don't know what that was. If you have a conception of the past that is
negative, then your presence can be negative. If you believe, you know, because bad things happen
to people. If you believe, though, that the past defines you and that's who you are, then that's
how you're going to live in the present. And then how you live in the present is going to
hide in the future. So for me, the mistakes that I allegedly made in the past never even happened
as far as I'm concerned, polygraph me. Just polygraph me. Never happened. And people go,
well, that's delusional. Well, you're delusional too, but at least my delusions helped me.
So that was pretty chilling, eh? I try to end these with a snappy thesis statement,
but I'm a little lost for words here. I thought this would just be a silly video I could bang out,
but shit got deep here. I guess, first of all, there's some satisfaction in hearing all that
from the side that accuses us of not caring about logic or reason or just being a bunch of post-modern
nihilists. In fact, maybe this is what Jordan Peterson was talking about in his first Sam Harris
interview when he said, I don't think that facts are necessarily true. At this point,
I don't really know, though, if your strategy is simply to withdraw entirely from reality,
what's a debunking video going to do? Cernovich has probably already altered his memory and believes
he never said any of that. From that perspective, anything is possible. Donald Trump had the largest
inauguration of all time. Slavery was a choice. Dilbert is still funny. All of these things are
equally true. Anyway, thanks for making it this far. I will be making an effort to get back on
track to doing one video a month. Until next time, take care out there, and peace.
