This video is sponsored by Surfshark VPN.
Click the link in the description to get 83% off for 2 years plus 3 months for free.
It's a super exciting time to be part of the vacation rental industry because it's
predicted to be worth about 198 billion by 2020.
Hey everyone.
Some of you may have noticed that lately I've been doing a bit of a, let's call it
a series where I've sort of been combining my love of sociology, left-wing politics,
and terrible, terrible reality TV shows.
After my cooking show video, I had a bunch of people recommend that I watch Nailed It,
the cooking show where home cooks try and fail to recreate unbelievably complicated
desserts and I'm just like, no, no, no, no, that's not trash.
I'm only interested in the kinds of shows where it's clear that the people who made
it had no regard for the safety, well-being, or dignity of anyone involved in the show.
Like, I'm only interested in talking about shows where just the fact that it was allowed
to be made is itself an act of violence.
And so this month I'm going to be turning to the world of home renovation TV.
In this video, I'm going to be talking about a little show called Stay Here.
Stay Here is quite possibly the most satanic show I've ever seen.
Travel, design, experience, profit.
Stay Here.
As I said, it's a home renovation show, but the twist is that all the houses they renovate
are meant to be rented out on Airbnb.
Now, I will admit that I'm not very into renovation shows, but even still, I feel pretty
confident saying that this is a bad one.
Specifically, what I think makes Stay Here so uniquely trash is that unlike any other
generically bad renovation show, and make no mistake, this show is extremely generic and
bad.
But at least with those other shows, it is just nice at the end to see a family move
into their new home.
But on Stay Here, you don't get that.
Instead, you just get people being like, yes, sick, going to make a ton of money off
of this.
Like, there are even a few episodes where the owners are just like, damn, wish I lived
here.
Let's just rent out the house and we'll live here.
I'm jealous that I don't get to stay on this thing.
I'm jealous of our guests.
Yes, I'm totally jealous of our guests because that place is sweet.
There's even this one episode where this guy owns this whole building and he lives in this
amazing apartment and then rents out the other apartment that kind of sucks and the hosts
convince him to move into the shittier space.
You're a young guy, not married.
No.
No kids.
No.
You've got to suck it up and you should move into the other apartment and we should
fix this place up and rent this out for short term rental.
Right.
Like, the episode ends with the guy living in a worse place than where he started, but
it's played as a happy ending.
Let me real quick tell you about this video's sponsor before we get back into ripping on
this show.
This video is sponsored by the VPN company Surfshark and right now, if you follow the
link in the description or go to surfshark.deals slash we're in hell and use the promo code
we're in hell, all one word, you'll receive 83% off for two years and three extra months
for free.
If this video has put you off of tourism, but you still want to, I don't know, see
what Netflix is like in Japan, Surfshark is great for tricking streaming services into
thinking that you're in another country so you can get region locked content.
Also I doubt I'm the only one who could and should do a lot more to secure my online privacy
and a VPN is a great tool for doing that.
They essentially create a private internet connection which prevents malware trackers
and those snakes over at your ISP from knowing what you're up to.
Surfshark has great security and a firm no logs policy to ensure that they aren't tracking
what you're doing either.
I've been using them for the last like month and a bit and I find them super fast, easy
to use, they aren't constantly updating and they have a clean web feature that blocks
ads and trackers which is pretty sick.
I'm not at all an expert in this stuff and they are paying me but I've used other VPNs
before and I will say that I do like this one better.
So if you need a VPN and would like to support the channel, click that link in the description
or go to surfshark.deals slash we're in hell and use that promo code we're in hell all
one word to tell them that I sent you, you'll get 83% off for two years and three months
for free.
So anyway, back to the video.
Also just the way the show is produced is brutal.
Whenever they do a transition, they either show the kind of like stock drone footage
you'd probably expect or more often they show a bunch of very unnatural pictures of the
two hosts doing touristy stuff in this dumb scrapbook collage effect that looks like it
came with iMovie.
I know what you're going to ask.
Don't worry.
The answer is yes.
Of course these transitions are accompanied by the worst music you've ever heard.
Speaking of, the show has two hosts.
The first is Genevieve Garter, an interior designer best known as one of the original
designers on trading spaces.
While basically everything about this show is baffling, Genevieve does and this is one
of the nicest things I'll say about anyone involved in this show, she makes sense.
She handles the interior design and renovation and is just a friendly-seeming lady who dispenses
pretty solid interior design tips.
Something is too perfect.
People don't feel like they can touch it.
So if you're going to put cheese out, always leave a few crumbles.
When things are more vertical, they move your eyes up the wall and away from that tiny footprint.
So it gives the illusion that things are actually bigger than they are.
When you need a polish or you have a little watermark in any of your tables or surfaces,
Maynace is your best friend.
I also don't want to be too mean to her since I believe she was cursed by a vengeful spirit
so that everything she touches takes on a hideous, Pinterest aesthetic.
Now you have a guidebook in your common room and all of your guests are going to take pictures
in front of this.
Kind of a King Midas if he was your quirky aunt situation.
In almost every episode, Genevieve paints the exterior of the place black and the interior
white.
The exterior has gone black and the interior has gone white to give it that modern Scandinavian
design aesthetic.
We have made some serious progress on the build.
To deliver the feel of an upscale boutique hotel at the beach, we're painting the exterior
of the house a chic dark peppercorn color to hide its imperfections.
Genevieve spices things up with some local art, which generally means geometric designs
appropriate from some form of indigenous artwork and it just looks like absolute shit.
I love this!
I found you because I wanted to make a special door and I definitely wanted to include some
of the native patterns of Washington, the totem poles being so prolific here.
So you've got the whole Aztec blanket pattern mapped out on the pool house.
I love this work because it brings the outdoors in but in a really modern contemporary sort
of abstract way.
Door is a jewel.
A real Native American aesthetic.
It's kind of that ultimate backdrop and I think it's going to set this whole pool area
apart from the competition.
Definitely.
Nobody has this.
Anyway, speaking of vengeful spirits, the other host is Peter Lorimer.
Peter is a real estate agent with a blog who used to work in the music industry.
It's not really clear why he's on the show but he gets presented as like a real estate
guru and handles the business side of things.
While it's not within the scope of this video to opine on what manner of creature of the
night he is, I think it's extremely clear from the show that whatever Peter is, he absolutely
hates humans and delights in our suffering.
He's got a management company so good job there but the management company is considering
dropping him.
Is that what's happening?
Yeah!
He's in trouble, huh?
Well, he's going to be really in trouble because I've invited them to the property.
Anyway, the show is very boring and every episode plays out the same so I'm just going
to run through the basic formula here.
At the beginning of every episode, Peter and Genevieve arrive in a new city and then say
something about it that makes them sound like Martians trying to pass as tourists.
What I love about Malibu is it's a place where celebrities and surfers define a one-of-a-kind
luxury lifestyle.
Uninterrupted rows and rows and rows of brown stuff, that's what I love about Brooklyn.
This is, as a New Yorker, what we need the most.
We need nature.
They then bring up the statistics that happily report how much money short-term rentals make
in that city.
I was digging through the numbers and Brooklyn alone brings in $309 million a year in home
shares, Airbnb, VRBO.
There are approximately 6,200 vacation rental properties in Austin.
Last year, they brought in about $250 million in revenue for owners.
And then they're off to meet the person they're there to help and shit all over their house.
I just feel like there's no style or personality, it's just very disjointed.
There is no design.
This is frat house everything.
Totally frat.
Right.
Nothing about this room says that you care at all.
There's two kind of messed up things that happen here.
For one thing, the before and after shots that they'll use are hilariously dishonest.
In the first episode, they just show big boxes lying around the living room and it's like,
sure, they probably didn't have amazing photos of the place beforehand, but I doubt they
just had IKEA boxes lying all over the place in their promos.
In another episode, they rip on this guy for having a messy office, even though he makes
it very clear that when he rents the place out, he locks that door.
There's a bedroom that's been used as an office, which for me, it's a big no-no.
The last thing I'm going to do when I'm on vacation is go sit in someone else's half-imagined office.
That's actually an office and I also use it for storage and lock it off when guests are here.
But also, they use this phrase throughout the series, which I think is so dark.
They tell everyone that they need to depersonalize the place.
This could mean a guy getting rid of his hookah collection.
We've got what look to be devices that you smoke pot in.
So what if a family is checking in and the first thing that their kids see?
Well, I've collected these from all over the world.
The depersonalization of this home is something that we have to work on.
Or in the second episode, telling a woman to get rid of all the pictures she has of her
and her recently deceased husband.
My husband had the house and unfortunately, he passed away a year and a half ago.
And it's been a difficult time for me.
Right? Everywhere I look, I see you.
Feels like Sharon's party pad rather than luxury.
It needs to be depersonalized.
That episode is so fucked, too.
Because the woman only wants to rent her place out six months of the year and live there the other six,
which she's doing while they film.
But Peter keeps ripping on her for things like having an exercise bike in her room.
You have a gym in here, too?
It is the thing that troubles me.
If I'm flying here from Europe, I'm dropping 1500 a night, I walk into my master suite.
You're reminding me of how fat I am.
When I walked in here before, I was reminded of how fat I was because there was a cycling machine.
Or worse, having food in her refrigerator.
All right, can I open your fridge?
It's full of half eaten.
Nothing about this fridge makes me even want to eat anything in it, no offense.
Yeah, but when you have people, you finally leave an empty fridge.
Would that be correct?
You would have water.
It is also pretty funny just who goes on this show.
Well, I would say that Airbnb and short term rentals are just bad, full stop,
which we'll get to that soon enough.
But they present everyone very sympathetically.
We're meant to feel for these poor people who are trying their best,
but just can't seem to succeed at turning their second home
into a source of income that can put their kids through college.
But as much as I personally think that landlords should get a real job,
I can obviously still sympathize with this woman who can't pay her bills
because her husband just died.
But then peppered in are just absolute dipshits
who we're meant to have equal sympathy for.
Like that woman's husband dying is supposed to be just as sad
as this 30 year old who can't get his investment property off the ground.
My name is Alex. I'm 30 years old.
I live and work in New York City.
I initially purchased this house in 2016 for $355,000,
but it's just been costing me money every single month that it sits here.
It's just a money losing investment.
Anyway, after the house has been roasted,
Genevieve then designs the new layout by entering her mind palace.
So let's start with this living room in between these two windows.
Is your king size bed, bedside tables, laundry all goes back here.
They then sit down with the owners to have a frank discussion about their finances.
This is a subtle thing, but I think these scenes are some of the grossest.
The owners tell Peter and Genevieve what their financial goals are.
And then Peter tells them that based off of what the owner's competition is charging,
they'll be able to meet all of their goals if they rent the property X number of nights a month,
a number that he seems to pull out of nowhere,
but promises them that if they do whatever he and Genevieve say, they'll be able to meet it.
In summary, what is your goal monthly?
We want to cover all the expenses associated with this boat.
So that is mortgage, mortgage, pump out.
And then we also want to cover little Rosie's childcare.
So altogether, that's about $4,000 a month.
For me, the art of pricing is to make yourself competitive.
And I think by the time that Jen and I are done,
we can get you to 250 a night and about 16 nights a month,
which will get you to your $4,000 a month and a total of $48,000 a year.
What's so fucked up about this is that it's never explained who's paying for the renovations.
And like, first of all, if it was the show paying for it, I feel like they'd mention that.
And secondly, there's a couple of people who seem really worried about agreeing.
I know that all of these changes seem expensive and they are.
This is not a cheap renovation at all.
If this was my property, I would be so confident in it.
Go for it. Yeah.
All right, good. I feel better.
Like, that doesn't seem like the response you would have if you were getting your place renovated
for free, right?
I've tried walking into it and haven't been able to find any solid answers.
It seems like the show does definitely pay for some of it, but not all.
And we don't know how much, which I feel like this would definitely be a very different show
if they were open about that.
For instance, at the end of each episode, they post a new ad for each property.
The copy gets read out loud while they swipe through the new photos,
and then it just cuts to credits.
Now we need to go live and launch the new property listing.
The vintage ranch of Paso Robles is the epitome of a romantic getaway for weddings,
wine tasting, and country living.
Enjoy nature under the magnificent 250-year-old grand oak tree.
No follow-up. No, here's how they're doing now.
I looked it up in six out of the eight properties featured on the show
are still up on Airbnb at time of recording, but still, definitely very weird, right?
Also, when I say they need to do whatever Peter and Genevieve tell them to do,
that can often mean things the owners don't want to do but get pushed into doing to maximize profits.
Like, the guy in episode six wanted to rent out the bottom floor of his house as a retail space,
and Peter and Genevieve are like, nah, fuck that.
You can see that it would lend well to something of a storefront,
maybe an art gallery or something like that.
Or a great vacation rental.
Look, I know that you were thinking about this as retail,
but as a businessman, I see this as a potential place to have another sleeping area.
You open up your windows, you're eating with your family, people are walking by,
you maybe have a few rocking chairs, whatever.
I love this indoor-outdoor thing.
And part of why he wanted it to be a retail space is because it's tiny.
When they turn into another room to rent, it looks completely fucked.
In another episode, they make the guy who had that office,
they didn't like turn it into another bedroom,
and then they see that he has a shed in his backyard and are just like,
hey, why don't you make this your office?
What's in here?
TV boxes, snowmen.
The thing I like about this right off the bat,
this could be your storage for sure.
You could even put a little desk in here and work in here.
We put money in your pocket by turning that into a bedroom,
which I think is key.
Like, that just sounds so shitty.
I love it.
Just the only home makeover show where a guest leaves the show with his office
moved into a pool supply storage area.
Anyways, after the owners sign their souls away, the show is pretty boring.
Construction starts, and while that's happening,
Genevieve takes them shopping for new furniture and appliances.
Again, no mention of who's paying.
How are you guys doing dishes now?
My hand.
Yeah.
Right, not sexy.
More expensive doesn't mean more stuff.
In fact, it means less stuff, higher quality.
Like, this is kind of a minimal-style bed,
but you know immediately when you see the texture, this is expensive.
Peter explains some aspect of business or marketing.
I want to talk about the headline.
For me, everything starts with a hook.
Two-bedroom Victorian with private pool.
It isn't grabbing me.
I would probably have something like three-bedroom pool oasis.
When installing security cameras at your short-term rental,
it is common courtesy you've got to let the guests know.
And so that the owners can have something in their guidebook to tell guests to check out,
they all go out to eat somewhere authentic, usually a cooking class,
but it's presented in such a way where the hosts tell the owners
that this place is now their favorite authentic local experience.
It's time to introduce them to a romantic dinner experience
they must guide their guests to.
Give it a good sort of push, you don't need a twist or burrow.
Oyster shucking class.
This is a great perk because it's obviously one of the number one restaurants in Seattle.
So to help build Brett's guidebook,
we've curated a very special Texas barbecue cooking class.
So Brett, we have a true authentic Texas barbecue experience.
We can't wait for you to show your guests.
First of all, it's so creepy to tell someone what their favorite restaurant is,
but also it's incredibly funny that that restaurant is just an oyster shucking class.
Like I'm sure they do regular service too,
but I love imagining this family taking the same class every week.
Like this is the best place in town.
Now there's two episodes in particular that I want to talk about with this.
And I'm pretty sure those are also literally the only episodes
where we see anyone who isn't white.
The first one is honestly fucked from start to finish.
It's set in Brooklyn and starts with Peter and Genevieve going to look at a mural of Biggie
near the property.
And Peter gets really weirdly emotional.
Oh, wow.
This is major with notorious B.I.G.
He was one of my heroes.
Before getting into real estate,
I was a successful record producer and international DJ.
Biggest influence on me and music as a whole was massive.
Real, I'm that girl who listens to gangster rap on her way to the farmer's market energy happening here.
The property they're looking at in this episode is basically a hostel
and Gordy, the guy who owns it, honestly seems like the best person on the show.
He's very clear with them that he does not want to raise the prices at all
because he wants it to stay affordable.
My goal is to keep the price the same.
I want to keep it affordable.
This is a working class community.
We want working class folks from all over the world to come back into it
and enjoy it and live locally.
This is something that Peter and Genevieve completely ignore.
It's kind of nuts in every other episode.
It's like a big thing how they make everyone turn any spare rooms into bedrooms
so they can maximize guests.
So the profit that you're going to get is directly linked to heads in beds.
We absolutely need to change this into a bedroom.
So the thing that jumps out to me, heads in beds is how you fluff up the numbers.
But here they get rid of all the bunk beds
and even tear out one of the bedrooms so they can expand the kitchen.
So my first thought is that we need to take out that wall,
take out this wall, all the way back, all of it.
Fantastic.
So we're going to open up this whole brown level.
Wait, wait, wait.
You mean taking a room, I'm making a room disappear?
But you gain a lobby diameter.
Um, I didn't.
Which, not really sure how you can do that without raising the prices.
And if we go over to Airbnb to look at this place,
oh look, it tops out at over a thousand dollars a night.
Oops.
Just your typical affordable youth hostel for only the children of CEOs.
Anyway, while the construction crew gets to work taking affordable housing off the market,
Peter takes Gordy and his young sons who help him run the place out to talk business.
Now, at this point in all the other episodes,
the owners either go furniture shopping with Genevieve
or to a fancy restaurant where Peter talks about SEO or tells them to start a blog.
So in your case, I would probably recommend SEO.
Search engine optimization.
Oh, okay.
Pay per click.
Blogging, when it's done in an authentic, vulnerable, genuine way,
is the most powerful tool a marketer can have.
When people see that you're real people on a real farm, engaging with your guests in real
experiences, it makes them feel like they know you.
I got to start taking more pictures and saving them and sharing them.
Instead, Peter takes Gordy and his kids to meet a woman who I think is just a maid at a hotel
and she teaches them how to make a bed.
So this is my friend, Marcia.
She is a luxury hotel bed specialist.
Let me show you how we make a hospital corner.
You lift and spread.
Tuck the sheets at the top and you sweep and then you tuck again.
I lightly spray.
Okay.
Like, that feels pretty fucking racist, right?
Did a guy who owns a hostel business really need to have the concept of making a bed?
Whitesplain to him?
And like, I want to be clear that all the beds in the before shots looked perfectly fine.
I just wonder what it is that makes Gordy different from the owners in every other episode.
Also, I like how he says that she's his friend.
Like, oh yeah, you guys hang out at the Biggie mural.
Now might be a good time to stop and mention that Airbnb has a pretty massive racism problem.
A paper from 2016 found that Airbnb hosts were much more likely to reject Black guests
even when it would hurt them financially.
Airbnb responded to this by releasing a report of their own boasting that they were actually
helping to fight racism because in that year usage of Airbnb had risen most in Black neighborhoods.
Which, first of all, that's not relevant.
The issue the original paper pointed out was that hosts were discriminating.
That'd be like if a movie theater refused to serve Black people, but then were like,
no no no, it's cool, we aren't racist, some of our janitors are Black.
But also, Airbnb saying they've seen increases in Black neighborhoods isn't good,
since that's just evidence that they were gentrifying those neighborhoods
by taking affordable housing and long-term rentals off the market.
Also, even in those Black neighborhoods, White hosts consistently earned way more than their Black
counterparts.
I don't say this often, but it genuinely would have been way less racist if Airbnb had
just said we have a Black friend.
Anyway, there's also the last episode, and this is the one where Stay Here actually tries
to address race.
The episode is set in Washington, and for their tourist location,
they go to this historic chili dog place, which seems super legit.
It's been a place where a lot of very famous people have visited.
Everyone from Chuck Berry to Barack and Michelle Obama have gone out of their way to visit
this specific location and become a part of that history as well.
They sit down and talk to the owner, who's this awesome old lady who's been there for
over 50 years.
At one point, Peter acts like they're doing her a massive favor by sending guests to her restaurant.
We want to bring guests into DC, and specifically the Shaw neighborhood, so they can get to learn
the history, they can meet you, and they can experience DC and live like a local.
Which like, they do kind of talk like that to every business, but it still kind of rubs
me the wrong way.
Like, Obama ate there.
I'm sure she doesn't need their help or want to talk to every tourist this asshole brings
to Washington.
But then, she mentions that Martin Luther King used to eat there, and then,
very much out of nowhere, the owner of the property says this.
Can you tell us a little bit about what happened in the Martin Luther King assassination and
the riots that followed?
Which seems pretty fucking weird, right?
Like, I'm a bit of an awkward guy.
I can relate to being in a group, not knowing what to say, and winding up putting my foot
in my mouth.
But I don't think I've ever interrupted a conversation to abruptly ask someone to
recount a traumatic event like that.
Yeah, we're doing six weeks, so it's getting pretty exciting.
We decided to go with Jennifer, you know, after her mom.
You know, I just wish she was here to see all of this, but like, you know, not to get
all like, I don't know, spiritual or whatever, but like, it, in a way, it kind of feels like
she-
Tell us about the night she died.
I'm sorry, what?
The night she died.
You found the body, right?
Yeah.
Um, anyways, after he says that, she tells him about the day MLK was assassinated.
It was just tears, tears everywhere.
Everybody, everybody that came in was just crying.
It was really very, very emotional.
And then it cuts to the owner of the Airbnb saying,
Everyone wants to feel the same way that I felt when I walk into Ben's Chili Bowl.
Everyone wants that experience.
What the fuck is going on?
I've watched this clip so many times and the way he delivers that line still weirds me out so much,
but it just gets so much more deranged from here.
I had to edit this clip to make it a bit shorter so that YouTube doesn't demonetize this video,
but I need you to know I didn't change anything to make this weirder.
Here's what happens immediately after he says that.
Virginia, I'm a massive, massive Obama fan.
Can you show me where he sat and ate his chili dog?
And may I sit there?
Please, of course.
Oh, this is really...
One, two, three, beautiful, gotcha.
Everything about this interaction is fucking unbelievable.
Like, Peter just interrupts a story about MLK to brag about what a huge Obama fan he is?
I think this scene is amazing too because it just works on so many different levels.
On the one hand, it's insane and hilarious,
but it also is just so in line with the other things Peter and the host have been saying.
What kind of people could an endorsement from this horrible show bring to this restaurant?
People who are massive fans of Obama, whatever that means,
who want a picture in front of this shitty sign.
What kind of experience does the owner of the Airbnb think people want?
One, where the woman relating this powerful story is packaged up
and sold as a feature of this short-term rental business.
Yeah, real nice diner.
I think my favorite thing on the menu is this old woman's involvement in the civil rights movement.
That are the chili fries.
By the way, in this episode, the property the guy is renting out is a fucking historical building
that was once Washington's first all-black fire station.
There's one part where they go to the, like, firefighter museum or whatever
so that Genevieve can get ideas for how to make the place look like shit.
After our visit to the museum, we also decided to create a timeline of the firehouse's history
and apply it to the tall window in the living room.
That is so hip.
2017.
Love that.
The firehouse is renovated and listed as a short-term rental.
Guests can now sleep in a piece of history.
It was a windowless old bedroom and now it's the firehouse lounge.
This is going to help tell the story of the firehouse and the neighborhood
before it looked like a frat house.
And now it's finally a family-friendly firehouse.
And there's this moment, right, where they get a tour of the museum from this old firefighter
who, I guess, works there and they tell the guy that the host owns the building that he owns.
And the firefighter just goes,
Mike owns the old firehouse.
Lucky you.
And there's just no interrogation as to why this actually pretty significant historical
building should now become a short-term rental so this guy can turn a profit.
So at this point, I should probably come clean about something.
I think that Airbnb and the short-term rental industry as a whole are bad.
Glad I got that off my chest.
There are a lot of reasons not to love Airbnb.
For one thing, there's the discrimination I mentioned earlier as well as less safety
since they are essentially unregulated hotels.
It's also worth noting that every landlord would rather be running a hotel
since they could charge way more per night.
Airbnb allows them to do this, taking housing off of the market while also avoiding a lot of regulations.
There's also this issue where, since tourism is concentrated in certain areas,
a disproportionate amount of the city's resources and services get allotted to those areas,
which is a part of a process called international gentrification.
Personally, I prefer to keep my gentrification locally sourced.
Gentrification is a process where a poorer area becomes more desirable as new wealthier
residents and businesses come in.
This usually results in the displacement of poorer long-term residents.
What often makes this particularly unjust is that the people who are displaced are often,
at least partially responsible for the area becoming desirable,
but since they're more often renters, they don't see any of the profits from the rising property values.
International gentrification is when this takes place on an international scale,
where poorer locals are pushed out not to make room for wealthier people who come to live there,
but instead through tourism and international investment properties.
This basically serves to throw fuel on the fire, since while normal gentrification and
local financialization of housing is bad, gentrifiers who move into a neighborhood at least
can interact harmoniously with the long-term residents, at least more so than tourists can.
But also, this can lead to a kind of housing crisis that cities can't just build their way
out of. Well, again, this is not excusing the very serious problems that our gentrification
and investment properties. It's one thing to have housing prices set by the local demand.
It's another for them to be set by global demand.
Airbnb is also different from other forms of gentrification because of an economic
idea called rent gaps. A rent gap is basically just the gap between where rent currently is
and where it could be. The theory goes that rents tend to remain relatively stagnant while
property values tend to rise, and so the gap grows. Rent gap theorists have used this as a
model to explain gentrification. They argued that the way it worked was that to close a rent gap,
you need to redevelop the property, which costs a lot of money, and so wouldn't be done until
the gap got big enough to justify the investment. Short-term rentals change this. Not only did
they create a new rent gap overnight, but they created one that doesn't require any development.
Now, this wouldn't be a leftist video if it didn't all come back to neoliberalism.
It's become a bit of a meme where anything and everything gets blamed on neoliberalism,
and to be fair here, neoliberalism is the economic paradigm we currently live under.
It's the air we breathe, and so its consequences are legitimately far-reaching. However,
the term does get overused and misused a lot. The worst, I think, is when people act like
neoliberalism is just when corporations or politicians cynically use progressive talking
points. Also, this is kind of a tangent, but you ever notice how Edgewoods will now say basically
the same dumbass talking points now as they did in like 2015, but just switch out the word SJW
for neoliberal? That sucks. Neoliberalism is not when corporations are woke. It is, and this is
a fairly simplified explanation, but when the government comes to primarily function as a tool
of capital, intervening in the market on behalf of capital to facilitate the extraction of profit
and minimize losses. While it was born much earlier, the mid-70s can in a lot of ways be
thought of as the point when neoliberalism moved off to college to go and make it on its own.
A big part of this was in 73 when a CIA-backed coup overthrew the socialist government of Chile
and installed the fascist general Pinochet. But around the same time, something else happened.
New York City went broke. Throughout the 60s, American cities were fucked by a decline in
manufacturing jobs and white flight to the suburbs. To combat this, the federal government got cities
to create jobs by expanding their social services. This works great if the cities are well funded
enough to pay for those jobs. However, they weren't. As a result, New York started borrowing money
from the banks. Banks loved it and even started advising the city to take out more sophisticated
loans. It worked out great for everyone. Until it didn't. In 75, the banks abruptly stopped
lending to the city, and from here, they were basically able to completely take over. A corporation
called the Municipal Assistance Corporation, or MAC, made up mostly of bankers was established to
manage the city's finances. The MAC prioritized repaying bonds above any social services, which
completely fucked the city. If you've ever heard about how New York used to be this disgusting
cesspool, this is what. But now, the banks had a problem. Now that they effectively owned the city,
they needed to find a way to make it profitable. After they received a cash injection of Saudi
oil money, they set to work rebuilding New York, or more specifically, Manhattan.
Instead of trying to go back to manufacturing or expanding the public sector, the banks instead
focused on building New York City's economy around finance and tourism. Since those two industries
were focused almost purely in Manhattan, when the city got around to rebuilding their public
services, I'm talking about like basic things like police, firefighters, garbage collection,
that kind of thing. Guess where all of those services were brought back to?
The city invested in public services in order to serve the financial class and tourists,
while the poorer boroughs were left to burn. And this ultimately became the roadmap for the
neoliberal city we see today. The reason I bring all this up is because it ties into one of the most
subtly unnerving things about stay here, the way they talk about the culture of the cities they
go to. For many New Yorkers like me, we just love Hudson because it's an easy two-hour train ride
from Manhattan. It's a very popular weekend getaway for antique shoppers, art collectors,
foodies, design lovers like myself. Uninterrupted rows and rows and rows of brown stuff. That's
what I love about Brooklyn. Throughout the show, the hosts always gush about the city they're in,
but in this creepy way that just feels so gross. A mural of Biggie isn't just cool, it's valuable.
Our house is literally down this block. Right here? Yeah, you can have coffee with Biggie every
morning. I bet his competition doesn't have Biggie. A city having a thriving art scene isn't seen as
good in and of itself or even because it allows guests to go experience cool art and music,
but because it means lots of places for people to take selfies. South Congress is an artist community.
The street is filled with great artwork and murals that travelers frequently post on social media.
In a way, the focus on selfies is kind of ironic because this is a show for vampires.
While this feels at least to me like it goes completely counter to how any of these things
should be enjoyed, it actually fits perfectly within the model of the neoliberal city I just
discussed. As Sharon Zucan discusses in her book The Culture of Cities, as cities across the world
compete with one another to attract business and tourism, a city's culture comes to play a bigger
role since culture is one thing that can't be relocated, but it can be commodified.
Now, I want to be very clear here that I'm absolutely not coming out against cities having
a culture industry or nice destinations, nor am I saying that you shouldn't travel and see the
sites. That said, I think that when we talk about these things, we should also ask who is a city for?
Here in Toronto, COVID has exacerbated our already brutal housing crisis and, as a result,
encampments of unhoused people have been springing up in lots of local parks. Over the last summer,
our increasingly militarized police force, along with a small army of private security guards,
have been conducting violent raids on these encampments in order to evict the residents.
Two things worth noting about this are, one, these raids are meant to evict as few as like
10 or 15 people, people who could easily be housed with the money spent on the massive police force
that's used to evict them. And two, the raids have been justified by claiming that the unhoused
people were dangerous or preventing people from using the parks for leisure. This is first of all
untrue, but also the encampments aren't gone now. They're just moved to less touristy places,
including much smaller parks where you actually couldn't really use them for leisure anymore
since they are now just completely filled with tents. The point of these evictions and the
subsequent violence committed against the people who tried to stop them, I think, is to send the
message that these parks and the city as a whole aren't for those kinds of people. Rather, it's
for tourists and the white collar class, people like Peter and Genevieve. On the bright side,
though, cities have been trying at least to fight back against the short-term rental industry,
both through fairly toothless government action as well as, in the case of Berlin, for the work
of renters unions. While, even still, there's nowhere near enough regulation and enforcement
to prevent illegal short-term rentals, one of the things that a lot of cities have been at least
able to ban on the books has been so-called ghost hotels, properties the owner doesn't live at,
and that are purely for renting out. I find this pretty funny since throughout the show,
Peter constantly tells the hosts to think of their property as a hotel, which is explicitly
the exact thing so many governments have tried to ban. Is this a VHS? Sweet. We took the A-track out.
It has to go. It feels like your spare room, as opposed to a small business, which is separate
to your residence. Now your home is not just a home, it's a business. It's like owning a hotel.
You need to get into the mindset of being you're a general manager of your own small boutique hotel.
That said, it is absolutely an uphill battle that we have ahead of us. And ultimately, what I think
is so interesting and also just brutal about watching stay here is that it's a piece of media
that endorses so much of the shitty cynical aspects of the short-term rental industry that
they've carried into every part of the work. When we look at all the little things I've
made fun of or complained about, the music, the editing, the bad designs, the awful hosts,
it seems kind of weird and out of place from the standard Netflix high production aesthetic.
But for a show about gentrifying, a show that views all art as an opportunity for selfies,
what could be a more fitting look? To me, I think that what's so chilling about stay here is that
the sanitized, generic aesthetic of the show is kind of a perfect representation of what cities
are becoming if people like Peter and Genevieve have their way. Thanks for watching.
Hey everyone, thanks so much for watching. If you like the video and would like to support the
channel, consider hitting that surf shark link in the description or better yet becoming a patron
like all of the amazing and frankly beautiful people whose names are scrolling past right now,
especially Christopher Tubbs, Happiness, Vincent Lee, Jacob McDonald, Star Star, Ben Snow,
Strawberry Puptart, Selma L. Aswad, Jasmine Wellner, Robin, Acid Summer, Kelly Flynn,
ScareBank, Eric Walker, Sean T, Veggie Oxblood, Ben Levitt, Victor, Adrena Chromejunkie, Shane
Cooley, Michelle Hamilton, Tyriel, Brian E. Black Jr., Dennis Deans, A.K., Bean the Ruse, Isaac Slatton,
Dormitory Fedora, Rome, Les Brown, Serena Sinclair, Marius Telltard, Miko, Akita Fischikeyama,
Robbie Kraft, Room for Cream, Neenor, Calvin Christ, Stu, Jawola, Corey, Royal Road, Thomas D,
Win, Jalfabet 89, Brain, Adarkop, Adarkop, Xander Corvus, Caleb Windsor, Billy and William Lambert,
Weapon X Reject, Rachel Ann, Megan Glenn, Andrew Ryan, Stitcher Ghost, Elizabeth Queen of Printers,
Anime Avatar, GG, Truculents, Tasso Barbasso, Sarcasm Jaime, Caitlyn Purveyor of Gay Frogwater TM,
Rebecca Margolis, Cepha, Desi Fowl, Matt S, Harla Hoffman, Jakey Stark, Winnie, Nathan Davies,
Gregoria III, Crypto Skunks, Tesla Death Ray, Hannah Gaia-Comin Rose, Niels Abelgard, Peyton
McKevitt, Colin York, Corey Slade, Grant Schwabacher, Ali G, Mandy Spetcher,
Daniel Kieshaw, Local Sports Coach, Matthew Kosta, Gina, Aldo Calrissian, please know,
Charles Acala, Heather Boning, Phil Argeria, Maurice Robert, Tony Wise, Joe, Ramsay Bargouti,
Caleb F. F. Fales, Alec J. Radecki, Sable the Chonk, Brian, Joel Bullitt, Mason Peoples,
Alex Hardy, Atomic Crimson, Charlotte Hollingsworth, Mary Paige Evans, Brian Stadola, Mr. Bones,
Oryx Bibble, Erica Somerall, Net and Echo, Marina Dove, H. Johnson, Bill Nibbs, Julia Sores, Cameron
Hussain, Becca B, just oh no, Morgan, Chris Crowley, Max Tavos, Lucid Zen, Sean McIntyre, Max
Gorenson, Alfonso, Jacob Friedman, G. Purr, Casey Kutniak, Nick Corpius, Ruby, Jamie,
Kenzie G, Katz or Neat, Arnaz Calling, Kells, Daisy and Sympian? Okay, sure, why not. Ketrasil,
Jaffeth Frolick, An Awakened Plant, Arif Hassan, Luca Mussini, Farth, Kate, Raz, Rain Tiel, Bonnie
Lockwood, Jimmy Fisher, Brendan Schrader, Kamra J, Danielle, Peacod Express, Taffyne Unicorn,
Barroom Hero, Matthew Piccarello, Jovian F. Godriott, James Karenacollis, Divergent Descent, S,
Aislin, Julian, Aleister Butcher, Eric Prushnell, Miguel Crespo, Conn Todd, Kevin Ritter, The Magpie
Magus, Emma Nay, Tyler Ulrich, Trenton Coleman, Rob Rory, Max Elford, Thomas Brereton, Maddie G,
Katerina, Tim Hofsummer, Nemo, Comrade Sy, Mike Wascom, Stefan Kastelen, Stephen Stetler, Tronton,
Isabella Kerr, Comrade Fox, Rat Bones, Lewin Nile Pudding, Griffiths, Haywin Ergain, Harrison
Densmore, Marijuana Matasovic, Shane Markoff, The Internet Gnome, King Matthews, Balazs Sores,
Iguana Tempe Palma, Colin J. Reboy, Stefano Colombo, Greg, Jesse, Joel Cresswell, Swarms
McKenzie, Leah Schutster, Panda's Predictament, The Perfect Airball, Corey Badge, McGillis, Jess,
Trey Anthony, Milan Pinjal, Gantra 420, Off Dwears Hats, Nixon Checkers, Jerry, Funds,
John Mertz, 21st Century Bill of Rights, Yon Yu, Randy, Rowan Oak, Mitch Kennedy, E.H. Sawyer,
Casey Young, Cafe Softy, Bruni, Red, Eric Peden, Russell Gilchrist, Dylan Robinson,
The Silver Samaritan, Simon, Carrie M, Thomas Swords, Alexandra Falls, Kristen, Subsystem of
Society, Thys and French Rise, Communist Android, Christina Davies, QTA 10, Ron Doofdad, Jack Crawford,
Drew Beyond, Lonely Party, Eggs Box, Kennedy, Lola Lane, and Muppet Mistake.
