This video is sponsored by Surfshark VPN. Click the link in the description to get 83% off for
two years plus three months for free.
Connection. That's what the Weir and Hell Foundation is all about. Over the last 20 years,
our charitable work has built connections across the world. Connections between cultures,
between communities, between powerful individuals in every level of your government and shadow
cabals, but most of all, between people. However, the last two months have been the hardest that
the Weir and Hell Foundation has ever had to face. Despite the best of intentions,
a recent political scandal has resulted in our foundation's mission, reputation,
and deep involvement in a so-called cult who worships the sea, all being called into question.
To our staff, stakeholder, and you, our fans, we wish to sincerely apologize that partisan
politicians and journalists have decided to direct their completely unwarranted scrutiny
towards our philanthropic organization with absolutely no regard for the effect that their
questions and concerns could have on our work providing structural adjustment
policies to countries in need. Truly a sad sign of the polarized times we find ourselves in.
Neither the Weir and Hell Foundation nor our founder, Lewis Cipher,
have ever claimed under oath to be perfect. Over the past 10 years, we've had our share
of growing pains and mistakes, but like the noble shark, we keep moving forward.
For example, while the press has claimed that Lewis bit a man in a ritual,
they failed to explain why this supposed victim had worked for our foundation for several years
if he had such a problem with the founder's religion,
nor have they mentioned that prior to working for us, he had cheated on his wife.
For Lewis' part, under the guidance of his fellow apostles of the jaw,
he's holding space for unlearning difficult accountabilities. However, because of this kind
of blatant punching down, Lewis has made the difficult decision to end our current charitable
activities to redirect resources to completing what he referred to only as the Great Connection.
I always look back at the time I've spent serving the Weir and Hell Foundation as the
best years of my life, and I just think that it's sad to see so much time, so much planning,
to have so much power finally within our grasp, only to lose it all.
It's a sad reality that when you break the mold, you often wind up painting a target on your back as well.
But in all seriousness, it really was disappointing to see politicians and the
media turn on us just because their puny minds couldn't comprehend the unrivaled
effectiveness of a charitable foundation partnered with the secretive occult forces
sponsoring this video, Surfshark VPN. The liberal elite in Ottawa will say that it couldn't be done,
but behold, by combining their eldritch sorcery with our unwavering faith in the free market,
we were able to harness their powers, allowing us to create private internet connections,
whether at home or on the go, shielding our online activities from hackers, trackers,
and our accursed ISP. What's more, if, like all too many of us these days,
you find yourself fleeing the country to avoid trumped up charges fabricated by those who simply
fear your power, then something you may not know is that lots of hotels change their prices
based on where you are when you book your room. Using Surfshark, you can change your location
traveling to and save on your stay. Surfshark is also the only premium VPN whose shadowy
tentacles extend into and have servers in over 100 countries, but the media is trying to push a
narrative that we're trifling with forces beyond our comprehension and it's like, no, we can control
them. And to prove it, Surfshark is offering their blessing to members of our foundation for 83%
off for two years plus an additional three months for free. So click the link in the description,
go to surfshark.deal slash we're in hell, or use the promo code we're in hell all one word no
apostrophe at checkout to serve Surfshark VPN while supporting our foundation while you're at it.
You guys want to see something weird?
Welcome, man, came a long way. Now I know Cribs typically is in West Palm Beach, Malibu,
welcome to Cribs East Africa style. So this guy who looks like a lacrosse player who had to change
schools because a pledge died in a hazing ritual is Craig Kielberger. I've been covering him and
the charity that he founded for my last two videos now. But as a quick catch up, when he was 12,
Craig founded the charity free the children with his older brother, Mark later renamed to we the
charity that is not his brother in order to fight child labor. And I don't mean that he got his
classmates to sign a petition or something. While it may have started there within a year or so,
free the children became a full on international development charity. This would be like if a
kids start a lemonade stand and by the end of the summer was gentrifying neighborhoods and pushing
mom and pop stores out of business. We charity became massive and the Kielberger brothers became
stars in the poorer countries where they operate, they build schools, hospitals and infrastructure.
While they do receive lots of corporate donations, a large amount of their money comes from the
volunteer work of kids in Canada and later in the US and the UK. In 2008, they also started a social
enterprise called me to we, which sells clothes and volunteer trips where kids would volunteer in
poorer countries, which we're just gonna stick a big old pin in and come back to later. All this is
done at a profit, most of which me to we then donates to we to date totaling around $20 million.
We does also buy a lot of stuff from me to we and so while we does still come out ahead,
from 2015 to 2020, the actual number was 1.3 million, which is nowhere near as high as the
number on their website, but it is also probably more than you donated in that time. You selfish pigs!
We also did all sorts of domestic work. The two big ones were we days, massive events that acted
as incentives for kids who did volunteer work and we schools, a program where they provide schools
with teaching aids and curriculums along with a host of just about every youth program you can think
of from ones aimed at teaching kids to recycle batteries to anti-bullying and mental health
awareness. But then in 2020, things came crashing down. The liberal government awarded them the
contract to administer a massive government program meant to help young people affected by the
pandemic without making we compete with any other charities or disclosing that Trudeau's family had
been paid to work for the charity, resulting in Justin Trudeau being investigated for a conflict
of interest. Again, an ethics commission did clear Trudeau of any wrongdoing and then a second
commission was established to investigate further. That investigation ended, however, when Trudeau
shut down the government, a very normal thing that the Prime Minister is allowed to do. The
attention from the scandal resulted in the charity being placed under far more criticism than it
previously had. Suddenly, people were saying things like, man, this children's charity sure has a
massive real estate portfolio. Or, hey, isn't it weird how that anti-bullying campaign was sponsored
by Hershey's, a company that uses child slaves? And even, I used to work for weed charity and the
way they treat their workers is horrible. And so as a result of this criticism, as well as the
pandemic causing especially lean times in the massive arena shows and a volunteer travel
industries, in September 2020, the Kielbergers announced that they were ending all operations
in Canada. I talked about all this in much more detail in my video from two months ago and then
again in my last one, which I made after we personally contacted me using my private email
address. Still not sure how they got that. They pointedly brought up the multiple defamation suits
they're currently pursuing told me that there were dozens of errors in my video and that I was
causing direct harm to their organization. In my opinion, a lot of their corrections were
pretty granular and strange, but there were also quite a few things that I did straight up get wrong.
I go over all of those in my last video, but there's also one more mistake that they've
pointed out, which was that in a tweet that I've now taken down, I said that their lawyers were
contacting me. Now, they're right that I was not correct and nowhere in that email does it say that
it's from a lawyer. In my defense, I got a strongly worded email from some very powerful people that
mentioned ongoing lawsuits that they're pursuing and personal information that they had gathered
about me. My incorrect assumption was that this was a legal threat and so I talked to a lawyer who
basically said, yeah, do whatever they tell you because you definitely can't afford to go to court
against them. In reality, that email was written by the executive director of Wee, Scott Baker,
who I definitely shouldn't have said was a lawyer in no small part because in my opinion,
it doesn't seem like these emails have been looked over by a lawyer, a communications department,
or judging by the many, many typos, even just a proofreader. This guy, Scott, who by the way,
I think one of the things I did that pissed him off and I genuinely wasn't trying to be rude here
was that in all of his emails, he addressed me as Mr. But I just kept calling him Scott.
I'm sorry if that was unprofessional of me. I've never had an office job. If YouTube doesn't work
out, I'm just going right back to wine cooking. But yeah, Scotty here has been taking time out of
his schedule, which I guess is a lot freer now that we stopped operating in Canada to send me
very angry and sometimes just wild emails, sometimes as late as 4am. I've been in contact with Scott
while writing this video and have submitted this script to him prior to releasing it.
He also suggested that I read the book What We Lost written by a former board member of We,
something I've done. One interesting point I've noticed is that while the book is extremely
supportive of We, there is one criticism that seems to come up a few times. I think it's most
succinctly put here. It's worth noting that sometimes We took about a situation that made it
worse. The Kielbergers often felt compelled to combat any error with a full-throated defense.
Over the years, many board members, including me, had questions whether it was counterproductive to
respond in such an aggressive manner. On reflection, however, I wish We had sometimes urged restraint
more strongly instead of putting out the fire we occasionally poured gasoline on it. I don't know,
I just think that's an interesting quote to keep in mind as we go over the notes that Scott
made about this video. For one thing, in my last video, I got my friend CJ the X to read the notes
that Scott sent me. For anyone who's never watched any of CJ's videos, what the fuck are you doing
with your life? Other than, I assume, working as the executive director of We Charity. Anyway,
here's what Scott said regarding CJ's performance.
In your last video where corrections were issued, you mockingly presented our responses to your
audience as if we were yelling the answers in a funny voice. However, those who criticized
We Charity as your sources, including the academics you quoted, were presented in a normal voice
and in a factual manner. Why is that? Now, look, I don't want to make this into a big issue, but
I didn't give CJ any notes. They just read the lines how they wanted to, and in more or less the
way they talk in their videos. Also, I'm hung out with CJ, and that is more or less just what
they're like. They're just a very, very intense person. Apparently, We Charity is upset that CJ
was being themselves. But that just makes what I'm about to say so much harder. As you probably
noticed, CJ is not reading Scott's lines in this video. In order to avoid any conflicts,
CJ, I'm sorry, but I'm going to have to let you go. Please take down your channel by the end of the day.
Sure. I'm glad they're taking it so well. I got the YouTuber Ro Ramden to replace CJ,
as she will replace all of us someday soon. Hello and welcome back to We Are In Hell,
Community Theater's answer to Tosh.0. I'm a gay parasite that infected your usual reader
via brain-eating amoeba. We're so glad to have you here. Just make sure to keep all of your arms
and legs inside of the vehicle at all times, and keep your shoes on when you use my bathroom,
because you might get tetanus. I'll be taking over from CJ reading quotes from The We Charity,
and look forward to delivering them at a calm cadence that lands somewhere between NPR hosts
talking about the Ukraine, and a single dad trying to coax his nine-year-old son into getting his
hand out of the garbage disposal. I hate how much younger you are than me so much. Anyways,
in the interest of fairness, Ro is going to be reading any quotes from Scott in a nice calming
voice. Any quotes from the Kielbergers will be read by Lance from the serfs in a cool, sexy voice,
and I've instructed everyone reading a quote from any academic to do so in a silly voice that
makes them sound dumb, so look forward to that. Scott has also taken issue with the fact that I
said that I would be critiquing the entire charity sector, and yet I've pretty much
mostly just talked about We, something that he has characterized as an example of me lying,
and has also insinuated that I'm only going after them for clout, which is fucking crazy.
Like, no one knows about We outside of Canada, and outside of Canada is where the vast majority
of my audience is. Like, covering them was a massive risk. If I was trying to get views here,
this video would be about Mr. Beast. No, let me be very clear, the motivation behind this video,
like with most things I do in life, is spite. In all seriousness though, the way that Scott has
started talking to me is extremely consistent with how We goes after anyone who's critical of them,
saying things like this. Alright, we're getting into the first quote here, so I figure I should
transition into my reader voice. Remember, we're supposed to be confident, calm, and conscious.
From the outset, it was your intention to target We charity. If you are true to your word that you
are really seeking to discuss the sector as a whole, I would think it would only be fair to
produce a video that profiles several charities, and ideally ones that engage in distinct purposes
and are of various sizes and structures, and you do proper analysis of the sector if this is really
your true intention. Otherwise, any commentary on the sector will be grossly misleading and frankly
dishonest. You have shown a pattern of saying to us one thing, and they're doing another to your
tens of thousands of followers. I realize you wish to grow your audience, grow your own brand,
and make money off of your YouTube channel, but in this case, you are doing this in a manner which
causes tangible harm to our organization and tens of thousands of resource-poor people we serve.
So that's good. Now, to be fair, there is some truth there in that We is not unique or the worst
actor in anything I'm going to be discussing here. However, I am going to be talking a lot about
them still, in part because as I established, it's funny and I don't like them very much, but
mostly it's because with all the scrutiny that's been placed on them, they make kind of a uniquely
perfect case study. I think that we would probably see a lot of the same issues in most charities
if this amount of scrutiny was applied to them as well, but for better or worse,
the We charity is the one we've got to work with. So get used to talking about these freaks
and settle in for what please God I hope will be my last video about this by first going through
this incredibly cursed cribs episode.
In the episode, which more or less functions as a commercial for me-to-we trips as well as their
Craig shows off the facilities where volunteers stay in Kenya. Now, some might find it a bit odd
for a charity and its founder to be featured on MTV Cribs, a show where rich celebrities show off
their decadent lifestyles. Personally, I would agree. It's very weird for a bunch of reasons.
For one thing, in my opinion, Craig has a very strange vibe through all of this. Like, this guy
looks like the villain in every 80s swabs vs snobs movie. Hard to believe he had time to shoot
this in between getting pranked by the nerd fraternity and losing a climactic ski competition
to a chimpanzee. In fairness here, Craig's had a very strange life. He's a devout Catholic,
he never had much of a childhood owing to traveling the world giving speeches since he was 12,
and he's written that he fired his first employee before he went through his first breakup.
He's also claimed to have never been drunk or high in his life out of fear of bringing shame
to his organization. So whenever you read about some horrible thing that the wee charity has been
accused of having done, just take a deep breath and remind yourself that at least Craig never
did something truly unforgivable like hitting a joint. But with that context, his grown in a
lab vibes make a lot more sense. So welcome to the central dining area, or as we call it, the mess tent.
Phenomenal food after a long day of school building, mass side pizza, the local joint,
it's phenomenal. It takes seven hours to deliver out here, of course, but hey, it's not here in
seven hours, it's free. What it kind of reminds me of is how, like, everyone knows what dad jokes
are, but dad jokes also have a deeply cursed relative, which is boss jokes. A classic boss joke
is something like seeing someone carrying some food and going, oh, great, you got me lunch.
That's the energy Craig brings to this video. And so in my opinion, it comes off as a bit weird
when at the very beginning and end, we see the local messai people who live in that area
interacting with a man who looks like he was evolutionarily designed to say,
do you know who my father is? So I hope you enjoy your time with Bugani, but
hey, we got work to do. So unless you're going to build a school, get out. As they say in Kisohili,
toke inje, toke inje, get out. Nope, don't like that. Although to be fair here, this definitely
isn't all on Craig. The editing is for sure very weird and also at times hilarious. Like,
they do these slow motion replays at seemingly random times in the video. A sweet sounding
5.1 surround sound. And welcome to it, Masa and Mara style.
A no-creeps episode we complete without the kitchen.
Deodorants, mouthwash, pen sanitizer, malaria pills, don't leave home without them in East Africa.
Let's close this space.
Okay, I'm a little biased on what I wear.
And there are just some truly amazing choices happening here.
Anyways, after showing the mess tent and playing some sick beats,
Craig stops by the kitchen and drinks some cows blood, which is a very big part of Masai cooking,
but also it really doesn't look like he's enjoying himself drinking it.
Hmm. Hmm. Hmm. Ow. Oh, that's great. Yeah, me when I'm lying.
And then for the next stop, Craig shows us the actual crib.
So first of all, I like how the outside isn't even remotely similar to Kenyan architecture.
They just fully made some cottage core shit, but also that place is obviously massive, right?
To the point where it's stretching the definition of the word cottage.
Something that's very strange is that Craig makes it so much weirder by instead calling it a hut.
And on the second floor, see, these huts are deceiving the big.
Yeah, almost like that's not a hut at all.
And Scott said something similar when he described it.
All structures were made from local materials.
They were designed to provide safety and comfort, but were basic in nature.
I feel like this building is like a fun Rorschach test where what you call it tells how rich you are.
For example, Craig grew up extremely wealthy.
Like I'm talking about he and his brother were able to start free the children while
they were themselves children because their parents moved into another house and let them
and their friends use their childhood home as an office levels of wealthy.
And so for him, it's a hut.
I don't know much about Scott, but I assume he's doing pretty well for himself though.
So for him, it's basic in nature.
And then for me, I'm 29 have never taken a vacation in my adult life.
And the only other job I've had has been working in kitchens.
So I'm just over here Googling the difference between a mansion and a man.
I should note though that none of these huts exist anymore since at the start of the pandemic,
we turned all their facilities in Kenya into medical housing, which seems like a pretty
unambiguously good thing to do.
So good for them.
Anyways, Craig gives a tour of the hut showing off the bathroom, the balcony, the master bedroom.
This is mosquito nets that they use here.
To be honest, it's more for decoration than function.
Yeah, man.
The giraffe print kind of gave that away.
Then we get to all the cars and motorcycles.
First of all, I just like how much he looks like a far cry though in here.
Maserati Ferrari.
Eat your heart out here.
Pagani.
We have the green machine.
But also I was expecting him to say how they use that thing for something.
But I'm not cutting anything out here.
Here's what happens.
The green machine.
Bet you don't have this in your driveway.
Check out a few of the other rides.
That's it.
Like, I'm sure that they do actually use it for stuff.
But it's so funny how Craig's just like, check this out, bitches.
Anyways, but the part of this episode that definitely comes off the worst is when Craig
shows one of his favorite parts of the hut.
So the stairway is one of my favorite features built entirely at a reclaimed wood.
So no trees were cut down for this.
You know, God, it's amazing what they managed to build in the absolute middle of nowhere Africa.
So in my opinion, that line seems extremely ignorant at best and honestly just racist at worst.
Like, first of all, I have a pretty hard time imagining him walking into a house somewhere
in North America or Europe and saying the same thing.
Like, wow, it's amazing that you were able to build stairs.
Except I asked Scott about this and he said that actually, yes, that is exactly what Craig would do.
So I have some thoughts on that.
First of all, it is just amazing that apparently it's official wee lore that when Craig's in
rural Alberta or if he was trying to appeal to a broader audience rural North America and
he sees some stairs, he's just like, wow, this hut is amazing.
No, but like, even if it's true that he didn't mean it that way, that wouldn't make it okay
since it's common for people other than Craig, I guess, to say stuff like that,
not because a place is so remote, but because of racist stereotypes of Africans all being
primitive, poverty stricken and not having access to modern technology.
This is something that it seems safe to say that Craig knew since, according to Scott,
the reason that Craig chose to say the middle of nowhere Africa was because he knew a lot of
people in the audience think of Africa as a monolith and so decided it would be better
to confirm their prejudices instead of correcting them.
Like, I don't have a lot of faith in the effectiveness of activism that just seeks to
raise awareness, but communicating that Africa isn't a country would have been the absolute
least he could do. Instead, I'm sure that there were people who watched that segment and thought,
this guy obviously knows what he's talking about and then believed something shitty just
a little bit more.
Now this, this is East Africa.
Just to be clear, as much as I may joke about how Craig looks like a proud boy with low self
esteem, I don't believe that he is some secret evil racist. I think that just like me, he grew
up in a colonialist white supremacist society and has internalized the prejudices that come with that.
Or rather, that's what I used to think. I now believe that that's the case for everyone except
for Craig Kielberger. As Scott explained to me,
I would also add that having worked with Craig for 20 plus years, I would voice in the strongest
terms that he is not a racist, and I could never imagine the word racist in Craig in the same
breath. Even if you have a different interpretation of the context of the MTV Cribs comment,
I believe that it's important to not present one line in isolation to a life's work. This
would be irresponsible to do so and, as a result, defamatory. Since his middle school years, Craig
has spent his life working with colleagues in the global south who are among his closest friends.
Collectively, he has lived and worked for years in the global south and he has dedicated his life
to expanding global compassion and solidarity to communities. So first of all, it's very bold to
say that you can't imagine the word racism and the name Craig in the same breath. Even if Craig
Kielberger is 100% not racist, Craig is for sure in the top 50 most common names for racists. It's
right below Nigel and above Patricia. Also, I would love to see them prove that he isn't racist
in court. Like, your honor, I'd like to call Craig's black friend who will confirm that he gave
my client an N-word pass. And like, I'm sorry that I've had to go over so much stuff here that
feels like it should be completely basic. This is starting to feel like a now this video from 2015,
but do you see who I'm talking to here? I plan to spend so much time on this. That Cribs video
is over 10 years old and while that doesn't excuse it, people can change and learn. When I asked
Scott about that line, I was expecting to get a standard statement that you hear anytime a corporation
gets called out for racism, saying that Craig is making space for starting a dialogue that centers
a conversation about shutting up and listening. But instead, I got this. I don't know, I just wonder
if there's a chance that this kind of defensiveness might be in some way connected to the hostility
that an anti-racist activist experienced while working at Wee in 2020. I was given a new speech
to read and immediately I was angry and this was coming from a panel primarily of white women and
men. So first of all, one of the words that left my mouth was, I don't know if you understand how
oppressive that is. To take the personal stories of a black woman who experiences a different kind
of discrimination, who has definitely experienced a different, has experienced racism on a different
level, to take her words, water them down and present her with a speech without her knowledge.
I feel like the truth was to make sure that they were protecting themselves
to not really be real. They just wanted to water it down. They wanted the speech to be more Wee.
I was asked to talk about cornrows and I was asked to talk about the Oscars and I was just like,
are we talking about what's really happening in Canada? Are we talking about systemic racism?
Are we talking about the mental navigation of being a person of color? Are we talking about
the incidences of being followed in stores constantly and carded and all of these real
things that were happening were completely erased? Shortly after there was a town hall meeting in
regards to some articles that were written about the culture of fair and employee experience and
founder Mark Kuhlberger was also there and we were asked to share if the articles aligned
with our experiences and I put my hand up because I'm that person and then I started
and shared that some of the things within this article really did resonate with me.
I saw the culture affair and one thing that I said was that so many people are having siloed
conversations that they're so scared to talk to people in positions of power where true change
can get implemented and not one, not two, not three heads nodded but the whole room was agreeing
with me and I believe that was a threatening thing and then the founder then stepped up from the wall
and completely shut me down in an instant was like no we're done we're not having this cut
just very blunt disregarded of anything that I said. Also if it feels like I'm being too critical
remember that these people were in charge of writing school curriculums teaching 4.3 million
kids across North America about how to get involved with activism. With all that said and
I'm genuinely not just saying this to avoid the strangest defamation suit possible we is right
that this one video of Craig or any scandals don't erase the good that Craig and the Wee
charity have done in the world and while that certainly doesn't absolve them from criticisms
either I do honestly get where they're coming from with how a lot of that stuff feels minor when
it's held up against the tens if not hundreds of thousands of people whose lives were made better
because of this charity. Wee sent me some testimonials speaking to the work that they've done for me
to refer to in this video awful kind of them all three letters talk about the great work Wee has
done building schools creating jobs and providing access to education clean water and medicine
I'll link them in the description but should also say that two of the letters are from people who
worked with Wee administering their projects and one is from a woman who's now a spokesperson for
them so while I have no reason to believe that the people who wrote them are lying they clearly
aren't neutral sources either along with the testimonials Scott added you also seem to have
an interest in quoting academics in your commentary on Wee please see an academic study written by
dr jason sol about the impact of me to wee tips on participants and communities maybe I'm just
imagining it but it doesn't sound like you like academics very much right I do though so I look
through this report by dr jason sol and his company mission measurement which does say that wee's been
extremely effective in their work that it's especially good that they combine their charity work
with me to wee's for-profit volunteer trips that they create jobs and bring a ton of money into
the community and then there's a very detailed breakdown of how people who went on these trips
were positively impacted showing most significantly that people who go are more likely to actively
look for ways to improve their communities students who took it were more confident discussing
complex political issues and people in corporate management showed improvements in leadership
skills which were also noticed by their employers one thing that I thought was a little weird though
was that they also found that people who went on the trip were apparently seven times as likely to
quote be agents of positive change in their local and global communities and that's a bit weird
right like I'm interested to know how they quantify being a positive agent of change so
I tried to look and see how they were determining that except the report doesn't include any
discussion of methods which for a supposed academic study is pretty unusual like Scott's emails to me
are better about citing sources than this paper the report does mention two studies that mission
measurement conducted for wee but doesn't include them or give any way of finding them
so I emailed Scott to tell him how this all seemed kind of weird and asked him about the studies
if they were peer reviewed or anything and if he could send them to me and he said no from your
questions it seems you may be doubting mission measurements credibility we find this troubling
other than jesse brown the founder and editor in chief of canada land what is the basis for your
commentary please keep in mind that our objective in engaging with them was to be able to confirm
that wee charity and me to wee are delivering the benefits as each intended and if needed
identify areas where programming could be improved the intention was not to produce reports that could
be published in an academic journal so to suggest that they either needed to be peer reviewed or
provide a discussion of methodology is not appropriate and rather unfair this is wild to me if they
were just for internal use then fine but they bring these studies up all the time as evidence of
how great we is I think they'd want people to see them you're supposed to keep the studies that
make you look bad in house you can release the ones that make you look good sorry if I'm
mansplaining to wee how to run a sketchy corporation here but the basis for asking those questions
is because we describe the report as an academic study and you know what academic studies include
methods data citations and ideally they've also been approved by experts in the field
you know why I like to use academic sources in my videos because they include all of that and so
I don't have to take an author at their word that's the whole point it sucks too since like
I do genuinely believe that we has done good work and drastically improved a lot of lives but
interacting with them it's unbelievably frustrating how they'll claim that they believe
in taking responsibility for the mistakes that they've made while also refusing to be held to the
most basic standards of criticism so yeah bear in mind that we has done a lot of good too now with
all of that in mind let's dig into volunteerism and the developments that led to kreg keelberger
making that facility out in the middle of nowhere africa volunteerism is the practice of
volunteers who are usually young well-off westerners traveling to lend a hand in remote and impoverished
parts of the world its most vocal advocates tend to be white dudes whose favorite party trick is
making everyone be quiet and watch them play kendrick off of their phone and rap along including
the n words which they insist that they can say because they spent a gap year volunteering and
orphanage in the middle of nowhere africa well yes that is just a description of something i saw
happen once in university i think that it's generalizable to the majority of people who
take these trips and if you want evidence of that well that's really not appropriate and
rather unfair probably the most common place to spot volunteers though is on dating apps people
with their favorite lou lemon tote bag quote is their bio and pictures of them posing with a bunch
of black or brown kids in a school with a dirt floor now as far as more formal definitions
one foundational study on the topic by wearing in 2007 describes these people as tourists who
undertake holidays that might involve aiding or alleviating the material poverty of some groups
in society the restoration of certain environments or research into aspects of society or environment
or from another study the practice of individuals going on a working holiday
volunteering their labor for worthy causes volunteerism has been heavily criticized
for a number of reasons several studies have found that these companies can often be dishonest about
the impact that their work has also the volunteer work that's usually done on these trips is generally
just unpaid construction work and it'd be better to have just hired local laborers especially since
most of the people going on these are teenagers who obviously aren't going to be very useful on a
construction site it's common to hear stories of kids going on these trips and then realizing
that locals were going out at night to redo what they'd spent all day working on and that's nowhere
near the worst case scenario a common volunteerist destination is volunteering in orphanages in
Cambodia the problem is that any business needs to grow and so in order to fuel tourism there need
to be more and more orphanages but while orphanages are cheap to build easy to fund because they often
operate for profit plus they look amazing on a tinder profile they are also widely recognized
as being terrible places for kids and should only ever be the absolute last possible resort
not so in Cambodia though since there's now all these orphanages that have been built by charities
and pressure from the tourism industry to fill them and so yeah the industry is to say the very
least fraught while I don't think that we has been involved in anything that bad volunteer trips
were a massive part of me to we's operations although they have been suspended since the
start of the pandemic a brochure handed out at we day in 2010 advertised volunteer adventures in
Kenya where visitors would experience an intimate and unique learning experience against the backdrop
of the african landscape all the while you enjoy the conference of home at bogany cottages and tinted
camp come with us and feel the real heartbeat of Kenya as you meet the people see the animals and
live the lifestyle the brochure advertised luxury accommodations and healthy meals made by we's
five star chefs included in said lifestyle that visitors would be living a so I sent Scott a
rough draft of this script and he sent me some corrections I assume that he'll want to release
a full more comprehensive statement which I will link below Scott wanted this point to be corrected
he wrote if you have seen the meals yourself in Kenya at our former lodge or have heard who the
five star chefs are please let me know because this is factually incorrect we asked this change
be reflected so the line about five star chefs as well as all the other claims I've made here
are based off of quotes from the brochure that I mentioned I have not personally been able to get
my hands on that brochure but it is quoted in an article by David Jeffress titled the me to we
social enterprise global education as lifestyle brand in it he wrote quote the all-inclusive
trips ensure the compassionate consumer luxurious accommodation and healthy meals made from organic
ingredients prepared by quote our five star chef after quote a hard day's work volunteering it goes on
a typical trip includes five days at the colleges learning about Masai culture and working with a
FTC that's free the children project in a nearby community followed by three days on safari or at
a beach resort but while one might think that that meets the definition of volunteerism laid out above
Scott was very adamant that it didn't saying we do not offer volunteerism travel we provide
culturally immersive travel there is a big difference prior to covid when these travel
experiences were provided hundreds of individuals in the global south were employed the leadership
in the global south designed the schedule for guests the purpose of our trips is not for people
to simply volunteer in developing countries travelers are instead welcomed into communities
in the global south in the spirit of partnership and learning among each other the volunteer work
is only a portion of the trip schedule which includes learning about global development issues
and education about the vibrant and proud culture in the communities finally the reason we have
been able to build for example a hospital a maternity ward two high schools a college and
hundreds of schools in kenya is largely because of the generosity of donors who have come to the
communities on these cultural trips and then made financial pledges to support the basic
needs of these communities this is done in partnership with the communities themselves
hundreds of thousands of lives have been positively changed because of this form of
partnership between travelers and community members so i don't think that any companies
specifically advertise themselves as volunteerism they instead offer a bunch of buzzwords about
working with local communities cultural immersion and sustainable development kind of like how we
does that doesn't mean that we was a bad actor here but just that pretty much all companies
basically say the same thing we are nothing like those horrible volunteerism companies what we
does is offer opportunities to synergize tourism and volunteering i said this to scott and asked him
to explain what he thinks volunteerism is and why specifically we is different and he replied
whether a company uses the word volunteerism or any other to describe it is more or less irrelevant
you will need to examine the actual activities such as the programs and the itinerary to see
what elements are included in the experience yeah that's my point there are certainly many
companies and organizations where volunteering is the primary focus of the experience and is what
the participants are paying to do habitat for humanity as an example runs international trips
where participants spend the vast majority of time building houses in places like mexico such
trips are also paid experiences as habitat for humanity is among the largest providers of such
volunteer trips i assume you will be profiling them in your video here's the link to their website
on me to we trips volunteering is only a small element of the itinerary rather the activities
are intended to provide participants with meaningful opportunities to learn about the
communities they are visiting and engage in cultural understanding alongside the community
members in a genuine manner for example day in the life activities whereby participants have
the opportunity to meet with community members in various contexts to learn about their lives and
with that the issues they in the wider community face these activities include attending home visits
assemblies at one of these secondary schools and meetings with the women's and men's groups
it is because of we charities long-standing relationships with these communities
that trip participants have such opportunities to engage with them this is something that makes
me to we's trips vastly different from those offered by other organizations and why culturally
immersive travel is always a more fitting description in conjunction with the above
activities me to we trip itineraries also always include workshops and discussion focused on the
activities of the day to give participants the opportunity to reflect on what they have experienced
and link it back to the broader issues including the impact of our actions in the global north
that many donors will make substantial contributions to support projects and programming in the
communities that they visit reflects the level of engagement and immersion that they experience
as you can imagine they make contributions because of the time they spend with the people who live in
the area not because of the time they might spend volunteering on a construction site
i sincerely appreciate that there is also a meaningful discussion to be had about the
various types of trip experiences that are often grouped under the term volunteerism
however as i said with we charity it is not fair to inaccurately portray me to we
for the sake of appearing critical of the entire sector which is also diverse
so it sounds to me like for scott the distinction between volunteerism and culturally immersive
travel is that with volunteerism they only spend their time volunteering that's not
really in line at all with any other definition that i've seen and i just don't think that that's
a particularly important distinction like the problems with volunteerism aren't that visitors
aren't interacting with locals enough also no i don't have any plans to go after habitat for
humanity in this video although i will say that like we they do not require volunteers to have any
skills or experience in construction and i will absolutely say that i don't think that anyone
watching this should travel to another country to pay to do a job that you have no experience in
anyways i think that the distinction between volunteerism and culturally immersive travel
is a bit semantic so i decided to just interview a couple people who've gone on we trips and i'll
let you be the judge who are you do you want to introduce yourself hi everyone uh my name is ellie
i am ellie grant you want to google me and i am someone who went on a we meet we trip in 2012
i went to kenya we had two weeks in kenya staying in the mass amara in this village
we were told that we were there to build a school i'm pretty sure we only built the school which
really just involved mixing concrete um like if you can imagine like 16 year old girls with no
upper body strength with these really heavy shovels and trying to like really dig in and mix
concrete to pour um that's what we were doing but i think that's also why we couldn't do more than
four days is because we didn't have the physical um capability to really do the type of labor that
they were required so yeah so we spent maybe four days building the school part half of that time
each of those times was playing with the children in the schoolyard taking photos of them all that
kind of crap and then um the rest of the time we were touring around so we went on a safari we
went to this local church and during their gospel we went to the health center that
for the children had built um yeah it was a lot of touring around and not so much
doing what we thought we were there to do we also did a ton of leadership development
so our facilitators um they were wonderful i will say they were great people we really
connected with them they did a very good job of leading this trip of you know like teenage girls
but um yeah it was a lot of time spent like doing these sort of leadership talks and activities
and trying to strengthen our um yeah ability and also our interest in helping to understand
like global and economic development and then also how we can interact with each other and
work together as a team a lot of team building kind of stuff um and for that i also don't think
that was necessarily a bad thing but it was just not what i expected and it was also interesting
because the students do all the organizing for these trips you do all the fundraising and
like the i think you have to do pledges and kind of getting things together and then obviously a
teacher has to sign up and actually fill out all the paperwork but they don't send those students
i don't remember the students getting a itinerary being like this is what you're going to do like
more than half of this time is going to be spent touring around we're going to lead these activities
and then less of that time is being spent um actually building a school because it but it was
though it was marketed as building a school so yeah it was a kind of a strange um yeah way to
enter into the the space okay i'm going to walk you through the first night and what i remember
we were driven to this compound it was like outside of Nairobi and we stayed there the first night
it was completely gated guarded by security guards um it was i think from what i'm trying
to remember it was quite like yeah kind of more modern like western development nice rooms flushing
toilets mirrors um i take like a dining hall area where you could sit and eat and we were
completely removed from the first night so if we're going to talk about cultural immersion
and actually experiencing uh the culture i the first day alone like sets the tone for
that immersive experience and this is just solely based on accommodation when we went to um
the the mara and stayed in this community uh you're like if you can imagine yeah this barren
field you can see these people's homes off in the distance they're living with the land they're used
to their routine in their lifestyle and then these people drive in on these giant um what are
those trucks called like the ones that can kind of like drive through water and over crazy hills and
shit i think i know what you're trying to hear a pagani we have the green machine the name is
slipping my mind but anyways but yeah we get there and then we're staying in these almost like military
tents and there's a mess hall tent that's set up and we weren't close to anybody's homes we weren't
sleeping eating washing interacting in a way that you know members there would and i could see that
being problematic on um i could see being that immersed as problematic as as well because it's
it's it can be intrusive we were we looked like aliens it looked like um like man on the moon
like just completely removed from the actual community yeah it was a lot of just being
toured around we weren't we weren't interacting they brought us to this yeah this church and it was
really cool but i felt about even at that age extremely uncomfortable this group of white
teenage girls and their teacher like teacher and leader counterparts are like just sitting
clapping along pretending that they're you know used to this sort of church um setting but yeah i
felt uncomfortable i'm like i feel like we are they're putting on a performance for us and we're
there and we're not actually talking to any of these people like we're we're just hearing them
sing which was it was cool but it didn't allow me to ask any questions i was 17 so i was like i'm
going to go to school and i was like i'm going to be going here i'm going to be volunteering with
the school i knew that before i'd like to build infrastructure for the school i knew that before
time i wasn't there the whole time but it was a really large part of the trip the part that i remember
the most and this was a while ago so it's foggy but the part that was like most sticking in my
brain that i feel like i spent the most time doing was volunteering for at least a really large
at least half the trip was focused around volunteering in this little community helping
build some infrastructure around the school so what i was doing there was a few things there was
some in some foundation that needed to be dug so we were digging holes to build foundation
and we were also laying bricks to build a tree um and also just hanging out with the kids at school
i was very much benefiting from what those trips do best in my humble opinion which is
grant a lot more to the traveler or the volunteers that i was able to give
and i will ever be able to give i took away because when i was helping dig a foundation
a few days later it rained when i was helping lay bricks for this latrine
i'm sure that we did it because we're not architects we're not bricklayers and it seems like
oh this simple task of just laying bricks why would you trust a bunch of 14 to 17 year olds to
lay bricks throughout the tree it was a very like it was a big moment for me to come to terms with
that like that was for me that was one thousand percent for me and i was not for that and that was
a hard part to solve because i thought i was really helping anyways then there was an element really
really like right next to the school there was this like essentially you know i guess i don't
want to use the wrong terms but it was like a hut like she was living in a home made of bricks
like a house that she's living in a hut and the hut was made within a big point of like saying
this was made with like a mixture of bricklay and like cowl or goat manure and we would we
entered this person's home again like i didn't really know what she was saying it was there's
nothing very we would just take her in entering this small space into this person's home and like
watch her make bread on her like stove made from like the same materials as her home and then
i just so cringy things like i this is something i never talk about and i i don't share that i have
this experience anymore because i i feel deeply i feel i do feel ashamed and i feel terribly proud
of this experience i learned a lot from it i learned so much especially when i look back
in a critical lens um but i don't like sharing this this is a part that i don't like sharing um
after we entered this person's home we took turns um putting on like a plastic glove and we picked up
some of the like clay manure mixture and like put it on her house
we weren't she had a house she didn't need us to smear more they're like like me going mad like
i was like it was like this is just such a song like you're experiencing this person's life and
i'm like how is it feeling to be in that prison like i used to come from canada that live in like
giant houses and have education and all this infrastructure and like how like patronizing do
you just maybe don't feel patronized because they do have a relationship with me otherwise like why
would we be in that situation she must she must benefit from us being there in some way in regards
to the relationship she has with me to me but man i i'm like i'm like red right now so i went to
that poor woman's home and rubbed a dirt on her wall um i carried we all carried a ton of water
from the well back to this lady's home hope she can use all that water and it was useful that we
grabbed it for her um i'm sure it was maybe a ton of people came to our site so when we were saying
they had some people come and just follow with dancing and do henna and bring some scarves and
goods and things and we could shop like on our little location so again that feels very curated
and then we went to the city of urec for a day and like hung out in the markets and did some
shopping and stuff and had like i ate at a restaurant in the city that was really nice
i just so i guess that was pretty that was like the culturally that's one of the most
because that was shopping we didn't talk about like the colonization of india you know that was
never we never really talked about their history this community that didn't have access to education
this community that girls can't go to school because there's no the train so if there's no
the train they're not in school once a week because there's nowhere for them to like deal with their
period for that week and they've looked down upon it just testing and dirty like it was very much
like a focus on the culture i just kind of talked about the caste system that's when i kind of like
went back to it goes back to the culture to have access to to education because there's
very advanced women in this culture or this poverty in this culture because of estimation of
the caste system like we understand like they talk about those systems but i don't think they
ever really talked about colonialism my cultural facilitator that i had become close to like he was
the person who would give us the cultural context and he was just a few years older than i was so
we ended up just becoming friends and chatting and it was one day he was really frustrated and mad
and i kind of asked him what was bothering him and he said that the previous night there was people
there who were from the corporate trip but they were like a boulder group of people
and they had cracked like a couple bottles of wine or something or cracked a couple bottles of
i don't know this is not some bubbly and he was frustrated because if you're here to do
work or like to make an impact in this community and you're having this
bottle of alcohol that's worth more than someone's like yearly income in that community like i really
do think that they think they're doing really great work and that their cause is just even though
they function in a broken system i guess that's my biggest problem with newbies like they were
they were made in a time that was much more insensitive much less aware the peak of like
neocolonialism and they were a part of like combating that and starting a new dialogue and
that's very admirable like the start of their story and their upcoming is admirable based on
like the context of like the global community but they've never learned or grown they've never
grown with the changing information they never like themselves continue to progress and learn
in a way that's more sensitive and must ignorant so hey me again so scott wanted to add a response
here uh he wrote it in this way that's supposed to sound like i'm just naturally saying it which
i really fucking hate here we go in fairness tens of thousands of people traveled with me to we
and many had an extremely positive experience the impact also helped shape future decisions
including what they would study in the future and making positive changes in reducing their
consumption patterns and their ecological footprint on the world as a result of the trip
we provided a study from dr jason sol who looked at the impact of its trips showing an overwhelming
positive impact on those who had traveled so just a small correction there scott actually
specifically refused to send me that study so um i'm sure that's just a simple mistake on his part
probably got that mixed up stepping back a bit the type of work that volunteerism is an extension
of is called international development so what that mean well development is a really sneaky
concept just googling it the salvation army's website defines it as quote the pursuit of
a better world for all for the elimination of poverty discrimination and injustice damn what
kind of monster would oppose that we should throw them in a cage and set them on fire if you know
what i mean as a side note i'd just like to say that joining my patreon means hope understanding
rescuing cats stuck up in trees and getting access to the music from my videos and your
name and the credits no but that's not what development really means like obviously the
term was first used on january 20th 1949 during the first televised american inaugural address
in it harry truman said we must embark on a bold new program for making the benefits of our scientific
advances and industrial progress available for the improvement and growth of underdeveloped areas
more than half the people of the world are living in conditions approaching misery
their food is inadequate they are victims of disease their economic life is primitive and
stagnant their poverty is a handicap on a threat most of them and to more prosperous areas the
material resources which we can afford to use for assistance of other peoples are limited but our
imponderable resources in technical knowledge are constantly growing and are inexhaustible
and in cooperation with other nations we should foster capital investment in areas needing development
this was the last minute edition but it fucking crushed not just in america but also in european
countries whose formal colonial reign was coming to an end the idea behind development is basically
that countries run on the same rules as historical strategy games and any disparities are just because
all those countries who just so happened to have been colonized didn't put enough points
into their skill trees for no specific reason don't worry about it all that was needed to end
poverty was for rich countries to help them catch up by teaching them about farming medicine and
the free market mostly that last one though i promise we'll tell you all about modern irrigation
techniques right after you guys prove that you understand basic economics now for your next
project you'll be building a golden statue of murray Rothbard this was so effective because
through this perspective not only were imperial countries not responsible for the state of their
former colonies now they were the solution and what did that solution look like well what this
development aid would often include would be a push for so-called developing countries to
modernize their economies through free trade and austerity policies interestingly that's actually
not at all what so-called developed countries did most countries that are rich today got that way
through policies that involved heavily investing in their welfare state and economic protectionism
the reason i bring this up is because i think that this flip in how western countries came to
understand their role in aid reveals two dynamics that we're going to see coming up again and again
on the one hand we have the stripping away of all historical and structural causes of poverty
portraying starving kids in an unspecified part of africa as victims without victimizers
on the other hand aid whether it be from individuals organizations or governments
is oriented to prioritize being enjoyable and profitable for those providing it over any concerns
about the needs of the people they're supposedly helping all right let's fast forward a few decades
now and talk about neoliberalism reagan thatcher milton freedman frederick hayek we privatized
the profits and socialized the losses and now eggs cost a thousand dollars and everyone's running
on views that basically covers everything but if you want a more detailed explanation of neoliberalism
check out any of my videos by the 90s neoliberalism had gone from a radical fringe ideology to the
world's dominant economic paradigm something that happened in north america during this period
was that we saw the rise of bands that i like to sing at karaoke and a movement aimed at making
capitalism an instrument for social justice through ethical consumption the main form that this takes
is what's called purchase triggered philanthropy which is when companies donate some of their profits
to some charitable cause generally tied to an ad candidate at the same time as the government
withdrew more and more the state's just been staying home and really going goblin mode right now
but as the government shrank into a small little bean and took on less of a role in things like
welfare and international development there was simultaneously an explosion of non-profit
organizations and non-government organizations soon ngo's and npo's came to take over some of
the state's functions in welfare and development respectively but while these organizations are
by definition not meant to be for making money with government funds drying up the charity sector
came to rely more and more on private funds non-profits have always worked closely with
corporations looking to seem like they're making a difference corporations will hand over their
advertising budget to a charity and the non-profit adds expertise and legitimacy to the project but
charities didn't just receive money from the private sector they also got something that
an endless stream of crypto bro turned motivational speakers on instagram have taught me is far more
valuable than money a business grind set one very messed up example of this is a little charity
that you might have heard of that's right world vision while world vision is probably best known
for those old sponsor child commercials where they'd film african kids with flies on their faces
i'm here in northern zambia and i need your help why i mean just look at this water but
despite the fact that they had a policy banning the hiring of gay people until 2014 world vision's
marketing has actually kept with the times albeit in a shockingly cursed way the world vision gift
catalog which you can find on their website or as physical copies that they mail out presents
charitable donations as products laid out like any other online shopping experience except
instead of spending 50 bucks on a three in one combo foot massager squatty potty and instapot
you can spend the same amount to buy some chickens for an impoverished community like
somewhere in the world it actually doesn't say it like on their site they show this video about
the impact that chickens have but don't tell you where it was filmed at all here was this couple
has four children and i understand the love that parents have for their kids
this family had received chickens from world vision which is a great gift the oldest ones
didn't really get to benefit from a great education because the family didn't have the
chickens at the time a savior who is but whatever so they have chickens for 50 bucks let's see what
else oh uh for 65 you can buy help for sexually exploited girls that feels gross right like i
feel like i shouldn't have to explain why depicting sexually abused children as products is beyond
fucked in a paper on this vincy lee describes the world vision gift catalog as an expression of
philanthropy capitalism the merger of business with charity this is absolutely nothing new but
lee points out that what is unprecedented is the scale at which it's taking place and with that
how shamelessly its supporters will celebrate it for its profitability the way this plays out is
that charity is seen as good because of its profitability donations then are now an investment
that drives innovation and develops infrastructure which can be used by major corporations thanks
to your generosity the child that you sponsor could grow up to be the next satoshi nakamoto or
elizabeth holmes you can see this in the world vision gift catalog not just in the little tags
they put on products advertising multiplies six x impact but also in how the first thing that you
see when you load the page and on the first pages of the physical copies all have to do with animals
the reason they push this is because the recipients aren't meant to raise some livestock and live off
of that themselves they're given them to start a business and to be clear here you can make a good
case for that being the most efficient and effective way to help people my issue though
is with who decides that and what their motivations are let's come back to kanda's favorite philanthropy
boys now and talk some more about we i'm sorry i'm sick of having to write jokes about these guys
who look like they're about to go on tucker carlson to argue that wealthy is the new n word too but
craig and mark are very explicit that this blend of business and charity is what we is all about
the two brothers along with richard branson's daughter holly wrote a book called we economy
that makes their stance very clear and craig has been hired to speak at events saying stuff like this
my name is craig keelburger i'm the co-founder of the we organization and i appreciate you joining
me today for a conversation on the power of purpose purpose is the differentiator 75 percent
millennials would take a pay cut to work at a company that gives greater purpose let me tell you
the story of tanya karnagy she was a young accountant at the firm apmg one of the biggest
accounting firms in the world after a volunteer trip overseas to africa she came back and questioned
whether her nine to five was equaling the social impact she wanted she almost quit her job but then
she thought about it and realized that in her company a company that had reached around the world
she could do more good issues like climate change issues like global poverty or forced migration
issues like gender empowerment the world's problems are innovations waiting to happen
that is what we're going to talk about today how business and charity aren't two opposites
but in fact they're merging on this path together of social entrepreneurship you can achieve both
purpose and profit in the process thanks so much for listening today if you want more tips and
ways to get involved please check out the we economy book it is the blueprint for purpose and profit
in the workplace i was gonna write a joke about how these look like presentations for a sketchy
crypto scam but then looked it up and found this article that of course craig wrote moving on in
a paper by jessica weirgu at all honestly shout out to et all unbelievably slept on writer they
argue that one of the key assumptions of flanthrow capitalism is that the market is a capable and
appropriate medium for providing aid the problem with this though is that there are certain values
that are fine to expect from a market when we're just consuming regular things that aren't as great
for distributing aid the big one is choice it's good that we can have a say and make choices when
we're buying things normally but not so much when it comes to charities with the world vision gift
catalog for instance products are sorted by most popular which makes sense in other kinds of online
shopping but the people donating to world vision aren't experts they don't know what's most needed
i don't care if nine out of ten karen's agree that kids in ethiopia need horses until i hear it
from someone in a lab coat i'm not buying those kids a single fucking horse in a paper called
humanitarians of tinder constructing whiteness and consuming the other nisha to me analyzes
the facebook page humanitarians of tinder where people submit pictures of white people just
being gross i'm just a pan looking for her gym i love staying active harry potter and being the
savior of africa asian swipe left the paper is actually so much better than it has any right to
be for how funny of a thing it's looking at in it to me writes the notion of the individual being
able to do what she pleases so as long as she pays for it and their specific consent is central to
the proliferation of volunteerism programs volunteerism programs that claim to work with fully
consent to individuals groups of communities actively shape geographies of who gets help and
who does not according to which markets better work and which representatives can better recruit
travelers to low community members are viewed as passive subjects the opinions are not considered
no ask for and they become spectacles for the volunteers to observe in the worst cases the
work of community organizations is seriously undermined by the presence of volunteers the
view that community desires and activities are somewhat besides the point to the volunteers
personal experiences cinematic of an overall view of community members as items of consumption
so bearing that in mind a comment per cheek of the practice of volunteerism is that it'd be a
lot more effective if people just donated the money they'd spend on a trip directly to the
people they're trying to help so why don't they I think a good question to ask here as we look at
this is what's gained by not doing that in Lee's paper she argues that in addition to purchase
triggered philanthropy there's also what she calls consumption oriented philanthropy things like the
world vision gift catalog where unlike a campaign where you buy something and profits are donated
to a charity there's not really an obvious product but instead the person receiving the aid becomes
the product when we donate in this way what we're in a sense buying is the performance of gratitude
from the recipient in my opinion this fits pretty well with the way that we present their trips
and activism as a whole in terms of the good it does for those volunteering allowing them to find
meaning explore not to mention impress colleagues and their bosses in their book me to we craig and
mark lay out what they call the rich but poor phenomenon the idea that while countries in the
global north may be materially rich they're spiritually poor unlike the people in the global
south who can teach us true happiness but initially surprised us most in our travels to many poor
countries of the developing world was not the misery or the extensive poverty but the happiness
and the hope that survived despite it we saw not only the scenes of hunger and suffering but also
moments of community compassion trust and laughter these people have something valuable to teach us
something that's like funny too is that they claim that they came up with this concept which
is absolutely not true because this is actually a very common trope appearing in a lot of writing
where indigenous people are portrayed as noble savages by their colonists and so it's wild to
want to claim that mark and i came up with this cool new concept that we're calling the white man's
burden hey so scott asked me to clarify a couple things here first of all he said that mark and
craig never claimed to have invented that idea i had based that claim off of a couple of lines in
their book me to we finding meaning in a material world where they wrote quote when we get caught
up in the race to get ahead taking time away from our spouses and our children we risk falling victim
to an overwhelming emptiness we call the rich but poor phenomenon we coined this term a few years ago
the world economic form and then later in the same chapter they write despite their immense wealth
they meaning the super rich cannot afford to spend even a day enjoying one of the most magnificent
winter resorts in the world this is how we discovered the rich but poor phenomenon the
tendency to live to work rather than work to live so i guess that's my bad there i shouldn't have
assumed that when they said that they discovered something that they meant that they had come up
with it scott also said that this is not an example of the noble savage trope saying quote the idea of
the noble savage is different the concept essentially refers to stereotypes of indigenous people in
communities where they are idealized and portrayed as being frozen in the past and having moral superiority
for being uncorrupted he goes on to say that craig and mark were simply commenting on the quote
resilience of people faced with adversity so while admittedly craig and mark never used the
phrases frozen the past or uncorrupted in my opinion what they wrote comes off as at the very least
adjacent to the idea of the noble savage but the point here is that while volunteerism does for
sure bring money into communities and helps the inhabitants by creating jobs and funding larger
aid projects the people in these communities are absolutely providing a service for the visitors
and so the key thing to be aware of here is that this is absolutely not a relationship between
equals but these trips do something more than just that in tumis paper she argues that the people
who go on these trips are exposed to the horrors of global inequality but in a context that prevents
them from reflecting on their own involvement in the system that causes it the reason why they're
able to go on this expensive trip is because of the same economic and geopolitical order that
robs the people they meet and take pictures with of the ability to travel in the same way but I
think that this really speaks to how the type of activism that we and lots of other organizations
just like them advocate for is one that not only ignores ongoing historical and systemic issues but
actively works to prevent volunteers from engaging with those issues by presenting them through the
lens of global capitalism and speaking of let's talk about some of we's corporate donors we has
for instance partnered with dow chemical with craig sharing a stage with then ceo andrew avaris
here some exciting programs for your school some exciting programs right here in michigan so they
are a big deal here but they're a big deal everywhere and how they help out so please join me and give
it a round of applause to the chief executive officer of dow andrew please come on up here
a man who was also at that time head of trumps american manufacturing council where he was
pressuring the trump administration to ignore studies warning about the harms of the pesticides
dow was producing craig has been very outspokenly in favor of public private partnerships but
i didn't think that this was what he meant there so regarding dow scott said quote i have included
a high-level description of the programming dow made possible you continue to attack we charity
on the engagement of corporate donors but fail to adequately share what kinds of programs they were
doing with us and the value these programs create the high-level description reads the purpose
of the partnership was to teach students in resource poor high schools in michigan state
the purpose of stem education damn that really was some high-level shit there anyway the point is
next time you criticize we for working with the company responsible for the bhopal disaster and
the ongoing contamination in the area just remember that they also teach high school students that stem
is important coming back to the question of why not just donate to these places instead adding all
the extra steps involved in volunteerism the answer is that doing it this way is far more
beneficial for everyone other than the people who are supposed to be the ones receiving aid for the
volunteers they get an unforgettable vacation a firepick for tinder and something that looks great
resume or college application in fact craig is pretty queer about one of the target demographics
of we economy being people at corporations looking for ways to stand out for corporations they benefit
from good pr or as we has referred to it when reaching out to potential sponsors the halo effect
they also get potential access to new markets in the global south and finally they produce more
people to hire with this kind of valuable experience that's a very common reason why corporations
support charities by the way like you know how tech companies love supporting programs that teach
people how to code that's to drive down the wages of programs as for the charities like we when
those people who've taken their trips go on to try to get their companies to make a difference
through brand partnerships with an NGO they're probably going to suggest the one they took a
trip with all those years ago with all that said i do want to close out by being fair to we here
i obviously have a lot of problems with how they operate but i think that it is worth engaging
with what i think is the steel man of their approach to charity which is that from a strictly
utilitarian consequentialist view of things they are helping people and even with all the criticisms
of them they're still doing it on a scale that more grassroots organizations can't really do
when i ask scott about this i don't think that the answer he gave me was totally unfair
there is no easy set of choices for a charity for us it is a matter of seeking to do the most good
we charity conducts a rigorous and thorough vetting process to determine suitability of
any partnership in short the charity has long utilized a numerical ranking system based on
several factors corporate partnerships have helped us like other charities ensure financial
efficiencies secure sustainable funding to be able to deliver long-term programming that are
critical to empowering communities in situations of extreme poverty and in canada ensure full
accessibility of our programs to all stakeholders regardless of socioeconomic factors we charity
has only sought partnerships with companies whose behavior on balance demonstrates a willingness
to exercise a high level of corporate social responsibility and that demonstrates a commitment
to and affinity with our charitable mandate there are many companies that we have turned down
without providing specific names there were for example various resource extraction companies
oil and gas companies and certain apparel companies that we declined affiliating ourselves with
now i do think that that is reasonable although i will say that i am pretty skeptical about
what that line is for who they will or won't work with for example while i think it's great that
they've refused to partner with clothing manufacturers they have also sold me to we
merch in walmart scott went on to say i understand that you are looking to offer a critical commentary
however if you are seeking to look at both sides of the matter the impact of the work we did with
our partners financial support really cannot be ignored thanks to the support over 200 000 students
received an education 30 000 women have alternative sources of income to escape poverty and provide for
their families and 1 million people have access to life-saving healthcare and clean water we believe
that it is important to listen to local voices in the global south local leaders work with families
who face the difference between life and death when a child gets access to healthcare and clean
drinking water and a young girl can escape early childhood marriage and fgm through opportunities
with education leaders in the global south often are the strongest advocates to partner
with companies because that corporate support funds these essential programs lastly it is easy
to critique a charity for working with corporations however it is important to consider the other
side of what this funding means for a charity's beneficiaries we hope you are planning to offer
some degree of balance in your future commentary carol mora who has worked with the we charity for
many years overseeing community programming in kenya and previously serving as the principal
of our all-girl secondary school has commented on this in the past she has noted that partnerships
with corporations are literally what keeps our communities alive anyone seeking to impose a western
mindset on these issues and not recognize them for what they are which is an essence a source of
funding that would not otherwise be available must consider the place of privilege that they are
coming from coming back to our question about why do we all in tourism instead of just directly
donating to the people who you're trying to help we's response would probably be that that would
be great but people aren't just going to donate without traveling to these areas meeting these
people and seeing why it's important for them to do that and i think that's fair but also speaks
to the problem of treating charities as an individual action in this way like this isn't a matter of
making the most of a bad situation this is a feature of the system that they champion in the
book the revolution will not be funded there's an essay talking about the charity sista sista
which had their funding placed in jeopardy after they tweeted their support for palestinians
and they make a case for why charities should abandon foundations and take on a more grassroots
model and i think that they make a lot of good cases for how grassroots organizing is not the
dead end that people tend to think it is and can be very effective and in fact has a lot of advantages
i think that those arguments are true and make good points but also realistically they could have
helped a lot of people with the funding that they lost and i do think that there's an important
question about how much was that tweet about palestinians really work and yeah i don't really
have an easy answer to that i think that it is very clear that it's impossible to make systemic
change while being dependent on people and organizations whose wealth and power depends on
the system for instance bill gates charity has done great work fighting disease in poorer countries
but also a big part of the reason why diseases are so prevalent in those countries is because
they can't afford medication and aren't allowed to use generic versions because of the intellectual
property laws responsible for bill gates's wealth well that said while i do think that grassroots
movements have a lot more potential than people like the kill burgers like to believe i'm not
confident in them being able to cause systemic change either and in the meantime that corporate
money does help a lot of people i guess one place where i will agree with them is that there aren't
easy answers to this although i think that hopefully we can do better than these goals
thanks for watching
so
so
i won't change for you
your love to break me
you
i am
What's the future that held me in my stead?
Lost in the flames
I will change for you
You'll have to break me
Even with my auto-plane
Lost in my need
I won't lose myself
I will be far behind
Even in my tenities
Lost with my grief
Lost in the flames
Lost in the flames
Lost in the flames
Lost in the flames
Lost in the flames
Lost in the flames
Lost in the flame
Lost in the flames
Lost in the flames
Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh
oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh
this video is sponsored by surf shark VPN click the link in the description to get
83% off for two years plus three months for free
