Hey everyone, for this video I'm going to talk about Steven Pinker.
More specifically, I'm going to talk about optimism, which is something that Pinker goes
hand in hand with.
Steven Pinker is a Canadian psychologist, which there's never been a bad one of those.
He's a neuroscientist and a linguist at Harvard University, but that isn't why he's famous.
Instead, his fame comes from his controversial and dangerous claims that everything is good,
actually.
That's it?
Really?
Nothing else?
What's that?
There's no one else in the room and I'm adding those camera movements in post?
Okay then.
Don't you worry you're in decline.
Don't you worry you're doing fine.
So admittedly, Steven Pinker seems on the surface like a bit of an odd person for me
to make a video about.
I was joking earlier, but in a lot of ways Pinker presents himself as a kind of benign
good version of Jordan Peterson.
I know Jordan Peterson's fans put up a big fight whenever he gets called a conservative,
but come on.
I mean, I have a pretty difficult time believing that Jordan Peterson ever voted for Justin
Trudeau, but Steven Pinker on the other hand, if he is still able to vote in Canada, probably
did.
He is an honest to God blue check certified orange man bad liberal.
Also, while Jordan Peterson has certainly enjoyed plenty of success and access to mainstream
audiences, I'd argue that there is an extent to which Peterson has and plays into this
image of him as a bit of an anti-establishment boogeyman.
Pinker on the other hand is the type of guy who gets invited to give TED Talks, is highly
celebrated in his field, was named one of Time Magazine's top 100 most influential
people and is everyone's favorite billionaire philanthropist, Bill Gates' favorite writer.
Now, it's worth noting that Pinker does definitely have something of a dark side in spite of those
liberal credentials.
For someone supposedly so liberal, it's a little odd that he was, for instance, a vocal
supporter of James DeMore, the former Google employee who was fired for writing a memo
arguing that women should not be programmers because of biological differences.
Speaking of biological differences, Pinker also argues on some bell curve shit that Ashkenazi
Jews as a matter of genetics have above average IQs and while he doesn't go so far as to
talk about which groups have lower IQs, once that door is open you can't really close
it.
Pinker is also friends with Jordan Peterson and is a peripheral member of the Intellectual
Dark Web.
Also, speaking of close friends, Pinker was extremely close with Jeffrey Epstein.
Weirdly, he doesn't seem particularly proud of that connection.
He now automatically blocks anyone on Twitter who uses Epstein's name and his mentions,
myself included.
I swear, I was just trying to wish him my condolences on the anniversary of his very close
friend's death.
Anyway, the reason for all Pinker's fame has been his two most recent books, The Better
Angels of Our Nature and Enlightenment Now.
In these books and his many subsequent media appearances, Pinker argues that the world
has been drastically improved thanks to the Enlightenment and more recently, neoliberal
capitalism.
Now, when it comes to the Enlightenment, Pinker says some wild shit.
The Enlightenment was an extremely important time period when a great number of key scientific,
philosophical, and political revolutions happened across Europe.
And I'm not playing to shit all over it, but also, I think Pinker really exaggerates
how important it was.
For example, at one point Pinker writes,
And look, I don't have a huge problem with Pinker as a psychologist being stoked about
how people were asking questions about how our minds worked 300 years ago.
The problem is that he acts as though no one had ever asked about how the human mind works
until Kant came along.
There's also the way Pinker uses a very broad definition of what counts as the Enlightenment.
For instance, he includes the founding fathers of America.
This isn't totally wrong by any stretch.
They were, at the very least, products of the Enlightenment.
But this tends to lead to other issues when he, for instance, credits the Enlightenment
with the abolition of slavery.
He also pretty notably doesn't include Karl Marx.
This isn't totally wrong.
You can very reasonably argue that Marx was a product rather than a part of the Enlightenment.
But again, this isn't a distinction that seems to matter to Pinker when he's talking
about the founding fathers.
Also throughout the entire book, Pinker insists on capitalizing the word Enlightenment like
a total fucking nerd.
Then we get to the more contemporary stuff about neoliberalism.
First of all, Pinker dismisses any criticisms of the ideas he espouses with just a wild
amount of anti-intellectualism.
If you think knowledge can solve problems, then you have a blind faith and quasi-religious
belief in the outmoded superstition and false premise of the myth of the onward march of
inevitable progress.
You are a cheerleader for vulgar American can-do-ism, with the raw-raw spirit of boardroom
ideology, Silicon Valley, and the Chamber of Commerce.
You are a practitioner of Wake history, a naive optimist, a Pollyanna, and of course,
a Pangloss.
Ebithet's aside, the idea that the world is getting better than it was, and can get
better still, fell out of fashion among the clericy long ago.
In the idea of decline in Western history, Arthur Herman shows that prophets of doom are
the all-stars of the liberal arts curriculum, including Nietzsche, Arthur Schopenauer,
Martin Heidegger, Theodore Dornow, Walter Benjamin, Herbert Marcuse, Jean Paul Sartre,
Franz Fennon, Michel Foucault, Edward Saïd, Cornel West, and a chorus of eco-pessimists.
Pretty bold of him to give a reading list of people much smarter than him.
The majority of Enlightenment now, and most of Pinker's media appearances, are spent
going through the data to empirically demonstrate that the world has gotten better, and this
is where things start to go a bit off the rails.
For example, check out Pinker's TED Talk, where he shows how the world has gotten better
through a series of graphs.
But he uses wildly different time periods for each of his points, so that the data looks
the same on each graph.
Two hundred years ago, 90 percent of the world's population subsisted in extreme poverty.
Today, fewer than 10 percent of people do.
For most of human history, the powerful states and empires were pretty much always at war
with each other, and peace was a mere interlude between wars.
Today they are never at war with each other.
The annual rate of war has fallen from about 22 per hundred thousand per year in the early
fifties to 1.2 today.
Solid rates plunge whenever anarchy and the Code of Vendetta are replaced by the rule
of law.
It happened when feudal Europe was brought under the control of centralized kingdoms.
Two hundred and fifty years ago, in the richest countries of the world, a third of the children
did not live to see their fifth birthday.
Before the 17th century, no more than 15 percent of Europeans could read or write.
Europe and the United States achieved universal literacy by the middle of the 20th century,
and the rest of the world is catching up, thanks to the universal penetration of running
water and electricity in the developed world.
But bad graphs aside, I don't have a huge problem with Pinker's points about how technology
has improved the world.
I don't totally share his enthusiasm about things like, say, the free market handling
the distribution of vaccines to the global south, but I think it is pretty uncontroversial
that it's better to be born now with access to modern medical technology than five hundred
years ago.
The problem is when Pinker goes into areas like economics where he's either wrong or
incredibly dishonest.
When Pinker talks about poverty, he employs a bit of a magic trick to disguise the actual
numbers.
Pinker's claims that poverty has been all but eliminated come from the UN's Millennium
Development Project.
This was a project designed to dramatically reduce global poverty by 2015.
Have you ever heard that factoid that, thanks to neoliberal economics, poverty has been
cut in half?
This is where that comes from.
But the problem is, that's all it's there for.
The Millennium Development Project was less interested in actually reducing poverty and
more interested in saying that they had.
When it was clear that their objectives couldn't be met, they'd quietly move the goalposts.
An example of this is their definition of absolute poverty.
The Millennium Development Project uses $1.90 US per day as their definition of poverty,
and by that metric, the number of people in poverty has dramatically declined so much
so that there are actually fewer people living on $1.90 than there are people who are currently
starving to death.
Now, you or I might call that a woefully inadequate definition of poverty, but the Millennium
Development Project calls that Mission Accomplished.
When you use a higher amount, like $5 or $7 a day, a more realistic amount for people
to live off of, it doesn't look like poverty has disappeared at all.
Right, put the magic away, bloody breadtubers honestly.
Hi everyone, I'm back for another video in my series on breadtube and economics.
This time I'll be covering Pound Shop Big Joel, we're in hell, and well, where to start
honestly.
First, the poverty decline is not just a statistical illusion.
The proportion of poor in the world has fallen pretty much whichever line you use, though
it's also clear that the decline gets less impressive the higher the line.
According to the World Bank's poverty calculator on their website, between 1981 and 2019, at
$1.90 a day, the proportion under the global poverty line dropped from 43 to 9%.
At $4 a day, the proportion went from 62 to 31%.
At $7.40 a day, it went from 71 to 52%.
At $15 a day, it went from 81 to 72%.
Now, there are a couple of ways you can splice the data to make the poverty decline seem
less impressive.
First, if you use the absolute number of poor people in the world rather than the proportion,
you get an increase in poverty at higher poverty lines like $7.40 a day.
The global population has grown and with it the number of poor people.
Secondly, if you omit China and other high performing economies, the decline in poverty
is very small though not entirely gone at higher poverty lines.
These countries have pursued different policies to the ones favoured by neoliberals such as
Stephen Pinker.
But should we do these things?
Which is the most honest measure of poverty?
Fortunately, Sam isn't the only person who is confused here.
There was an interview where Mehdi Hassan challenged Stephen Pinker on his understanding
of the numbers and Pinker seemed kind of under-equipped to address the points.
Well let's take global poverty.
Yeah.
You have a chapter in the book on prosperity.
You want to make the case that the world is more prosperous and less poor than ever
before and you point to data showing the number of people living on the extreme poverty line
as defined by the World Bank today at $1.90 a day is down from $2 billion in 1990 to $700
million in 2015.
The world is becoming middle class you say.
But surely you know, I know you know because you're a very clever, well qualified guy,
that there are numerous studies and a number of scholars who dispute that poverty measure
is arbitrary, as inaccurate, that in reality to quote from a recent academic paper by an
anthropologist at the LSE, quote, around 4 billion people remain in poverty today.
Around 2 billion remain hungry more than ever before in history.
Completely irrelevant to which way the numbers have gone.
Of course, the definition of extreme poverty is going to be arbitrary.
If you make it higher, then more people will be in poverty, make it lower, fewer people.
But no matter what cut-off you set, the direction is downward.
That's not true.
That's not true.
Actually, if you look at the work done by Jason Hickel at the LSE, if you take a poverty
measure, a billion people have been added to the number of people on that poverty measure
since 1981.
The trend shows the exact opposite when you move it to $5 a day.
In terms of the proportion of people in poverty by that criterion?
No, no, the sheer number of people, a billion people have been added to the poverty total
since 1981.
Yes, but billions of people have been added to the world as a whole.
What's relevant is the proportion.
You also used absolute numbers in your book.
You say it's gone down from 2 billion to 700 million.
I note that by at least the most widely accepted definition of extreme poverty is interesting
that the absolute numbers have declined as well.
But the main point is the proportion, because more people have been added, so anything is
going to increase.
You say widely accepted, but this is my point.
You don't acknowledge in the book, there's no caveats where you say, for example, Professor
Lance Pritchett, Harvard colleague of yours, a development economist who studies his stuff,
says the poverty line shouldn't be $1.90, it should be $12, $15 a day.
And when you make that simple statistical change, the entire picture of poverty changes
and the arguments in your book basically fall apart.
Do they not?
I don't think so.
In my video, I discussed the behaviour of poverty using these different measures, but
I also look at where the poverty data come from.
What does it mean to be in poverty, and how do we know which poverty cut off to use?
Which people, in which times and places, are excluded from the data?
And what does this mean for how we interpret a graph like this, showing poverty declining
over time, and much beloved by Stephen Pinker and Bill Gates?
Watch my video if you want to avoid embarrassing yourself, like seemingly all Canadians when
they talk about this.
My video also covers Stephen Pinker on the subject of inequality, and let me tell you,
he really butchers this one.
He's committed to the view that inequality is not inherently bad, which requires some
very one-sided readings of well-known studies which show that it is, in fact, bad, both in
how it has come about and in its consequences.
For example, he paints super-rich individuals as entrepreneurs and artists like J.K. Rowling,
who have created things people value and have been rewarded for doing so.
He fails to mention deliberate policy changes over the past few decades, which have produced
today's ultra-rich individuals.
One example are intellectual property laws, which have expanded hugely in scope and length
over the past few decades.
As people and individuals are not allowed to use certain ideas or technologies, except
possibly by paying, this has created monopolies and increased the prices of things like drugs
and software for the rest of us, increasing inequality both within countries and globally.
But if Pinker pointed this out, Bill Gates, arguably the biggest beneficiary of intellectual
property in the world, just might not endorse the book.
But you weren't as thorough as you should have been, which is even worse.
If you want to learn more about poverty and inequality and how Pinker gets them wrong,
as well as write on occasion, then come and check out my video.
It might be a little drier than Sam's, but at least I know that the word data is plural.
Man, fuck that guy.
Okay, I'm back in my bedroom.
We're done with the magic eye bit.
This is just going to be some classic weird inhale from here on out.
Nothing fancy.
But I'll just have a nice drink and relax.
Now the part of Pinker's work that I'd most like to focus on is his writing on happiness.
That's right.
You optimists have had it too good for too long, or at least you think you have.
In Enlightenment now, Pinker devotes a chapter to addressing what I think is a fairly reasonable
objection to his work, which is, if things are so much better, why do people seem to
be so much less happy?
I will say that I found this chapter fairly gross, since Pinker doesn't miss a single
opportunity to say that people who are unhappy living in the global north or even suffering
from mental health problems are just ungrateful.
It's honestly a stunning failure to empathize with the misfortune of others and understand
that not everyone has Steven Pinker's life.
What do you have to complain about?
We live in the best time to be alive.
We get to be told how smart we are about linguistics.
We can buy mad scientist, brand conditioner.
We can even fly around in a cool plane with a fun guy and his young massage friends.
In this chapter, Pinker first tries to show that happiness does in fact neatly rise along
with GDP.
To do this, he cites quantitative data from happiness researchers, but there's a bit
of a problem with this.
First of all, there are studies that contradict the ones Pinker cites that show that the citizens
of wealthier countries are no happier.
Pinker relies on one study, which does show a correlation between happiness and economic
growth.
However, for some reason, he doesn't include any of the criticisms that have been made
about that study.
But also, as Pinker discusses, data on happiness are collected by just asking people how happy
they are.
We're going to scientists measure something as subjective as subjective well-being.
The best way to find out how happy people are is to ask them, who could be a better
judge?
An old Saturday Night Live skit has Gilda Radner in a post-coital conversation with
a nervous lover played by Chevy Chase, who is worried she didn't have an orgasm.
And she consoles him by saying, sometimes I do and I don't even know it.
We laugh because when it comes to subjective experience, the experiencer herself is the
ultimate authority.
By the way, Pinker really loves dryly citing comedians to support his points, but like,
they're always creeps like Chevy Chase, Louis C.K. or Woody Allen.
I just wonder why that is.
But Pinker's totally twisted sense of humor aside.
As Sarah Ahmed points out in her book, The Promise of Happiness, this is a methodological
problem with the study of happiness as a whole.
Since when we talk about happiness, we don't just mean feeling good, but generally think
of being happy as synonymous with a well-lived life.
As Ahmed writes,
If happiness is already understood to be what you want to have, then to be asked how happy
you are is not to be asked a neutral question.
It is not just that people are being asked to evaluate their life situations, but that
they're being asked to evaluate their life situations through categories that are evaluated.
This also brings us to another issue with the rapidly growing field which studies happiness,
often called positive psychology or, if you'd prefer a more general and far cringier title,
happinessology.
Happinessologists unsurprisingly consider happiness to be the ultimate marker of success and not
just any old happiness, but a very specific brand of it.
Ahmed writes,
Positive psychology is positive about positive feeling.
It presumes the promissory nature of its own object.
To feel better is to be better.
Happiness becomes a form of being directed or oriented, a following the right way.
It is no accident that philosophers tend to find happiness in the life of the philosopher,
or that thinkers tend to find happiness in the thinking of thought.
Rather than assuming happiness is simply found in happy persons, we can consider how claims
to happiness make certain forms of personhood valuable.
And so bearing that in mind, let's ask ourselves exactly what kind of person is happiest.
For this, let's turn to the great-granddaddy of objectively measuring happiness, Root Veenhoven,
who, pushing back on the wishy-washy humanity's notion that happiness is subjective, decide
to attack the idea of happiness with facts and logic, conducting studies which came to
this conclusion.
Happy persons are more likely to be found in the economically prosperous countries, whose
freedom and democracy are held in respect and the political scene is stable.
The happy are more likely to be found in majority groups than among minorities, and more often
at the top of the ladder than at the bottom.
They are typically married and get on well with families and friends.
In respect of their personal characteristics, the happy appear relatively healthy, both
physically and mentally.
They are active and open-minded.
They feel they are in control of their lives.
Their aspirations concern social and moral matters, rather than money-making.
In matters of politics, the happy tend to the conservative side of middle.
Yeah, cool, must be nice.
This explains why rich white people have so much power.
They're just naturally happier people.
All the colonialism, slavery, and genocide is just a coincidence.
It really all just comes down to winner mindset, baby.
Now, we're going to come back to Sarah Ahmed and questioning whether happiness is a good
goal to have later on, but for now, I want to keep looking into different ways that we
could measure happiness.
In addition to hard numbers, Pinker also does a cursory vibe check of literature from other
time periods.
Though no one gave happiness questionnaires to the people who lived in closely knit communities
that were loosened by modernity, much of the great art composed during the transition brought
to life their dark side, the provincialism, conformity, tribalism, and Taliban-like restrictions
on women's autonomy.
Many novels from the mid-18th to the early 20th century played out the struggles of
individuals to overcome the suffocating norms of aristocratic bourgeois or rural regimes.
Today we enjoy a world of personal freedom these characters could only fantasize about.
A world in which people can marry, work, and live as they please.
One can imagine a social critic of today warning Anna Karenida or Nora Helmer that a tolerant
cosmopolitan society isn't all it's cracked up to be.
I can't speak for them, but my guess is they think it was a pretty good deal.
Okay, I'm not alone in hating this guy's writing, right?
Now we're going to look into modern artistic trends too, and to do this we're going to
be using what is, at least on its face, the most mushy, feels-over-reals school of analysis
out there, affect theory.
Effect theory is an analytic discipline that studies feelings, how they work, how we think
of them, and what they are.
It's sort of the science of vibes.
As Warren Burlant, who actually tragically passed away very recently at the age of 63,
notes, affect theory can be incredibly useful for analyzing the current moment.
Like, for something like the Enlightenment, for example, since we have historical hindsight,
it's a lot easier for us to look back and make sense of its causes, effects, who was
involved, or if you're Steven Pink or just make a bunch of shit up.
But in the present moment, it's a lot harder to do those kinds of things.
For instance, a lot of scholars think that we are now in the period of post-postmodernism,
but since we're currently in the middle of that moment, it's very hard to say anything
definite about it other than that it desperately needs a better name than post-postmodernism.
This is where affect theory can be really useful, because one thing that we can know
about the present historical period is how it feels.
And how it feels is...
What Burlant argued is that the affect that defines our current moment is what they called
cruel optimism, and their explanation of this is just the best description of a toxic relationship
that I've ever heard.
A relation of cruel optimism exists when something you desire is actually an obstacle
to your flourishing.
It might involve food or a kind of love.
It might be a fantasy of the good life or a political project.
It might rest on something simpler too, like a new habit that promises to induce in you
an improved way of being.
These kind of optimistic relations are not inherently cruel.
They become cruel only when the object that draws your attachment actively impedes the
aim that brought you to it initially.
An example of cruel optimism would be something like smoking.
You might pick it up to fit in, but ultimately it winds up being an obstacle to that goal
by causing you to die.
And then no one wants to hang out at a party with the decomposing corpse.
Guys, we all know every friend group has the decomposing corpse, and if you think yours
doesn't, check your pulse because it's probably you.
In their book Cruel Optimism, Burlant argues that there's a relationship of cruel optimism
between us and, for lack of a better term, the American dream.
Burlant argues that that feeling of, ah, comes from us losing faith in the object of our
optimism, the idea that just working hard and maybe getting a degree will be rewarded
with a good life, but still holding onto the desire for that good life as advertised.
Burlant asked what happens when, instead of placing our hope in new things, we instead
remain attached to the old sources of optimism, even though we no longer have faith in them
delivering a better life.
Their conclusion was that we see the rise of new forms of media that focus on the instability
and powerlessness which seems to dominate our modern world.
In seven epic quests to defeat evil, for the heroes of these new modern stories, victory
is characterized by just getting by.
We can see another expression of cruel optimism in the anthropologist Gassan Hague's book
Against Paranoid Nationalism, which, as a side note, in addition to being a really smart
and well-written book, is also much more importantly, really funny, like in the introduction
he writes,
2001 was a good year in Australia as far as opposition to racism is concerned, and 2002
is looking better.
While not claiming to have investigated the matter empirically, my impression is that
in 2001 a record number of Australians declared themselves to be opposed to the use of the
terms of racist and racism.
Everywhere I turned, people were courageously stating things like, I am not racist.
That's not racism.
I did not mention race, I am talking about culture, or people will say I am racist, but
I am not.
And of course, to the delight of the connoisseurs, the famous, I am not racist, but.
So strongly do the anti-racist feel that if you ever refer to one of them as a racist
without their agreeing, they are likely to sue you.
I've tried to get some people I think are racist to sign a contract agreeing that they
are racist before I use a term to refer to them, but I have not succeeded so far.
It is clear that they are dead set anti-racists.
In his book, Hague argues that society can be thought of as a mechanism that distributes
hope to its citizens.
He goes on to examine the ways that hope is then unequally distributed.
He argues that society distributes hope in three ways, through group membership, through
access to a social life, and most importantly for this video, through the promise of a future.
An example of how cruel optimism fits into Hague's theories is in a talk Slavoy Zizek
gave in London after being caught rifling through the compost in search of dinner, he
discussed how the Labour movement was unable to prevent the rise of Margaret Thatcher.
Zizek argued that the left was unable to prevent the working class from voting for Thatcher,
because while they focused on economic inequalities, Thatcher was instead able to provide her voters
with the fantasy, or as Hague would call it, hope of a better future.
Thatcher, racistly, argued that there was such a thing as a British character, and that
anyone who had the British character had the potential for upward mobility.
This promise of a better future was so powerful that it overrode the fact that her policies
were directly responsible for worsening the lives of the very people who bought into it.
One of the interesting observations Hague makes about this hope distribution system is why
countries let in refugees.
In addition to providing cheap labour, accepting refugees serves to legitimize a country by
showing that they've produced so much hope that they can afford to give some away to
the less fortunate.
Hello and welcome to Kooky Crazy Canada where we got so much of the good life we don't even
know what to do with it.
So come on down and grab some premium hope while supplies last.
No supplies are limited and not available to those who arrive here at the Canada-United
States border have made a refugee claim in another country as confirmed through information
sharing and not admissible to Canada on security grounds or because of criminal activity or
human rights violations or made a previous refugee claim that was not found eligible.
Results of good life may vary.
Coming back to Pinker now, I think this raises a good question about his book.
What and who is Enlightenment now for?
In Jason Hickel, one of Stephen Pinker's biggest critics book, The Divide, he mentions
a well that was donated by the US in the West Bank of Palestine.
The well features a big sign that says it's a gift from the American people, but Palestine
doesn't need wells.
Not really.
Their water shortage comes from the fact that Israel, with the support of the US, takes
about 90% of Palestine's water for settlements and won't let Palestinians deepen their
wells to get at what water is left.
The well and the sign aren't there to help Palestinians, they're there for Americans
to feel good knowing their government has produced so much hope that they can give a
little way for free.
Pinker's work serves a very similar purpose, to deliver hope to justify neoliberal capitalism.
Not for those most negatively affected by it, but those enjoying its rewards.
Like giving a copy of Enlightenment now to someone living on $2 a day, expecting them
to be cheered up by the fact that crime in America has been decreasing since the 90s
is straight up serial killer shit.
And Pinker is explicit about this.
If you're reading this, you're not dead, starving, destitute, moribund, terrified,
enslaved, or illiterate.
Which means that you're in no position to turn your nose up at these values.
Oh my god, he admit it.
So if being happy and optimistic is a scam, what should we do?
Well, one thing that's nice is that if we're going to be miserable, at least we have some
pretty rad company.
Sarah Ahmed points out that most progressive movements have fought against what was viewed
as happiness at the time.
She points to the stereotypes of the feminist killjoy and the angry black lady as representatives
of groups who fought against views of happiness in favor of equality.
Another example is the struggle for queer liberation, which has fought to eke out an
alternative to the vision of happiness that is the domestic bliss of the traditional nuclear
family.
Another thing that Ahmed points out is the concept of flow state, that feeling when you
stop thinking and lose yourself entirely in what you're doing, very common with athletes
and gamers, neither of which are welcome on my channel.
The concept of flow state comes up a lot in the study of happiness.
Many people who write about flow state describe it as the best moments of our lives, when
instead of passively relaxing or being in our own heads observing the world, experiencing
it as something other and in opposition to us, instead in flow state we're actively
engaging as a part of the world and losing ourselves in something we're good at.
The problem with this, though, is that the world is in opposition to certain types of
people more so than others.
As Ahmed writes,
When the subjects are not in flow, they encounter the world as resistant, as blocking rather
than enabling inaction.
Unhappy subjects hence feel alienated from the world as they experience the world as
alien.
What if to flow into the world is not simply understood as a psychological attribute?
What if the world houses some bodies more than others, such that some bodies do not
experience that world as resistant?
Ahmed, drawing on the work of Franz Fanon, notes that an unhappiness with the status
quo and awareness that the world is in opposition to you, preventing you from flowing, is a
key component to the development of revolutionary consciousness.
Not only that, but for those on the margins, the realization that there is something wrong
with the world, which they have been alienated by, allows them to build solidarity with others
who don't fit with the world as it is either.
Instead of optimistic for the future, Ahmed suggests, as my fucking boy Frederick Jameson
wrote,
We should be anxious at the prospect of losing our future.
This is different from pessimism, since it doesn't mean resigning ourselves to misery,
but rather believing there is the potential for a future worth living out there, if we're
able to fight for it.
Thanks for watching.
Oh shitty future, throwing back whatever we can to avoid the dread of what's been said,
but there's just no escaping it.
Trying to find the words to explain what it feels like, bugging out like we did, I say
something weird, but that is just the price of faking like we're innocent.
Chasing them, chasing them, chasing them, chasing them, since only knowing it.
Looking for a dream that we love to a nightmare, lying to myself about things that I love
cause I'm distracted by public displays of happiness.
So I scour the internet for a new pair of Nike status symbol shit that I say I'm above
this on control, oh no, oh no, I'm fucking full of shit.
Stinking rich, hypocrite, no it's not gonna bring no happiness, no gonna bring no happiness.
There's no vacant place, there's no vacant place, there's no vacant place, there's no vacant place.
There's no vacant place, there's no vacant place.
