This video is sponsored by Surfshark VPN. Click the link in the description or go to
surfshark.deals slash we're in hell to get 85% off of Surfshark for two years plus an
additional three months for free.
Let me tell you a story about change and innovation and one man's mission to save
the world. Growing up, Louis Cypher was like any other Canadian boy. Poverty, famine, and
conflict minerals were the last things on his mind. He was too busy thinking about
math, food, and sport.
This all changed one day when he heard on the news about an Eritrean boy who bravely
fought against child labour in his country. The story lit a fire in young Louis, who from
that moment on made it his mission to be on the news for that too. He went on to found
the Weir and Hell Foundation to fight child poverty, and now he's done more than poor
what's his name ever could.
Louis saw that the problem with traditional charities was that they weren't operated
like businesses. Realizing that there had to be a better way, he traveled to developing
countries and partnered with the most respected members of these communities, the resource
extraction companies operating in the area.
Now, thanks to Louis's innovative fusion of charity and business, kids in North America
can know they're helping to stimulate the economies of poorer countries whenever they
buy their favorite products from the Gorm Cole and Petroleum Company.
I first got involved with the Weir and Hell Foundation all the way back in high school,
and I've been right here saving the world with them ever since.
We do just so much amazing work with schools and wells and I think we're still giving
them goats. But most importantly of all, they helped me, a shy kid with braces, acne, and
a twisted sense of humor, that most people just weren't smart enough to understand at
the time, feel like I'd finally found a place where I belonged.
And thanks to the work we've done, tens of thousands of kids all over the first world
now think that that's what activism is all about.
And none of this would be possible without the amazing, generous companies who've donated
to us out of the goodness of their hearts, including Surfshark VPN.
As anyone who's donated large sums of money to the Weir and Hell Foundation knows, online
security is extremely important. Surfshark creates a private internet connection for
you that protects your online activity from hackers, trackers, and your ISP both at home
and on the go.
Not only that, but for those of you who aren't generous enough to afford to take volunteer
trips to any of the Weir and Hell Foundation's luxury resorts in developing countries, Surfshark
is the next best thing. Surfshark allows you to change your location to access region lock
content and is the only premium commercial VPN with servers in over 100 countries. And
they're offering a special deal for Black Friday slash the holiday period. Right now,
if you click the link in the description or go to surfshark.deals slash Weir and Hell
or use the promo code Weir and Hell at checkout, you'll get 85% off for two years plus an
additional three months for free. But that's not all. As part of this partnership, the
Weir and Hell Foundation is proud to announce for the very first time that we will be expanding
our work in developing countries to break the cycle of poverty and stimulate the economy
with our schools teaching young people to be online political content creators. So click
that link in the description to get Surfshark and lift a young person out of poverty and
onto a debate panel.
Hey everyone, since the season tizz almost upon us, I thought that this month I'd talk
about charities and why they're evil. Well, maybe not evil per se. There absolutely are
charities that do super important work and even the less good ones are for the most part
staff by very, very good people who are sincerely trying to help. That said, I'm going to try
to make the case that there are problems with the ways that most charities operate that
can't be fixed without changing things on a fundamental level. Also, this is just a
lot more fun to talk about. Some of them are kind of evil. As a bit of a case study, I'm
going to look at one charity that's controversial. Can I say Allegedly Evil? Let's go with
Embattled. In this video, I'm going to talk about the Wii charity and the problem with
there's a pretty strong chance that the Wii charity doesn't mean anything to about 93%
of the people watching this and that's because they're a Canadian charity. That's right,
you pervs. I'm going to talk about Canadian politics in this video, so strap the fuck
in and please, please, please, please, please don't close this window. I promise it's going
to get weird. I cannot stress enough how batshit some of the things that this charity is accused
of doing are. Also, they do operate a lot outside of Canada too, with massive events
in America and England especially, but as far as I've seen, people in those countries
don't seem to have any idea who they are, which is pretty on brand for anything that
Canadians claim is internationally successful. It's like how people will say how the tragically
hip were internationally renowned and like, yeah, New Orleans' sinking is a banger, but
mmm. So to catch everyone up, most basically, the Wii charity is a massive children's charity
here in Canada run by Craig and Mark Kielberger, two brothers who look like if someone designed
clothing store mannequins that could feel pain. The Wii charity was originally called
Free the Children when they started focusing specifically on fighting child labor through
like, conducting raids on sweatshops, but eventually they realized that that wasn't
very effective and instead moved to a more holistic approach as well as a name that makes
them much harder to research. They mostly operate in poorer countries where they do a little
bit of everything, building schools, digging wells, improving infrastructure, providing
medicine and creating jobs, or as they would put it, breaking the cycle of poverty. On paper,
that all sounds pretty good, right? But there's so much more to it than that. The Wii charity
has been alleged to have done basically every sketchy thing that you could imagine a children's
charity doing. Lying to donors, misappropriating funds, mistreating workers, child abuse,
going after journalists. Oh yeah, and also one guy claims that Mark personally held him
at gunpoint and essentially tortured him in order to again design a fraudulent confession
which would later be used to blackmail him. You know, charity stuff. Now, a quick disclaimer
here. Normally, when I make these videos, I do all my own research and try to be very
thorough. For this one, I tried to do that and then begrudgingly listen to a podcast
that is about this subject called White Saviors by Candleland and like, they cover everything
I was going to and a lot more and spoke to tons of people who were involved. I think
I take my analysis in a different direction and they aren't the only source I used here,
they are the main one. I bring this up for two reasons. One, this is a condensed version of a
lot of the stuff that they go over. So if you're interested in learning more, you can check them
out, link in the description. And two, the Wii charity is very litigious and has filed multiple
defamation suits against that podcast as they do with any outlet that is critical of them.
And like with the White Saviors suit, they not only sued the company that produced it, but also
named everyone involved in the production seemingly kind of just at any level as defendants.
This is all to say that throughout this video, you're going to hear the word allegedly a lot and
that's why. It hasn't been within the scope of this project to fully investigate everything myself.
And so I'm relying on things that other people have reported, which seem credible to me, but
the Wii charity definitely would disagree. It's just not within my pay grade to determine
what's true or not in some of those cases. And so I've tried to leave some of the more ambiguous
stuff out. To summarize, please, please don't sue me. Anyways, the thing that most Canadians are
probably most familiar with the charity for is the Wii scandal that broke in 2020. I'm just
going to get the Canadian politics stuff out of the way right now and then I promise that'll be it
and also I'll buy you all ice cream. So near the start of the pandemic, since a lot of young people
were losing their summer jobs, Justin Trudeau introduced a program where kids who'd lost their
jobs could make some money being paid to do community service. This was a massive project
with a budget of almost a billion dollars, which the Trudeau government gave to the Wii charity
to handle without looking into any other organizations first. This raised some eyebrows,
especially since Trudeau and his family had appeared at an awful lot of Wii events before and after
becoming Prime Minister. Now, there is a reasonable explanation for all this, which is that the Wii
charity is the biggest children's charity in the country and so since they've had tons of politicians
and celebrities at these events, it's not at all out of character for Justin Trudeau to be there,
since we're talking about a man who loves photo ops so much they shows up to climate change marches
to, I guess, protest him himself? Also, this program needed to be implemented as fast as possible and so
wow, I think there's definitely a case to be made for why they should have looked into other
organizations, especially knowing what we know now. Given Wii's massive organizational infrastructure
and connections with schools across the country, they were genuinely a natural first pick for
something like this. So, while that story checks it out, it was still a little fishy. Did we and
Trudeau have any financial relationships that could make this a conflict of interest? Asked Trudeau's
critics. No, replied the Wii charity, lyingly. It came out that while it was true that everything
that Trudeau and his family had done for Wii prior to 2015 was unpaid, after he became Prime
Minister, we super randomly, allegedly, began paying his mom and brother for speeches that they
give, which they used to do for free. They also began sending his finance minister on luxury vacations
and gave that minister's daughter a job. And also, weirdest of all, was that they gave Trudeau's
wife a wellness podcast? Like, First Lady isn't really a title we use here, which is cool, I guess,
but because of that, Wikipedia had her occupation listed as Wii Ambassador. Stupid fake country.
When the scandal broke, Trudeau shut down the government to prevent investigations into it,
which is fully just a thing he can do without it even really being that big of a deal. And then,
in the end, his finance minister took the fall. So yeah, that's basically what happened and is
also the most normal part of the story. Oh yeah, and also, the ice cream shop is closed.
We're turning around and going to the exploration of the problems endemic to the non-profit industry
store. They're open all night. To start, I want to look deeper into things, and so let's rewind
a bit to where this whole controversy started. In the early Middle Ages, the first almshouses were
established in Europe. These almshouses were shelters that provided housing to the poor,
old, and sick, and like all charity at the time, they were run by religious organizations.
Secular charitable organizations didn't begin in Europe until the Enlightenment,
when the upper classes began getting involved in philanthropy through voluntary associations
like Gentleman's Clubs. These eventually resulted in the incorporated model of charity we know today,
when the British Captain Thomas Quorum appalled at how many orphans he was seeing in the streets
of London began the Foundling Hospital in 1741. Now, let's skip forward a bit and also to the
other side of the Atlantic Ocean. In America, before the Civil War, charity was much more of an
individual activity. This changed with industrialization and the social ills that came with it.
These were generally organized by well-off community leaders and helped people that they
thought were deserving. We're talking orphans, widows, maybe some disabled people, but only if
you had like a really sad story. Very importantly, while these organizations would help a lot of
people, and that's an amazing thing to do, their focus was on treating the symptoms of
society's problems but never on the causes. For instance, they'd help the poor but never
advocate for things like higher wages. Then in the 1900s, things really took off as the first
millionaire robber barons began establishing charitable foundations to give back to society
while also shielding their money from taxes. Charities were a win-win situation for them.
They could kill two birds with one stone-shaped cake which they would then both have and eat.
Sorry if that line didn't make any sense. Yesterday, I woke up and started my day at 11.30 p.m.
These foundations would hire a lot of the same people who worked in the early
charity movement, but one key difference was that while previous charities would focus on
tangibly addressing an issue, these foundations were a lot more general. They'd be less focused on
things like volunteering and more into researching policies and spreading awareness. For example,
in 1914, when a group of minors were massacred by the Colorado militia for going on strike against
Colorado fuel and iron, a company that proto-Bezos John D. Rockefeller owned 40% of. The Rockefeller
Foundation began pushing the narrative that, of course, the pride of the individual worker was
tragic, but the solution isn't a union, but the life-saving work that the Rockefeller Foundation
is doing to alleviate the poverty that the people who work for us find themselves in for no particular
reason. At the same time, they worked to suppress any investigations reporting on the massacre,
claiming that the union was the real cause of the violence, and also sponsored speakers who'd tell
the community things like, what killings? And no, we didn't. Frederick Gates, one of the people
running the foundation, said, quote, the danger is not the combination of capital, it is not the
Mexican situation, it is the labor monopoly, and the danger of the labor monopoly lies in its use
of armed force. It's organized in the deliberate war on society. I like how he used the completely
made-up term labor monopoly for unions, while also referring to an actual monopoly as the
combination of capital. You can't do both those things in the same sentence, but it wasn't all good.
In 1916, charities came under attack when the U.S. Commission on Industrial Relations filed the
WALSH report, which accurately claimed that foundations were just propaganda tools for
capitalists, saying that, quote, in the effort to undertake to be an all-pervading machinery for
the molding of the minds of the people, in the constant industrial struggle for human betterment,
foundations should be prohibited from exercising their functions either by law or regulation.
Luckily though, in the end, the government didn't do anything, because why would they?
From here, foundations began focusing on more big-picture stuff, instead of just covering up
individual massacres. They would work on advocating for social and political causes,
but this led to a new slew of criticisms, this time from conservatives like Congressman
Wright Pattenay, who correctly pointed out that these foundations were just a way for the rich
to avoid taxes and exert control on society. But their problem with this wasn't that it was bad
in and of itself, but that these foundations were too progressive. For example, the Ford Foundation
put a bunch of money into the civil rights movement, but even though they were doing that with the
goal of steering the movement in a more conservative direction and away from all that anti-capitalism
stuff, which they did, that was still too much for conservatives who, in a fumble for the ages,
demanded that Congress more strictly regulate foundations to prevent tax dollars from funding
left-wing movements. This resulted in two things. Regulations were put in place for foundations,
taxing their investment incomes, limiting the types of businesses they could engage in,
and also requiring them to spend a whole 6% of their money on actually doing charity stuff.
That was later reduced to five. It also led to the formation of right-wing organizations like
the Heritage Foundation. Now, let's fast forward a bit. In Pakistan, most Christians are descendants
of members of the lower castes who converted from Hinduism under British imperialism. Their
extremely low socioeconomic status, combined with being a religious minority, has made them an easy
target for discrimination, which only got worse when, with the full support of the Reagan administration,
General Mohammed Zia al-Haq performed a coup and installed himself as a military dictator in 1977.
Christian Pakistani children are often trapped into bonded labor, supposedly working to repay
a loan they or their parents took out, but a lot of the time having to work indefinitely because,
like, they can't read and the factory has guards, so what are they gonna do? One such child labor
was Iqbal Nasee, who was sent to work in a carpet factory at the age of four to help pay off his
family's debt, which amounted to about 12 American dollars. After several attempts, Iqbal escaped
when he was 10. He got an education and became an activist, fighting to end child slavery in
Pakistan and anywhere else. In 1995, he was assassinated by, I wish there was a less silly name
for these people, the carpet mafia, hitmen who worked for the carpet factories, killing or capturing
any escaped slaves. Iqbal's death became international news and in a suburb of Toronto,
it caught the attention of a 12-year-old boy named Craig Kilberg. Craig wasn't particularly
interested in foreign events at the time, since he was busy being 12, but that story stood out.
This boy was his age. The next day, he gave a presentation to his classmates and rallied them
to do what they could to get involved. They started a club called Free the Children to raise funds to
help kids in poorer countries. Soon, this spread to other schools and Craig's older brother Mark
got involved. Free the Children became a large grassroots movement and was unbelievably successful,
especially considering that for a very long time, it was literally run by children. Like,
the brothers converted their family home into office space while their parents moved out
to make room for their twin son's startup.
It's a normal household, but at the same time, not every household has 50 young people running
through it for a barbecue and preparing for a conference dealing with the elimination of child
labor. So it's the normal household where you have the fun, the studying for homework,
the young people coming for pizza parties. At the same time, you have the other side of it,
where it's an office. It's where Free the Children is run.
This is a very weird thing about Craig especially. He was an amazing public speaker just by the age
of 12. I was also 12 years old at that point, and I had never heard about child labor. Child
labor is wrong for a white middle class child in North America. Then why is it any different for
a girl in Thailand or a boy in Brazil? Something that he'd be asked a lot is if his parents had
much or any involvement, or maybe even if he was being exploited. And he always said absolutely
not. Craig, if I can just ask a question, obviously it's a cause that no one can question,
but are you certain you're not being exploited by adults in any way because you run this campaign?
Actually, I'm the founder of the organization Free the Children, so I've done it totally on
my own will, and it's a completely youth-run organization. But this kid was holding press
conferences and flying out to do paid speaking arrangements before hitting puberty. Like,
they actually sued a magazine for defamation for saying that his mom was essentially acting as
his manager. I don't know. In my opinion, it seems like it's very important to Craig that he tell
this narrative where he did it all himself. But it just paints this very strange picture of this
little boss baby. Like, a big piece of lore is that Craig went on a solo trip through South Asia
meeting with charities he could partner with and tagging along on sweatshop raids.
While on his trip, he found out that the Prime Minister Jean-Claire Chien was in Delhi at the
same time as him, and so to get his attention, Craig staged an impromptu press conference
outside of his hotel. Here's how he describes it in his unbelievably satanic book, We Economy,
where he and Mark tell their stories and just give business advice based on their model.
If you're curious what kind of advice they give, the fact that the book's cover
is a heart made of money might give you some clues. Here's Craig.
Then introduced the child slaves that I had met during my travels. Mohan, a nine-year-old boy,
had been working 12-hour days in a carpet factory since the age of five. He told the press about
going without food or bathroom breaks. He was often beaten for falling asleep on the job.
Another boy, Nagashir, could barely speak from injury. He wasn't sure when he was sold into
slavery at the factory, but he imagined he was around seven. Then 14, he told the story of an
attempted escape, not for himself, but for his younger brother. They were both caught and badly
beaten. Nagashir was branded with a hot iron. He lifted his arms and turned his neck to reveal
the scars from where the iron had cinched his throat, making his speech painful and difficult.
It wasn't until a few days later, on the next stop in my travels in Karachi, Pakistan,
when I learned that our impromptu news conference had caused a major stir,
both with the prime minister and my mom. Already upset with me for not calling enough,
mom was shocked to see me at the top of every Canadian newscast and even CNN.
The press conference got Cretan's attention, but also the attention of the international media.
A short documentary was made about him. He was then interviewed on 60 minutes and began touring
the world, giving talks and important conferences and meeting with people like the Dalai Lama,
the Pope, and most important of all, Oprah. As you can probably imagine, this kind of attention
and career made Craig into a pretty weird kid. Here's how he describes it in his own words.
As a teen, I could quote conversations I'd had with world leaders at global forums or
development seminars. But I couldn't name a popular song or an Oscar-nominated movie.
My classmates went on about a show called Dawson's Creek, which was exactly like our lives. I watched
one episode, it wasn't. I was oblivious to conventional teen angst, being so busy with
Wee Charity, formerly Free the Children. Balancing a financial statement was more
familiar to me than my math textbook. I fired my first employee before I ever broke up with a girl.
Looking back, it was like living in a maid-for-TV coming-of-age movie, a childhood-adventurous
story about traveling to 50 countries before reaching adulthood following a personal passion
for a social cause and learning from some of the world's greatest mentors while my friends and I
built a charity. That doesn't sound like a coming-of-age movie, dude. That sounds like a rejected
pitch written by a guy who fired his first employee before breaking up with a girl.
The Wee Charity became a massive phenomenon, with campaigns that kids all across Canada,
America, and England participated in. Their operations expand to include volunteer trips to
other countries that they were operating in, as well as hosting huge events called Wee Days,
with celebrity speakers and performers. One thing that's also worth mentioning here is that
this expansion in Wee's operations also involved growing their staff well past a bunch of teens
inexplicably living in a house together. There have been widespread allegations of mistreatment
and underpayment of their staff, who they'd guilt into working ridiculous hours for terrible pay
by reminding them that they were working for a charity and that not accepting these horrible
conditions was selfish. Basically, like how your mom would say, finish your vegetables starving
children in Africa would love to eat those, except it's about labor exploitation.
Trip leaders would allegedly have to pay Wee for their training with no guarantees of getting a job
while shared living accommodations were provided by Wee, creating what some former employees have
described as a cult environment. It was allegedly common at Wee Day for staff to be on the verge of
passing out from exhaustion, which sounds bad, but don't worry, we had doctors on site who would
treat exhaustion by allegedly injecting people in the ass with something that would get them moving
again. The Wee charity has confirmed that they had holistic medics on site, but won't say what it
was that they were injecting people with. But there were some subtler issues with Wee Day too.
When they were advertised, the messaging was on how exclusive they were and that the kids needed
to earn their admission.
Yes, that is accurate.
It's a little weird for a charity to be using MLN sales techniques, right? Now, to be fair,
I can understand wanting to really motivate kids to work hard, especially once for a good cause.
I mean, we can all agree that Alec Baldwin's always-be-closing speech from Glenn Gary, Glenn Ross
should replace Hamlet on high school English curriculums. But also, past a certain point,
how much money high school students are able to raise isn't really a matter of work ethics,
so much as just how rich of an area their school is in. And so, it feels kind of weird for a
children's charity to just kind of exclude poorer kids like that. Also, Wee Days have only been
held in major cities like Toronto, Montreal, Kitchener, Winnipeg, Vancouver, London, that's
London, England, not London, Ontario, New York, Minneapolis, and LA. Students from out of town
were expected to get there themselves, which basically meant no one in rural areas could
go to them. But also, they definitely weren't throwing events like these in Kenya or any of
the other countries that they are building schools in. Like, I understand that there are a lot of
reasons why it wouldn't make sense to do that, but if your corporate culture is one where you need
to give your employees mystery injections just to keep them on their feet and then shame anyone
who complains by saying that, like, we have so much and the children in Kenya have so little,
maybe you could scale back the budgets of your massive concerts and pay your workers a bit better
or just use that money to build more schools. To understand why this is, let's look into some
of Wee's other programs in Canada. Thanks to the massive success of Wee Days and Wee Clubs, the
charity was able to build very strong relationships with school boards across the country. They
partnered with these schools to unroll a bunch of anti-bullying and mental health campaigns,
as well as a program called Wee Schools, where they'd provide teaching aids and
curriculums for teachers. One pretty wild thing about this was that through these curriculums,
they were literally able to write themselves into students' textbooks. But there was something
else going on with all of this too. The real money going into these programs wasn't coming from
small donors, but major corporations. As Craig writes in Wee Economy, a corporation attaching
itself to a cause or getting the endorsement of a charity can serve as an amazing ad campaign.
Purpose sells. Purpose is a differentiator. If the thought of adding a social mission to your
already established brand feels daunting, know that you don't have to do purpose or even find
the cause all on your own. Working with partners for brand credibility is nothing new. Think back
to the golden age of celebrity endorsement, which for me peaked somewhere between Pepsi and Britney
Spears and Fabio and I Can't Believe It's Not Butter. Today, it might be a non-profit partner
that boosts your business instead of a pop star. Now, despite comparing his charity to Britney
Spears and Fabio, Craig is actually being uncharacteristically modest there. Partnering
with Wee Charity meant brands were able to get something that even an endorsement from Fabio
couldn't get them. The ability to advertise in schools. All those teaching aids and curriculums
that taught what a hero Craig is came covered in corporate logos. And this didn't stop without
corporate sponsors either. We made sure that they were cashing in in some pretty sketchy ways too.
They regularly talk about how they've disrupted the non-profit industry through innovations,
but like any company that says stuff like that, what they mean is that they found a way to get
around regulations. So the Wee Charity started the for-profit company Me Too Wee to fund their
charitable work, which is pretty standard for a lot of charities to do. What makes Me Too Wee
disruptive though, is that instead of being owned by the Wee Charity and therefore required to be
pretty transparent about all their activities, Me Too Wee is just the Kielberger's own company.
And the separation between the two is extremely unclear. For an example of how this works in
practice, when kids at a school do a fundraiser, they'll sell bracelets or something made by
people in Kenya, then either donate the profits to Wee, or maybe use them to fund a trip to
volunteer building schools. What isn't made clear is that Me Too Wee is selling those bracelets to
the kids for a profit. Likewise, those trips in the places visitors stay when volunteering are also
owned and run by Me Too Wee again for a profit. Now the Kielberger's have argued that this isn't
unique, plenty of charities do similar things, but it's not that weird. It seems a little suspicious
to me how very few people involved in these clubs seem to be aware of that situation.
Lastly, the brands that Wee partners with are some of the most evil ones on the planet. Their top
donors include Allstate Insurance, who after being named the worst insurance company in America
partnered with Wee, and thanks to them, they were now the insurance company whose CEO gave out money
to kids. There's also Tech Resources, a mining company that's been knowingly contaminating the
water in the Eli Valley in British Columbia for almost a decade and counting. But now, they're
the company that donates zinc to poorer countries whenever kids recycle batteries. Also, that is
by far their most convoluted campaign. So the idea is that a disposable battery contains enough
zinc to treat six kids who are deficient in it. And so in reality, what they were doing was encouraging
kids to recycle batteries and then Tech donated money to Wee to treat zinc deficiencies for each
battery. But like, the messaging really made it sound like they were just feeding kids batteries.
Another of Wee's major sponsors was none other than Dow Chemical, best known for manufacturing
pesticides and also napalm and Agent Orange. And then Benton Midwin, Craig brought Dow's former
CEO Andrew Loveris out to a crowd of cheering teenagers. Loveris had recently stepped down from
being CEO to become head of Trump's American Manufacturing Council, where he was working to
get the Trump administration to ignore studies on the harms of the pesticides that Dow produces.
And last but certainly not least, we have Hershey's Chocolate, which uses child slaves to farm their
cocoa beans. This is obviously the most egregious one of all for a charity supposedly fighting child
labor to support. When the news of this first broke, we denied that this ad campaign existed,
but like, you know how an ad campaign's whole point is to get people to notice it, right? So
people were like, yes, it does. Now, while that obviously isn't great, Wee charity isn't unique
in this. Corporate donations are just a fact of how nonprofits are funded, and Craig makes
what seems like a pretty fair case for them by saying this. When we launched, we worked with
some great grassroots organizations, but it was more about incremental rather than system change.
We realized if we wanted to create big change, we'd need to know more about the root causes
rather than the symptoms of the broken system, the things that would make a real difference long
term. Like, we definitely crosses the line very regularly about which businesses that they work
with, but I can definitely see the logic where having a big impact and tackling those big systemic
issues requires a lot of resources. And so I can understand the perspective of a nonprofit saying
that even if a company that's giving them money isn't 100% ethical, they feel that the good that
they're able to do with that money outweighs any good PR that they give to the company. I can,
in a sense, absolutely respect that argument. But as is the case with almost anything Craig
Kilburger says, it's worth asking, is that really true? I think the phrasing he uses in that quote is
really interesting because on just a sheer logistical numbers basis, he's obviously right.
Like, if your goal is to, for example, vaccinate kids in poorer countries, then
yeah, more money means more vaccines. But Craig says that the reason they need all that money
isn't to expand the scale of their operations, but to tackle the root causes of a broken system.
And things become a bit more complicated there. In the anthropologist Jason Henkel's book,
The Divide, he talks about his experience working for an NGO and the limitations they have.
World Vision had hired me to help analyze why their development efforts in Swaziland were
not living up to their promise. The reason I discovered was that their interventions were
missing the point. World Vision went about caring for dying AIDS patients, setting up
income generation schemes for the unemployed, teaching new techniques to farmers and paying
for children's education. But as helpful as these projects were, they did nothing to address the
actual causes of the problems. Why were AIDS patients dying? Over time, I learned that it had
to do with the fact that pharmaceutical companies refused to allow Swaziland to import generic versions
of patented life-saving medicines, keeping prices way out of reach. Why were farmers unable to make
a living off of the land? I discovered that it was related to the subsidized foods that were
flooding in from the US and the EU, which undercut local agriculture. And why was the government
unable to provide basic social services? Because it was buried under a pile of foreign debt and
had been forced by Western banks to cut social spending in order to prioritize repayment.
These findings troubled me, but when I pointed them out to one of World Vision's managers,
I was told that they were too political. It wasn't World Vision's job to think about things like
pharmaceutical patents or international trade rules or debt. If we started to raise those issues,
I was told, we would lose our funding before the year was out. After all, the global system of
patents, trade, and debt was what made some of our donors rich enough to give to charity in the
first place. While charitable organizations do lots of great stuff, whenever you start to look
deeper into, as Craig put it, the root causes, what you tend to find are things that aren't likely
to make the donor class happy. In order to keep their funding, charities are required to remain
apolitical, but the causes of global poverty are political. And unless that can be addressed,
then the best a charity can hope to do is provide a really, really big band-aid. Also,
if you can't acknowledge the causes of poverty, you run the risk of naturalizing it. These places
are just naturally like that for no real reason, but don't worry, we're here to fix it. And nowhere
is this effect more clear than on those volunteer trips that I've mentioned. Also, just like,
while I've been holding up way as an example, none of this is unique to them. These are problems
that exist throughout the entire non-profit industry. That said, some of the stuff that
allegedly happened, particularly in Kenya, is actual supervillain shit and very much not like
any other charities. Unfortunately, I'm not going to be talking about that until my next video.
Sorry, everyone. It's a surprise cliffhanger. I wanted to make this into one video, but
there's a lot of ground to cover here, and I just ran out of time and also didn't want to make a
thing that's like two hours. Next video is coming in like two weeks, and I think it'll be good.
I'm going to be talking about volunteerism as well as just some of the frankly cartoonish crimes
that the weak charity has been alleged to have committed. See you in two weeks, and thanks for
watching.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
