Can I ask you a bit of a weird question?
What is the purpose of true crime?
What does it do?
You're watching We Are In Hell.
Hello to all you Necroheads out there and welcome to another episode of True Crime Exhibition.
We are in to his house, bow, bow, bow!
And speaking of in the house, for Air Canada Gal, September 25th, 2010, started like any
other day.
She got off work at six o'clock, which was pretty normal for her.
She drove to her house which she shared with her partner, Dolphin Girl.
She arrived at the house at some time between 6.30 and 7.00 pm.
So we don't actually know the exact time that she arrived home at?
No, and that's actually one of the things the detectives found challenging later was
pinning down the time she got home.
So at some point in this window, she arrived home and opened her door, unaware that her
life was about to change forever.
Hello boys, ghouls and non-binary jewels.
I hope that you're all having a de-frightful Halloween.
Fuck that, fuck, fuck, we're not doing that, that's stupid, um, I'm sorry, this is like
gonna be a long video too, can you imagine if this was the whole time woke cryptkeeper
puns?
Hey everyone who's still watching, for this very special Halloween edition of Where in
Hell, we're gonna talk about true crime.
True crime is one of those things like astrology where at least when I was a kid it was like
trashy, but now every girl I know is obsessed with it.
By the way, my stance on astrology is that I don't believe in it, but the way it'll
piss off the most annoying types of guys is hilarious and has made me a critical supporter.
Although maybe there is something to it, I mean I get all these comments that say that
I'm cancer and I'm like, dude that's crazy, how did you know I was born June 25th?
So what is true crime?
Basically it's a non-fiction genre that focuses on the details of crimes.
Wikipedia also describes it as trash culture.
So that description's a little broad, not to mention harsh, although what do I know,
I am a culture raccoon.
True crime can take lots of different forms ranging from podcasts to TV shows to documentaries
to airport books to great books to the evening news.
And while I do think trash culture is a bit much, there is definitely lots to criticize
true crime for.
Please don't close the video, I swear this is going to get more interesting than just
a bunch of true crime is canceled hot takes, but first, an exhaustive list of true crime
is canceled hot takes.
Hot take, the first.
True crime is often quite exploitive and disrespectful towards victims of crimes and
their families, as Sarah Zed talks about in her great video about American Vandal.
Also shows like cops in the first 48 can function as copaganda as skip intro points out in his
great video about the subject.
There's also the fact that so many of the podcasts I listened to when I was researching
this are sponsored by home alarm companies, which can be an extremely sketchy industry
in its own right.
By the way, did you know that you probably spend more time being watched on security
camera in America than in China?
But that's somehow okay because it's capitalist doing it instead of the government.
There's also the issue of what gets categorized as true crime versus just crime, right?
Like there's nowhere near as many podcasts talking about the unsolved murders of black
and brown people in shitty neighborhoods as there are about middle class white women
getting kidnapped in the suburbs.
And another criticism is that being really into true crime seems more than a little serial
killer-y.
This is the criticism that I think is the least founded.
It kind of reminds me of the old playing violent video games will turn kids into school
shooters argument.
And I do get it, like it is definitely weird when I'll be like talking to a girl in theory
and I'll ask her what she's into and her response is just murder.
But when you check out true crime like at all, especially with the podcasts, it becomes
pretty clear that the focus of the show is not how to become a good serial killer, so
much as it is how to avoid getting killed by one.
There is a reason that these shows are sponsored by home security systems, not latex glove
manufacturers.
As I said earlier, the majority of true crime fans are people who aren't straight men.
People who are a bit more justified in their fear of getting put in someone's trunk.
Okay, now that's all out of the way.
This video isn't going to be about why true crime is problematic.
It's going to be about why it's necessary.
When Air Canada gal got inside the house, it was completely silent, which was unusual since
she would normally be able to hear dolphin girl splashing around in the tub.
Right, that seems really strange since dolphin girl was probably pretty loud.
Right, so she went upstairs to investigate but what she found in the bathroom was horrifying.
First of all, there was blood everywhere, as well as ropes and handcuffs in the bathtub
but no dolphin girl.
Wait, so you're saying there was blood everywhere but dolphin girl wasn't there?
Uh, yeah, Air Canada gal was shocked.
She was freaking out, right?
But she noticed a trail of blood on the floor so she walked out of the bathroom to investigate.
The question I want to answer in this video is what is the purpose of true crime?
One pretty obvious answer would be that it's to inform people.
I mean, it is non-fiction, true crime.
The problem with this, though, is that while yes, true crime does usually provide the true
facts of a crime, it's actively terrible at informing its viewers about broader trends in crime.
A study found that heavy consumers of true crime are actually less informed about the
true crime rate than members of the general public since their heavy consumption of crime stories
makes them think that gruesome murders are just happening constantly.
In order to understand true crime, we're first going to have to go back to its origins.
I think the most interesting thing I've learned in researching this video is just how old true crime
is. Like, it has literally been in print since we invented the printing press.
Like, there's this one hilarious Chinese book of true crime stories that dates back to the Ming
dynasty and it's just full of these really funny, like, dumb, low-level cons?
And this is a translation, but coaxing a sister-in-law into adultery to scam oil and meat or pilfering
green cloth by pretending to steal a goose. Honestly, though, who among us hasn't lost
just swaths of green cloth to would-be goose thieves? The earliest true crime we have, though,
comes from 16th-century Germany, which is where and when the printing press was invented.
Clergymen would sell or give out pamphlets that included horrifying stories of true crime
meant to shock people into acting morally by showing them the consequences of a life of sin?
The stories would have titles like, a true and most horrifying account of how a woman
tyrannically murdered her four children and also killed herself. You'll never guess what that one's
about. She first went for the eldest son attempting to cut off his head. He quickly to the window
sped to try if he could creep outside. By the leg, she pulled him back inside and threw him down onto
the ground. Ladies, if you skip church, you're gonna wind up murdering your kids. That's just how
it works. There are a few interesting things about this. For one, historians don't think that
the church made any money off of these. At best, they'd be breaking even. Also, like, I get that
this is how academia works, but it is so funny to me that there are people who've devoted their
lives to working out the business model of the 16th-century equivalent of chick tracks. But this
is evidence against another criticism of pulpier forms of true crime, which is that they're just
a cash grab. I mean, I'm sure that that is true to some extent, but also this shows that there is
some non-monetary motivation for true crime. But I think the most interesting thing that you see
when you take a historical look at true crime is how the types of crimes that get covered change.
16th-century Germany was a point of rapid social change, and at that time, you started to see a
lot of stories of mothers murdering their kids. In a paper by Julie Wiltenberg, she argues that
depicting this kind of violence on the most fundamental forms of social interactions
mirrored fears from that time about the changing nature of society. Later, post-Reformation
Protestants were pushing for basically parental controls over marriage, and around that time,
you start to see more depictions of married couples killing each other, a mirror to societal
anxieties around illegitimate marriages. As Wiltenberg writes,
I would argue that you can see true crimes fixations on LGBTQ people
and Satanists throughout the 20th century as tapping into the cultural anxieties of their time
in the same way. Even more recently, I think this has kind of been flipped on its head.
In a time of increasing awareness of police brutality, I don't think it's a coincidence that
the most popular true crime stories are things like serial and making a murderer. Shows where
the horror comes not from the crime committed so much as the arguable imprisonment of an innocent
person. Essentially, true crime acts as a sort of social control, enforcing the norms of a society
by depicting the most graphic violations of those norms. It's fucking rush hour outside.
God damn it. Fucking fasten the furious out there. Just zoom, zoom, zoom. And this doesn't
just mean that true crime tells people how not to behave. When they condemn something,
they're kind of implicitly affirming its opposite. For example, when someone condemns the act of
rioting, they are implicitly supporting the value of private property.
True crime exhibition is proudly sponsored by Blackwater Home Defense Systems. For years,
Blackwater has worked to protect our freedoms abroad, and now they're bringing that expertise
literally to your front door. We always talk about this. You simply cannot count on the police
to protect you, but with my Blackwater Home Security System, I can sleep soundly knowing
that any intruders will be shot on site. And that's a promise. It has never been easier to hire
private mercenaries to defend your home. And for a limited time, if you use our promo code at the
checkout, you'll receive one month of Raytheon Predator drone support absolutely free. This all
relates to the theories of a French sociologist named Emil Durkheim. Durkheim was arguably the
first person to legitimize the field of sociology, and his work went on to form the basis for the
sociological theory of functionalism. Functionalism is one of the big three foundational theories of
sociology, along with symbolic interactionism, which I talk about in my crappy jobs video,
and conflict theory, which is essentially just Marxism, which I talk about in every one of my videos.
Functionalists analyze things by asking what that thing does for society, or basically what is its
function. And when it comes to crime, Durkheim's hot take was that it's good, actually. Well,
not exactly. Durkheim didn't think that crime was good, but that it was necessary, like pain,
or me reading my YouTube comment section. These things are horrible experiences, but are physiologically
necessary. First of all, Durkheim argued that every society has had crime, and even if there was
some magical place where everyone was a perfect person and no one did anything wrong, there would
still be people in that society who would violate the rules and be considered criminals,
even if degenerate scumbags like you or I wouldn't think that they had done anything wrong. You might
even say that old Durkheim predicted cancel culture. Kill me. And so Durkheim figured that if something
is a necessary ingredient in any society, it must serve some kind of purpose. And when it comes to
crime, he argues that the purpose it serves is to define the border between what is and isn't
acceptable. From this view, crime is necessary because it allows us to define ourselves in
opposition to it. This isn't like just saying that if there were no murderers, we wouldn't think
murder was bad. The functionalist view is that a culture can't exist without defining itself
in opposition to those outside of it. There has to be an us and a them. For Durkheim and functionalists,
part of forming that group identity involves labeling certain behaviors as deviant and anyone who
engages in them as other. Crime, then, is the experience of out-group behavior invading the
interior. I think this in part feeds into why true crime is so white and upper middle class.
In a society that views those groups as the norm, there's a greater horror to crime invading those
spaces where it supposedly shouldn't belong. Part of the fascination with Ted Bundy, for example,
is that this horrifying murderer was in fact a handsome, well-spoken white dude,
someone who by all accounts should fit within society's in-group. An important thing to
understand with Durkheim and waiter functionalists is that no act is inherently criminal in and of
itself. Instead, certain behaviors become deviant or criminal because they offend what Durkheim calls
the collective conscience. Since there cannot be a society in which the individuals do not
differ more or less from the collective type, it is also inevitable that among these divergences,
there are some with a criminal character. What confers this character upon them is not the intrinsic
quality of a given act, but that definition which the collective conscience lends them.
If the collective conscience is stronger, if it has enough authority practically to suppress
these divergences, it will also be more sensitive, more exacting, and reacting against the slightest
deviations with the energy it otherwise displays only against more considerable infractions,
it will attribute to them the same gravity as formerly to crimes. In other words, it will
designate them as criminal. Now, some of you may have noticed a bit of an issue with that. For
Durkheim, laws and even governments are just expressions of a collective cultural will.
And so, if something is illegal, it's because most people in society just more or less agree that it
should be. But that's not really true, is it? There are lots of laws that exist, not because
they represent the collective moral compass of society, but because they benefit people in power.
One example of that might be marijuana prohibition in America. The vast majority of Americans
are chill as fuck, or to use layman's terms, support legalization. However, weed remains illegal
mostly to serve the interests of the prison industrial complex. Joe Kennedy III once explained
that the reason he opposed marijuana legalization was because if it was made legal, cops wouldn't
be able to use it as an excuse to claim probable cause when they pull people over for no reason.
If you smell marijuana in a car, you could search the car. When it became decriminalized,
you couldn't do that. Although, to be fair, it does kind of make sense that
Kennedy might be a little nervous about cars. This is one of the key issues with functionalism.
It inherently views society as a harmonious organism where all the pieces work together.
And so it's much more interested in maintaining order and stability than in addressing injustices.
This makes it, to say the least, a pretty conservative way of explaining things. And
you can definitely see that when you look into Durkheim's work. For example, in his most famous
book, he did a massive study on suicide and discovered that suicidality is linked to a
lack of social solidarity, something which he believed was getting much worse as industrialization
and modernity were eroding traditional social structures without providing viable alternatives.
His proposed solution to this was to create new sources of social solidarity by...
you guessed it, giving capitalists almost complete control over every aspect of their
employees lives. Much as I hate to admit it, history did prove him right on that one.
I mean, we do all know how famously happy Amazon workers are. Now, to be fair to Durkheim here,
he did also believe that crime is a good way to change society. He figured that if a law is
unjust, then the way to make people realize that is by breaking it. Crime implies not only that the
way remains open to necessary changes, but that in certain cases, it directly prepares these
changes. Where crime exists, collective sentiments are sufficiently flexible to take on a new form,
and crime sometimes helps to determine the form they will take. It would never have been possible
to establish the freedom of thought we now enjoy if the regulations prohibiting it had not been
violated before being solemnly abrogated. At that time, however, the violation was a crime,
since it was an offense against sentiments still very keen in the average conscience.
Now, while I do think it's reasonable to read that quote as Durkheim supporting the use of
civil disobedience to fight injustice, Woke King that he was, Durkheim was actually pretty racist
towards Indigenous people in Australia, so maybe not that Woke, but most functionalists are definitely
not coming away from reading Durkheim ready to go dumpster diving for food, not bombs. The
functionalist perspective is inherently interested in maintaining the order of society, not in
changing it. If you want to do that, well then mask up comrades, let's talk about conflict theory.
So, Air Canada Gal literally follows the trail of blood and it leads her to her worst fear.
She finds the love of her life, Dolphin Girl's lifeless body. She was lying on the floor dehydrated
and clutching a stab wound as if she had broken free from her bonds and made it all the way down
the hall where she finally collapsed and died. So, she was actually able to escape from the rope
and make it down the hall before dying? Right, that's what I just said.
The conflict theory of sociology kind of came as a response to functionalism,
while functionalists view history as periods of stability punctuated by brief moments of unrest.
Conflict theorists see the exact opposite, and while functionalists believe that if you
want to understand something, you need to ask what it does for society, conflict theorists say that
if you want to understand something, you gotta ask who's getting fucked over. For example,
two years ago up here in Canada, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, also known as the
Mounties, the RCMP, or horse pigs, were planning to use live ammo on the Wetsuetan people who were
defending their land from being illegally stolen and destroyed to make an oil pipeline. However,
now that commercial fishermen are illegally preventing the Micmac people from fishing on their
land through threats, intimidation, assault, destruction of property, and arson, the RCMP
have now said that, ooh, sorry, that's actually not a police issue. I'm just kidding there,
they didn't say sorry. Now, while for me personally, I'm not a huge fan of the police
existing. I have always pictured police abolition as sort of a slow process where more and more
of the police's responsibilities would be placed into the hands of different organizations and
members of the local communities. Call me a lib, but I certainly wasn't thinking that fucking
arson investigations would be first on the shopping block. Regardless, I don't know how you
could really argue that that makes sense as an expression of any collective conscience. Like,
the only coherent sentiment that you could glean from that would just be that genocide is good,
actually, but Durkheim was actually pre-racist towards Indigenous people in Australia, so
actually, yeah, that does check out. No, but I mean, even if you do think that that's an acceptable
moral position, first of all, eat shit. And secondly, I don't think that you can reasonably
argue that vigilante justice is an acceptable part of a stable society. Going back to Joy
Wiltenberg's paper on the history of true crime, oh yeah, that's what this video is supposed to
be about. She makes an extremely interesting observation about the history of true crime and
really crime itself. In the Western world, the modern concept of crime draws on older
conceptions of sin, but focuses expressly on acts that are forbidden and punishable by human authority.
As a violation of public order, crime came to new prominence with the emergence of increasingly
effective states and judicial systems in the later Middle Ages. Of course, violent acts like those
featured in sensationalist accounts were also committed in the early Middle Ages and became
the subject of discourse, although not in the forms later taken by sensationalism. Medieval
chronicles record acts of mayhem and murder committed by noblemen and rulers against each
other. Unlike the events recounted in later sensationalism, these violent clashes lacked
an ordering authority to seal their significance and focus the action on a single miscreant
and his punishment. Essentially, the very concept of crime is contingent on the enforcement of state
power, not like whatever society agrees to vibe with. In fact, the collective conscience can and
very often is shaped by the media and the state who move the Overton window to wherever is most
convenient to serve their interests. And by the way, like don't get me wrong here, it definitely
doesn't mean that you like support genocide if you're interested in Durkheim's theories or anything.
Folks, please do not harass Emil Durkheim. I shouldn't have to say this because he died
over a hundred years ago, but do not start swarming his replies or sending him threatening
messages if for no other reason than because it reflects badly on me. But seriously, like asking
what does X do for society is a very interesting and useful line of questioning as I hope I've
demonstrated by asking that about true crime in this video. We do, after all, live in a society.
It's just important to remember that very often things are the way they are, not because they're
natural or agreed upon, but because people with power wanted them that way.
Is it possible the nature of their relationship was also an issue? Like an airplane and a dolphin?
Both women? Seems a little cray cray. Yeah, so police call that type of thing
intuition and while not officially it likely did play a role. So they arrested Air Canada Gal?
Yes, she was thankfully arrested and charged with the murder of Dolphin Girl, which now means
that her dolphin family can rest easy knowing their daughter's killer is safely behind bars.
That in
I take
I grip the
Neville's won't find me out here.
The black and sky
The white caps fly
And the water is warmer than the air
What can you do
Where are your friends now
Where's your head now
Yeah
You feel it under you
Black below walls
They know you're here now
Yeah
Oh
The ocean
Can you feel them float up from the
Deep
What can you do
Where are your friends now
Where's your head now
Yeah
You feel them under you
The black below walls
And they are here now
Yeah
Yeah
