Hey, this is going to be kind of a weird video, so before we begin, take a look at this barn.
Nice.
Here are some more pictures.
Really take it in.
You got it?
Cool.
Let's get going.
A few months ago, I went on vacation to Paris and saw this painting.
One thing that immediately sticks out about it, which I think that most people know,
is that the Mona Lisa is small.
Just 77 by 53 centimeters, or 30 by 21 inches.
This is especially noticeable against the otherwise empty wall that it's hung on.
Even more so when it's compared to every other painting in the room.
Every wall is filled with massive paintings that I think can literally be described as epic.
This is especially true for the wall opposite the Mona Lisa, which is completely covered by
Paulo Veronis' The Wedding at Canna.
Just over 22 feet high and 32 and a half across, looking at it from across the room,
the crowd of people almost seem to bleed into the painting and spill out from it.
And speaking of the crowd, around 10 million people visit the Louvre every year,
and of them, an estimated 80% are there just to see one painting.
There's a line to see it that, when I went, began near the entrance of the room
and wound its way through those rope barriers, which I just learned are called staunchens.
Once you get to the front, there's a little area where the line breaks down
and you have to kind of push your way to the front, almost like you're at a concert.
This is pretty unsurprisingly an extremely common complaint.
If you look through the one-star reviews of the Louvre on Google,
most of the complaints are from people upset by how much of a circus seeing the Mona Lisa is.
Seeing the La Gia Conda should be a mystical, very special moment,
but unfortunately, it was like being at the fish market.
Extremely busy and noisy, people giggling and taking stupid selfies,
not even looking properly at the painting and totally ignoring the charm and the magic.
It's a very sad experience. The management should review the whole process.
Small room, tiny groups of 15 to 20 people allowed to admire the masterpiece
for a few minutes in peace and all. Please think about it.
You travel all the way to look at the world famous Mona Lisa
and when you finally get there, you're treated like cattle
and allowed to take only one picture and explicitly not to look at the painting.
When a selfie is more important than art itself, the Louvre has failed as a museum.
Pickpockets at the entrance of the Louvre Museum. Zero police.
Security of the museum didn't care. We feel victim to this scum.
Bad overall experience. We'll never visit Paris again.
Cannot recommend this place, especially for tourists.
Sorry, a bunch of them are also just people being super racist towards Roma people.
Imagine how big of a piece of shit you have to be if France isn't racist enough for you.
Dude should really give Paris another chance. Just look into what they did in Haiti.
So first of all, that second one is really funny because like,
I have no idea who told them that they couldn't take multiple pictures or look at the painting,
but that's absolutely not a rule.
But maybe this is a bit of a hot take.
When that first reviewer says how seeing it should be this magical and transformative experience,
but it's ruined because these people are talking and taking selfies,
I have to wonder, was that really the issue?
Like, don't get me wrong, it is obviously a good painting,
and seeing it was genuinely impactful to me. I mean, look at the length of this video.
But I have to admit that I didn't appreciate the Mona Lisa in the same way that I did any of the other paintings in that room.
In fact, I don't know if I even appreciated it in the same way as I do any other painting, period.
Not because it's so perfect, but because the Mona Lisa is so ubiquitous that for me,
it doesn't really register as art at all.
If I went to someone's house and they had a framed print of the Mona Lisa on their wall,
my first thought wouldn't be that they must be really into Renaissance paintings.
It'd be to wonder why they didn't take out the piece of paper that comes with the frame.
I just feel like a print of the Mona Lisa is one step below.
This is kind of a deep cut, but have you ever seen this store called iMazy?
So they're a German company with locations all over the world,
and what they do is you go into this store and pay them to take a picture of your iris,
and then they make it into a print.
I am deeply obsessed with this company, mostly just because I think it'd be really funny
to get a bunch of prints of my eye and then give them away as gifts.
Just for any occasion, too.
Obviously birthdays and holidays are a no-brainer,
but I think they'd work just as well for things like weddings, bar, butt mitts, fuzz, or baby showers, too.
Just giving people a picture of my eye to put in a nursery like,
don't worry, I tested it. It works.
Sorry, I don't want to get distracted talking about iMazy.
You know those videos where they'll wear a bunch of voices on top of each other and are like,
this is what it's like to have ADHD?
No. This video is what it's like.
Welcome to Weir and Hell, the channel where I turn my hyper fixations into your problem.
I think I might make it a Patreon goal, though, where, like, if I hit a certain amount,
I'll make a full video about iMazy.
Comment if you think I should do that.
But the point is that maybe this makes me bad at liking art,
but I feel like at this point the Mona Lisa is so saturated
that it has the same level of meaningfulness as an eye picture.
And so, to me, seeing it felt less like some magical experience of aesthetic bliss
and more like that feeling of recognition you get seeing a celebrity walking down the street.
Like, I'm not going to call the Mona Lisa bad,
but I will say that if it's your favorite painting, that's incredibly weird.
And I'm not saying that because I'm just making up a weirdo with a house filled with Mona Lisa posters,
all of whose lips are noticeably worn out.
For this video, I've read so many things by people who are obsessed with this painting,
and they're all freaks.
Legit, going all the way back to probably the first person to make the Mona Lisa famous,
an English art critic named Walter Pater,
who in 1873 published a book called The Renaissance, Studies in Art and Poetry.
The book was a collection of essays he'd written, each discussing a different Renaissance painter,
and the most famous of these was his one on Leonardo da Vinci,
in which he describes the Mona Lisa like this.
La Giaconda is, in the truest sense, Leonardo's masterpiece,
the revealing instance of his mode of thought and work.
From childhood, we see this image defining itself on the fabric of his dreams,
and, but for express historical testimony,
we might fancy that this was but his ideal lady embodied and beheld at last.
The presence that thus rose so strangely beside the waters
is expressive of what in the ways of a thousand years men had come to desire.
Hers is the head upon which all the ends of the world are.
Set it for a moment beside one of those white Greek goddesses,
or beautiful women of antiquity,
and how would they be troubled by this beauty?
She is older than the rocks among which she sits.
Like the vampire, she has been dead many times and learned the secrets of the grave,
and as Lita was the mother of Helen of Troy and as Saint Anne, yes, the mother of Mary,
certainly Lady Lisa might stand as the embodiment of the old fancy,
the symbol of the modern idea.
So first of all, what the fuck?
Secondly, Pater's book was a massive hit,
often credited with reigniting the English-speaking world's interest in Renaissance art.
But more than that, his essay on Da Vinci was what led to the Mona Lisa becoming
not just famous in the art world,
but coming to be seen as the quintessential capital M masterpiece.
But coming back to those angry reviews,
I don't think that they're wrong in terms of how they describe the experience.
And while I wouldn't say that I share their frustration,
I do agree that there is something strange about the crowds.
Well, I know I've been kind of hard on it,
and do think that the Mona Lisa is the most overrated painting in the world.
Maybe it's just the hype, but even still, it is genuinely pretty cool to see it
in a way that's not really captured in a print or on a screen.
But a lot of the people I saw there, especially the ones most eager to get to the front,
did mostly just see it through a screen.
And that's a bit ironic, right?
Like, the Mona Lisa is literally the easiest painting in the world to find a picture of,
so what's the point of photographing it?
And let me just say that while I think this is going to get pretty interesting,
I am well aware that people these days use their phones too much
as kind of a banksy-tier observation, and I'm absolutely not the first to make it.
In fact, the footage that I've been showing is from a project that explores exactly this question.
The horrendously named hashtag Mona Lisa is an experimental film that was shot in the Louvre
and consists entirely of slow-motion footage of people looking at the Mona Lisa.
It's also 11 hours long and was shot in 360p.
In an interview, Jennifer Anderson, the film's co-director, said this about the length.
Initially, hashtag Mona Lisa was going to be a short, possibly one 10-minute shot,
that we intended to submit to the New York Times op-doc series.
However, we realized that a short wasn't going to work.
Any editorial decisions we made would ultimately reduce a complex subject
into an overly simplistic argument.
So we allowed the content to dictate the form, which resulted in an 11-hour film.
Yeah, totally. That's why my videos are the length they are too.
It's not that I'm an undisciplined writer.
I'm just letting the content dictate the form.
I honestly think, though, that the makers of this film do correctly identify how
there is something very strange about the way that the Mona Lisa is famous.
And I know where you think this is going.
I promise you this isn't going to be a video about how we need to stop staring at our phones
and experience the world around us or some bullshit like that.
In fact, where I disagree with those angry comments is that
I don't think that there's anything necessarily wrong with people looking at the Mona Lisa like this.
Instead, I would argue that the people taking selfies are actually the ones experiencing the painting,
if not correctly, then at least as it's now meant to be enjoyed.
In this video, we're going to talk about why it is that people photograph
the most photographed painting in the world.
Unlike Peter, when I saw the Mona Lisa, the thing I thought about wasn't how she's a vampire goddess.
Instead, I was reminded of a much more recent piece of art, the book White Noise by Don DeLillo.
In one scene, which was very frustratingly cut out of the recent movie adaptation on Netflix
so I couldn't use clips of it for this video,
the main character, a college professor named Jack Gladney,
takes his friend and colleague Murray J. Siskin to a local tourist attraction
called the Most Photographed Barn in America.
We drove 22 miles into the country around Farmington.
There were meadows and apple orchards, white fences trailed through the rolling fields.
Soon, the signs started appearing, the Most Photographed Barn in America.
We counted five signs before we reached the site.
There were 40 cars and a tour bus in the makeshift parking lot.
We walked along a cow path to the slightly elevated spot set aside for viewing and photographing.
All the people had cameras, some had tripods, telephoto lenses, filter kits,
a man in a booth sold postcards and slides, pictures of the barn taken from the elevated spot.
We stood near a grove of trees and watched the photographers.
Murray maintained a prolonged silence, occasionally scrawling some notes in a little book.
No one sees the barn, he said finally.
A long silence followed.
Once you've seen the signs about the barn, it becomes impossible to see the barn.
He fell silent once more.
People with cameras left the elevated site, replaced it once by others.
We're not here to capture an image, we're here to maintain one.
Every photograph reinforces the aura.
Can you feel it, Jack?
An accumulation of nameless energies.
There was an extended silence, the man in the booth sold postcards and slides.
Being here is a kind of spiritual surrender.
We see only what the others see, the thousands who were here in the past,
those who will come in the future.
We've agreed to be part of a collective perception.
This literally colors our vision, a religious experience in a way,
like all tourism.
Another silence ensued.
They are taking pictures of taking pictures, he said.
He did not speak for a while.
We listened to the incessant clicking of shutter release buttons,
the rustling crank of levers that advance the film.
What was the barn like before it was photographed, he said?
What did it look like?
How was it different from other barns?
How was it similar to other barns?
We can't answer these questions because we've read the signs,
seeing the people snapping the pictures.
We can't get outside the aura.
We're part of the aura.
We're here.
We're now.
You seem immensely pleased by this.
So, first of all, I can't stress enough how much I love this book
and think you should absolutely read it.
It is very much post-modern fiction,
and so maybe avoid it if you don't have patience for books
where you hear descriptions like,
her skin was as soft as bamboo lyoscel,
and bright eyes shined up at him like Advil liquid gels.
But if you don't mind that, and I am exaggerating a bit here,
this book is so good.
Really funny and pretentious in all the most fun ways.
Yeah, that section of the book has been jokingly referred to
as the most talked about scene in post-modern fiction,
and it's for good reason.
Not only because it slaps,
but because it puts into words exactly what's so strange
about something that's famous for being famous.
I think for me, it perfectly encapsulates the experience
of seeing the Mona Lisa.
People are taking pictures of taking pictures.
Everything in that room, including the people in it,
are there in service of maintaining this aura
that the painting has because of its notoriety.
With that said, I want to dig deeper into what this really means,
what's really happening here.
And so, one good place to start is by asking
if this is necessarily a bad thing.
While white noise is overall extremely critical
of contemporary society and the post-modern condition,
Delillo doesn't really give a particularly queer answer
to this question.
The fact that Jack remains silent while his smug
media theorist colleague says all this
implies to me that the scene isn't just meant as a critique
of the barn or the people taking pictures,
but also of people like Murray and now me.
That said, Don Delillo may have two Pulitzers,
but his YouTube channel fucking sucks,
so screw him, I think it's an interesting question.
So, to answer this, something you need to know about white noise
is that it is an extremely transparent novelization
of simulacra and simulation by Jean Baudrillard.
I'll just give everyone who I convinced to buy a copy
a minute here to cancel their orders.
This scene in particular does a perfect job
of explaining the concept of a simulacrum
as Baudrillard understood it.
Simulacra are signs or symbols that don't point to anything.
The barn, which is never actually described,
is an amazing example of this.
It's a tourist attraction for being a tourist attraction.
It's photographed because it's been photographed.
This also means that in a sense it has no origin.
Something goes to see what the barn is, but what it's become.
You can only photograph the most photographed barn
after it's already been photographed.
But while I was at the Louvre,
something else that really struck me was this video's sponsor, PayPal...
Honey, this is by far the most disrespectful and evil thing I've ever done.
Honey is an online shopping tool
that automatically searches for promo codes on lots of your favorite websites.
I've been trying again to better shape lately,
something which we all know can only be done
by first getting an inexplicably expensive exercise shirt.
But with Honey, I've been able to save on lots of these purchases.
And best of all, it's completely free to use.
Just go to joinhoney.com
slash we're in hell, all one word, no apostrophe.
If you think that's impressive, check this out.
Honey has over 100,000 five-star reviews.
So click the link in the description to get Honey today.
Just thought I'd take a little trip out to the garden.
Welcome.
My overgrown bamboo plant.
So while Baudrillard Saw Society coming to be dominated by Simulacra as a problem,
there is a barn half full perspective as well.
In a paper by David Allen and Agatha Handley
called The Most Photographed Barn in America Simulacra of the Sublime
in American Art and Photography,
they argue that the barn being a simulacrum is good, actually.
Their argument is one that I really jive with in a lot of ways.
It's based on a Neil Platonist perspective.
So Plato's most famous work is The Republic,
where he talks about a cool prank
where a bunch of people are trapped in a cave
and can only watch shadows on the wall.
When one guy gets out and sees the real world for the first time,
he's given a cash prize or something.
It's been a while since I've read it,
but I watched Mr. Beast's recreation of it, so I think I get the gist.
Plato then outlines his ideal society,
where the philosopher kings are at the top
since they can reveal the truth of the world of forms.
How convenient that he gives himself the best job, eh?
One of the aspects of Plato's Republic that's a sticking point for a lot of people
is his stance on art.
Plato thought that art was bad
since it led people to believe in illusions
and away from the truth,
and so he thought it should largely be banned.
But after his death, new philosophers
started to continue his theories.
One of these guys was Platonist,
who's largely seen as the founder of Neoplatonism,
which, kind of funny considering how
even though he was born just over 150 years after Plato's death,
it feels a bit soon to start pulling out the neo-prefects
considering that we're still dealing with guys
where the only pictures we have of them are of marble sculptures.
Platonist pointed out that art might actually not be bad,
and in fact might even be good.
He argued that just like philosophers,
artists can help people see the forms too.
But let's come back to the most photographed bar in America.
In White Noise, Murray says that once people have seen the signs,
they can't see the barn for what it actually is.
The thing is, though, that the most photographed bar in America
is a real place, and as you may have guessed,
you have seen it.
So this is the T.A. Moulton Barn,
built by Thomas Alma Moulton and his sons
between 1912 and 1945.
It's since become a tourist attraction to photograph the barn
with the Teton Mountain Range in the background,
often seen as a symbol of Jackson Hole Wyoming.
And honestly, if you're from a place called Jackson Hole,
I understand why you'd want people to talk about anything
aside from your hilarious town name.
While it's not generally referred to as the most photographed bar in America,
it is accurate to call it that,
and it's not unlikely that this is what Don DeLillo was referencing in the book.
This particular picture was taken by J. Riley Stewart in 2015,
but this isn't quite what it actually looks like, though.
In a blog post, Stewart explains how he took this original image
and altered it first by cropping the sides,
then by lightening and warming the barn
to emphasize that it's the subject of the picture,
as well as doing the same to the mountains
to make them look more dramatic.
The reason he did all this is because, for Stewart,
good photographs tell a clear and compelling story.
And just like a literary story,
the photograph must have a leading character,
a subject, certainly,
but it must also place that subject
in context with other elements of the story
in order to evoke an emotional response.
Not everyone will see the same story as the photographer,
but this is true.
If the artist tells a good story,
it's much easier for someone else to emotionally engage in the scene
and dream up their own setting, plot, or ending.
And that's what good art is all about.
The story that Stewart was trying to tell here
was one about man versus nature
and the hardships faced by the people
who tried to settle this land,
dating back to the pilgrims.
Stewart writes about how, when he visited the barn,
he experienced a sense of the sublimity of nature
and that his goal in telling this story
wasn't necessarily for the viewers to get the same story,
but instead for them to use that story
to access that deeper experience.
And this is kind of a perfect explanation
of the Neoplatonist view of Simulacra.
The picture, however subtly, has been altered
so that it doesn't refer back to the real barn anymore,
but instead the story of the barn.
A story which, by the way, also isn't particularly true.
The barn is less than 100 years old
and became an iconic part of Jackson Hole, Wyoming
only after being abandoned by its original owners
and turning into a roadside attraction.
But in their paper, Alan and Hanley argue
that this kind of thing is good
since by willingly stepping into a Simulacrum,
whether it's a work of art or nature,
people are able to use that
to experience a piece of the sublime.
The people who travel to the barn
aren't just taking pictures of taking pictures,
they're taking pictures of this story.
A part of me really likes this reading
since I have a pretty firm policy
that any time someone has a profound experience
with art or nature, I view it as a net good.
On the other hand, I'm not a huge fan
of letting someone lie
because it makes people happy.
It seems to me that those kinds of profound experiences
are cheapened if we just make shit up
so that people can have them.
Like with the Mona Lisa,
an even better example is the Venus de Milo.
That sculpture is actually bullshit.
So during the early 1800s,
the Louvre was in pretty rough shape.
In 1815, France had started returning
and a bunch of the art Napoleon had stolen,
which was easily 70% of what was in the Louvre.
This led to a lot of empty wall space,
and so the museum was down ridiculously bad
for a new attraction.
And the thing that they really wanted
was a statue from the classical period,
since classical sculptures were like
the shit at the time in France.
100 gecks?
More like 400 BCE?
That's what everyone in France was like back then.
That's right, if you played Money Machine
on some loudspeakers 200 years ago,
it'd kill more people than the rain of terror.
So in 1821, a Greek farmer on the island of Milo
found an ancient statue.
The French were on that shit.
They immediately called dibs,
sent their experts over to excavate
and reassemble the statue,
and paid the farmer 1,000 francs,
which is about 11,000 in today's money.
Most of the sculpture was found in two large pieces,
of course with both of its arms iconically missing.
Once they'd finished playing it together,
they were fucking stoked to have found this amazing sculpture.
These experts claim that the masterpiece
came from the classical period
and was likely made by the famous Greek sculptor Praxiteles.
The year after it was discovered,
they proudly displayed it in their classical section,
where it immediately drew enormous crowds,
which continued to this day.
The only issue is that the Louvre
was lying.
The statue's base showed
that it wasn't from the classical period at all,
but the Hellenistic period
about two to three hundred years later.
The base also contained
the signature of the real artist
who wasn't Praxiteles,
but you fucking guessed it,
Alexandros of fucking Atriarch,
who is just another sculptor,
but one who's much less famous.
Yeah, because it was such a big draw
and they wanted to keep it in the classical section,
they fully just hid the base
of the sculpture in the basement
for over one hundred years
until they finally revealed the truth
in the fifties.
And the thing is that I definitely felt
something seeing those pieces,
but if I'm being completely honest
with the Mona Lisa,
it was more a feeling of being
fascinated by the whole spectacle,
whereas with the Venus de Milo,
my first thought was honestly,
it's just like in the Simpsons episode.
But there's another way of looking at all of this,
one that's much more explicitly
referenced in the passage from
White Noise and Baudrillard,
and that's an essay by Walter Benimine
called Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction.
The essay deals with Benimine's
thoughts on the way that art has
changed in the age of the photograph
and the movie camera,
an age where anything can be reproduced
in infinite number of times.
Benimine talks about original art
having a genuineness to it
and he calls it aura.
While I think that de Milo
using that term in White Noise
is probably a reference to
Benimine's essay given the context,
unlike Murray,
when Benimine uses the word aura,
he's talking about something that
by definition can't be photographed.
The aura for Benimine
is the here and now-ness of the work,
that realness that you feel
when you're looking at something
that you can reach out and touch.
The aura is lost through the mechanical
reproduction of art,
not only when the genuinen work of art
is reproduced by, for instance,
being photographed and reprinted
or now through digital scans,
but also he talks about how
he was now noticing the start
of new kinds of art
that were specifically designed
to be infinitely reproduced.
A perfect example of this is this video
that you're currently watching.
There is a massive difference
between this and being in a room
with someone explaining this to you
in person.
For one thing, that person would probably
be smart,
but also, I'm not talking
to you or anyone really.
Right now, I'm sitting in my apartment
filming myself reading a script
off of a teleprompter, redoing
each take over and over again until I get it
right. I'll then go through everything
in an editing program to cut it all
together. There is no
story here because everything you're seeing
has been meticulously
mediated by a camera and editing
designed to be
camera and editing, designed to be
experienced not by a single person
but by hundreds of thousands.
That might be a bit optimistic for a video
about the Mona Lisa, but we'll see.
For Benny Mean, what
made reproduced art especially
significant was that he was writing
in 1935 when photography
and movies were still fairly new
mediums, and so when
Benny Mean talks about movies as
works of art that are meant to be reproduced,
he wasn't imagining
YouTube videos that were written,
performed, and edited by one person
on a heroic dose of vivans,
but a whole crew where
each individual artist's contribution
was combined like workers
on an assembly line. This
led to him having some wildly
optimistic ideas about how
movies were going to become this
revolutionary, proletarian
medium which hasn't
worked out too well, but
the reason he thought this is because
something that I don't think is
at all clear in the essay is that
Benny Mean thought that
it was a good thing that the aura
is disappearing. This is just
a heads up that if anyone's interested
in reading this essay, Benny Mean
was undeniably brilliant, like
there are so many parts that completely
blew my mind, but also
he can be pretty hard
to understand. You know when someone's
so smart that they almost sound dumb
I've watched so many
YouTube videos explaining this
essay, and they all say that
the mistake people always make is not
realizing that Benny Mean was against
the aura, which I think at that
point it's on him. The
evidence that they point to is always
this one quote.
And that technological reproduction in this
kind of massification, in his words,
emancipates the work of art from its
parasitic subservience to ritual.
By the way, theory and philosophy is a dope
channel that all of you should subscribe to,
but also like,
I'll be honest, I'm kind of just taking
his word on this a bit here. So
why doesn't Benny Mean like the aura
and what does he mean when he says
ritual here? Basically
he talks about two ways that people
valued art, through
cult value and exhibition
value. With the cult value
think about like, a
cross and a church. While
people might want a fancy cross
that looks nice, it's not
there to be purely decorative, right?
Like, when they were first decorating
churches, no one said,
you know what would make a great centerpiece,
an ancient Roman execution
method? No, instead the cross is there
because it's a symbol that seemed to be
doing something. An even better example
would be a cave painting of an
antelope as part of like, a spiritual
ceremony. In that case, how
realistic the antelope looked was
presumably beside the point.
It wasn't important how good the art
was, but just that it was there
since it was an ingredient in a ritual.
Benny Mean points out
that the greater the cult
value that a piece of art has,
the more closed off it is from
the public. This could be in the form
of art or artifacts
with religious significance, which can
never be moved from a specific place
or can only be viewed by people
with a certain rank in the institution.
It can also be the case where objects
are closed off from the public because
of the role they play in a political
or economic ritual, like being
in a private collection or a cabinet
of curiosities. The Mona Lisa
was originally displayed in the palaces
of King Francois I
and Louis XIV, and then
in Napoleon's bed chambers.
Exhibition value, on the other hand,
is in the opposite way. The more the work
is reproduced and the more that it's
shown, the greater the value.
This is because it isn't an ingredient
in a larger ritual anymore, but instead
is a symbol with its own
significance. Benny Mean was glad
to be done with the aura because he saw
it as a holdover from when art wasn't
available to the masses, but was instead
hidden away by the rich and powerful
to be used in their evil rituals.
This doesn't mean
that he thought everything was fine, though.
Instead, he pointed out that even though
art was now largely being
viewed secularly, it was
still being turned into a sort of
sacred object in the form of
art for art's sake.
Benny Mean called this view of
art a sort of negative
theology, in that it's the idea
that art should be seen as
pure, unaffected by any
social or political conditions
and certainly not
serving any social function or
message. This is extremely clear
in the case of the Mona Lisa, actually,
in no small part because
art for art's sake is
exactly what Walter Pater
believed in. And so
it's no wonder that the Mona Lisa
is seen as this kind of
holy relic when its most
famous feature is its
mysterious smile, literally
an absence of meaning.
Benny Mean argued that instead of
art for art's sake, the correct
response was to politicize
art. And so,
I'm going to try and do just that
by going back to the Mona Lisa, but
first, there's a lot more
to this story there.
Pater's over-the-top fan fiction
did turn the Mona Lisa into
the Capital M masterpiece, but
while it was undeniably
famous in the art world,
all that really meant for
Normies was that the painting got a
prominent write-up in the Louvre's guidebook.
For the Mona Lisa to become the
icon it is today,
the vampire had to disappear.
This happened
on August 21, 1911,
when the Mona Lisa was
stolen. The man who
stole it was an Italian guy
named Vincenzo Perugia,
and this dude was amazing.
The son of a bricklayer,
Perugia was born in Domenza,
a village a bit north of Milan.
In his 20s, he traveled around, living
in Milan, Lyon, and eventually
settling on Paris when he was 25,
where he worked in construction, because
as you'll see, Perugia was
the most Italian man to ever live.
Before stealing the painting,
he'd been in jail in Paris twice,
once for robbing a sex worker,
and then a second time for
literally bringing a gun to
a knife fight. He would
get into fights constantly, generally
because he was very short, and
as I said, very Italian.
He once testified that he was
buoyed by all the French construction
workers, saying that
I cannot stress enough that that quote
was from a grown man who was complaining
about being buoyed in court
while on trial for
stealing the Mona Lisa.
It's anti-Italian discrimination.
But to be fair here,
Vincenzo had a right to be
a bit defensive. This guy taught himself
how to read as an adult,
and apparently used to spend days
holed up in libraries, cafes,
or art galleries, reading
everything he could get his hands on.
When he was on trial, the prosecution
described him as a house painter,
and so Perugia, furious,
stood up and shouted that he
was an artist.
But I'm getting ahead of myself here.
Let's talk about the heist, because
it rules. Like I said,
back then the Mona Lisa absolutely
wasn't the icon it is today.
It wasn't obscure either.
In 1910,
one year before Perugia's heist,
the Louvre received a very weird
letter from someone in Vienna
threatening the Mona Lisa.
Not to steal it, but I guess
to destroy it or something.
And so the Louvre
had a glass box built to
protect the painting.
When I say that Perugia was involved
in this, the natural assumption
is probably that he sent the letter
threatening to whack the Mona Lisa
because he suspected her
of salting his wine. But instead,
he was one of the laborers
hired to build the glass box.
And working on that
job gave him some
interesting ideas. And so
on Sunday, August 20th,
1911, Perugia wearing
one of the white artist smocks that
the staff of the Louvre wore at the time,
conveniently one of the easiest
possible uniforms to forge.
He posed as a worker and then
snuck into a storage closet where he
slept overnight.
There's all sorts of debate as to
whether or not he was alone.
A lot of sources claim that he had
accomplices. Two Italian brothers
he was friends with who one
source claims were plumbers, which
is fucking awesome.
Other people think that he and the brothers
were all pawns of some secret criminal
mind. I'm not going to go into the details
because they aren't that
interesting and they don't change
what I'm going to talk about, but
I'm pretty convinced that he worked alone.
Anyways, the Louvre was closed on August
21st and since it was at the time
the largest building in the world and also
had hilariously lacked security,
after a night in a storage
closet, Perugia found himself alone
in the gallery and was able to take his
time. He removed the Mona Lisa
from the wall and took it out of its
protective box, which he knew how to do
since he had helped install it.
Then he hid the painting under
his clothes and this is completely true
walked out the front door
without anyone noticing him like
a fucking hitman speedrunner.
It gets weirder too because
not only did no one notice
him stealing the painting or walking
away with it, they wouldn't have even
noticed that it was gone at all
if not for pure coincidence.
Louis Barot, an artist who
is famous for reproducing paintings
just so happened to be scheduled
to paint the Mona Lisa the
morning after it had been stolen
but instead he found
four screws on the wall where the
painting was supposed to be. Once they
realized it was stolen, the Louvre closed for
a week to investigate. France's borders
were closed, a 25,000 franc reward
was put out for the painting
and every train or ship in and out of Paris
was being searched. All of this
was unsuccessful though because
instead of fleeing the country, after
Perugia had gotten out with the painting
he took a cab back to his apartment
hid the painting in a trunk
he'd built with a false bottom
showed up to work late claiming
he was just hung over and then didn't
open the trunk for two
fucking years.
A few things happened in those years though.
For one thing, after being closed for a week
the Louvre reopened but kept the space
where the Mona Lisa had hung empty.
This became a massive attraction
for the museum. People traveled from all
over the world to see an empty space
with four hooks.
Another thing was that people were pretty
understandably like, how
the fuck did this happen? And so
the Louvre investigated their security
policies and realized that
oops, actually there were
a bunch of works that had been stolen
that they hadn't even noticed.
I just love that the Louvre used
to collect art, like I collect
graphic novels, like I either have
a copy of a mortal Hulk
to lying around somewhere
here, or maybe I went into someone.
In particular, a series of three Iberian
sculptures were missing. To find them
the Louvre put out a reward which wound
up being claimed by the man
who stole them in the first place
a Belgian art thief named Joseph
Gueret Pire.
One question, Pire told the Paris police
that he'd been paid to bring them
to the French poet Guillaume
Apollinaire and that they were four
of Apollinaire's painter friend,
better known as
Pablo Picasso, who'd
been using the sculptures as
references for his paintings
and specifically one of his most
famous works, The Des Moises
de Avignon.
I've been preparing for this video by really
going hard on Duolingo and
am fully aware that based off my
pronunciation just now, Lily's
going to track me down and really make
me bite the curb if you know what I mean.
But this part of the story is awesome.
Picasso and Apollinaire were arrested
not for the sculptures but for
stealing the Mona Lisa despite
there being zero evidence.
Apollinaire cracked immediately
and confessed to everything including
stealing the Mona Lisa which he
absolutely didn't do
whereas Picasso instead
denied everything including
having ever met Apollinaire
which he absolutely had.
Apparently the judge just decided
to throw the case out which like
these guys had actually
stolen things from the Louvre
but apparently you can get let off the
hook by being a big enough dumb
ass in court. But the thing that's
interesting to me here is that
there was a certain logic to thinking
that these two guys were in some way
out to get the Mona Lisa.
Picasso and Apollinaire were
at the forefront of modernism
which at the time was a radical
avant-garde movement. While this
obviously didn't make any actual sense
there is a certain logic
to the authorities having it
in for the people advocating
for a type of art that
looked a lot like the four
screws in a wall that had now
replaced the Mona Lisa, the most
iconic symbol of the old guard.
It gets even better.
The French art writer and friend of
Picasso, André Salmon had written
at length about how much he
hated the influence that Da Vinci
had on art. Salmon
specifically saw the Mona Lisa
as an obstacle that needed to be
overcome to free art.
And the person he thought was doing this was
Picasso, specifically thanks to
you guessed it, Le Demoiselle
de Avignon.
In one of his books he writes
I feel like with friends like that, it's not really any wonder
that Picasso denied having ever met Apollinaire.
Like the cops are just busting down his door
because they take any writing like that
very literally, and Pablo's just like
but as you can probably guess
it's just like,
it's just like,
it's just like, it's just like
it's just like, it's just like
but as you can probably guess from that
the Paris police weren't doing a great job
in their investigations
and you know, if they were smart
they wouldn't be cops.
At one point they even questioned Perugia
along with all the other workers
who'd installed the glass box
which they only did as a last resort
after everything else had failed.
I just love how these cops are just like,
okay, we've raided the houses
of every avant-garde artist
in Paris from Man Ray to Marcel Duchamp
we gotta get outside the box here.
One guy is just like,
this is probably stupid but like
what if we maybe tried
interviewing people who had
direct access to the painting
and the scene of the crime.
So yeah, they did like fully search
Perugia's apartment where the Mona Lisa was
and just didn't find anything.
One other thing they did right after the painting
was announced missing though was
plaster Paris with wanted posters for the Mona Lisa
which didn't help them find the painting at all
but is very interesting
for our purposes.
Since I would argue
that this is what caused the Mona Lisa
to reach the level of fame it now has.
Almost overnight
the painting itself became
literally impossible to see by anyone
while simultaneously
reproductions of the painting
became impossible to avoid.
To put this in terms of Walter Benjamin's theories
this basically maximized
both the Mona Lisa's cult value
and its exhibition value
at the same time.
One of my favorite anecdotes about this
is that in those two years
when the Mona Lisa became wildly famous
it was common for people to sell
prints of it and this is going to sound crazy
but the prints weren't even of her
made into a minion
or smoking a joint or anything.
The thing is that at this time
not only was photography nowhere near
as accurate as it is today
but even if it was
the primary way of replicating pictures
was lithography which was
even less accurate and so
the way that people would make prints
would be by photographing
sketches of the painting
and so it's not too surprising
that once the Mona Lisa was
eventually found and returned
it became a sort of simulacrum as well.
But before we get into that too much
let's talk about how the painting was recovered.
After two years Perugia decided
to pay time for him to get rid of the painting
so he threw all of his stuff
in that false bottom trunk
and traveled back to Italy.
Once he was there he got a hotel
and called up an Italian art dealer
asking if he'd be interested in buying the Mona Lisa.
Except like
this wasn't someone who trafficked
and stole an art or even just
a guy he knew. He literally
just found him in the phone book
gave him a call
and then invited him over to his hotel
to see the painting because
everything that this man does is insane.
So after spending a while
talking to Perugia the art dealer
is convinced enough to meet with him
goes to the hotel, sees the painting
and is basically like
yeah let me come up
with a number and I'll get back to you.
And then immediately
calls the police.
Perugia is arrested and extradited to France
where he was found guilty because
the judge wasn't very receptive
and he was defensive but your honor
they bullied me.
The thing is I'm only kind
of joking there. There genuinely
was a lot of anti-Italian
discrimination in France at the time
and it is very believable
that Perugia faced a lot of it
while he was working construction.
His version of the story is that while
he was working at the Louvre his boss
had brought up how much of the art there
was from Italy essentially to rub
Perugia's nose in the fact that France
looted his country and was never
going to give back what they'd stolen.
And like as much as I like
to clown on Italians here
that is genuinely
an incredibly fucked up thing to brag about.
This Perugia
claimed put him into a patriotic
rage and so he decided
to get even by liberating the Mona Lisa
returning her to her
homeland where she belonged.
Although funnily and far be it for me
to let details get in the way of a good
revenge story the Mona Lisa
was actually probably
the only painting in the entire
room it was in that
actually wasn't stolen from Italy
but had been bought legally.
Not one to get hung up on details though.
Perugia claimed that he was never
interested in money which was
a lie he wrote tons of letters to his
friends and family back home about how he
was about to get rich. That said
it is still pretty likely
that the story about his boss was true
and so I think
that when he claimed that he just
wanted revenge against his asshole boss
and to fuck over France both of which
are incredibly based reasons
to commit a crime there's
a good chance that he was at least
partly telling the truth and
it made him a bit of a hometown
anti hero.
The painting did a tour through Italy
before being sent back to France
and Perugia was sentenced to one year
in prison although he was released after
serving only seven months. He
fought in World War One and
had a family in France where he lived
for the rest of his life until he died on
his 44th birthday.
Now while this is just amazing no matter
what I want to get back to what this
video is all about. This
pretty lady!
That was weird I shouldn't have done it like that.
So something that's important to touch on is
how the context that a work of art is
displayed in affects the art itself.
One good example would be
to compare the Louvre to another museum
the Getty in Los Angeles.
Both museums feature a wide variety
of famous old European art
to the point where if you switch
two paintings from one museum to the other
it's unlikely that anyone would
notice but the context
that they'd be displayed in would drastically
change the art.
The Louvre is an ancient museum
that was originally a palace
built in the 12th century by King
Philip II and gradually became
the royal residence until Louis the 14th
moved to Versailles in
1682 leaving the Louvre
to become a place for displaying the royal
art collection. After the Revolution
the collection was declared public
property and the Louvre was turned into
a public museum which
then grew much more under
Napoleon whose signature move
was to steal all the art from any
place he invaded which was a lot.
The Getty on the other hand
is much more modern. It was started
by the American businessman and art
collector J. Paul Getty in
1954 with the Getty
Center later being built in
1997 to display a vast
collection of pre-20th century
paintings as well as modern photography.
Unlike the Louvre
the Getty is a very modern
building in a modern city.
It's also completely inaccessible
by foot and requires you to either
drive or take a train there.
I don't bring this up just to shit
on L.A.'s lack of lockability
but to point out that the
context in which art is displayed
is an integral part of
the experience of art. Something
that I think is worth noting about the change
that took place when the Louvre and
the collection inside of it went from being
the property of the king to that of the
state is what didn't
change. Something that's worth noting
about a monarchy is that in one
the royal's job is in a
sense to act as the personification
of the country.
The art historian Roy Strong
has noted for instance that
the reason why a monarch will
have so much treasure isn't so
much just because they
necessarily want it but because
it's part of their job in a sense.
This isn't meant as a
defense of royals or anything
imagine if this was just me coming out as
a monarchist as Strong notes
Magnificence was an element
of fundamental importance to the Renaissance
and Baroque court.
A prince must be seen to live
magnificently, to dress
splendidly, to furnish his palaces.
It's fundamental objective
was power conceived as
art. Essentially the art was kind
of beside the point. The reason
it was there was because it represented a display
of power to have been able
to gather it all. And so
in the case of the Louvre becoming publicly
owned while the ownership of the art
and the building have changed
many have criticized just the
concept of museums themselves
by pointing out that not
that much else is different from
when these were private collections.
My friend Maya Ben-Divide
made a fantastic video where she
discusses cabinets of curiosities
and rooms of wonders. Private
collections of art, treasures
and indigenous artifacts that have been
plundered through colonialism.
These were extremely popular
among the rich in Europe, particularly in
England. In her video Maya
argues that video game
inventories are modern day
descendants of that practice
and it feels almost redundant
to say that the same is
absolutely true of museums.
Not only are the collections
in most elite museums in western countries
still made up of objects
that were collected through colonial
plunder, but their existence
still serves the same function
which is to display power.
The only difference now is that
instead of the collection belonging
to the royalty who served as
a personification of the country under a
monarchy, under a democracy
it's open to the public
since the public now fills
that role instead.
So finally, let's get into
why exactly people go to the Louvre
to take pictures of taking pictures.
I think my favorite take on this is one
that I found in a book called Stealing
the Mona Lisa by Darian Letter.
At one point in it he addresses
the cliché of how people
will say, my kid could do that
in response to modernist art.
There have been plenty of responses to this
question before me, but his answer was
one that I hadn't heard before
which was that if a kid's art
winds up in a museum, then
maybe that itself
makes it belong there.
He writes,
I can see how this may seem like a cop-out
and it does definitely avoid the question
of what does or doesn't belong
in a museum in the first place, but
his point is more about the way
that the context that art is presented in
changes it.
An eight-year-old's picture being hung in a museum
would cause people to look at
the context that art is presented in
changes it.
An eight-year-old's picture being hung in a museum
would cause people to look at
it and experience it very differently
than if it was on a refrigerator.
In the same way that
a painting being hung in the Louvre
might represent the history
of European painting
and the French Empire, whereas
if the same painting was hung
in the Getty, it'd be
more of a testament to the business
success of J. Paul Getty
and the prosperity of America
and California.
When it comes to the Mona Lisa
I think that the best way to describe
the experience I had, as well
as that of the angry reviewers
is that we were seeing
a sort of performance art piece
being performed by
the museum and the people
taking those pictures.
Thanks for watching.
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
Music
