Hey everyone.
On this channel I tend to discuss bad reality shows, but this month I thought I'd switch
things up a bit by talking about a show that I actually love.
My Cat From Hell is a show on Animal Planet where cats with behavior issues are rehabilitated.
Now if you've never heard of this show, and especially if it doesn't sound like something
you'd be interested in, I want you to try to guess the kind of person who hosts a show
like this.
Really think about it, pause the video and close your eyes if you want to, then come
back when you're ready.
You got it?
Well, if you didn't picture a rockabilly street magician, then you were dead wrong.
This guy, who looks like the villain in an airbud movie about bowling, is named, get
ready for this, Jackson Galaxy.
Like, just take a look at how this show opens.
I'm Jackson Galaxy, I'm a musician by night, and a cat behaviorist by day.
I cannot stress enough that this isn't an obscure David Cross character, and is in
fact a real guy with a real show.
And I'm not alone in thinking that this is wild.
At the beginning of each episode, the owners of the cat that he's going to work with
make a point of saying how surprised they are by what Jackson looks like.
Jackson is totally not what I expected.
How you doing man?
Hey Jackson.
Hey Garrett.
Hey Garrett.
This is my girlfriend Jenny.
Hey Jenny, good to meet you.
Wow, I was expecting someone more conservative.
I don't know that I had any preconceived notions, but when Jackson walked through the door,
that's not what I would have preconceived.
But also, it's often not in the way that I would expect.
Hi.
Hey man.
Hey Jackson.
Hi, nice to meet you.
Come on in.
That was definitely not what I expected when I opened the door.
I don't think I was expecting somebody who was so hip.
Like, there's a lot that I'll say about Jackson's appearance, but I definitely wouldn't
exactly call the guy who looks like the one way too old member of every 2000s boy band
hip.
I also love how he keeps all of his equipment, which is just stuff like toys, cat treats,
as well as a black light for when he needs to do a forensic investigation of where the
cat is peeing.
We have to approach this from a CSI perspective of leaving no stone unturned.
All of this stuff is kept in his guitar case because of course it is.
Now while Jackson is wild, so are the owners of the cats that he works with in a way that
only people who went on a reality show in the 2000s can be.
I'm Brian.
And I'm Karey.
We met when I was working at a restaurant and Brian came in every day for five weeks.
One really funny part is there's a guy who collects figurines and makes a big point of
saying that they aren't toys, but then for the entire show, everyone else just calls
them his toys.
She destroys things.
These figurines over here, they're all limited edition.
These aren't regular toys.
This is my suggestion for you.
You value these toys a lot and know that.
I covered this with clear acrylic.
Oh, right.
There you go.
Kidcroof, right?
So now Sean Tappy, everyone can see his toys.
Or in the first ever episode, one of the owners says that he's a dog person and then the
editor, who I can only assume is a cat, edits it to make him look really sinister, complete
with a black and white picture of him with a dog.
I have never been a cat person.
I always grew up with dogs.
Not only did I not ever have cats, I never got a long well with cats.
But then also, he's actually kind of a huge asshole to this cat, but because he doesn't
understand how cats work, there's just moments like this.
He tries to discipline her like a dog and it doesn't work.
This is a punishment.
That guy really sucks though.
At one point, Jackson brings out one of those cans of compressed air with a motion sensor
to train the cat not to go into the owner's bedroom.
There's a tool that I really like to use.
It's a motion-activated air blaster and I use it as a learning device, not as a punishment.
So all it does when the electric guy picks it up, it blasts out some air.
And the guy gets really weirdly stoked because he finally has a way to punish his cat.
It should come right about to here and there it goes.
That's so cool.
Try to lure her over.
I can't wait.
The air blaster is awesome.
That same couple also complains that their cat pees everywhere, but then Jackson sees
that they also just don't change the litter.
Wow.
That is one nasty litter box.
If the litter box is right here, there's a sink right here, and the cat is choosing
to pee in the sink, that's because the litter box is not a very attractive place.
By the way, this isn't exactly relevant, but I need to show you this clip.
Now I'm going to get gross on you guys and stick my hand in here.
I get a little bit of grief sometimes for feeling pee and poo.
I'm sorry, they're giving you grief?
That actually sounds like a very tame reaction if you're regularly sticking your bare hands
in litter boxes.
I get that there are contexts where that would make sense to do, but it didn't even seem
necessary in this episode.
The cat wasn't sick or having any diet problems that would require Jackson to look at its
stools.
It kind of just seemed like Jackson was looking for an excuse to feel some cat shit.
Now let me tell you about this video's sponsor, Skillshare.
Yeah, that's the transition.
Skillshare is an online learning community with thousands of classes taught by people
with real-world, relevant experience.
So something about me is that I'm one of those people who was recently diagnosed with
ADHD and now can't shut up about it.
A lesser known side effect of the medication is thinking that literally everything that
you do is an ADHD thing and talking about that to anyone who will listen.
Yeah, getting diagnosed just explains so much.
Before I never knew why sometimes I would dream in black and white, but now—oh, sorry—Iced
americano and a chocolate chip cookie, please.
Anyway, where was I?
But while being medicated rules, it doesn't solve everything.
And so the hard part has been trying to learn ways of getting things done that actually
work for me.
That's when I found Skillshare really helpful.
They have a lot of different courses about productivity.
I'll be honest, some of them were very much not right for me, but others really clicked.
Everyone's brain is different, but they're all beautiful.
Skillshare is also great for anyone interested in learning skills that could give you new
creative outlets like painting, graphic design, or photography, as well as more professionally
oriented things like web design, marketing, and real jobs like YouTube or podcasting.
I will personally say as a self-taught video editor, while there are so many amazing free
tutorials out there, if you're starting from square one, it really is so helpful just
to have that kind of baseline knowledge that you get from a basic class that teaches you
the proper way to do everything right from the beginning.
The free tutorials are great anytime you need to look up something complicated, but they
aren't as good at teaching you all the basics.
Case in point, I'd been doing this for about two years before I learned what a ripple delete
is.
And right now, Skillshare is giving the first thousand people to use the link in the description
and a one month trial for free.
Plus, in the spirit of sharing skills, I'm going to throw in a completely free tip for
anyone thinking of getting into making YouTube videos.
Stay out of my way.
Anyways, thanks so much to Skillshare for sponsoring this video.
They don't root around in litter boxes, but they won't give you any grief if you do.
Click that link in the description to get one month for free and support the channel
a little bit while you're at it.
Coming back to Jackson Galaxy, something I find fascinating, which is extremely rare
in reality shows, is that the spectacle of the show doesn't just come from Jackson's
absurd drip, but the empathy that he shows to the cats he's helping.
He regularly emphasizes that the goal of his work is much less to train the cats than
to train their owners.
I always remind myself that part of my job is to help cat guardians recognize where their
own actions feed into feline bad behaviors.
And I really want to approach her all the time and I have to like restrain myself because
I don't want to stress her out.
One of the things I'm most impressed about with Coray was her ability to admit her failings
as an emotional being.
Sometimes I find the problem I'm dealing with is much more human than feline.
His response to a cat climbing on furniture isn't to train the cat to stop, but instead
to get the owners to understand that climbing is a legitimate need that the cat has and
they need to give it things to climb.
Now what I'm seeing up here guys, of cat heaven.
This is how a cat should see the world, powerful, secure, confident.
At some points I do think that it's a little bit much like Hilton Man that they make pretty
expensive changes to where they live.
One of the things that I'm not seeing here is any place for her to perch, any place for
her to get some vertical distance from the floor, we're going to cut to the chase on
this one.
I want to open up this area.
So we're going to use this bookcase and I want to see steps.
A little mini shelf here, a little mini shelf up there.
And then when they don't do it because like, I don't know, not everyone has the time or
money to drop everything to install cat shelves ASAP, Jackson gets really pissed at them.
I'm noticing what I don't notice, I still don't see shelving, I still don't see access
to up there.
Tell me what's going on here.
So, we've looked, we've looked for different types of shelves and uh, by the time I get
back here next week he has to be able to get up to the shelves, he has to be able to get
up above, down again.
There is no tomorrow on this one.
And nonetheless, I think that the empathy Jackson shows embodies a vision of restorative
justice that runs completely contrary to the punitive model, which is so frequently employed
at just every level of our society from the criminal justice system, right down to the
treatment of misbehaving animals.
And this is intentional for no small part to serve the interests of the ne-
I can't do this.
Man, it really seems like things only get worse, doesn't it?
I wrote this after an all-nighter on the day after the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade
and is likely to also make another ruling this week preventing the EPA from doing anything
about climate change.
It's also my birthday.
And while on a personal level the last two months haven't been great for me, uh, some
personal issues combined with the burnout that I've been dealing with for a while now
as well as just the state of the world, uh, led to me feeling like shit and my head being
bad as you can probably tell.
Now, personally, whenever I'm not feeling so hot, I like to take care of myself by just
setting aside a few hours and doing this little relaxation exercise that I think I actually
like invented where what I'll do is I just sit back and switch between refreshing the
same three social media apps over and over again until around 4 a.m.
I call this self-care.
Not to go all damn kids in their smartphones here, but it is honestly kind of wild being
in that state and realizing just how perfect social media is for worsening your mental
health.
Everything you see is just bad news or people doing better than you, which really is just
another kind of bad news.
This obviously isn't a particularly novel observation.
It should call it anti-social media, am I right, folks?
We even know from the Facebook weeks that they're actually facing a morale problem over there
as more and more of their employees come to realize that history will remember them
as monsters.
Don't worry though, Facebook takes mental health very seriously, and so now they're
actually cracking down on any employees caught reading Hannah Rents' report on the banality
of evil.
But while social media does certainly play a role in making us think everything is bad,
as well as in actually making those things bad in a lot of cases, this isn't going to
be a video arguing that everything is fine, actually.
Just win at your screen time and stay off social media.
Might as well tell people to exercise and quit smoking while they're at it.
Now, things are genuinely very bad, and it's been getting worse for, I don't know, the
last 30, 40 years, maybe longer, and it doesn't feel to me like anything is going to improve
for a very long time.
Again, I'll freely admit to a bit of a bias on account of my brain being mean to me, but
I don't think I'm alone in this.
It feels like everyone on all points of the political spectrum feels this inevitable sense
of collapse.
It just feels impossible to stay even remotely informed without being overwhelmed by this
absolute hopelessness as like the jaws of this methodically laid steel trap close in
around us from every angle.
It's almost a cliché at this point.
Well before this latest catastrophe, it's just a general vibe that everything is falling
apart.
And then that feeling is just magnified by how every liberal with access to institutional
power is completely useless in the face of rising fascism.
Americans just lost their right to get an abortion and Nancy Pelosi read a poem and
asked for donations.
Conservatives are openly calling for violence against trans and LGBTQ plus people.
If I was a parent and my fifth grade daughter had had to sleep and shower in some kind of
cabin at some summer camp that I paid money to send my child to and there was a man calling
himself a woman sleeping in her cabin, my husband would have beat him into the ground.
They are under qualified to have children that should have their children taken away
from them because it's child abuse.
The LGBT transgender grooming our children's minds is a national security threat.
We need to hold people for treason, start having some public hearings and start executing
people who are found guilty for their treasonous acts.
And Hillary Clinton is out there saying that the Democrats need to stop caring about niche
issues like trans people in the interest of winning elections.
Sorry trans people, it's nothing personal.
Hillary just doesn't think that you're a winning issue and no one knows how to win
an election quite like Hillary Clinton.
It's not just politicians either.
Oh my fucking god, I can't listen to another person saying how shit just got real.
It's time to roll up our sleeves and vote even harder.
People are out in the streets getting tear gassed at protests and the Libs are calling
them Republican instigators which honestly I can kind of see the logic there.
Like, they're doing something effective, there's no way that they're Democrats.
Those bastards overturned Roe v. Wade, well let's just say that I wouldn't want to be
in their shoes once SNL gets done with them.
We don't need to storm the Capitol, okay?
Our January 6th happens every Saturday night and it comes with a musical guest.
Also holy shit the way these people talk about voting, don't get me wrong I voted in every
election that I've ever been able to, even when it doesn't matter because of where I
live.
That said, particularly in America, red states are so gerrymandered at this point that it's
effectively impossible to just vote our way out of this.
At this point saying I'm aga- Oh Jackie, sorry for yelling, it's okay, I'm just angry at
my phone.
At this point saying that I'm against electoralism is like saying someone getting out to walk
because their car broke down is against driving.
And of course, these are just a few issues out of the endless barrage of nightmare scenarios
unfolding constantly.
I haven't even touched on war, inflation, the pandemic, or climate change.
Hey uh, anyone else notice how governments are warning about food and gas shortages and
then upping the police budget?
I wonder what that's about.
I'm not trying to bum you out, but I think we need to be honest about where we're at
and how we're feeling.
That said, I'm also not a huge fan of just like posting those Instagram infographics saying
let this radicalize you rather than turn you to despair.
Not because I disagree with them at all, but because I don't think bad shit happening
is enough to get people to do anything.
If anything, I think that more often when we don't have anywhere to channel that anger
into action, we feel defeated and give up.
Hell, as annoying as they are, I can understand people who think things will get better if
we all just vote super hard this time.
It's better than just thinking that things won't get better.
The problem, as I see it, isn't a lack of righteous anger, but an inability and in some
cases an unwillingness to imagine a better world that's actually worth fighting for.
And so in this video, I'm going to talk about why utopianism is good, actually.
In S.D. Trostowska's book, Utopia and the Age of Survival, she begins by laying out
the question, in this hell world that we find ourselves in, how do we on the left keep fighting
when the odds are completely stacked against us?
As she puts it.
The future might not belong to us after all, this we must grant.
Given the distinct possibility that history is not on our side, why not give up?
Why continue denouncing the world over the world's wrongs?
Why insist, as in the old days when the future was a promise to us, that real change for
the better is possible?
The world to come must still be worth fighting for.
No matter the actual odds of victory by the right side of history, which are low indeed.
As long as the future is for us a prima facie of value, we will not give up the little claim
we have to it.
What is more, we will fight without fail to get it right.
She goes on to describe the current state of the left using Walter Bennymeans' term
left wing melancholy, which in his book by the same name, Enzo Traverso, describes as
the feeling that since the fall of the Berlin Wall, the rise of neoliberalism and Francis
Fukuyama's declaration of the end of history, there's been an inability, particularly on
the left, but also just in general, to imagine a future.
This is why Traverso argues culture is so nostalgic now, because without being able
to imagine a future, all we can do is look back at the past.
You can obviously see this with the rise of doomers, people who are primarily on the left,
who you usually see online, because let's face it, they aren't leaving the house, posting
about how futile politics are, because they've essentially given up on things getting better.
I don't think it's any coincidence that capitalist realism by Mark Fisher, a book
that struggles with this very issue and doesn't really come to an optimistic conclusion, has
become so emblematic.
But also, I think that this explains a lot of the problems with mainstream liberal politics.
A lot of this comes from neoliberalism, from the 80s onwards, as multinational corporations
came to call the shots and states increasingly turned into tools of capital, politicians
stopped saying that they would improve the world, and instead moved towards promising
to protect citizens from greater and greater threats.
What we were left with was a politics where the highest goal is just efficiently managing
society rather than changing it.
I think that this is why people will claim that Donald Trump and Ewan Musk aren't neoliberals.
All their economic views absolutely are neoliberal, but they both promise to improve the world,
which is a surprisingly rare thing now.
Coming back to left-wing melancholy now, to use a Freudian metaphor here, in his essay
Morning in Melancholia, Freud compared, you guessed it, Morning in Melancholy.
Freud argued that while both are reactions to loss, with mourning we can put that loss
into words, which lets us process our feelings and eventually heal.
With melancholy, the feeling of loss gets stuck in the subconscious, and so we still
feel like shit, but because we can't articulate why, we can't get better.
One of the key scholars in utopianism was a guy named Ernst Bloch.
When most people think about utopianism, they think that that means imagining a perfect
world, but Bloch instead used an extremely broad definition, arguing that imagining a
utopia just means that you're imagining the world not as it is, but as it should be.
Whether that means sci-fi space communism, or just a stronger social safety net and access
to abortion, those both stem from the same very human urge.
Bloch argued that the feeling at the root of all utopianism is longing, because the
only way that longing can be articulated is by imagining it being fulfilled.
The problem we're facing now is left-wing melancholy, where since we can't articulate
our loss, it's left to fester just below the surface, then I think that the solution
might be to learn to articulate it through left-wing utopianism.
Now, this is all getting a little bit dense and theoretical though, so let me slow down
a bit and explain one of the more confusing concepts I've brought up so far.
What the fuck is going on with Jackson Galaxy's facial hair?
I think the most striking thing is that this is almost just a beard, but instead he shaved
these two lines into it that separated into this weird mix of sideburns and a goatee that
winds up really giving evil biker.
I mean, first of all, imagine shaving that every day, trying to keep the lines perfectly
straight, like that's just your life, but also, in a sense, his facial hair is defined
by what it lacks.
The enigma of it lies in both the fact that there's just no name for whatever the fuck
that is, but also because what defines it is purely the two thin strips that are missing.
So first, let's look at what isn't working.
I think one of the symptoms of this left-wing melancholy is a certain amount of cynicism
towards earnestly engaging in politics, and to see why that's maybe not the best, let's
turn to everyone's favorite Marxist philosophy raccoon, Slavoj Žižek.
In his book, The Sublime Object of Ideology, Žižek makes some really interesting observations
about cynicism.
Also, sorry, I normally couch all this smart shit in something silly, but for this video,
I read a bunch of books and now I'm going to tell you about them.
So if you know just one thing about Žižek's work, it's probably that he's extremely
concerned with...
Ideology.
Now, when Žižek says...
Ideology.
He's using that word in the Marxist sense, i.e. structures and discourses that cause
people to view the world in a distorted way.
A good example that Marx used was medieval monarchism.
So like, what makes a king a king?
Well, having subjects to rule over who treat him as a king, right?
But the thing is, those subjects don't think about it that way.
They look at it backwards, thinking that the king has some special quality that makes
them have to serve him.
Essentially, they think that him being a king turns them into subjects instead of the truth,
which is that them serving him is what turns him into a king.
But in our modern society, we tend to think of ourselves as actually pretty aware of how
these things work.
Like, it's not even a particularly radical observation to understand the ways that capitalism
is fucked.
Not even just on the left.
For example, one of the reasons I don't use Instagram much anymore is that I've completely
fucked my algorithm by following a bunch of motivational quote pages that are just hilarious.
The main one is called Men With Quote, and they just post stuff like this.
She asked me, what's your favorite position?
I said CEO.
But then I fell down the rabbit hole, and oh my god, dude, it just gets so much weirder
from here.
For example, there's a ton of these accounts that are just dedicated to posting this exact
same kind of thing, but over pictures of the joker?
From nothing to something.
We came here from hardware, CRO.
And then one that really stands out is an account called Billionaire World, which makes
a lot of posts that I would consider to be actually pretty scathing critiques of capitalism,
but like, as good things.
Like they post stuff like this.
My boss arrived at work in a new Ferrari.
I said, wow, that's an amazing car.
He replied, if you work hard, put all your hours in, it's strive for excellence, I'll
get another one next year.
And they are unironically just like dope, that's really awesome that society works that way.
But the fact that people are so aware of this has led some to think that we are actually
in a time of post-ideology.
Gizek instead argues that the people who think that are idiots.
He brings up Pascal's wager, which for anyone who wasn't an edgy high school atheist, basically
says to think about being religious as a bet.
If you're a Christian and when you die it turns out atheists were right, well, you wasted
a lot of Sundays that you could have spent sleeping in, maybe you could have had a more
adventurous sex life and been a bit more fun at parties.
On the other hand, if you're an atheist and it turns out Christians were right, well then
you're fucked.
Just being damned for all eternity, like, I'm sorry, an incel who's now on a watchlist
made some really good points in a debate in 2007.
Now, this isn't a good argument for being a Christian.
For one thing, it completely ignores all the harm that is caused by Christianity.
It also presents a false dichotomy, not considering that you could be anything other than a Christian
or an atheist.
But Gizek points out that Pascal is actually saying something really interesting about
belief here.
Most people think of religious faith as something that you believe at the core of your being,
not a thing that you could fake to min-max the afterlife.
But Gizek says no, that's actually exactly how faith works.
For him, belief is external.
It's what you do.
What you believe in your heart of hearts doesn't matter.
If you spend your life pretending to be a Christian, then you're a Christian.
In fact, arguably, you're more devout if you do it that way.
Like if you obey a rule because you thought about it deeply and came to the logical conclusion
that you supported, that's not obedience.
Obedience is when you obey the rule even though you don't agree with it.
In fact, real obedience is when you forget that the rule exists at all.
For example, most of the people watching this are probably wearing clothes right now.
Newtists can skip to this timestamp.
But actually, why are you doing that?
Even if you need to get dressed for work or to go outside, I'm willing to bet that
you didn't make a conscious decision to get dressed today.
You probably just did it because that's what people do.
For Gizek, this is key to understanding ideology.
It relies on a sort of as-if.
Of course, we all know that the king isn't really magic, that the economy is made up
and money isn't real, but we all act as-if it is.
This brings us to Gizek's issues with the ironic cynicism he sees cropping up everywhere.
First of all, he makes a good point against the idea that cynicism and irony are good
ways to fight totalitarianism because they make it seem ridiculous, which robs the tyrant
of their power.
Gizek says that that's wrong because totalitarianism isn't based on facts and logic, but power
and coercion.
Presenting people in power as ridiculous and stupid is actually great for them because
as long as you're calling them hypocrites or whatever, you're ignoring what they're
actually doing.
As Jean-Paul Sartre writes in his essay about anti-semitism,
Never believe that anti-semitists are completely unaware of the absurdity of their replies.
They know that their remarks are frivolous, open to challenge, but they are amusing themselves,
for it is their adversary who is obliged to use words responsibly, since he believes
in words.
The anti-semitists have the right to play.
They even like to play with discourse, for by giving ridiculous reasons, they discredit
the seriousness of their interlocutors.
They delight in acting in bad faith, since they seek not to persuade by sound argument,
but to intimidate and disconsert.
But there's another issue with cynicism.
Gizek sees the way people tend to engage in politics from an ironic distance as just a
shield for ideology.
Remember, for Gizek, belief is what you do.
So when someone says something like, yeah, you can steal more by owning a bank than by
robbing one, but like, isn't upset by that, they aren't free from ideology, in fact they're
more in it than ever.
Gizek sees this ironic distance, which to be queer I'm absolutely guilty of, as a problem,
because the classic Marxist way of fighting ideology is to critique it and show the distance
between the truth and the mask that's over top of it.
But cynicism is basically saying that they see that distance, but choose the mask anyway.
And so, to see what an alternative to this cynicism might look like, let's take a look
at what utopianism is all about.
By the way, it was really funny researching this video because utopianism is like wildly
unpopular.
It's basically the millennials of critical theory.
Also, I was talking to a friend of mine once who works in a restaurant with a bunch of
zoomers and he was like, man, the boomers are out to get us, Gen X is out to get us,
now Gen Z is out to get us, the only people you can trust are the ones who remember 9-11,
but not very well.
No, but utopianism definitely has a bad name.
On the right, this is because during the Cold War it became a buzzword, basically meaning
totalitarianism.
On the left, however, some Marxists have criticized it arguing that it's a distraction from serious
analysis of material conditions.
Now, I'm planning to push back on both of these arguments, but first, I should probably
clarify exactly what we're talking about here.
But I'm not going to.
Instead of defining our terms like a little academically responsible goody-two shoes,
I am at all times wearing exactly three shoes and only one goes on my foot.
We're going to be starting from Bloch's extremely open-ended definition, which in
her book, Utopia's Method, Ruth Levitas summarized as Utopia being, quote, an expression of
a desire for a better way of living and being.
Beyond that, I'll be elaborating further as we go, but a big part of this video is
just going to be grappling with what Utopia is or should be.
Something I will say, which I'll be explaining more throughout the video, is what Utopianism
is not, which is a blueprint for the future.
This is where a lot of the criticisms that Utopianism is a recipe for totalitarianism
come from, and kind of fair enough, right?
Planning out every aspect of a society and expecting that to just work out perfectly
isn't a great idea, and we can see that play out throughout history.
Thankfully, most Utopians agree with that criticism.
One example of this is Paul Tillich, who was a very cool theology professor at the University
of Frankfurt until he was fired in the 40s for not being a Nazi.
Cancel culture strikes again.
Tillich wrote about the problems of seeing Utopia as a blueprint to be followed, pointing
out how doing so can lead to totalitarianism when it's enacted, or disillusionment when
it isn't.
Tillich argued that Utopia is inherently transitory, existing purely in the realm of not yet.
Because of this transitory nature, though, we're destined to be disappointed by Utopia
if we view it as something achievable, because it isn't.
Plus, even if we did achieve it, by that point we'd have our sights set on something else.
Instead, we can choose to embrace that transitory aspect of it, and as Levitas argues in Utopia's
method, we can find the true value of Utopia by viewing it...
You're never going to guess where this is going to go... as a method.
From this perspective, there are a few ways that Utopianism is useful.
For one thing, it functions as a form of criticism, since any vision of a Utopia is,
after all, a way of articulating what's wrong with the world as it is.
To explain why that's useful, let's come back to another common criticism of Utopianism,
which we can see in the writings of one of the very first sociologists, Emile Durkheim,
who was very clear that he was not a Utopian.
However, in his book, The Division of Labor in Society, he outlines a very specific vision
of his ideal society... and the division of labor therein.
One of the things that makes Durkheim really interesting to read is how,
while the school of thought that's based off of his work is pretty conservative,
because of the times he was writing in, as well as just him being a bit of an odd guy,
his politics don't really line up very well with what we'd now think of as right or left wing.
For instance, he was actually pretty radically opposed to imperialism,
but also pretty brutally sexist, even by the standards of his time.
And so, in the blueprint he lays out for his ideal society,
which he is very clear shouldn't be called a Utopia,
there are some extremely progressive things, like abolishing inheritance,
but also stuff like abolishing all art that he didn't think was good for society,
which was most of it.
He can't do that!
Like, if I made all the art that I hate illegal,
every gallery would be nothing but figurines of Misato Katsuragi.
Something that's really funny with Durkheim though,
is that his theory was that societies progress as they increase the specialization of labor.
So like, going from one person making every part of a wagon or something,
to each part being made by someone who specializes in just that part.
This does tend to increase productivity and quality,
and in some ways, people having access to better stuff for cheaper
can make for a more progressive society.
For example, improvements in the ways we make medicine and food generally help everyone.
But also, there are still a lot of people who don't have access to medicine or food right now,
and any advancements in the ways that we produce those things
aren't likely to radically change that or make society more progressive.
So, I think that's a pretty clear hole in old Durkheim's theory.
And while there was plenty of evidence of this while he was alive,
instead of admitting that there might be a problem with his theory,
our boy Emil basically just did the principle skinner meme
and argued that his theory was completely correct,
but society was wrong. Absolutely amazing behavior.
He called the ideal world that he was describing the normal development of society,
i.e. how society should be if his theory was correct, which it obviously was.
And so, instead, what we're living in is an abnormal society,
which is developed in the wrong way for some reason.
This is especially funny because Durkheim argued that what he was describing
was definitely not a utopia because unlike utopians,
he was a very smart politics understander.
Basically, for Durkheim, what made something utopian was that it was unrealistic or impossible.
Unlike the utopians, Durkheim was advocating for realistic and achievable goals,
you know, like the abolition of inheritance and music.
But this is one of the reasons why utopia is so useful as a form of criticism.
As the French philosopher Miguel Abensure argued,
part of the value of utopianism is that it's a form of criticism
that estranges us from the familiar and encourages us to imagine what society should be like,
free from the bounds of what seems realistic.
This isn't to say that there isn't a time and a place where we should be realistic,
but also what's considered politically realistic is decided by people in power.
And if we go by their rules, then all we'll be able to do is make minor tweaks to the system
rather than actually changing it.
No revolution ever seemed realistic until it happened.
And likewise, there is no realistic path towards adequately addressing climate change.
And so maybe it's time we start thinking a bit more about what should happen
rather than what we've been told could happen.
This freedom to imagine that utopianism creates is key to Abensure,
who argued that its function is to quote,
teach desire to desire better, to desire more,
and above all, to desire in a different way.
I think that the funniest episode of My Cat From Hell is the one about City the Kitty.
City the Kitty was a stray who was taken in by Laurie and Shawna.
He now regularly attacks their other cat, Missy, as well as Shawna.
City the Kitty scares me because I know that if he can get close enough to me, he will attack me.
Which, first of all, I'm sorry, but saying that you're terrified of a cat named City the Kitty
is very funny. I guess not everyone's a city person.
Also, this is, I think, the most strange thing I've seen in this show.
The way they discipline City the Kitty is by buttering him.
For the uninitiated, if you're trying to figure out what that means,
it's the most literal option you could have been thinking of.
They just wipe the cat down with butter whenever he misbehaves.
Just imagine the first time they did that.
Just standing in the kitchen with a stick of butter in one hand
and a misbehaving cat in the other, just like, hang on a second.
I've got an idea.
And then your life just includes picking cat hair out of your breakfast from now on.
There's also a really funny bit at the end where Shawna plays Jackson a song that she
wrote about City the Kitty and Jackson's just sitting there looking completely unimpressed.
Just like, I love two things in this world, music and cats. And this song is an insult to both.
But the best part in this episode is that Worry is so mean to Shawna,
just blaming her for this cat attacking her constantly.
I'm the one that's always trying to take care of the fights
with City the Kitty and Missy.
Shawna never asked me how she can help deal with City the Kitty and his behavioral problems.
Never?
No.
Well, you play with him, but you don't give me ideas on how to make him a better cat.
Just like, you need to pull your weight and start coming up with some ideas here.
Is he attacking Missy again?
Where's the butter?
But also, they say how they take pictures of City the Kitty.
Started taking pictures of him every day, started posing and doing amazing things.
So we thought, well, he's meant to be in this house.
Which I guess they just post online or something really has this energy.
I'm so fucking stressed out for running my pet lizard's Instagram account.
I'm about to have a nervous breakdown. I told my therapist,
she said, we'll take a break from your pet lizard's Instagram account.
I said, I can't. It's my sole source of income.
My fans will comment stuff about how the work I'm doing is important,
bringing the lizard, bringing the attention of the lizard community,
or bringing the lizard, bringing the lizard to attention,
lizard issues to the forefront.
Just unbelievably relatable.
My lizard is reality TV.
What's yours?
But then, Laurie says, I think the strangest line in the whole show.
Even though it may hurt you and even though he scares you,
he has come into our lives for a reason.
I think eventually someday he's going to be there to be able to change the world in different ways.
It's all well and good to theorize that your asshole cat is going to cause world peace.
But importantly, the value of utopianism isn't just in theorizing.
Block himself is very queer about this,
arguing that imagining a utopia alone doesn't constitute utopianism.
For him, it only becomes utopian when we begin to take steps
to turn that utopia we imagined into a reality.
Beyond just being a method of criticism,
Tristowska argues in Utopian the Age of Survival that
utopianism has always played a role in radical politics.
And likewise, as Russell Jacobi claimed in his book The End of Utopia,
the decline of utopianism has signaled with it an existential threat to the future
of radical leftist political movements.
Tristowska argues for a version of utopianism that's
less a method and more a form of myth.
When I say myth here, I don't mean something that's untrue,
but instead like an overarching narrative for people to believe in.
She cites the socialist, philosopher, revolutionary,
and also the first guy to call himself an anarchist,
Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, as saying,
A revolution is a force against which no other power,
divine or human, can prevail, whose nature it is to be strengthened and to grow
by the very resistance which it encounters.
A revolution may be directed, moderated, slowed down,
but like the ancient Nemesis, whom neither prayers nor threats could move,
the revolution advances, with fatal and somber step
over the flowers cast by its devotees through the blood of its defenders
across the corpses of its enemies.
Fucking metal.
She also cites the French historian George Sorrell who wrote that
As long as there are no myths accepted by the masses,
one may go on talking of revolts indefinitely without ever provoking any revolutionary movement.
They allow us to understand the activity, the sentiments,
and the ideas of the masses as they prepare themselves to enter on a decisive struggle.
The real development of the revolution did not in any way resemble the enchanting pictures
which first created the enthusiasm of its first adherents,
but without those pictures, would the revolution have been victorious?
Well, neither of these guys thought themselves as utopians.
I think it's very clear that in their view, all revolutions require a mythology
that actually mobilizes people to take action,
a mythology based on a belief in a better world at the other side of the revolution.
As for where this organizing myth should come from,
Tristowska has an interesting take.
She argues that our vision of utopianism shouldn't come from the future,
but from the past in the form of nostalgia.
Nostalgia for sure has a bad name these days.
I think particularly in the context of utopianism,
where it's generally the territory of people on the right who will post shit like
an ad from the 50s or a Roman statue with a vaporwave filter with the caption that reads,
This is what they took from us.
Like, yeah dude.
If it weren't for the pink haired they, thems,
we'd all be living in an ad for steak knives right now.
In a lot of ways, nostalgia kind of reminds me of Marx's example of the king and his subjects.
Like, when we're nostalgic for something,
it's never actually the thing itself that we miss, but the time when we had it.
Like, the best thing about when I was living in my first apartment after graduating from
university was, uh, having never been cheated on.
The best thing about playing Pokemon Silver on a Game Boy Color was my grandparents being alive.
The best thing about 90s cartoons, easy, 9-11 hadn't happened yet.
Also, Gargoyles was sick.
Still holds up too, check it out, great storylines,
Keith David voices Goliath and it doesn't have that inescapable atmosphere of Islamophobia.
I think Gargoyles is actually just the exception to that.
I do just genuinely miss that show.
But Tristowska argues for a different kind of nostalgia.
One where we look at past leftist movements as our inheritance
and a legacy that we have a duty to continue.
This isn't an argument for just making our own,
this is what they took from us memes,
where instead of Roman busts we use pictures of labor movements,
but instead that we should channel this nostalgia for movements of the past by looking at them
not as something that we can or should return to,
but instead recognize that doing so is impossible,
that the past can't be recreated, but it can be surpassed.
But this isn't the only reason why utopianism is important right now.
Coming back to Bloch, something that's important about him is that as a Marxist Jewish intellectual,
he was forced to flee Germany during World War II.
In his book The Heritage of Our Times,
he tries to answer the question,
why in Germany did fascism win out over socialism?
Unsurprisingly, he argues that the answer comes down to utopianism.
The book received a fair bit of criticism from other leftist scholars.
Walter Benjamin described it as being,
Like a great lord who arriving at the scene of an area devastated by an earthquake
confined nothing more urgent to do than to spread out the Persian carpets,
which, by the way, are already somewhat moth-eaten,
and to display the somewhat tarnished golden and silver vessels,
and the already faded blockade and damask garments which his servants had brought.
Oh shiiiit!
Classic Benjamin Byrne.
But I do think that's a little bit unfair, though.
First of all, Bloch responds to his Marxist critics by pointing out that
people's desire for a better future is a real thing with real social consequences,
and it shouldn't be ignored.
In fact, that criticism kind of proves his point.
He argues that leftists have consistently been more concerned with what he called
the cold stream of analysis over the warm stream of desire, and that, given the lack
of a leftist articulation of what a better future would look like, reactionaries have
been able to step in and fill that role instead.
And I think that that's kind of happening again today.
Say what you will about slogans like, this is what they took from us, or make America
great again, but those are actually promising something.
This isn't to say that fascism has no competition when it comes to utopia, although the alternative
isn't good either.
Both Levitas and Tristowska argue that utopianism has been co-opted by capitalism.
We see this in things like the lottery, travel commercials, self-help, diets, and fitness,
all of which offer a vision of utopia, but crucially, it's achieved not by improving
society, but by improving yourself.
This is something Block warned against too, pointing out that this is a trap we can fall
into if we aren't careful, that too often utopia can be, quote, a beautifying mirror
which often only reflects how the ruling class wishes the wishes of the poor to be.
It is also debatable whether this is utopian at all.
The German sociologist Karl Mannheim argued that the opposite of utopia is ideology, that
both are distorted visions of the world, but the difference is that the goal of utopia
is to change the status quo, whereas the point of ideology is to enforce it.
Arguably, this is the biggest threat to utopianism of all, since this ideology makes the hope
for a better world purely individualistic.
That said, there is a silver lining here.
In his book The Sociology of Emancipation, the French sociologist Luc Boltanski also
I'm just realizing there have been so many French theorists in this video and I just
wanted to say, I'm sorry, and I'll try to do better.
In a time between this and my next video, I'm really going to try to listen and hold
space for discussions, as long as those discussions aren't in French.
Anyways, Boltanski argues that what's so crucial about utopianism is that it bridges
the gap between the micro and the macro, between individuals and systems.
Through utopianism, people can come to articulate their problems, not as personal grievances,
but as social issues requiring political solutions.
Like, if we ask a 30-year-old with back pain and fucked up knees to imagine a world where
they didn't have those, that world is probably going to involve greater access to healthcare
and workers being treated better.
Boltanski writes,
Utopia may do more than articulate, through compensatory fantasies, the unsatisfactory
nature of present reality.
As critique, it foregrounds and makes explicit this inadequacy, identifying the source of
dissatisfaction as something more systemic, more general than one's own place in the
world.
A sociological imagination is brought into play and personal troubles become public issues.
Utopia's importance lies in its capacity to embody hope, rather than simply desire
and to inspire the pursuit of a world transformed.
Who's the best cat in Ontario?
It's you, Jackie.
It's you.
And I think that that's where we need to go from here.
In a sense, I do think there's some cause for optimism in all of this.
If people's two main choices for imagining a better future are shitty ad campaigns or
losers who are still triggered by 100-year-old modern art, I don't think it's crazy to think
that now's a good time for the left to step in and be filled with people's hopes once
again.
And listen, I'm as guilty as anyone of being cynical and focusing too heavily on criticism,
but we won't have a future unless we're able to earnestly imagine one that's actually
worth fighting for.
Hey, so first of all, thank you for making it to the end of this video.
And sorry for taking so long to make this one.
As I said, I've been going through some stuff.
And then to top it all off, while I was working on this, my friend Nick died.
Now is the time when I would normally plug my Patreon since donations through that allow
me to take a bit longer on videos sometimes.
And I'm very grateful to everyone who supports it, but apparently one of the last things
that Nick did before he died was donate to Planned Parenthood.
And so it would mean a lot to me if, instead of giving to me, you donated to them.
Not only because that's an important thing to do right now, but also to honor his memory.
I'll put a thing in the description or figure out a way for you to do that easily.
And yeah, thanks so much for watching.
Held like water in your shaking hands
Are all the small defeats a day demands
Ten to six or nine to five trying dying to survive
Never knowing what survival means
Leave the apartment to buy alcohol
Hung our diplomas on the bathroom wall
Pick at the plaster chipped away
Space some stunning tooth decay
Enlist the cat and the impending glass war
Let's lay our bad day down here dear
Let's make believe we're strong
Like maybe we shall overcome today
Overcome the stupid things we say
Say I needed more than this
Say I needed one more kiss
That light on way too long now
Let's plant a bomb at City Hall and
Kill a demilane
You'll talk the night away
You'll call in sick, I'll quit the word games that I play
Swear I weigh more than half believe it when I say
That somewhere love and justice
Shine, cynicism falls asleep
Turn the talk to itself
Stop your slogans all come true
We forget to feed our fear
