These lectures are part of the great courses series. They are produced by the teaching company.
The lecturer is Professor Michael Starbird.
Professor Starbird is a professor of mathematics and a university distinguished teaching professor at the University of Texas at Austin.
He received his BA from Pomona College and his PhD in mathematics from the University of Wisconsin.
In 1974, Professor Starbird joined the Department of Mathematics at the University of Texas at Austin.
During his tenure, he has accepted visiting positions at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, the University of California at San Diego, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
From 1989 to 1997, Professor Starbird served as associate dean of the College of Natural Sciences, and he is a member of the Academy of Distinguished Teachers.
In his interest to bring authentic understanding of significant ideas in mathematics to the non-mathematician, Professor Starbird has developed and taught an acclaimed class that presents higher-level mathematics to liberal arts students.
He has also authored a book on the subject, The Heart of Mathematics, An Invitation to Effective Thinking, co-authored with Edward B. Berger, was the recipient of a 2001 Robert W. Hamilton book award.
A popular lecturer on campus, Professor Starbird has won numerous teaching awards, including a mini-Stevens Piper Professorship awarded to ten professors each year in the state of Texas,
the Gene Holloway Award for Teaching Excellence, the oldest teaching award at UT, the President's Associates Teaching Excellence Award, and the Friar Society Centennial Teaching Fellowship, which is awarded to one professor at UT annually.
Professor Starbird prepared the course guide that comes with these tapes. The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical notes, and bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
These lectures are titled Change and Motion, Calculus Made Clear, Part 1.
Welcome to calculus. It's going to be my great pleasure to introduce you to calculus or take you through a tour of calculus during these next 24 lectures.
The reason it's going to be such a pleasure is that calculus is all around us and calculus is something that we can all enjoy and appreciate.
When we're driving down with a car on a road and we're saying where we are at every minute and we see how fast we're going, that's calculus.
When we throw a baseball and we see where it lands, calculus. When we send somebody to the moon, which we do regularly, a calculus.
When we look at the stars or we look at the planets and we see how they orbit the sun, calculus. Calculus has been one of the most influential tools, intellectual tools for understanding our world that has ever been devised in the entire history of humankind.
And in fact, during the last 300 years, if we look at how we live differently now from how people lived 300 years ago, most of those differences come from technological and scientific developments and their consequences.
And most of those were based in fundamental ways on calculus.
So calculus is something of great importance, but what I like about it is that calculus comes from everyday observations.
That it's something that we can understand in English. The fundamental ideas are things not that require complicated notation or complicated vocabulary,
but the fundamental ideas of calculus, the thing that makes it work is that it comes from looking at what happens every single day of our lives and just thinking about it very, very clearly.
And that's the way we'll introduce calculus in the next several lectures and in fact throughout this whole series of lectures as ideas rather than as a mechanical formal process.
But I must tell you that one of the reasons that calculus is of such importance and has been for these last 300 years since its invention is that it can be used in a mechanical way.
It can be used by people who don't understand it. That's the amazing part of it. Calculus, the word calculus comes from calculating in a mechanical way.
For example, if you learn to multiply in elementary school by doing a formal process and you had these numbers here and these numbers here and you said you subtract this and you add this and you may not have known why you get the right answer.
But they told you that if you follow those steps, you sure enough get the answer that you expect.
Well, in a way, that is one of the strengths of calculus in practice, that engineers, scientists can use the mechanistic kind of aspect of calculus to actually do things that are important to do.
And I have to tell you that students in my own calculus class at the University of Texas have that view of calculus.
Almost anybody who starts with a calculus course, they end up seeing the mechanical side in preference to the actual conceptual side.
Now in this course of lectures, we're going to emphasize the ideas of calculus much more than the mechanical side.
But the mechanical side is the side that actually gives calculus its reputation for being a fearsome and difficult subject.
Now I actually have a theory about why calculus is often viewed as very hard.
I think it comes from the Greek root of the word calculus.
The word calculus comes from the Greek word stones, calculate stones.
Now stones are hard.
Now you see stones are hard and maybe that's why calculus is hard.
But stones were used in the ancient world to count things.
You know, the sheep coming out of a pen, I presume they use stones.
And so it was associated with the mechanical way of reckoning.
And that word is what then came to the word calculus.
And so the word itself actually refers to the more mechanical side of the subject.
But it does have this fearsome reputation for being hard.
And of course, part of the goal of this course is to make you see calculus in a totally different light.
That calculus can be your friend.
And by the end of this course, I hope that you all not only see calculus in your everyday lives, but that you enjoy it.
But I do want to say as a math teacher, when I sit in an airplane, I talk to the person next to me and I say,
oh, I teach mathematics or I teach calculus.
And of course, many people unfortunately react saying, oh, that's scary.
That's the most frightening thing.
And in fact, and then one of my missions in life is to change their attitude,
and make them feel that mathematics in general and calculus in particular can really be an enjoyable subject and accessible to people.
But I did want to read you a specific example of a person and his attitude toward mathematics and calculus.
And this is Sir Winston Churchill in his autobiography of his early life called My Early Life, A Roving Commission.
He talked about various things in his early life, including in chapter three, he talked about taking examinations.
He was rather a different high school student and had to pass some examinations in order to go to the military academy.
And he had difficulty passing these examinations, had to take them several times.
Winston Churchill, of all people, had trouble with examinations.
And in this section, he talks about his attitude toward mathematics.
So he proceeds and says this.
All my life, from time to time, I have had to get up disagreeable subjects at short notice.
But I consider my triumph, moral and technical, was in learning mathematics in six months.
Well, he goes on.
He said, at the first of these three ordeals, I got no more than 500 marks out of 2,000 for mathematics, 2,500 for mathematics.
At the second, I got nearly 2,000.
I owe this achievement not only to my own back-to-the-wall resolution, for which no credit is too great,
but to the very kindly interest taken in my case by a much-respected Heromaster, Mr. CHP, male.
And he goes on.
And he says, of course, what I call mathematics is only what the Civil Service Commissioners expected you to know to pass a very rudimentary examination.
I suppose that to those who enjoy this peculiar gift, the waters in which I swam must seem only a duck puddle compared to the Atlantic Ocean.
Nevertheless, when I plunged in, I was soon out of my depth.
When I look back upon these care-laden months, their prominent features rise from the abyss of memory.
Of course, I had progressed far beyond vulgar fractions and the decimal system.
We were arrived in an Alice in Wonderland world at the portals of which stood a quadratic equation.
And here is where he gets to calculus.
He said, further dim chambers lighted by sullen, sulfurous fires were reputed to contain a dragon called the Differential Calculus.
But this monster was beyond the bounds appointed by the Civil Service Commissioners who regulated the stage of Pilgrim's heavy journey.
So calculus has a reputation as being a real monster, a dragon with a fiery breath.
But as a matter of fact, calculus doesn't have to have that aspect at all.
Calculus is what we come to find from looking at a car driving on a road, at throwing a ball in the air, at all of these everyday things.
And we will see that, in fact, the whole structure of calculus is really the exploration of just two ideas, and that both of those ideas arise from these everyday phenomena.
But I want to say a word about why it is that calculus has been so incredibly effective at describing our world.
Calculus has allowed us not only to describe the world, but to manipulate it.
That's why we are able to do these things in the world, because we can predict what's going to happen if we throw a ball or if we hit something.
The reason that calculus is so important is that calculus deals with change, change and motion.
That is the basic underlying issue that calculus addresses.
You see, you can look at the world in various ways. You can look at it as a static place.
You can look at objects as fixed static things and describe them, and that's important.
And you can understand features of the world by taking that sort of static view of it.
But in real life, the things that make the world interesting is the dynamicism of it, the dynamics of it, the fact that it's moving and changing.
So when calculus came about, it was trying to overcome some basic issues associated with understanding motion and change.
Back in the ancient world, in the 5th century BC, in fact, so 2500 years ago, the Greek philosopher Xeno posed several paradoxes about motion.
It turns out that motion, something that we see every day, we move all the time, it turns out that it's one of those issues that if you think about it, you get confused.
And that's what Xeno pointed out in his paradoxes of motion. If you think about it, you get a little more confused.
What a paradox is, and I'll tell you Xeno's paradoxes in a minute, but what a paradox does for us is it presents the same situation from two different points of view.
And the two points of view lead to opposite conclusions.
And what's paradoxical is that you have two very compelling ways of looking at the same situation that are diametrically opposed.
Often paradoxes are great generators of ideas because you have these two ways of looking at the same thing that give you different answers.
And so you know that somehow one of them is wrong. You need to resolve those two, either come to grips with the two.
Let's talk about Xeno's paradoxes specifically.
So one of Xeno's paradoxes was the paradox of the arrow.
So you shoot an arrow. Here's the arrow going by in the air.
And Xeno asked the question, well, in what sense is it moving?
We all know the arrow is moving, it goes across the room, it's moving.
But he said the following, at every instant, the arrow is in just one place.
Just one place.
So what sense is there in saying that at that moment, at that instant, the arrow is moving?
You see, because at one moment it's not moving. It's just in one place.
Well, it's a little bit puzzling, and I hope that you at least get a sort of a sense of it's a little puzzling.
One of the things that's puzzling about Xeno's paradox is that if you think about it, it starts to bring up issues of infinity in the following sense.
You might say to yourself, well, maybe what's really going on here is that the arrow in sort of an infinitely small amount of time,
goes some specific infinitely small amount of distance, and that's what motion is.
But that's troublesome, because what in the world does it mean infinitely small?
That's not really a concept that has any meaning.
If you talk about motion, in general, what you're talking about is saying the arrow is here at one moment, it's somewhere else at another moment,
and it took a certain amount of time to get from here to there.
That's what we think of as motion. It's a change in position over change in time. That's motion.
But if you look at instantaneous motion, then you have to ask yourself, in this zero amount of time, how far did it go?
And that is the puzzle.
And indeed, that is one of the problems, the conceptual issues that calculus actually resolves.
We find a way to deal with infinite processes, and particularly the concept of sort of zero over zero.
Zero motion in zero time is what you'd think about when you think of instantaneous motion, and we try to make sense of that.
Now, at first, it doesn't make any sense, and that was the paradox of Zeno.
He said it doesn't make any sense to say it goes some distance in zero time, because it doesn't. It's in one position.
So trying to resolve that kind of puzzle was part of the accomplishment of calculus.
From the time of Zeno, nearly more than 2,000 years elapsed before calculus really came to its full development.
And during that time, there was a steady progress of mathematical ideas that needed to be developed before we could understand calculus the way we know it now.
I thought it might be fun to see some of the many people who participated in this long development and to hear about them.
We should actually begin before Zeno in the 6th century BC when Pythagoras started his school of mathematics and, of course, invented the Pythagorean theorem.
Then Zeno came along in the middle of the 5th century BC, and in the middle of the 4th century BC,
Greek by the name of Eudoxus developed a method called the method of exhaustion, which was very similar to one of the basic ideas of calculus.
And we'll see that method in action in lecture 11.
At about the year 300 BC, Euclid invented the axiomatic method of geometry and wrote probably the most famous math book ever written, the elements, Euclid's elements of geometry.
In 225 BC, Archimedes used this method of exhaustion to develop formulas for areas and volumes of geometrical figures.
And we'll see a wonderful example of his application in lecture 11.
Skipping ahead a couple of thousand years, we get to the year 1600.
At that time, Johannes Kepler and Galileo Galilei were working on motion, planetary motion, and describing the motion of objects using mathematical formulas.
In 1629, Pierre de Faumeur developed methods for finding maxima of values, and we will see that idea in action in lectures 9, 22 and 23.
And he was very close to being an inventor of calculus in 1629, but not quite.
In the 1630s, Bonaventura Cavallieri developed a method which he called the method of indivisibles that we'll also see in lecture 11.
That was very close to one of the ideas of calculus.
René Descartes was famous for his Cartesian coordinate system that made a connection between algebra and geometry.
In 1669, Isaac Barrow was Newton's teacher, and he gave up his chair in mathematics to his famous student, Newton.
And I thought this was such a nice thing to do until I learned that actually he just got a better job.
Finally, we come to the two people whose names are most closely associated with calculus.
These are Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz.
These are the two people who are associated with calculus, you say invented calculus.
But as we see, actually the developments are definitely incremental.
And the fact that both of them invented calculus near the same time independently shows that the idea was in the air.
In fact, Isaac Barrow, Newton's teacher, actually expressed the fundamental theorem of calculus, which we'll talk about more in a few minutes.
He actually wrote it down in some of his papers before Newton, but didn't recognize it for its significance.
From the time of the invention of calculus forward, many people developed variations on the idea and applied it to many applications in life,
to physics and economics, probability and all sorts of things.
Johann and Jacob Bernoulli were two of eight Bernoullis involved in developing calculus and applying it on the continental Europe.
Landhart Euler developed a tremendous amount of mathematics, including applications and extensions of calculus, especially infinite series.
Joseph Louis Lagrange worked on the calculus of variations, which is a branch of calculus.
Pierre Simon de Laplace worked on partial differential equations and applied calculus to probability theory.
Jean-Baptiste Joseph Foyer invented ways to approximate certain kinds of dependencies, certain kinds of functions with circular functions,
sines and cosines.
And this idea actually came from looking at epicycles, which were the old way of trying to describe planetary orbits before the time of Kepler.
Augustine Louise Koshy developed ideas about infinite series and tried to formalize the idea of limit.
George Friedrich Bernhardt Riemann, and here we're in the 1800s, by the way, middle of the 1800s, he developed the modern definition of the integral,
one of the two ideas of calculus.
In the middle of the 1850s, Carl Weierstrass formulated the rigorous definition of limit that we know today.
And notice that that time, 1850, is more than 150 years after calculus was invented by Newton and Leibniz.
So it took a long time to understand calculus even after it was invented.
So if you don't understand calculus the very first time you see it, it took humanity 2,000 years and it takes all of us quite a bit of time to understand.
In fact, essentially nobody understands calculus the first time they take it.
I didn't understand calculus the first time I took calculus.
And in fact, among my friends of math teachers, most of them didn't understand calculus the first time.
When we first understand calculus is the first time we apply it by teaching it.
That's when we actually understand calculus.
But much of the mathematical development during all of these centuries was aimed at describing things in the world,
describing motion, planetary motion, the motion of moving objects, describing the things that we see around us.
And the idea of understanding the world and being able to manipulate it really means in our modern era to write down a mathematical relationship that describes dependent quantities.
For example, if we want to understand the motion of the planets, what we want to do is write down a formula that says at this time this planet will be here,
that's the idea of a function, by the way.
A function is a thing that expresses a relationship between dependent quantities, such as position is dependent on time.
The position of a planet is dependent on what time it is.
But we often capture the relationships between dependent quantities by writing down formulas that describe the relationship between the two of them.
That's what a mathematical model is.
A mathematical model is an abstract relationship that then corresponds to reality in an effective way.
Let me give you an example of a very simple one.
Let's take a circle.
We all know the formula for the area of a circle.
If you know the radius of a circle, then the area of this circle is pi r squared.
So that means if this radius is 15 inches, then we know that the area is pi times 15 times 15 square inches, 225 pi square inches.
We don't have to measure the area of this individual circle because we have described a relationship between those two varying quantities, the radius and the area, that always works.
So that's an example of a simple mathematical relationship that we seek to find to explain reality.
If we're trying to explain the motion of the planets, what we mean is describing a mathematical formula that corresponds then to reality.
If we want to explain economics, we want to get a mathematical model which predicts what is going to happen.
Now in the case of economics, we're not as good at it, as accurate as we are in other realms.
But that is what we view as the goal of understanding.
Relationships between varying quantities are often described and visualized by looking at graphs.
Because you see a graph, and you've all seen graphs that are very familiar like the Dow Jones price over time.
That's a graph that illustrates the relationship, which is a function between time and the Dow Jones average.
Let's look at an example or two of relationships described by graphs.
Here's an example of a graph that relates time on this axis to the power output at a nuclear generating facility.
And it's a particular date. This is April 25th, 1986.
You can see that at this time, it was operating at its normal operating level.
And then at 1 a.m., it began to generate less and less power.
And the slope of this graph, the fact it's going down, tells us that something about what's happening in the world, less power is being generated.
Here it levels off for a time and now it begins to lose ground and generate even less power.
All of a sudden, it generates tremendous amounts of power.
There's a huge upsurge.
It turns out this is the graph of the power output of the Chernobyl nuclear facility on the day that it went critical, which was April 26th, 1986.
So it's an example of showing visualizing a relationship between two varying quantities, in this case time and power output.
Well, the important thing about being able to visualize relationships between two varying quantities graphically is a concept of abstraction.
In mathematics, we can deal not only with a particular varying quantity, but we can deal in general.
There are some Stone Age people living today who count one banana, two bananas, three bananas, but they can't count one, two, three.
Well, in mathematics, once you get the idea of abstracting the ideas to apply to anything, then once you have a description of the mathematical underlying relationship,
then that same idea can be applied to any situation that has those relationships.
So here's a sequence of graphs that illustrate this idea.
This is a graph associating elephant population with some varying quantity.
Here's profit on shoes, depending on number produced.
Here is time telling us how high a baseball is.
Here is the width of an area of a rectangle around a river.
Notice that the shape of the graph itself didn't change at all.
So if we can do mathematics that helps us understand the shape of the graph, then we've automatically understood all of those other features.
Well, calculus then is really based on two fundamental ideas, and it's the exploitation of those two fundamental ideas that leads to the whole world of calculus.
The two ideas have names.
One is called the derivative and one is called the integral.
And what's amazing to me is how powerful these ideas are in the sense of how rich the applications of them are.
This is an example of a typical textbook in introductory calculus, and it has more than 1200 pages.
Now, to a student, these are 1200 different pages.
To a professor, it's two ideas and 1198 pages of examples, applications, and variations.
And that's the way we will see calculus during this series of lectures.
The two ideas, one is the derivative and called the derivative and one is called the integral.
I'm not expecting you to have any idea of what those words mean.
But the derivative is a way of measuring instantaneous change.
It's talking about how we can quantitatively think about change.
And the integral is talking about the accumulation of small pieces that add up to some object.
It gives us a perspective of the world that I find very attractive, namely a dynamic view of the world.
We can look even at static things in a dynamic way.
For example, let's look at the volume of a sphere.
Well, we can think of this sphere as just sitting there, and that's the way we ordinarily think of it.
But another perspective is to see it as growing from a point and developing into a whole sphere by the addition of layer upon layer upon layer of thin membranes.
And that accumulation of thin pieces to form the whole is the idea of the integral.
We can see a cone growing by adding discs coming down.
We can see here's a pyramid growing from a point.
Here's a cube growing from one side coming up layered on three sides being added to grow into a bigger and bigger cube.
We can also think of a cube as growing from one side, taking one face and adding just thin squares that accumulate into a cube.
Now, this is an interesting idea because each of those thin squares has no volume.
It's infinitely thin, and yet when we put them together, we get the entire substantial cube.
So this is an idea of infinity, taking something infinitely thin and accumulating it to the whole thing.
And this is the idea of the integral.
Well, it turns out the way we're going to approach these two ideas of the derivative and the integral are that we're going to not take the shortcut of oversimplifying.
Einstein said, I want things presented as simple as possible, but not simpler.
So in this course, we're going to try to be authentic and really tell the ideas that make up calculus.
The two ideas, the derivative and the integral, both come from a scenario of analyzing a car moving down a road.
And just thinking very clearly about that idea leads to these two tremendously influential ideas.
In lecture two, we talk about the derivative specifically.
In lecture three, we talk about the integral, and then in lecture four, we see the connection between the two of them.
We see that they're really two sides of exactly the same coin, and the way we present them, it'll be obvious.
If I succeed, it'll seem completely obvious to you that those two things are opposites of one another.
Those two ideas are related. So if successful, it'll seem obvious, and you'll say, what's the big deal?
In lectures five through nine, we'll talk about applications of the derivative, visualizing it, abstracting it to things other than a moving car.
We'll talk about how to actually do derivatives in a simple mechanical way, harking back to this mechanical view of calculus.
And then in lectures eight and nine, we'll talk about some applications of the derivative to baseball and to optimization, finding the best of all possible worlds.
In lectures 10 and 11, we'll talk about ancient Greek mathematics that led to ideas of the integral, very close to the integral that happened to millennia before the integral was actually invented.
And then we'll do a parallel sequence of lectures about the integral to what we did about the derivative, visualizing it, applying it to different settings from where we established it,
and then talking once again about the fundamental theorem of calculus, but now we have a more robust view of the derivative and the integral.
In lectures 16 and 17, we're going to do the mathematical underpinnings of this whole subject, which will allow us to deal with infinity in the formal way that makes everything work.
Then there's a sequence of lectures from 18 to 23 that talk about applications of derivative and the integral to all sorts of different settings, including physics, music, economics, and business, and biology.
And finally, we'll see that calculus is everywhere in the last lecture. Calculus is all around us, calculus is our friend.
So I hope that in the sequence of lectures, we will come to find that calculus is something that is one of the greatest intellectual triumphs of humanity, and it will be my great pleasure to lead you on a tour of this most enjoyable subject.
Thank you.
