In the last lecture and this lecture, we're talking about ways that the ancient Greeks
found formulas for common geometrical shapes.
And in the last lecture, we found how the Greeks found formulas for the volume of a
cone. Remember, it's one-third the area of the base times the height.
And that was also true for a pyramid or a tetrahedron.
And then we also found that the surface area of a sphere, surface area of a sphere, was
equal to 4 pi r squared. And that was a really amazing fact.
And we're going to use those facts, combine them together, to find now the volume of a
solid sphere.
So the goal of the day is to find the formula for the volume of a solid sphere.
So the first method is due to a gentleman by the name of Bonaventura Cavallieri, who
lived in the 17th century, and this was somewhere in the year approximately 1635.
He had a method of analyzing geometrical shapes that was called the method of indivisibles.
And the concept that he had was this. Suppose that you have an object such as this sphere
and you wanted to find out what its volume is.
Well, you could think of the sphere as being made up of a lot of little triangles, that
is, the surface of the sphere, just little tiny triangles. And in fact, so tiny that
he called them indivisibles. So he was thinking of them as sort of infinitely small, infinitesimally
small.
Well, if you take a little triangle that's on the surface of the sphere and then you
comb down to the center point of the sphere, what do you produce? Well, you produce what
we talked about in the last lecture, a pyramid over a triangle, which is called a tetrahedron.
So you have that tetrahedron that comes down from the surface of the sphere down to the
center.
Well, suppose you cover the entire sphere by little tiny triangles. Then you will have
then, if you cone to each one to the center of the sphere, you will have filled up this
volume. We learned last time what the volume of a tetrahedron is. It's the area of the
base times the height times one-third. That was the formula for the volume of a tetrahedron.
So if you have a lot of tetrahedra, all with the same height, namely the radius, the total
volume will be the area of the base times the height, r, added up over the entire surface
area.
So let's look at this specifically, and you should feel that you're right on the brink
of knowing the formula for the volume of a sphere using this perspective. So here we
have a picture where we can see inside the ball. You can see there's a little triangle
that cones down. This is a tetrahedron. And the volume then of the entire sphere is going
to be the area of the surface, which is what we figured out last time, 4 pi r squared times
the height of each of these little indivisibles, these little tetrahedra. That's r times one-third.
So putting this all together, we have the formula for pi r squared times one-third times
r, which is four-thirds pi r cubed. Well, this was a wonderful method of looking at
volumes of a sphere and getting the formula for the volume of the sphere. But the volume
of the sphere was known long before Cavaliere used this method. Indeed, it was known in
ancient times by Archimedes. Archimedes was an amazing mathematician. He lived in 225
B.C. And he had a method of finding the volume of a sphere that used levers. Remember, Archimedes
is famous for the same. He did levers. He knew how levers worked. And he said, if you
give me a lever long enough and a place to put the fulcrum, I can lift the earth because
he had the concept of a lever. Now, let me remind you of the concept of a lever.
If you have a lever balancing on a fulcrum, it's like a teeter-totter. And the way it
works is if you put the same weight at equal distances from the fulcrum, it will, of course,
but it's also true. It'll balance with other configurations of the weight. For example, if
you put a weight that is at half as far, half the distance on one side, and then you put
another weight that's twice the distance on this side. So in other words, if this is one
unit away in this direction and two units away in this direction, what will the weights
be that allow that to balance? Well, the answer is that it's the distance away from the fulcrum
times the weight is going to be the same as the distance away times the weight on the other side.
That's why he can lift the earth. If you have a very heavy object that's close to the fulcrum,
then the product of its weight times the distance, as long as that's equal to a longer distance
times a lighter weight, they will balance. So the concept of the lever is that two things balance
if it satisfies the mathematical relationship that the distance times the weight on one side
is equal to the distance times the weight on the other. So that is the concept of the lever.
And amazingly, he was able to take advantage of that idea and figure out the volume of a sphere.
Now, the way that he did it is very reminiscent of the integral, and that's why we're putting it
here in this lecture that is beginning our sequence of lectures on the integral, because it has the
concept of slicing up the sphere into thin bits and putting them together. And this is the perspective
that the integral actually will give us, as you will see in subsequent lectures.
So this was Archimedes' idea. So let's look at this picture. Archimedes envisioned a three
geometrical objects that were inside each other. One was this rather fat cylinder.
This is the outer green cylinder. One was a cone. You see this purple cone? And by the way,
these are inside each other. So they're touching, they're cutting right through each other. So
they're not separate. You just have to envision them. So you have this cone. The cone has the same
base as this outer base of the cylinder. And then it comes to a point right here at the fulcrum
of what's later going to be the lever. Of course, right now it doesn't balance because there's
nothing on this side at all. Everything's on one side, but we'll put some of the things on the
other side in a minute. Okay, so we have a cone. We have a cylinder. And then in the middle here,
we have a sphere. And the sphere has a certain radius r. And the radii and the dimensions of the
other objects are what you see in the figure. And so let me review them. The sphere is radius r,
and therefore it, and it's placed in this configuration. So it just touches at the
lever point, at the zero point. And therefore its other end is at the two r point because the radius
is r. The cone goes straight from the, its apex is at the lever point at zero. And its radius,
the radius of its base is two times r. And its height here is also two r. So it's just the base
of that cone is right at the edge of the sphere, far edge of the sphere right here.
And then the cylinder also has radius two times r, two times the radius of the sphere. And it is
just straight across going from the zero point of the lever to, for two r distance. Okay, so we
have these three geometric shapes put there. And you, you might wonder, well, why in the world,
what do they have to do with finding the volume of a sphere? But let me point out something
about these shapes. And that is that we know the volumes of two out of three.
And that's what we're going to take advantage of. We know the volume of a cylinder,
because the volume of a cylinder is just equal to the area of its base times its height.
We, we saw in last lecture the volume of a cone. The volume of a cone is its height
times the area of the base divided by three. So the, the missing link at this stage, because
Cavaliere wasn't around for another 2000 years, the missing link is the volume of the sphere. And
that's what, that's what Archimedes is going to get at. Okay, so now this is the way he did it.
And it, it's, it's just amazing. So what he did is envision the following process.
Suppose you think about taking this configuration that we have here, this set of three geometric
objects, and you take just a little thin slice that goes straight through all three. And what
we're going to do eventually is take slices all the way along and combine them. But for now,
let's just focus our attention on one particular thin slice. Well, when we, when we do that,
we get three things. We get a slice of the cylinder. You see, you have to envision all these
as solid objects. So you get a slice of the cylinder, you get a slice of the cone, right here,
and you get a slice of the sphere. And notice that all three of these are just disks. They're all
round circles, but they are of different sizes. The cylinder is the biggest. If we choose a
place to cut that's over here on the, on the far side of R, then the cone will be the next
biggest disk, and the sphere will be the smallest disk. Now here is the clever observation that
he, that our comedies makes. He said, suppose that I just envision these three disks by themselves.
Then I can balance them on a lever if I do the following thing. I leave the disk of the cylinder
where it is. I leave the disk of the cylinder exactly where it is. And I move the disks of the
cone and hang both of them from the place to R. Now, so the idea, remember that the, the disk
of the cylinder is the biggest one. So in order for it to balance, you've got to have the smaller
ones farther away. And it turns out that, that he showed that the volume, the volume of this little
bit of a cylinder, now remember it's two R in radius, and then it has a certain thickness, and
it's the same thickness as these blue and, and purple pieces of the sphere and the cone, that, that
if you leave the green disk where it is, it exactly balances if you put the sphere slice and the cone
slice at the two R mark. Likewise, if you take another slice at a different place and you leave
the green cylinder part where it is, but you move the blue and purple, the cone and the sphere parts
to two R, then they'll exactly balance. Now, I haven't, I haven't gone through the math of
showing you why these two things exactly balance. It's a little bit of geometry. It's not hard,
but it's, it's a little bit complicated. And instead of, of doing that, I want to just assert
that it's true and, and then proceed with the demonstration. Okay, so at this stage, what,
what do we find? Well, since for every slice, we can take the slice of the green cylinder and
balance it by putting the corresponding slice all hanging from the same place to R, then we learn
that if we combine all of them together, the entire sphere will be constructed over here,
the entire cone will be constructed over here, both hanging from the two R mark,
and the cylinder will be just staying where it is. Now, so now's the time. Let's actually see
that it works. And we'll just hope that it works. So here we go. We're actually going to do a
physical demonstration of this to see if it's true that a cylinder will balance the sum of the
sphere and the cone if they're placed in exactly that configuration. So here we go. Now, let me
first of all describe these individually. Notice that this is a cylinder whose height, whose thickness
here is exactly the diameter of the ball, two R. You see its height is exactly the same as this?
And notice also that the height of this, of the cone, is, is also the same. These are precisely
the same, two R high. Notice that this cone, its base is exactly the same. You see it fits exactly
on the top of the cylinder. So this is the cone that, that if you embedded it inside was the
original position of the cone. And so its height here is two R. And then the radius of it is two R.
And this sphere has radius R or diameter two R. So, so these objects do accord with the
situation we had. Now we're going to put them, we're going to, to put up, make a lever and
actually hang the cylinder on one side and the sphere and the cone on the other and we will
hope for the best. So here we go. There we go. Let's put this out of the way for a moment.
Balls tend to roll away. Okay, here we go. There we go. So
this is the lever and we're going to hang the lever from here. So remember how the cylinder is
configured. It goes right up to the lever part. So here it is. It goes right up to the point
where the fulcrum is. So the cylinder is now in its correct location. And then on this other side,
we hang the sphere and the cone. So here we go. Hang the sphere and the cone. And notice that their
entire weight is all at one location on the, on the, on the lever arm. And its location is precisely
equal to the width of this, of this cylinder. Now what will happen is if we put this on here,
it should exactly balance. And
yes, it does. It does. This is amazing. Okay. So this exactly balances. Now,
what does this tell us then about how, why is it that this allows us now to compute the formula
for the volume of a sphere? Well, remember, when does, when do things balance? They balance
if the product of the distance out from the fulcrum of one thing times the distance out from
the fulcrum times the weight of the other. So it's the distance times the weight
plus the distance times the weight, not plus. If the distance times the weight is equal to
the distance times the weight on the other side, that's when they balance.
So we know the distances and we know the weights. So let's put them together. By the way,
the weight is equivalent to volume. We're assuming these things are of uniform mass,
so that the weight is just the same as the volume. So now let's look at this and see what we know.
Since they balance, it says that the distance away from the fulcrum on this side times the
weight of the sphere plus the cone must be exactly equal to, well, here we have the cylinder,
it spans all the way from 0 to 2R, but it's the same as if we hung it from the point R because
it's symmetrical about that. So it's the same as just hanging it from the point R. So therefore,
we have the formula that the distance away from the fulcrum times this weight, the sphere plus the
cone, is equal to the distance away from the fulcrum times the weight of the cylinder. Well,
we know 2 out of 3 of those, so we can compute the equation for the volume of the sphere. And
here we go. We'll just do it. It looks a little complicated, but it's not because we know all
the formulas. So here's the formula that came from the balancing along the lever. And then if we
just do the distributive law, we have 2R times the weight of the sphere plus 2R times the weight
of the cone. What's the weight of the cone? Well, the cone is one-third base times height.
It's one-third, what is the area of the base of this cone? Well, the cone has a base whose radius
is 2R, so its area is pi times 2R squared times 2R, that is the height. So this formula right here,
one-third pi times 2R squared times 2R, is the equation for the volume of the cone,
and that's what we learned in the last lecture. And this is equal to, here's our R times, well,
what is the volume of the cylinder? Well, the volume of the cylinder is just the area of a face
times how high it is. Well, once again, its radius is 2R, so the area of the base of the cylinder
is pi times 2R squared, and its height, the height of the cylinder, that the width here of the cylinder
is 2R. So this is now the equation that we have. And then just doing, multiplying all these out
and combining them, we see we leave the 2R times the volume of the sphere, that's what we want,
the volume of the sphere. We leave it on this side, we combine all these things together,
and just do the math, and we see that 2R times the volume of the sphere
is equal to 2R times four-thirds pi R cubed. Dividing by 2R on both sides, we see that the
volume of the sphere is exactly equal to four-thirds pi R cubed. Now, this is, to me, this is just one
of the amazing things in mathematics that our comedies could figure out this volume of the sphere
using the principle of the lever, and using the idea of slicing the sphere and the cone and the
cylinder into little tiny pieces. And that's the idea of the integral, the idea of accumulating volume
by adding up thin slices. So this is a wonderful demonstration of the volume of the sphere.
Now, what I'd like to do is to reflect on this from the derivative and integral point of view.
That is to say, let's think about a sphere and see the relationship between our equation for the
volume of a sphere and our previous knowledge of the equation for the area, the surface area,
of the skin of the sphere. If we take this dynamic perspective of the world and we think
about the sphere as growing, then we have an image of the sphere as an onion, because onions are
exactly this way. You know how onions are. There's a layer upon layer upon layer of this thin coating.
They have this idea of building up the whole onion by thin layers. And that's the concept
of the dynamic view of this solid sphere. It's the accretion of thin layers that create the
entire volume. Well, if we take this dynamic view of the volume of a sphere, then what we see
is that the volume of a sphere of radius r, if we make an increment of delta r,
then that is showing the amount of substance in that thin shell, that shell that just covers
the surface. The amount of extra volume is helping us to figure out the rate at which the volume is
growing when we change the radius. So how fast is it growing? Well, the rate at which it's growing
is just the volume of this pink coating divided by how wide it is, the delta r change. It's the
volume of the bigger sphere minus the volume of the smaller sphere divided by how much the radius
has changed. Well, that expression is the derivative of the volume. In English, it means it's the rate
at which the volume changes when you change r. It's how influential a little bit of change in
radius is to the volume. And we see that the derivative, just using the formulas that we
saw in lecture seven of bringing down the exponent and dividing, we see that the derivative, sure
enough, of four thirds pi r cubed is four pi r squared. So all of these ideas are related.
The idea of how fast something is growing and the derivative and the volume and the surface area,
these are all related to each other. I'm going to move this out of the way. And then let's
let's see this relationship between volume and surface area in one or two other settings.
So we've seen this once before, and I want to revisit it in order to more clearly describe
the relationship of increasing volume to surface area, because now we're taking the integral
perspective. Remember in lecture four, we saw that the integral and the derivative were
opposite sides of the same coin. But we saw it then in the context of a car moving down the road in
terms of velocity and distance traveled. Well, here for the first time, we're beginning to see
that same relationship in terms of volume. So let's think again about a cube growing from
a corner and becoming bigger and bigger by the accretion of three sides. It becomes bigger.
So the rate at which the volume is increasing can be seen visually by looking at this pink
layer of material that is added to a cube if you add delta x to the length of each side.
You see that what you add is a layer of material on each of three sides, this side,
the top, and the backside. So the rate at which that volume is increasing is equal to the additional
volume divided by delta x, which is the amount of additional length that you're adding to each side.
And sure enough, you can see that if you view it visually, when you take, for example, this face,
the volume of this slab, what is the volume of the slab? It's the area, which is basically x squared,
times its thickness, which is delta x. So if you divide that area by delta x, you just get the
area of that side. Likewise, you get the area of the top and the area of the backside.
Now, so therefore, you see that the rate at which the volume is increasing is close to
3x squared, three times the area of the face, x squared. Notice once again that there are little
pieces that we're ignoring. You see this little square here? It's delta x by delta x, and then
it's x long. We're ignoring that. The reason we're ignoring it is that as we choose delta x to be
smaller and smaller, that becomes vanishingly small. And in what we'll later see is the limit
that that becomes negligible and goes to zero. Now, what I'd like to point out is to see that the
fundamental theorem of calculus, which connects the integral process with the derivative process,
is at play here in this example of, first of the example of the sphere that we saw a few moments
ago, and here the example of the increasing volume of the cube. Because you see that the
derivative of the volume is 3x squared. What that means is that if we add 3x squares worth of
sort of infinitely thin volume of just surface area, then the accretion of that addition over time
gives us the total volume of the cube. Just as when the car was moving down the road,
and its instantaneous velocity was given to us, then in a way we could think of the instantaneous
velocity as saying, how far do we go in a very small amount of time? If we add those together,
we get the total of the distance traveled. Well, likewise, if we add together these 3x
squares of additional incremental volume as we grow x, as we combine them together,
we get the total volume of a cube. Likewise, with a sphere, because 4 pi r squared is the surface area
of the sphere, then the integral of this 4 pi r squared, we would imagine as we grow it up like
an onion to be a solid thing, we can see that the totality of what we get is the opposite of the
derivative, the opposite of the rate at which it's growing, which is 4 thirds pi r cubed.
Well, in the next lectures, we will see the integral in a visual way, graphically, as we
did for the derivative, and then see further the fact that the integral can be viewed as this
sum of little pieces that accumulate to an entire volume or area or other complete entity.
