Professor Starbird is a professor of mathematics and a university distinguished teaching professor at the University of Texas at Austin.
He received his BA from Pomona College and his PhD in mathematics from the University of Wisconsin.
In 1974, Professor Starbird joined the Department of Mathematics at the University of Texas at Austin.
During his tenure, he has accepted visiting positions at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, the University of California at San Diego, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
From 1989 to 1997, Professor Starbird served as associate dean of the College of Natural Sciences, and he is a member of the Academy of Distinguished Teachers.
In his interest to bring authentic understanding of significant ideas in mathematics to the non-mathematician,
Professor Starbird has developed and taught an acclaimed class that presents higher-level mathematics to liberal arts students.
He has also authored a book on the subject, The Heart of Mathematics, An Invitation to Effective Thinking, co-authored with Edward B. Berger, was the recipient of a 2001 Robert W. Hamilton book award.
A popular lecturer on campus, Professor Starbird has won numerous teaching awards, including a mini-Stevens Piper Professorship awarded to ten professors each year in the state of Texas,
the Gene Holloway Award for Teaching Excellence, the oldest teaching award at UT, the President's Associates Teaching Excellence Award,
and the Friar Society Centennial Teaching Fellowship, which is awarded to one professor at UT annually.
Professor Starbird prepared the course guide that comes with these tapes.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical notes, and bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
These lectures are titled Change and Motion. Calculus made clear, Part 2.
These lectures are part of the Great Courses series, they are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are part of the Great Courses series, they are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are part of the Great Courses series, they are produced by The Teaching Company.
Well, last time we saw that the same process that was used to find the distance traveled if we know the velocity.
Also gave us the area under the graph of a curve.
And now we're going to see that that same process of dividing things up into small pieces, in the previous case small intervals of time,
that that same process of dividing things into small pieces and then doing a multiplication and an addition.
That is the central process of the integral allows us to compute all sorts of interesting numbers,
including the volumes of various solid figures and also including things such as the pressure on the side of a dam,
something that doesn't seem to have anything to do with the process of a moving car or a variant.
So that's the strength of the integral is that in its abstraction it can be applied to all these different arenas.
Well, let's begin then by finding an example that seems most closely allied to what we've already done.
And that is areas.
We saw that the integral is the area under the graph of a function.
And so let's see if we can turn that fact into a way to figure out the area of a circle, a familiar shape.
So let's begin here with this picture of a circle.
And just to be specific, let's think about a circle of radius 3.
So here we have a picture of a circle of radius 3 centered at the origin.
And we can see that the graph of that curve is described by a particular formula.
And the formula is, as you see, that at every point x away from the origin, the height is just computed using the Pythagorean theorem.
Since it's x across and since the radius of the circle is 3, then we know that this height, which is the height of the graph,
is exactly equal to the square root of 3 squared minus x squared.
So that is the formula for this circle.
Well, knowing the formula for the circle, we know how to find the area under a curve.
The area under a curve, remember, is equal to the integral.
So in this case, if we write down the integral from x varying from minus 3, that's the left-hand most part of the semicircle,
and we compute the integral of all the way for x varying between minus 3 and plus 3,
and at each value of x between those numbers, minus 3 and plus 3, what do we add up?
Well, we add up the height above x, but we saw that that height above x is exactly equal to the square root of 3 squared minus x squared.
And then we thicken it up by thinking about dividing up this area into little rectangles.
We'd make a small thickness of delta x, and if we added up a finite number of rectangles, as we see here,
we'd have an approximation to the actual area of that semicircle.
And then if we let the width of those little rectangles go to zero, we would end up with the integral.
And so, indeed, the area of a semicircle can be written as the integral as x varies from minus 3 to plus 3 of the square root of 3 squared minus x squared dx.
So that's an integral whose value is exactly half of the circle.
Well, we know what the area of a circle is.
It's pi r squared.
So in this case, since the radius is 3, the area of the whole circle is pi times 3 times 3, pi times 9.
And so the area of a semicircle would be 4 and a half times pi.
And if you took your calculator out and divided the interval from minus 3 to 3 into little tiny pieces and multiplied for each little piece,
the height above that piece times that thickness, like, say, 0.1 inch, you would see you would get a number adding up those sums of areas of rectangles that was approximately equal to 4 and a half times pi.
Well, let's now say we're not really interested in half a circle.
We're really interested in a whole circle.
So I want to do this slight variation just to show us moving away from the idea that we just have a graph of a curve and we're looking at the area under that graph and above the axis.
Instead, now let's look at the same picture but with the whole circle.
So here's our same circle of radius 3.
We're trying to find the area of it using integrals.
Well, the process would be the same.
That is, at every value x between minus 3 and 3, we simply draw a rectangle.
You see this tall rectangle that goes from the bottom portion of the circle up to the top portion of the circle.
Of course, it's just twice as long a rectangle as the part that was above the axis.
But the point is that if I add up the areas of these thin rectangles, I'm going to get a procedure that is what the integral gives us.
That is where we're adding up thin pieces times some value.
In this case, the value is the height of the part of the circle around the point x, at the point x.
It goes all the way from the bottom of the circle up to the top of the circle and it has a certain thickness delta x.
So if we add up all of those heights times delta x, we will get the area of the circle.
Well, this generates a different integral.
In this case, it's the integral as you see from minus 3 to plus 3 of 2 times the square root of 3 squared minus x squared dx.
And if we actually computed that integral, we would see that that would be the area of a circle.
So the goal of this lecture is to show a correspondence between a geometric goal and an integral.
So let's move on to another geometric object, namely a pyramid, and see if we can compute the volume of a pyramid using an integral.
So here we're moving entirely away from the idea of an integral being the area under a curve.
And we're just abstracting the idea and trying to apply it to the volume of a pyramid.
Well, so let's be specific and take a pyramid whose height is 200 feet and whose base is 400 feet by 400 feet.
In other words, it's 200 feet from the center of the pyramid to the middle of the edge.
How could we approximate the volume of that pyramid?
Well, the theme here is to take thin sections.
And in the case of the pyramid, we could take this pyramid, oh here I have a pyramid, we could take this pyramid and divide it into thin sections,
each of which was thin up and down, but each piece looks like a square times a little thickness.
And then those squares get smaller as we head toward the top of the pyramid,
or alternatively bigger as we start at the top and go down, and then they're a little bit of thickness.
So when you envision this pyramid, as you see in this picture, you shouldn't envision it any longer as a smooth pyramid on the side,
but rather as one of these step pyramids where it goes down and then out and then down and then out and then down and then out.
Because that is exactly the image that we have of our approximation of the volume of the pyramid.
It squares times a delta H.
Well, now let's interpret this in terms of an integral.
Whenever we can write something down as an expression that's a sum where each part of the sum is accomplished by multiplying a small thickness,
dH, by an area, which is exactly the setting we have here, then we can add them up by using the integral.
So let's see why it is that what integral it is that will yield the volume of this pyramid.
Well, what we would do is it's easier if we start at the top instead of starting at the bottom,
and so we'll think of our height as going downward instead of upward.
That just makes the algebra easier because if we go down to a particular distance H from the top,
and we look at this red highlighted slab, we can see that that slab is a square thickened up by a small increment of height that we are designated delta H.
So you see that red slab, it's at distance H down from the top, and what is its volume of that little tiny piece?
Well, the volume of that little piece, we have to look at the geometry of the whole pyramid to see how big the square is that is H units down from the top, H feet down from the top.
Well, notice that I picked the pyramid to have a shape so that at any distance down, the size of the square is half of the size of the square is the same as the distance down.
You see, because it's 200 feet down from the top and it's 200 feet over from the middle, therefore 400 feet all the way across.
So how big is the square at depth H?
Well, at H, since we're H down, then it's H units over to the edge, and therefore the whole square at this red square at depth H is exactly 2H on each side.
Therefore the area of this one little piece of volume is 2H squared.
When we thicken it up by this delta H, we get the volume of this one slab that's being added, accumulated to give us the volume of the whole pyramid.
Well, once we see that characteristic concept that for every H between 0 and 200, we have a contribution of the volume that's equal to 2H squared delta H.
Then we can see that adding up these little, like this one red slab, we have similar ones all the way from 0 to 200 as H varies between 0 and 200.
And that gives us an integral as H varies between 0 and 200 of 2H squared DH.
So when we interpret this integral as a sum, we look right here, we say, well, the 2H squared is the area of a square.
What square?
It's the area of the square corresponding to the H that's H units down from the top.
So the concept here is to be able to take a geometric situation such as the slabs that are making up a volume and interpreting it as an integral because we know how we would find the volume by adding up little pieces.
Okay, let's just do several of these and then you'll get in the swing of it.
Okay, so this was the pyramid.
Let's try a cylinder.
Okay, so here is the cylinder.
The cylinder is just positioned horizontally about the x-axis.
So it's just a sideways cylinder.
Okay, and to be specific, as you can see, it starts right here at the axis and it goes for four units out in this direction.
Then, and once again to be specific, let's assume that it is three units high.
So it's four units long and three units high.
Well, I picked this example because we know what the volume of a cylinder is.
We know what the volume of a cylinder is.
It's equal to the area of the circle times the height.
So for this particular one, since its radius is three, the area of this face is pi times three squared.
And then its height is four.
So the total volume is pi times three squared times four.
And nine times four is 36, so 36 pi.
So that's the answer, but let's look at it from the integral point of view.
Suppose that we take this cylinder and we think about dividing it into little thin vertical sections.
In other words, think of having a roll here in front of me and I just slice it with a knife into thin slabs.
Well, if I add up the volumes of each of those thin slabs, I will get the total volume of the cylinder.
Now, I know that in this case it seems silly because we already know the volume of the cylinder and why divide it up if you know how to do it.
But it's going to help us to understand the style of corresponding an integral to an addition process.
So here we go.
Once again, if we take a particular value x between zero and four,
you can see that if we've divided the cylinder up into little parallel slabs,
then at the point x, what is the contribution to the volume associated with x?
Well, it has a certain width, delta x, as you see, and it has a certain area of each face.
Well, in this case, the area of the face is always the same for every x.
It's just pi times three squared.
So the total volume of the cylinder is then equal to the area of each piece,
which is pi times three squared times delta x,
added together as x varies between zero and four.
So once again, once we have written a volume or anything as that kind of a characteristic sum with the delta x in there,
it gets transformed into an integral that gives the exact answer.
When the delta x changes to dx, you get the exact answer.
And so we see that the volume of the cylinder is the integral as x varies from zero to four.
Those are the two limits of integration from the bottom and the top of the nice S curve times,
well, what are we adding up?
Well, the area, pi times three squared, that's the area of each piece, times dx,
which is what the delta x was transformed into as delta x became arbitrarily small.
So that's a cylinder.
Let's do one that's very similar, except that this time the circles are going to change their size as they vary.
So here we have an example of a cone.
So the cone is positioned, I guess from your point of view, it should be this way, right?
OK, so from your point of view, it's this way.
OK, so the cone is coming out like this.
And if we think about slicing the cone into pieces, we see how we would approximate the volume.
We'd approximate the volume by thinking about adding up all these little slabs of pieces.
Now, here in this particular example, we're talking about a cone whose height is four and where this distance is three.
So this distance is four, and the radial distance at the end is three in this specific example.
Now, let's just think about what we get when we slice the cone.
Well, we do exactly the same as we've done many times before now,
is that we draw the picture of dividing the cone by vertical slices.
Now look at this red slab that we have right here at a typical place in the middle.
This red slab is just to be viewed as the characteristic piece that actually then occurs all the way between zero and four,
but it's what happens at this varying quantity x.
So if we are x distance away from the origin, how big is the contribution to volume associated with x?
Well, in this case, the x matters, because as we move further away from the origin, the area of the circle gets bigger.
We add more volume, whereas when the x was very small, then you added very little volume.
So we need an expression that tells us at this particular point x what is the radius of that circle at that distance away from the origin.
Well, we have to look at the picture and see. We have to see the geometry of it.
The geometry is telling us that there's a certain steepness to the cone.
And if we're x distance in, how big is the radius at that point?
Well, it depends on how steep the cone is.
Well, do we know how steep the cone is?
Answer? Yes, we do, because you see it rose three units, that's the radius at the end, for four units of motion this way.
Therefore, if you were x units away, how high are you?
Well, you're three quarters x units high.
So if we look then at our picture again, and we focus our attention on this red slab, this red disk, we see that since this is x units away, the radius of this disk is exactly three quarters times x.
Well, once we know that, we could write down the expression that would give us an approximation to the volume.
Namely, for every x starting here at zero and moving on to four, we would have an expression that said that we're contributing the area of this disk at point x times delta x.
That would be that red, the volume of that red slab, that red disk, and that is exactly equal to, what's the area?
Pi times three quarters x all squared, because that's the radius at that point.
You see the radius right here at that point is three quarters x, the point x distance.
So it's pi times three quarters x squared times delta x, the thickness.
When we pass to the making those delta x's get increasingly small, we simply change the delta x to dx.
Think about x's that vary continuously all the way from zero to four.
You just think of all of the x's between zero and four, not just five or ten of them as we have pictured in this case.
And that's what happens in the integral.
You pass to that limit and the integral then becomes the integral from zero to four of pi times, well, what's the radius?
Three quarters x squared dx, and that's the volume of the cone.
So we're expressing something that we want to know in terms of an integral.
Let's do another example that has nothing to do with geometry.
And this is to show the versatility of the integral and the process.
You see what the integral is telling us is if we're ever in trying to compute a value.
If our method for computing that value sort of naturally involves breaking up something into little pieces and adding them up,
that's a signal that tells us, well, maybe the integral is the thing to use.
So let's take an example of a water being held back by a dam.
So suppose we have a dam that's 100 feet wide and 40 feet deep.
100 feet wide, 40 feet deep, and the water comes right up to the top of it so that the water is also 40 feet deep.
And we want to know what is the total pressure that is against the dam?
Well, if we start to think about this example, the first thing that we notice is that pressure is something that changes with depth.
Right near the top, the water doesn't push very hard against the wall because there's not much pushing against that water.
I mean, you've all experienced this.
If you swim and you dive under the water, you feel the pressure on your ears because what you're feeling is the weight of the water that's above you.
And in fact, the deeper you go, the more the pressure is and the pressure is determined by how deep you are.
So this is just a fact about pressure.
Water weighs a certain amount.
In fact, it weighs about 62 and a half pounds for every cubic foot of water.
Sort of amazing, by the way.
One cubic foot of water, that weighs 62 and a half pounds.
It's heavy.
Water is a heavy thing.
And so what that means is that if you think about just stacking up cubes of water on top of each other, for example, suppose you had 10 cubes of water that were stacked up,
what would be the pressure on the square foot of the ground that it was pushing against?
Well, it would be 10 times the 62.5 pounds.
It would be that weight per square foot.
So in fact, if you're at any depth, the pressure, by the way, pressure goes in all directions.
So the pressure against the sidewall of the dam at a certain depth is the same as the pressure if you were taking something that was flat downward.
So when we're trying to compute the pressure against the wall of the dam, well, the problem is that at different depths, the contribution of the pressure to the total pressure varies.
At the top, it's very little.
And then as you go deeper, it's more.
So let's look here and see how we can view this as an addition problem.
You see, if you took the, how would you approximate the total pressure on the dam?
Well, one way to do that would be to say, suppose I took thin strips, you see these thin strips on the face of the dam.
Those thin strips, each one has an incremental depth that's labeled here delta H.
As usual, we use the delta to mean a small quantity.
And what this little thin rectangle has is a certain area to it.
Notice that that little rectangle is all at about the same depth because we have this is 100 feet wide.
And this little rectangle is H units down.
And it's just a little thin rectangle.
The reason that we're interested in that little rectangle is because at that depth, the total pressure on that little strip is about the pressure at that depth times the area.
The number of pounds per square foot at that depth times the area of that strip.
Whereas if we have a big thick area, we have the problem that the pressure varies from the top to the bottom of that part of the dam.
So if we envision just a thin part of the dam that's all at about the same depth, then we're in a position to compute how much pressure is on that little thin rectangle.
Well, let's see what it is.
OK, so here we have that red rectangle.
Notice it's H feet deep.
Well, how many pounds per square foot are there on something that's H feet deep?
Well, the answer is 62.5 times H. That's the number of pounds per square foot.
See, if you're H feet down, the number of pounds of water is 62.5 H pounds per square foot.
Well, how many square feet are in this little thin rectangle?
Well, how big is the rectangle?
It's 100 feet wide and it's delta H feet tall.
So the total amount of pressure on that one little thin part of the dam wall is exactly 62.5 H times 100 times delta H.
Because the 100 times delta H is the area and the 62.5 H is the number of pounds per square foot at depth H.
If we wanted to approximate the total pressure on the dam, we would say, well, how much pressure is on this strip, how much pressure is on the next strip, how much pressure is on the next strip, and then we'd add them up.
But that long addition problem looks like an integral.
And you notice that if we take smaller and smaller delta H's, we'd be adding more and more numbers together, but each one would have the same format.
62.5 H times 100 times delta H.
And H is varying between 0, which is H is actually the depth, the distance down from the top.
It varies from 0 depth, H equals 0, down to the bottom of the dam, which is 40 feet.
So if we want to sum that up, which is sort of a pun for the integral, to sum it up, what we would see is that the total pressure on that face of the dam is equal to the integral as H varies from 0 to 40, which is the total depth.
And at every depth H between 0 and 40, I'm asking myself, what is the contribution to the pressure at that depth H?
The answer, it is 62.5 H times 100 DH, where all we've seen is that the delta H of our approximation has changed to the DH of the final integral.
So what we've seen here is that the integral is a versatile tool that can be applied to all sorts of different subjects.
We saw it applied to finding areas. We've previously found it to find the distance traveled if we know of the velocity.
We've applied it to volumes, and here we applied it to finding total pressure on a dam.
It has many other applications as well, and it's one of the most important tools and useful tools in modeling our world.
