Starbird. Professor Starbird is a professor of mathematics and a university distinguished
teaching professor at the University of Texas at Austin. He received his BA from Pomona
College and his PhD in mathematics from the University of Wisconsin. In 1974, Professor
Starbird joined the Department of Mathematics at the University of Texas at Austin. During
his tenure, he has accepted visiting positions at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton,
the University of California at San Diego, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. From 1989
to 1997, Professor Starbird served as associate dean of the College of Natural Sciences, and
he is a member of the Academy of Distinguished Teachers.
In his interest to bring authentic understanding of significant ideas in mathematics to the
non-mathematician, Professor Starbird has developed and taught an acclaimed class that
presents higher-level mathematics to liberal arts students. He has also authored a book
on the subject, The Heart of Mathematics, An Invitation to Effective Thinking, co-authored
with Edward B. Berger, was the recipient of a 2001 Robert W. Hamilton Book Award.
A popular lecturer on campus, Professor Starbird has won numerous teaching awards, including
a Minnie Stevens Piper Professorship awarded to ten professors each year in the state of
Texas, the Gene Holloway Award for Teaching Excellence, the oldest teaching award at UT,
the President's Associates Teaching Excellence Award, and the Friar Society Centennial Teaching
Fellowship, which is awarded to one professor at UT annually.
Professor Starbird prepared the course guide that comes with these tapes. The course guide
includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical notes,
and bibliography. To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow
along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by the Teaching
Company. In all the previous lectures, we have been discussing calculus as being a method
of analyzing change and dependencies of one quantity to another. We started with the idea
of a car moving in a road and how its position was dependent on time. And then we analyzed
that. We took its derivative to find the velocity, how fast it was going. We've analyzed other
things that depend on one varying quantity. For example, the volume of a sphere varies
according to the radius. If somebody tells you the radius of a sphere, you know what
the volume of that sphere is. The volume is dependent only on one varying quantity. But
in real life, there are many things that vary according to several different independently
varying features. Let's take a very simple example. Suppose that you are walking on a
mountain above a flat plane. You have a flat plane here and you're walking around in the
flat plane and you're trying to see what the altitude is. Well, the altitude at every given
place is dependent on both where you are north-south and where you are east-west. It's dependent
both on your longitude and your latitude. So, for example, if we think of this as a
terrain here, this is the terrain, then if you wanted to say what the altitude is at
this point, you'd say, well, where am I this way, where am I this way, and then what is
the altitude right there? So, this is an example where altitude is a number that is dependent
on two potentially varying quantities, your east-west direction and your north-south direction.
So this is a slightly different kind of an issue from what we had in the case where a
quantity was just dependent on one varying variable, one varying quantity. But the versatility
of calculus is that once we have the philosophy of it, the philosophy of calculus is that
we can find things like rate of change. We can measure how things are changing, how dependent
quantities are influencing one another, how the change of one thing entails a change in
the other, the rate at which one influences another. But here we have a possibility of
several varying features that influence one single quantity, like the altitude. Well,
as you can see, the kinds of issues that we face in trying to deal with like terrain are
somewhat more complicated and more interesting than they were when we just had one varying
quantity. When we had just one varying quantity, like position as something that's dependent
on time, of a car moving in a straight road, then we could capture all the information
there in a graph because at every time on the time axis, we'd have a position on the
position axis, and that graph told us everything there was to know about where we were at each
time. Well, if we're talking about a quantity such as altitude that we view as dependent
on two different variables, then our capturing that information is a little bit different
because here we have the potential to plane, the plane of the ground, and at every point
in that plane of the ground, we have a number, the altitude. If we drew what we would call
a graph of that changing quantity that's dependent on two varying quantities, we would
actually get something that looks like the model of a terrain, the model of a mountain
and a valley because at every point in the two variable plane, we have a height. So that
shows that if we look at the mathematical description of a graph, the analogous thing
to a graph is going to be a surface, a surface above a coordinate axis, if you will, where
you're given two points, you get one value. Now, incidentally, in the next lecture, we're
going to turn this around and we're going to say, suppose one varying quantity gives
us two values and in each of these cases, as we think of all permutations of ways that
some set of varying factors can influence some other varying factor or factors, we can apply
the philosophy of calculus and get insight into exploring the meaning of those different
variables. But today, we're going to talk about these situations where you have two independently
varying quantities that together give a particular number. So let's try to ground our discussion
by a specific example. The example that we'll talk about is the area of a rectangle. The
reason that I want to talk about the area of a rectangle is it's about as simple a quantity
that's dependent on two factors that I could think of. And remember the philosophy of this
whole course is if you can think of the simplest possible example of a phenomenon, explore that
and understand it because then you'll have developed strength so that we can move on
to more complicated ones. So let's think about this rectangle. Well, for any choice of length
and width, if we multiply the length times the width, we get the area. So this is an
example where one number, the area, is the result of two choices, the length and the
width. So this is what is called a function of two variables because you've got two things
that can vary, the length and the width. And together, by looking at both of them and
combining them in a certain way, you get a number, in this case, the area. So let's think
about what kind of issues that are calculus like that we might want to explore in relation
to this function of two variables. Let's go back to our altitude issue here. If we're
on the side of a mountain, what kind of questions would we ask about being on the side of a
mountain? Well, one question that you could ask is how steep is it? But that question
is not good enough question. How steep is it when you're on the side of a mountain? That's
not a very good question. The reason it's not a very good question is that it depends
which way you go. It's steep if you go directly uphill, it has a certain steepness. But of
course, if you go at some other angle, it has a different steepness. So what we're interested
in analyzing, the analogous question, analogous to the question of how does the change in
one varying quantity influence a change in another varying quantity. In the case of altitude,
the concept is a little bit more complicated. Because you see, you could vary either the
east-west direction and see how steep it is, how fast it's going up or down. Or you could
vary the north-south direction and see how fast you're going up or down. Or any direction
in between. You could go at a diagonal and say, how steep is it if I go that way? How
steep is it if I go this way? You see, so you have a much richer collection of questions
that are analogous to this question of how fast is one quantity changing relative to
a change in some varying quantity. Okay, so let's return now to the rectangle and see
if this added richness of questions can be applied to the rectangle. So the area of a
rectangle and the way that a function of two variables is written is you have the two variables
with a comma in between. The area, depending on a particular choice of length, comma, width
is equal to the length times the width. So let's suppose that we consider a rectangle
of a particular size, two by five, length five with two. And let's ask calculus questions
about that rectangle. Well, what are the calculus questions about the rectangle? Well, the questions
are how does the area change for a change in the quantities that are making up that area?
In other words, how would the area of our rectangle be influenced? At what rate would
it be growing if we allowed the length to grow? And how much would it change if we allowed
the width to grow? At what rate would the area increase if we increase the length by
a certain amount or increase the width by a certain amount? Well, let's just look at
it. If you look at this rectangle, it's a five by two rectangle, length five with two. What would
it mean to say the rate at which the area is changing for a change in the length? What it means
conceptually is that we're going to grow the length by a little tiny bit and we're going to see how
much the area grows. And then we're going to divide the change in the area divided by the change in
the length to see the rate at which the area is growing. You see? Because if you add a foot, of
course, the area grows more than if you just add an inch. But the rate at which it grows, in other
words, the multiplication factor of how much the area is growing compared to the rate at which the
length is growing, that is the rate of change as we have spoken about before of how one factor is
influencing another. So this really neat symbol, the D of derivative has been transformed to this
extremely elegant script delta. And the script delta of A and with the script delta of L at the
bottom is the analogy to the derivative. And it is called the partial derivative of the area with
respect to the length. Because it's saying how is the area changing if we fix everything else, we fix
the width, and we just allow the length to change. You see, in that case, we've sort of taken our
problem of two varying quantities and disaggregated the two. And we fixed the width for the moment, we
just fixed the width, and we say, OK, I'm not going to change the width at all. And just if we change
the, let's see what happens when I just change the length. But if I just change the length, I'm back
to the case of just one varying quantity influencing the outcome. It's just the length that's
changing if I keep the width fixed at two. And then it's really very easy problem to see why it is that the
rate of change of the area, if I change the length, how much will the area change? Well, let's just think
about it. Suppose you added an extra unit of length. How much additional area would you add? Well, you'd
add two square units. You see, you'd have just this block that I've drawn here of two square units. Or
suppose you added just half a unit. Then you see you would add one square unit of additional area, but one
divided by how much change in length, a half, one divided by half is again two. One divided by half is two.
The point is, it's the rate that we're considering, the rate at which the area is growing when we increase the
length. How much is the area growing compared to the change in the length? So geometrically, we see that the
answer is two because we're just tacking on a little strip whose height is two. Now let's just look at the
same question from the point of view of the width. If we have this rectangle that's two by five, well, we could
alter the width by just a little bit. We could change the width a little bit. And if we do so, of course, we increase
the area. We increase the area by adding a little strip at the top here. Well, at what rate will the area increase if we
keep the length fixed and we just add a little bit to the width? Well, let's think about it. I mean, once again, if we
add just a little thin rectangle, as you see here, to this side of this rectangle, and you divide by the delta W, the
little width that you have added, the rate at which you're adding area is exactly five because that ratio will always just
be five. Now, OK, so what does that say? Well, one thing it says is that if you wanted to build a room and suppose
your room were two yards by five yards, and you said, oh, I have a little bit of extra wall that I could add to the room.
Would it be better to add that extra wall to increase its length? Or would it be better to add the extra wall to increase its width?
Well, what this says is that if you increase its width, the area is changing faster, is growing more at a faster rate than if you
change its length. So you would be better off to add the extra bit of width this way to create a bigger room that it would have more
area than if you use the same amount of extra wall and added a bit of length. So this is a simple example of something that is varying,
the area is varying according to two independent numbers that can change. But of course, they don't have to change independently. You see, you
might want to change both the length and the width. You could change both the length and the width, and you could change it in any
combination. For example, you could change the length by twice as fast as you change the width. And then you could ask, at what rate is the area of
this rectangle growing if I change the length and the width simultaneously according to some proportion? Let's look at an example. What do I
mean by this? Let's look at an example. Suppose you decide, OK, I'm interested in what happens to the area if I increase both the length and the
width simultaneously at the same rate. You see? So in other words, it's a rectangle. It starts out being two by five, and then you allow it to grow both
length and width in the same amount. Well, then what kind of a question from a derivative point of view should we be asking? We should be asking the
question at what rate is the area growing when we change the dimensions of the rectangle by adding a little bit of length and a little bit of width
simultaneously? To do that, the computation that we would want to do is this. We're changing at this angle, this delta V. This is the angle that we're
changing the length and the width, and it's 45 degrees. You see, 45 degrees because we're changing the length and the width by the same amount. And so the picture that we have is
that for a little bit of change in this direction, we add this amount of additional area. If then we say, OK, let's do the derivative philosophy to this. The derivative
philosophy is that we see how much additional stuff we have, that's the air of the pink, and we divide by how much length, how much additional unit of length we changed in order to accomplish that change in area. It's the ratio of the
change in area divided by the change, in this case, how much diagonal distance we changed. So if we make that computation, we would get another kind of derivative, a derivative that it talks about the combination of changing two variables simultaneously in concert. And we can find formulas that tell us what the effect is of
individual changes and how we can then compute what the change would be to the total in all sorts of different combinations of changing the width at one rate and the length at another rate and anything like that you can think of. So this is an example of the kind of analysis that we would want to do if you're talking about quantities that are varying on the basis of two independent varying quantities.
Well, what we're trying to do here is to go through our analysis of functions of just one variable, the ones that we've been dealing with the whole time up to this point, and try to see analogies to how the analogous situation might work in this more complicated case of having a surface as the graph instead of just a line.
Well, remember that if you have a smooth curve, one of the features of a smooth curve was that if we magnified it, you look at it very, very close, it began to look like a straight line. And that straight line had a slope equal to the derivative. That was a characteristic of a smooth curve when you magnified it, got closer and closer to a straight line.
Well, let's think. What is the analogous situation for a surface? Suppose that you have a surface that's varying according to two independently varying quantities. What would you expect if you get to a point and you magnify that surface? You look at it very, very close. What would you expect to see?
Well, let's think about it. You have the smooth surface, and it has maybe a curve to it like this, a smooth curve to it, and then you look at that curve up very, very close, and you look at it very, very close, and you look at it very, very close. What does it begin to look like?
First of all, let me tell you, you all have this experience in everyday life. Suppose you're on the ocean. If you're on the ocean, you are on the graph of a function of two variables because you're on the surface of a globe.
And what happens when you look outside that ship and you look at the ocean right near you? What does it look like? Well, it looks like Kansas. It looks flat, completely flat, so that magnified, a smooth surface looks like a flat plane, a tangent plane.
Just like we had a tangent line to a curve that just touched it and was somehow showing the shape of the line, the direction that that curve was going, here we see that at a single point we see a flat plane.
And so if you're standing on the side of this mountain, if it were, instead of actually a rough mountain with rocks and so on, if it actually were the graph of a smooth function of two variables and you were standing there on the smooth graph, and if you looked very close, you were just a very tiny person and it was a huge mountain, you would just see a flat plane.
And that plane would tell you how steep it is going up in this direction and in all the other directions because it would be like just lying on a flat board.
So that is the analogy to the concept of derivative and tangent line. The analogous situation is these derivatives in various directions and tangent planes instead of tangent lines.
So that's another image that we have of this function of two variables. It's sort of an interesting image that when you see something like this, a smoothly varying surface, you should think to yourself, oh, if I look at it up close, it looks like a plane and then a plane in a slightly different orientation and a plane in a different orientation.
Every point looks like a plane in a certain orientation.
Well, remember some of the things that we did with functions of one variable. One of the things we did in building the best of all possible worlds, we found maxima and minima.
We found the places where things were best. And we can do a similar thing for functions of two variables. Let's think about it.
If you have a surface like this that represents some varying quantity where you have two independently varying numbers that both together comprise one number, the maximum point, the maximum points are going to occur at the peaks, at the tops of the mountains.
And the minimum points are going to occur at the bases of the valleys. Let's think in terms of tangent planes. What will be the image of the tangent plane if you were right on that surface and you looked at this in a greatly magnified way, what would that tangent plane look like at the maximum or the minimum?
What would it look like? Flat. It would be the place where the tangent plane was an exactly flat plane. It wasn't tilted this way. It wasn't tilted at an angle. It was absolutely flat because that would be a place where every direction you went, you fell off downward.
You never could go in a direction and actually rise to a higher level. It's at the place where you can stand still and you don't worry about falling off that you're at the peak, or incidentally the valley of a crater, either one.
Here's an example of a graph of a function of two variables and you can see here we've drawn tangent planes right at the peaks and here's another tangent plane at the very valley.
So this is a good example here of taking the concept of the derivative and applying it in a different setting.
But we've been talking about derivative so far and now we have to think about the integral. What is the analogous situation to the integral?
Well, remember the integral told us the area under a curve. That was one interpretation of the integral, is that it told us the area under the graph of a curve and above the axis.
That was one of the basic properties of the integral and we can take the analogous view and think about an integral of this function of two varying factors.
The integral associated with a surface is going to give us the volume underneath the surface.
So we move from this graph in the earlier lectures we had a graph and the integral gave us the area under the curve.
Well, here we have a surface which is the graph of a function of two variables and the analogous process to the integral is going to give us the volume underneath that surface.
Now since it's an integral that has a different character, it's an integral associated with a function of two variables, then we get to invent a notation that is even cooler than the notation for the integral.
The integral remember had that wonderful single s, that tall sensuous s, but the double integral, which is called the double integral because you have two varying quantities, has two of them put together.
So that is really neat. So here is an example of a formula using a double integral.
You could describe a cone. Here's a cone. Let me show you a cone.
You could describe a cone and view a cone as the graph of a function of two variables because you see at every point in the disk, the bottom of the cone, there's a certain height that takes you up to how high the cone is.
And since you can say for every point in here there's a certain height, then this is the graph of that function of two variables.
So the double integral will tell you the volume of the cone because the analogous thing to finding the area under a curve was to find the volume under a cone.
And so the way we would describe this, the notation for it, is that we say that here this expression, 1 minus the square root of x squared plus y squared, this is for every point xy, that's xy away from the origin.
It has x in the x direction, y in the y direction. How high is it till we get to the cone?
Well, if this is a cone whose center point is one distance up and its radius is one, then the height by the Pythagorean theorem, you see this, you can see it by the Pythagorean theorem, is 1 minus square root of x squared plus y squared.
And if you look at that, you generate this cone and if the expression for the double integral would, this is the notation for it, and the value of it would be exactly the volume of the cone, which we've seen it before.
We could also describe a pyramid in the same way and see that its double integral of that expression would give us the volume of a pyramid because once again, we can look at the pyramid as being the graph of a function of two variables.
For every point in the square, we see how high it is to get to the surface of the pyramid.
Well, I haven't said anything about how double integrals are actually computed. I mean, how do you actually go about finding an answer to a double integral that had that kind of a formula?
And I didn't tell you about it, but instead of telling you about it, I thought I would demonstrate the technique. So the technique is this.
Suppose that this is the volume we're trying to compute. So it's the volume underneath the graph of a function of two variables.
Now, the way that you actually compute these volumes is that you take this total volume, you're trying to find the volume underneath this surface, and the way you do it is you slice.
So you make a slice this way, and then since calculus is always a matter of thin slices, you take another slice, very thin slice.
Here's this thin slice. That was not too good of a thin slice, but it's good enough.
Now, this is a thin slice. Wow, is that thin? This is an extremely thin slice. It's supposed to be the shape of this thing.
It's a very thin slice, but I guess the moral of the story is that, first of all, that slicing bread doesn't work too well.
But the second moral of the story is that if you added up all these thin slices, you would get the volume of this bread.
And you would also have proved the important fact that calculus, and particularly calculus of functions of two variables, is the best thing since sliced bread.
