Managing money, especially when it comes to investing, can be complicated and confusing.
There are hundreds of investments to choose from, and it can be hard to tell them apart.
For example, one mutual fund calls itself a balanced fund, and another calls itself
a growth and income fund.
What's the difference between the two?
And the language of investing is full of technical terms and jargon we aren't familiar
with, like coupon yield, dividend yield, yield to maturity.
Do I have to be a rocket scientist to know what I'm doing?
And on top of that, investing can look pretty risky.
Maybe you want to invest, but you're worried about making a big mistake and losing your
savings.
Maybe you already got burned by an investment that lost money.
Given the ups and downs in the markets, investing might not seem a whole lot different than
playing roulette at the casino.
Is it really just a matter of luck?
Well, for both of these reasons, both because investing looks complicated and because it
looks risky, most people don't feel well prepared to make investment decisions.
And when we don't feel prepared to make decisions, we put them off if we can.
And it's so easy to put off investing decisions because there's no real deadline.
But putting off investing is one of the biggest mistakes that people make with their personal
finances.
It turns time, which can be one of your best allies, into your worst enemy.
Have you put off investing?
Well, if you have, I'm here to help you get started.
If you're already out there investing, I'm here to help you invest with more confidence.
In this course, I want to convince you that you don't have to be super smart or super
lucky to be a successful investor.
Investing well isn't about using fancy models or being foolhardy.
Like many things in life, it's about mastering the fundamentals.
Not convinced?
Well, let me tell you about one of the most brilliant investment decisions that I know
of.
You've probably heard of Warren Buffett, self-made billionaire who's been a very successful
investor for decades.
In the late 1990s, while the dot-com boom was taking off and stock prices were soaring,
Buffett refused to invest in any of these new companies.
And what was the reason?
He simply said, I don't understand these companies.
I don't understand what they do.
And I don't understand why they have such high prices.
And I won't invest in things I don't understand.
For a while, Buffett looked like an idiot because stock prices kept going up.
But eventually, the stock market fell dramatically.
As the market fell, everyone else suffered big losses on their portfolios.
But Buffett had plenty of cash to invest at much more attractive prices.
If you read about any great investor and how they make decisions, you'll find similar
stories.
They can explain in one sentence exactly why they bought what they did.
And their reasons always come down to basic fundamental ideas that make sense.
Now, I'm not going to tell you that you can all be Warren Buffett.
But in this course, we're going to learn the principles, the fundamental ideas that Buffett
and other successful investors rely on.
And I'll show you how to use them to become a more confident investor.
But I realize that your concerns about the complexity of investing and the risk aren't
just going to disappear.
That's why I want to deal with those concerns right away in this first lecture.
First, I'm going to start making the case that the basic ideas behind investing are
sensible and easy to understand.
Then I'm going to talk about the risks of investing.
I'll tell you what I think are the most serious threats to your investments and explain why
they're so bad.
But I'll also show you that there are sensible and effective ways to protect your investments
from these risks.
By the end of this lecture, I think you'll have a better picture of what you're getting
yourself into when you invest, the good things as well as the bad.
And hopefully any sense of frustration or dread that you associate with investing will
start to fade and may even be replaced with a little excitement.
So let's get started on learning those fundamentals that I keep talking about.
What is investing in the first place?
Well, basically investing is spending your money, time, or other resources in order to
create or acquire assets.
An asset is anything that holds on to its value over time.
Buying an asset is a way to store resources that you don't need now so that you can use
them later.
In other words, what we call investing is really a form of saving.
Now, according to my very broad definition of assets, there are millions of potential
investments out there.
But when most of us think of investing, we're thinking of buying a certain type of asset,
a financial asset.
Financial assets are documents that entitle their owners to receive something of value
generally a set of cash payments from someone else.
Another name for a financial asset is a security, which is written evidence of the extension
of a loan.
One of the distinguishing features of a financial asset is that it doesn't have any intrinsic
value.
It's either a piece of paper or more likely a collection of digits stored on a computer.
This fact leads to a lot of the interesting behavior of financial assets that we'll talk
about later and in future lectures.
But for now, this fact leaves us with a couple of serious questions.
How can something with no intrinsic value be a good place to store value?
Where does the value of assets come from anyway?
Well, the answer is that it comes from real assets.
Real assets are used directly in the production of goods and services.
Some real assets are storeable commodities like cotton or oil.
Many real assets are what economists call capital goods, machines, buildings, factories
and the land that they sit on.
Other real assets are actually invisible but nonetheless real like ideas, knowledge, skills.
Economists call these assets intangible assets and in the business world they're often called
intellectual property.
What they all have in common is that their value comes from their ability to make goods
and services.
And when they're combined in new and creative ways, they can dramatically increase in value.
Financial assets derive their value from real assets, though the relationship is often quite
complex.
Financial assets are created whenever somebody borrows money in order to buy real assets.
For example, when a business borrows money to build a new factory, a financial asset
in the form of a bank loan, bond, stock or other security is created.
Later, the profits from operating that factory generate the cash that pays off the holder
of the financial asset.
Financial assets make it possible for ordinary people to invest in real assets and enjoy
the increase in value that can go with it.
Financial assets can be divided into small amounts so that individuals can buy many different
assets.
Real assets are so expensive that many households couldn't afford more than one, if any.
For example, you probably can't afford to buy a factory, but you can afford to buy an
investment that helps a company build a factory.
And financial assets are extremely convenient to buy and sell.
Real assets, like factories, can sit idle for years until the right buyer comes along.
But you can sell your stock in a company that owns the idle factory in a matter of seconds,
thanks to online trading.
So, the attraction of investing in financial assets is that it gives us a convenient way
to participate, albeit indirectly, in the investment into real assets, which is where
the value is created in our economy.
This gives everyone the chance not only to store extra resources for later, but to have
these resources grow significantly over time as well.
Sounds great, right?
Well, before we rush out to find the next Google, we need to consider the threats to
investment success.
There are many, but I want to focus on the top four.
It's important that you realize you can lose money, even on the most well-considered investment.
At the same time, though, it's also important to know that you can take steps to protect
your investments from all these threats.
Let's get right down to the danger that most people probably fear the most.
This is the chance that an investment loses money because its value falls.
The prices of financial assets typically move up and down frequently, sometimes almost violently,
and these ups and downs are extremely hard to predict, especially on a day-to-day basis.
This situation makes new investors very uncomfortable and for good reason.
What if I buy a stock for $100 a share today and tomorrow its value falls to $80?
Or what if I was planning to retire next year and the value of my portfolio falls by 10%?
I think that questions like these keep a lot of people from investing in anything other
than bank deposits.
But what most people don't realize is that there are many ways to deal with the ups and
downs of the market.
I'm going to describe a few of them now and I'll spend much more time on them in future
lectures.
The first line of defense against losing money is simply to give your investments some more
time.
Even though financial prices bounce up and down minute-to-minute and day-to-day, over
longer periods of time, the short-term bumps smooth out and reveal a longer-term trend.
If you invest in assets that really are creating value, the trend of prices will eventually
show that value.
The market is actually trying to discover the correct value for every investment, and
though it makes mistakes, these mistakes do get corrected.
Let me give you a few examples to illustrate my point.
I'm going to show you a few graphs of the daily closing value, the price if you will,
of the S&P 500 index.
The S&P 500 measures the stock prices of 500 of the largest companies in the U.S.
It's a pretty good indication of the overall value of the U.S. stock market, so most people
use it to stand for the price of the entire stock market.
I'm going to show you some of the worst stock market drops in recent memory.
As you look at these graphs, pay attention to how much stock prices fall and how long
it takes for the market price to rise back up to its previous level.
The first drop I'll show you is the infamous crash of 1987.
In this crash, the S&P 500 dropped by almost 20% on a single day.
But as you can see from the prices after the crash, the market started to rise within a
few months and was back up to its pre-crash price by the end of 1989.
Actually, it took less than two years to regain the losses.
That's a fairly quick rebound, but the fact that the market came back is not unusual.
To help convince you of this point, let me show you another big market drop.
This time, let's look at the so-called dot-com, or as I like to call it, dot-bomb crash of
2000 and 2001.
In this case, the market fell by over 40%, but the fall takes place over a period of
years rather than days.
And the recovery takes about three years in this case, but prices do recover.
And finally, let's look at how the S&P 500 behaved during the global financial crisis
of late 2008.
Again, market prices take a big dive over the course of about six months, but they start
to rise again and nearly return to their previous value after about a year and a half.
Again prices continue upwards and more than regain what they've lost in less than three
years after the start of the decline.
Just think what would happen if during a market downturn like the ones I showed you, you
panic and decide to sell off your investments.
You'd lock in huge losses and miss out on the recovery.
Time really can be an effective defense against losses on your investments, but you have to
be patient.
And you also have to have the time to spare.
Unfortunately, many of our investments run up against serious deadlines, such as the
due date of your child's first college tuition payment, or the first day of your own retirement.
If you leave all your investments in assets whose prices bounce up and down, you could
suffer a serious loss on the day before you have to sell.
That's why a critical part of investing is selling off some of your risky investments
well before you actually need the cash.
The idea is to shift riskier investments into safer ones as you get closer to the time you
need cash.
But you should do it gradually over a period of years rather than doing it all at once.
This will cushion the blow from a market downturn because you won't be selling all of your investments
at any given time, just a portion of them.
In addition, the rest of your investments will get time to recover their value and hopefully
even earn back enough to make up for any losses on the portion that you sold.
There are other ways to protect the value of your investments from large drops in market
prices, such as diversification, and I'll discuss them in future lectures.
Now I'll move on to another risk of investing that everyone should be aware of.
This is the risk of bankruptcy, not your own, but rather the bankruptcy of the issuer of
one of your investments.
Remember that a few minutes ago, I defined a financial asset as a document that entitles
its owner to receive something of value from someone else.
The party who promises to give the owner of the financial asset the something of value
is called the issuer of the instrument.
Issuers of financial assets can be firms, governments, or people, and all three of these
parties can go bankrupt.
When the issuer of a financial asset that you own declares bankruptcy, it almost always
means that your asset will lose value.
Fortunately, it doesn't necessarily mean that you will lose all of your investment.
This depends on what kind of asset you hold and how the bankruptcy is worked out.
In general, if you hold a loan or a bond, you'll probably get something.
But if you hold stock, you'll probably get nothing, even if the company survives the
bankruptcy.
Bankruptcy is always a possibility, even for borrowers who look financially strong today.
Fortunately, in most cases, there are plenty of warning signs that an issuer is losing
financial strength and may be sliding towards bankruptcy.
Companies and governments, who are most likely to be the issuers of the investments you'll
hold, are required to make their financial information publicly available.
You can examine that information for yourself or rely on the judgments of other market players
who also frequently examine this information and make their opinions known.
There are some surprise bankruptcies now and then.
You may recall the famous cases of Enron and Worldcom, which went bankrupt in the wake
of the dot-bomb crash.
These firms had excellent reputations and huge market values, but each suddenly collapsed.
In both cases, it was later discovered that massive accounting fraud was covering up big
losses so that the companies were not as solid as they seemed.
The U.S. government passed a big accounting reform in response to these cases so that
another Enron seems fairly unlikely.
But the fact remains that bankruptcy sometimes surprises the markets.
By being alert and proactive, investors can take effective steps to limit bankruptcy risk
in their investments.
First, you can simply avoid investing in financial assets that come from financially weak issuers.
And you can monitor the financial strength of the issuers of the assets you do hold,
so that if the issuer starts to weaken, you can sell off the asset well before the issuer
is in serious danger of bankruptcy.
The two dangers I've just described are certainly serious threats to successful investing, and
everyone who wants to invest should have a plan in place to deal with them.
There are still more dangers out there, though.
In fact, I think the two threats I'll talk about next are even more dangerous to individual
investors than market crashes or bankruptcy.
The first of these is inflation.
Are you surprised?
Probably not if you remember the 1970s.
Inflation, of course, is simply a general increase in prices.
There are lots of ways we can measure inflation, but the one that most people are familiar
with is probably the Consumer Price Index, or CPI.
This index measures the price of a set of goods and services that a typical household
consumes.
Why is inflation a danger to investing?
Well as I mentioned earlier, one of the main reasons we invest is to set aside resources
that we don't need now, but we think we'll need later.
We invest because we anticipate that, sometime in the future, we'll either want to buy something
that costs a lot, like a college education or vacation home, or because our income will
be lower than the amount we want to spend on our living expenses, as is the case during
retirement.
Inflation drives up the prices of the things we want to buy with our savings, so that we
may not be able to afford the type of college education, vacation home, or retirement that
we wanted.
Of course, most of us are well aware of that, but what we don't seem to realize is how
stealthy and relentless inflation is.
Whereas financial prices go up and down, hopefully a bit more up than down on average,
the prices of everything else only seem to go up and steadily.
And if inflation is low, say 3% or less, we hardly notice it.
But over time, a small increase in prices each year amounts to a huge increase in prices
over decades, thanks to compounding.
Let me show you a couple of pictures to emphasize this point.
What we're worried about is how much prices can change over the course of our investing.
Suppose, just for the sake of argument, that we'll be investing for 40 years.
I took the Consumer Price Index and calculated the total change in the index measured in
percent over consecutive 40-year periods.
This should give us an idea of how much prices could change and how much they tend to change
on average.
The graph shows that the price changes during these 40-year periods were 400 and even 500%.
That means that something that cost $1 at the start of the period cost between $4 and
$5 at the end.
By the way, these total increases in prices average out to annual inflation rates of just
under 4% per year.
So what I'm showing you is the damage that a moderate rate of inflation will do to the
value of your investments.
The other aspect of inflation that makes it dangerous is that it can differ greatly across
different types of products.
Some products experience low rates of inflation, in the case of technology-related products
like computers, their prices can even fall for long periods of time.
But other products experience very high rates of inflation.
These inflation rates don't influence the average inflation rates because these products
make up a small share of the overall economy.
But what if the products that experience high inflation are exactly the things that you're
saving up for?
Here are a couple of examples that might get your attention.
One of the reasons for investing I've mentioned is to save for a college education for your
children.
Well, if you've looked at the rate of inflation for college tuition, you'll realize that
it's far higher than the average rate of inflation.
In fact, a rule of thumb is that the rate of inflation of college costs runs about twice
the rate of general inflation.
According to statistics compiled by the College Board, the average annual rate of increase
of college costs was just under 6% per year from 1989 through 2005.
And what about retirement?
One of the retirement expenses that many people fail to anticipate is health care.
Most of us think about spending our retirement savings on exotic vacations or a really nice
set of golf clubs.
But the reality is that our consumption of health care, goods and services, goes way
up as we pass retirement age.
Even though retirees have government-provided insurance programs, there are still many expenses
that are only partly covered, and the coverage is likely to shrink over time due to our government's
long-term budget pressures.
Have you looked at the numbers on the rate of inflation in health care?
According to the Consumer Price Index data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the average
annual rate of inflation in medical care has been about 5.9% per year over the last 50
years.
It may make you feel a little better that the average inflation rate in medical care
has fallen to only 4.3% over the last 20 years.
Hopefully, this helps convince you that inflation really is a serious enemy of a successful
investing.
The question then is what can we do about it?
Well, the main strategy is to find investments that keep up with inflation.
Many assets will keep up with inflation, and stocks seem to be one of them.
But the assets that tend to do better at keeping up with inflation also tend to be the riskier
ones.
For example, Treasury bills are a very safe asset, but tend to do a poor job of keeping
up with inflation.
On average, they just barely keep up, and over shorter periods of time, especially when
inflation is increasing, they can seriously lag behind.
There are some assets that are designed to keep up with inflation, and I'll devote some
time to them in a future lecture.
Even if you load up on assets that keep up with a general rate of inflation, you may
still be burned by inflation in the price of something you're saving for.
Again, the best strategy is to look for assets that keep up with a specific inflation you're
worried about.
But this can be a really difficult challenge.
For example, I don't really know of any private investment that keeps up with the price of
college tuition.
There is another way to protect against the ravages of inflation, but it's a painful
one.
You could save more now just to cover the amount of increase in prices that you don't
think your investments will match.
But it's really hard to stay motivated to save more just so you can keep up with inflation.
Save this strategy to use as a last resort.
The word motivation brings me to my final threat to investment success.
By far, the biggest threat to investing confidently and successfully is us.
Well, to be more precise, it's human nature.
In many ways, our own psychology and emotions do far more damage to our investing success
than market crashes ever did.
Here's an example.
Economists have noticed that investors tend to exhibit herd behavior.
We see or hear about people buying, say, internet stocks.
We think everyone else is buying, and we need to buy it, too, or else we'll be left behind.
So we join the crowd, rush into an investment without doing much of any research on it,
and then the price gets pushed up by the herd and then plummets later.
Another way that our unfamiliarity with financial instruments can lead to trouble is that it
makes too many of us easy victims for financial scams.
I think we want to believe that there are some secret surefire investing techniques
waiting to be discovered, and this makes us easy to fool.
For example, one of the most celebrated financial scams of recent years was the fake investment
fund operated by Bernard Madoff.
It was a classic pyramid scheme in which new investors' contributions were used to pay
out earlier investors and no real actual investments were being made.
Interestingly, Madoff was excessively secretive about the operations of the fund and actually
used that fact as a marketing strategy.
The fund was so popular that people had to compete to be allowed to invest in it.
There are so many ways that our own human nature interferes with our own success that
economists recently invented a new branch of economics to describe and study them all.
This new field of economics is called behavioral economics, and it blends psychology and physiology
with economics to gain a better understanding of how people's decision making goes wrong,
especially in situations involving investing.
Some of these behavioral quirks are fairly mild, while others can cause serious problems
for your investments.
An example of a mild type of behavioral impediment is called confirmation bias.
People tend to only notice evidence that supports their beliefs and ignore evidence that contradicts
it.
If you get the idea that McDonald's is a great stock, then you'd notice that their sales
in China are booming, but you'd ignore any evidence that their sales in the US are declining.
A more serious type of behavioral impediment is our extreme aversion to losing and how
it changes our behavior.
Experiments that behavioral economists have done on gambling show that once people start
to lose money, they become willing to try riskier and riskier gambles that actually have very
little chance of winning.
As long as the prize they get if they win will make up for the previous losses.
Now if we apply this example to investing, it suggests that investors who lose money
will tend to choose riskier investments that appear to have the potential to make up for
previous losses.
Believe me, this is not the way you should be picking your next investment.
The most interesting and frightening part of all these behavioral quirks is that there's
such a deeply ingrained part of us that most of the time we don't even realize that these
are mistakes.
So if this is true, how do we make sure that we don't inadvertently sabotage our own investments?
Well, the first step is to become more familiar with investing.
This means learning some basic ideas about how the financial markets behave as well as
learning the main tools of investing, all these financial assets, and how they really
work.
In addition, you'll need to learn some things about yourself so you can figure out what
kind of investing strategies and techniques you'll be comfortable with over the long haul.
As you learn these things, you can go on to the second step, which is making an investment
plan.
You're most vulnerable to the behavioral problems I've just discussed if you're investing by
the seat of your pants and making it up as you go along.
In fact, all the threats that I've talked about so far will do the most damage to investors
who haven't decided in advance how they want to handle these risks.
So you need to make a plan.
It doesn't have to be a written document.
An investment plan is simply a set of decisions about how much to invest, the types of investments
and strategies you want to try, and when to sell off investments.
We'll talk a lot about the details of financial planning in later lectures.
But I just want to emphasize now that you should always have a plan that you can fall
back on when the markets or life throws something unexpected your way.
Well, I hope all this talk about risk makes you feel better about investing, because it
should.
Understanding the main risks to investing is the first step toward managing them.
And we've learned that there are simple and effective ways to manage these risks.
We've also already learned some of the fundamental ideas of investing.
And the rest of this course will build on this foundation by learning about the different
investments that are available and how to choose the ones that are best for you.
We'll also learn about different investing strategies so that you can act to protect
yourself from risks and also take advantage of good opportunities.
And we'll learn some financial planning tools that can help you reach your financial goals.
If you take the time to learn the fundamentals of investing and make your own investment
plan, then you'll feel prepared to make investing decisions and manage your investments.
So you can stop worrying now and start investing.
