In the first lecture, we learned about several threats to your investments, including the
wild ups and downs of the market.
But you know, where some people see threat, others see opportunity.
Some people see dollar signs in those market swings, especially the upswings, and they're
convinced that they should be able to make a fortune from them.
Well, maybe not a fortune.
That would be too greedy.
All they really need to do is beat the market.
Ah, beating the market.
What every investor dreams about.
But that's what it seems like, judging by all the books, magazines, TV shows, websites,
blogs, podcasts, live seminars, and of course spam emails devoted to the subject.
For example, I did a quick search through the book section of Amazon.com, and found
over 100 books that have the phrase, beat the market in their title.
And that doesn't even count the variations on that idea, like Peter Lynch's bestseller
called Beating the Street.
If all these different authors claim that you can beat the market, can they all be right?
If they are, then there must be hundreds of different ways to beat the market.
That makes beating the market sound pretty easy.
But if it's so easy, then why do we need all these books on investing to tell us how
to do it?
These are the sorts of questions I'm going to discuss in this lecture.
In fact, I'm going to take an in-depth look at the two really big questions that sum up
all these smaller ones I've just raised.
The first of these questions is simply, can anyone beat the market?
The second one then, of course, is if someone can beat the market, how do you do it?
These two big questions get to the heart of one of the most important and enduring controversies
in finance.
Professors and investors have been arguing about these questions for decades.
And this controversy isn't just an academic issue.
It has direct relevance for your own investing.
Each investor needs to decide where he or she stands on the issue of whether it's possible
to beat the market, because your own answer to this question will become one of the foundations
of your investment strategy.
By the end of this lecture, you should be in a much better position to choose whether
to join the investors who want to beat the market or the investors who don't even try.
To reach an informed decision, though, you'll first need to grasp the basic elements of
a theory called the efficient markets hypothesis.
Many people also refer to this theory as market efficiency, or EMH for short.
So in this lecture, I'll start by taking a look at what the efficient markets hypothesis
claims and I'll explain the economic reasoning behind it.
Then, I'll spend some time explaining why the efficient markets hypothesis implies that
it's very difficult, if not impossible, to beat the market.
But I'll also summarize some of the evidence that people use to suggest that there may
be opportunities to earn market-beating returns after all, at least in theory.
And I'll finish the lecture by discussing whether there are practical ways that individual
investors can beat the market, and we'll talk about what this all means for your investment
strategy.
So what is the efficient markets hypothesis?
Well, its origin goes back to the 1950s and 60s, when economists began to apply the models
of modern economic theory to a wide variety of subjects, including finance.
The economist who is credited with developing the EMH is Eugene Fama of the University of
Chicago.
He outlined this theory in a paper published in 1965.
Now if you've ever heard much about the various schools of thought and economics, you know
that the University of Chicago economists have been famous advocates of the free market
and the power of competition.
And the power of competition really is the main economic idea underlying the EMH.
The driving force behind market efficiency is the intense competition among investors
to find and exploit any advantages that help them to earn above market returns.
Now the ultimate source of any investment advantage is information.
Risk and uncertainty are an inescapable part of investing.
So any information about an investment that reduces that uncertainty surrounding its future
return is really valuable.
When new information about an investment is revealed to the market, this changes the price
of the investment.
For example, think about Boeing's stock.
If American Airlines suddenly announces that it intends to buy 100 new Boeing jets, this
will make Boeing's stock price jump up because the new order for jets implies that Boeing's
future profits will be higher than we expected.
Of course if you knew about this jet order before anyone else in the market did, you
could make a nice profit by buying Boeing's stock and waiting for the news to be released
to the market.
So you can potentially earn a big reward for being the first person to get a hold of some
new information and then make an investment based on that information.
This fact makes investors compete for the information.
But not just any information.
Investors are only looking for information that would affect someone's decision over
whether to invest in an asset.
We use the term material information to describe this highly desirable and profitable information.
We expect material information to affect the market price of an asset when it's revealed
to the market.
Since everyone's in a hurry to find new material information and be the first one to make an
investment based on it, this means that the new information influences market prices very
quickly.
In fact, it may influence prices so quickly that the prices change before most of the market
even knows the information.
Here's why I can make that statement.
Now suppose I've noticed that whenever a particular investor buys Boeing stocks, some
good news about Boeing is released to the market soon after that and the stock price
goes up.
I conclude that this other investor has some source of advanced information about Boeing.
I don't know what the information is, but whenever I see this person buying Boeing's
shares, something good happens to Boeing.
So whenever I see this other person buy Boeing's shares, I buy the shares too, hoping to profit
from this person's information.
If hundreds of other people are also watching this person's trades, then as soon as this
person starts to buy Boeing's shares, these other investors also buy, and that drives
up the price of Boeing's shares right away, even before the news about the sale is released
to the public.
It's as if the information had been released to everyone.
Now before I move on to discussing the implications of this competition for information, I want
to mention that the U.S. and many other countries try to ensure that the competition for investment
information is fair, and certain investors are explicitly forbidden from benefiting
from material information that they obtain as a result of an unfair advantage.
For example, if you work for Boeing, especially if you're a top executive, then you'll probably
know about the American Airlines contract before anyone else in the market does.
So you could easily benefit from buying Boeing's shares before the news of the contract is
released at very low risk.
But the government makes the following argument.
It says that you have this information only because you're a Boeing employee, an employee
with privileged access to information.
And this gives you an unfair advantage over other investors.
Therefore, countries like the U.S. ban insider trading, even though some economists argue
that this makes the market less efficient.
This fierce competition to find material information and then make investments based
on it leads to two consequences that are part of the efficient markets hypothesis.
First, any material information about an asset that is known now is already incorporated
into current market prices.
This includes anything you know or expect about the future, since those things can also include
material information.
And second, new information is incorporated into asset prices extremely quickly, if not
instantly.
Often, people will summarize the efficient markets hypothesis by stating a simple version
of this first consequence.
Market prices fully reflect all current information.
Now many people object to the word all in this phrase, because that seems pretty extreme.
They agree that competition makes asset prices incorporate a lot of material information,
but they disagree about the kinds of information that get incorporated into market prices.
This disagreement has actually led to the creation of three different versions of the
efficient markets hypothesis.
And these versions differ based on what kind of information that you believe is already
built into asset prices.
One version is called the weak version of EMH, and it states that the efficient markets
hypothesis is correct with respect to past financial prices.
That is, current asset prices reflect all information about asset prices, but they don't
necessarily reflect any other material information, even if it's known now.
A second version of EMH is called the semi-strong version, and it states that current market
prices reflect all publicly available material information.
Well, you've probably guessed that the third version of the efficient markets hypothesis
is called the strong version.
It states that current market prices incorporate all material information, whether it's publicly
available or private.
So the incorporation of private information is the big difference between semi-strong
and strong form market efficiency.
This definition of strong form market efficiency begs the question, though, of exactly what
is private information.
Well private information, by definition, is known only to a few people and isn't widely
distributed or shared.
Now this is important because it means that this private information is private property,
and its owners can benefit from their exclusive access to it.
Private information includes inside information, of course, such as an executive's advanced
knowledge of a merger deal, but it goes well beyond private inside information.
Only outside anyone outside a firm can observe the firm's activities carefully and accumulate
private information.
For example, you could simply observe the number of trucks going into and out of Hershey's
chocolate factories and build up advanced information about increases or decreases in
Hershey's sales from that.
Private information that is not inside information usually combines observation with analysis.
That is, investors often take a publicly available information about a firm and perform
their own analysis on it.
This creates private information out of public information.
A good example of this is the firm's accounting information.
Stock analysts love to tinker with companies' accounting numbers in order to reach their
own conclusions about the company's financial performance.
Taking public information and using it to create private information is really how stock analysts
try to add value in their jobs.
In fact, in 2011, there was a fascinating insider trading case in which the defendants
claimed that all they were doing was collecting bits of non-material public information about
these firms and putting them together in very, very clever ways.
Well, so far, we've been discussing how information is incorporated into stock prices, but we
haven't seen at all why the EMH has anything to say about beating the market.
To see the connection, we need to go back to the two basic parts of the Efficient Markets
Hypothesis and think about what they imply for the behavior of asset prices.
Now, remember that the two parts of the Efficient Markets Hypothesis are that market prices
fully incorporate information that is known now and that new information is incorporated
very quickly into asset prices.
So let's think about what it means for prices to reflect all available information, including
our expectations about the future.
This means that if we know or expect something about the future, then these expectations are
already built into today's prices.
This in turn means that changes in asset prices are literally unpredictable.
Think back to my example of the Boeing contract.
If I predict that Boeing shares are going to rise in value tomorrow, then I'll buy
them today so that I can benefit from the increase in price, which helps drive the price
up today.
So today's price already reflects the expected increase in price tomorrow.
That only leaves room for unexpected price changes in the future.
By definition, an unexpected price change can't be predicted.
Now, if I can't predict what future prices are going to be, how can I expect to earn
high returns?
Well, I can't.
Well, hold on, you might say.
Instead of trying to guess what the prices will be tomorrow, why don't you just wait
until new information comes to the market that nobody knew already, and then you can
try to be the first person to invest based on this brand new piece of information?
Well that sounds good, but then we run right into the second part of the efficient markets
hypothesis, which again says that new information is incorporated into the market prices extremely
quickly.
That means that there's no time for me to follow this strategy.
By the time I try to act on this new piece of information, it'll be too late.
The price will already have moved.
So if the efficient markets hypothesis is correct, there's no way for me to predict
future prices successfully, and there's no way for me to benefit from the arrival of
new information in the market.
Notice how devastating the unpredictability of future prices is to your investment plans.
How can you choose between different assets, let alone decide whether to buy or sell, if
you can't predict prices?
In this case, your best strategy is simply to buy a slice of the entire market and hold
it.
Some of the assets will be losers, sure, but this is the only way to ensure that you'll
hold the winners too.
Again, if price changes are unpredictable, then there's no way to tell in advance which
assets will be the winners and which assets will be the losers in the future.
Now if you do follow this advice and buy a slice of the entire market, then your return
on this investment will be the market return.
So we say that you can't beat the market return.
Wow.
Now you can see why the efficient markets hypothesis is so controversial.
If it's true, then anyone out there trying to beat the market is doomed to fail.
And there's no need for investment advisors, stock analysts, money managers, or anyone
else who tries to make a living forecasting asset returns.
So if only to save their jobs, most people in the financial services industry vehemently
disagree with the efficient markets hypothesis.
But rather than taking anyone's word about the validity of the efficient markets hypothesis,
let's examine the evidence on both sides of the issue.
Some of the most convincing evidence in favor of the efficient markets hypothesis comes
from simple statistics.
So all the professional money managers out there, do you know how many actually beat
the market?
Well, study after study basically finds the same result.
Less than half of them manage to beat the market over long stretches of time, say 10
to 20 years.
Yes, many fund managers have an amazing year now and then, but most don't seem to be able
to keep up that kind of performance year in and year out.
Their low returns in other years, more than offset the returns they get in really great
years once in a while.
In fact, from a statistical point of view, it may be difficult to judge whether the higher
returns that a money manager achieves in any given year are due to skill or to luck.
For example, suppose there are 5,000 mutual funds all trying to beat the market.
This is like buying 5,000 scratch off lottery tickets.
If you buy that many, some are going to be winners.
So even if investing returns are totally random, there will always be some managers
who will win the lottery and earn really high returns.
But it's just their lucky year.
People who don't believe in market efficiency are quick to argue in response that there
are in fact at least a handful of money managers who did beat the markets for very long periods
of time, if not over their entire investing careers.
People like Warren Buffett, Bill Miller, and Peter Lynch did earn above market returns
for decades.
And though it's possible that these super investors are just incredibly lucky, that
argument's harder to believe if you examine these managers' investing strategies and
their decisions.
For example, Peter Lynch looked for companies that did simple things but did them better
than anyone else, like how Haynes made pantyhose.
He called one of his main investing strategies garp, which stands for growth at a reasonable
price.
Changes investing ideas make sense, and they help explain the case that skilled and disciplined
investors really can beat the market.
People who don't believe the EMH is true have found plenty of failings in the theory as
well.
One set of failings has to do with the implication that the efficient markets hypothesis says
that changes in market prices should be completely unpredictable.
Investors and market professionals have found lots of counter examples to this prediction.
For each version of the efficient markets hypothesis, people have shown that there exist many different
pieces of information that do help predict future market prices of stocks and other assets.
For example, researchers have shown that what goes down must come up in stock markets.
When stock prices fall one day, especially if they fall a lot, this seems to increase
the chance that the stock price will rise the next day.
This would seem to contradict even the weakest version of the EMH that one that says that
past prices shouldn't be able to predict future prices.
Other bits of information, like earnings announcements that companies make, also seem to predict
future prices even a few days after they've been revealed to the market.
This seems to contradict not only the idea that future prices are unpredictable, but
also the idea that the information is quickly incorporated into market prices.
But some of the most interesting evidence against the efficient markets hypothesis comes in
the form of so-called anomalies.
These anomalies are real-world examples of investment opportunities that literally shouldn't
exist if the EMH is true.
One of the most famous anomalies is the so-called January effect.
This is a phenomenon in which stock prices tend to rise in January, and it's especially
pronounced for small company stocks.
Many professional investors have been able to earn good profits by purchasing stocks
in early January and then selling them at the end of the month.
The defenders of the efficient markets hypothesis, though, do have responses to these attacks.
First, they argue, even though some information does seem to be able to predict future prices,
investors can't profit from these price changes because of trading costs and other frictions.
For example, if you know that the price of Ford Motor was going to rise by a penny per
share tomorrow, but the trading commission was two cents per share, you couldn't actually
make any money from this information.
So many people who support the efficient markets hypothesis admit that the EMH is not strictly
true but because of transaction costs and other frictions.
But they argue that the most important implication of EMH does hold true.
You may be able to predict future prices a little, but you still can't use that information
to actually beat the market.
The supporters of the efficient markets hypothesis also have a comeback for the anomalies, and
the argument goes something like this.
Whenever anomalies like the January effect are discovered, a large number of investors
immediately tries to exploit the anomaly.
But as they do this, their increased buying or selling will change market prices and it
will eventually drive the anomaly out of existence.
So if the efficient markets hypothesis is true, any anomalies will get weaker and they'll
disappear as profit opportunities.
The January effect is actually a case in point.
Over time, the January effect weakened as investors shifted their purchases from January
to late December and then mid-December and so on.
The earlier the buying started, the smaller the change in price was.
So if the efficient markets hypothesis is true, any meaningful violations of the theory,
such as anomalies, will automatically be corrected by the market.
Now some people attack the efficient markets hypothesis by taking a completely different
approach, one that's based on ideas from behavioral economics, which you may remember that I discussed
in the introductory lecture.
The argument is that the market can't be efficient because people aren't fully rational.
They make investment mistakes constantly based on their emotions or other psychological biases
and these mistakes end up affecting the behavior of market prices.
For example, behavioral economics has an explanation for the what goes down must come
up story I mentioned a few minutes ago.
Behavioral economists think that markets overreact to new information based on fear or other
emotions.
If a piece of bad news about a firm comes out, the share price is driven down far beyond
what the news objectively implies for the company's value.
After this happens, investors realize their mistake and the price rises back to a more
reasonable level.
An extreme version of the behaviorist approach actually reaches one of the main conclusions
of the efficient market hypothesis, but for a completely different reason.
The argument goes like this.
If people really are highly irrational, making mistakes and doing things that are not in
their best interests, then this would also make market prices hard to predict because
you don't know in advance what kind of odd behavior is going to drive the market next.
This means that price changes would be unpredictable, which is one of the main implications of the
efficient markets hypothesis.
So this behavioral economics story says that market inefficiency causes prices to be unpredictable.
The economist Robert Haugen uses this extreme behaviorist view to make a wonderful analogy
about what we can say for sure about whether the markets are efficient.
It's a sports analogy and it uses American football.
Imagine a football field where one end zone represents markets that are perfectly efficient
and rational, and the other end zone represents totally irrational markets.
Haugen says, we can be pretty sure that we're on about the 20-yard line, we just don't know
which end zone we're heading for.
I think this analogy really sums up well what we can truly say about market efficiency after
looking at all this evidence.
Remember that we found some good evidence that prices are hard to predict, and that it's
tough to beat the market.
So we could be on the 20-yard line close to the market efficiency end zone, according
to this Haugen analogy.
This would be a market that's pretty efficient, although there are still some significant
inefficiencies in irrationalities out there.
On the other hand, remember that the behavioral economists say that markets are hard to predict
and it's still tough to beat the market.
So we could also be on the 20-yard line that's closest to the irrationality end zone.
That is, we could be in an emotionally inefficient market that has just enough efficiency in
it to correct the worst of the mistakes that we make.
Another reason why I like that analogy is that it gives the sense of a balance between
opposing forces in the markets.
There's actually a bit of paradox at the heart of the efficient markets hypothesis,
in that it relies on a balance between efficiency and inefficiency to make it work.
Well, here's what I mean.
For markets to be efficient, some investors have to believe that markets are efficient,
so that every day they go out into the markets and try to find those inefficiencies that
they can exploit for their own profits.
But by doing this, they make sure that the markets stay mostly efficient.
Whenever these investors find an inefficiency, they buy or sell the mispriced asset and this
buying and selling causes the market price of the asset to change until the inefficiency
disappears.
If they do too good of a job, the market gets highly efficient and these profit opportunities
go away.
These investors stop trying to find inefficiencies and the inefficiencies creep back into the
markets.
This picture of a dynamic balance between efficiency and inefficiency, sometimes the
markets are more efficient, sometimes less, is surprising, but it's actually a satisfying
explanation of market behavior.
I think it does a good job of explaining the fact that irrationalities and exceptions
to efficient markets hypotheses seem to pop up frequently, but they don't seem to last.
Well we're not even close to being able to prove whether this story is right or wrong
though.
I don't think we'll ever be able to prove how efficient the markets are.
What does seem true though is that there are good investment opportunities for you no
matter what you believe about market efficiency.
If you think that markets are very efficient, then you can simply be a passive investor.
When you invest, you should aim to buy your own little slice of the entire market and
earn whatever the market delivers.
I'll have more to say about how to do this in future lectures, but it mainly involves
buying into broad based mutual funds that invest in the major stock and bond markets.
On the other hand, you may think that markets are inefficient enough so that you can actually
earn a higher return than the market.
You may think this for example, if you agree with the semi-strong form of the efficient
markets hypothesis.
You may believe that public information is incorporated into market prices, but private
information isn't.
That means that if you put some time and effort into creating your own private information,
you can make good investments that beat the market.
You can produce your own private information by gathering publicly available information
and analyzing it yourself.
You literally put the pieces together to get a better understanding of the company so that
you can tell whether it's bonds or stocks are better investments than other people think
they are.
Think you can't do that?
Well, guess again.
As a professor, I've had several students over the years who are outstanding individual
investors.
What they all had in common was a love of investing and the willingness to read everything they
could get their hands on about the firms they were interested in.
These students didn't know a ton about fancy pricing models.
After all, they were taking my courses to learn these things, but they were always able
to tell me exactly what the value creation story was behind their latest stock purchase.
They were willing to put in the time and effort required to build up private information,
which they then used to justify their investments.
I think my students' example helps show exactly what it takes to become an active investor
who tries to beat the markets.
If you want to do that, you'll have to put in the time and effort it takes to learn about
companies and make up your own mind about whether the market price is right or not.
I think that anyone is capable of building up private information that they can use to
become an active market-beating investor.
But if you're like me, you may not want to spend your time that way.
Personally, I think the markets are pretty efficient, but there's plenty of room for
people to find good investments that beat the market.
But I also know it's going to take a lot of my time and energy to find these investments.
And frankly, I'd rather spend my time doing other things I really love, like spending
time with my family, riding, giving lectures.
So in my own investing, I'm a pretty passive investor.
I'm trying to hold my own little slice at the global market.
So in this lecture, we've learned about a big decision you have to make as an investor.
Do you think markets are highly efficient and can't be beat?
Or do you think there's room for investors to beat the market by exploiting inefficiencies
or correcting irrational behavior?
If you think markets are highly efficient, then your investing path is very clear.
If you want to try to beat the market, join it.
And if you think the market can still be beaten, then you have another decision to make.
Are you willing to put in the time and effort that it takes to find those market inefficiencies?
You may find out that the answer is yes.
After all, there's a great sense of satisfaction from being proven right and making money in
the process.
But it's also okay if the answer is no.
The main point to remember is that you can reach your investment goals no matter what
your opinion is about market efficiency.
