Welcome back. In this lecture, I'm going to start to take an in-depth look at different
types of investments. Although there are literally thousands of different financial products
for you to invest in, most of them are made up of the same basic few types of financial
instruments. So you can consider this lecture and the next three that follow your introduction
to the main building blocks of investments. Later in the course, I'll also introduce
a few more building blocks that you might want to add to your set. But the ones that
I'll show you now are what I consider the essentials. And the investment I want to
start with is stocks. Now this may come as a big surprise to you. After all, stocks can
be pretty risky investments. So isn't starting to invest by picking stocks like learning
to swim by jumping into the deep end of the swimming pool? Absolutely. So let me be very
clear that I'm not saying that stocks are the investments you should buy first. But
I am convinced that stocks are the best place to start learning about investing. And there
are several reasons why I say this. First, the basic ideas behind stock investing are
clear and easy to understand. The ideas behind stock investing are really the same ideas
behind all the investing we do. Also, the stock contract itself is very simple. Other investment
contracts are more complex and sometimes those details get in the way of understanding the
big picture. And finally, the details of stock investing, the nuts and bolts of buying and
selling stocks, should you ever want to do that, are very similar to the details of other
types of investing as well. So although stocks are not necessarily the best starter investment,
they are a great model for learning about individual investments and how to use them.
The way to start thinking about stocks is to think about what companies do and why they
need stocks to achieve their goals. Every day, the media is full of reports about companies
who have just announced bold new projects. For example, in August of 2011, Google announced
that it had made a deal to buy Motorola Mobility. This was a surprising deal. Google is a provider
of internet services and software. And Motorola Mobility was primarily a maker of mobile
phones. And even though Google produces the operating system that makes mobile phones
work, this is still a risky combination of businesses. It's an expensive deal too. Google
agreed to pay $12.5 billion. But it could pay off tremendously. Making the money spent
on the deal seemed like a real bargain. This example shows what businesses are supposed
to do. Try risky but innovative and surprising new projects that have the chance to create
valuable products and handsome profits. These projects always involve investments in real
assets. To make something new, businesses need to buy machines, factories, land, ideas,
and in the case of Google and Motorola Mobility, entire companies.
To do that, though, they need money. Lots of money. And chances are, businesses don't
have enough cash on hand to fund all the projects they want to pursue. They have to borrow the
money from somewhere. And this is where financial assets come in. Financial assets are documents
that describe the terms of a loan. The borrower gets money now and the lender receives something
of value in return. Usually the thing of value is a promise from the borrower to make cash
payments in the future to whoever the holder of the document happens to be at the time.
But there are other valuable things that a firm can offer in exchange for a lender's
ready cash. One of them is an ownership stake in the business. There are several legal forms
that this shared ownership can take, such as a partnership, but by far the most successful
form of shared ownership has been the corporation, which uses stock. When a firm issues stock,
it divides up the ownership of the company into thousands if not millions of equal parts,
which are the individual shares. Each share has an equal claim on the firm's profits and
an equal say in the management of the firm. The more shares you buy, the bigger the slice
of the company's profits you receive, and the more influence you have on company decisions.
This is one of the reasons why I wanted to start with stocks. I think that all of us
can understand and identify with, maybe even fantasize about, becoming the owner of a company.
If you own a company, then your investment increases in value when you make good decisions
and invest in successful projects that increase your company's profits. I'll have a lot more
to say about picking stocks in future lectures, but the basic skill of stock investing really
boils down to finding companies that invest in successful projects. That's true when it
comes to picking other types of investments as well.
Well the story I've told so far about stocks is basically right, but it's highly stylized.
I'm going to add a dose of reality now and try to explain how the stock contract tends
to work in practice. This will help distinguish stocks from other financial instruments and
it'll give us a few tips along the way about stock investing.
First off, the story I've told makes it sound like whenever a company has a good project
it wants to fund, it just sells some shares to investors. In reality, companies don't
sell shares all that often, and they don't fund most of their projects through selling
shares. When a company sells shares to the public for the first time in a special sale
called the initial public offering, or IPO, it usually does use investors' money to expand
its business and start new projects. And when one company buys another one, it often pays
for this purchase by issuing new shares. But otherwise, firms are reluctant to sell shares.
There's a long and interesting explanation why, but the short version is that there are
usually cheaper ways for firms to borrow other than selling shares of stock to investors.
What this means is that most investors buy their stock from other investors, not directly
from firms. By the way, we use the term primary market to describe the market for new assets
that investors buy directly from the borrowers who issue them. So when Facebook has its
IPO and sells shares directly to the public, this takes place in the primary market for
stocks. We use the term secondary market to describe the market for used, or more accurately
pre-owned, assets. When one investor buys a share of Citigroup stock from another investor,
we say that this takes place in the secondary market for stocks. The primary and secondary
markets aren't actually different markets or different places, just different types
of transactions. So just because you're buying an investment in the secondary market, it
doesn't mean that you're not really lending the company money. What you're effectively
doing is taking over the loan from someone else. Your objective as an investor is still
the same whether you're buying in the primary or secondary market. Find those good companies
that will make your investment increase in value. Another way that the real story of
stocks differs significantly from the simple version is in terms of control. The simple
story of stock investing makes it sound like corporate decisions are made in town hall
meetings where all the shareholders get together and have a chance to make their voice heard.
The reality is that most investors hold such a small piece of the company that they have
very little, if any, impact on its decisions. Corporations are a type of representative
democracy in which shareholders elect a board of directors who represent their interests.
But the board of directors then turns around and hires a professional management team,
which runs the firm day to day. For large companies such as IBM or ExxonMobil, only
shareholders who own millions of shares have the potential to affect the decisions of the
firm and even then it's fairly difficult for them to do that. Despite this reality,
the power of ownership that goes along with stocks does still matter. If the managers
of a company make a string of bad decisions that threaten the value of the shares, stockholders
will start to put pressure on the firm to improve. You may have heard of so-called activist
investors such as William Ackman or Carl Eichen who amassed large blocks of stock in poorly
performing companies and then pressure the managers to change the way that they run their
business. Because of activist investors and other mechanisms that I don't have time to
get into, bad managers eventually get punished and their firms get reformed while good managers
eventually get rewarded and their firms get more valuable. So even though you probably
can't exercise much control over a firm that you invest in, you can still benefit from
the power of ownership by looking for companies that are run by good managers whose firms
haven't yet been adequately rewarded. Yet another way that reality differs from the
simple stories we tell about stocks has to do with dividends, which are the profits that
companies pay out to their shareholders. While it's true that stockholders are entitled
to a share of the company's profits, the company isn't under any obligation to actually
pay them out. Many corporations up to 40% or more according to some estimates don't
pay any dividends. There's actually a good reason for this though. When a firm earns
profits, it has a choice. It could pay the profits out to shareholders or it could hold
on to the profits and reinvest them into new projects. If the projects are really great
and offer high returns, then shareholders should be glad to let the company keep the profits,
reinvest them now and pay out even more profits later.
Company like Microsoft is a great example of this. For many years, Microsoft didn't
pay any dividends to its shareholders and its stocks still rose like a rocket. That's
because the market for personal computers was exploding and Microsoft sales of software
were exploding right along with it. Microsoft had great investment opportunities in the
form of new versions of its Windows operating system and its Office software, among many
others. Investors were happy to let Microsoft hold on to its profits so that it could continue
to invest in these projects. But eventually, Microsoft found that it was making more profits
than it had good investments to spend them on, so it started to pay a small dividend
in 2003 and has been paying one ever since.
The final reality of the stock contract that I want to mention is that if you buy a stock,
you'll have to sell it sometime if you want to convert it to cash. A stock is technically
alone with infinite maturity, so the company won't ever actually pay back the loan. In
reality, of course, most companies come to an end eventually, but there are some companies
out there that have lasted for a hundred years or more, like AT&T. And, as I just mentioned,
a stock may not ever pay out any cash dividends at all, so you may not get any interest on
the loan either.
Why is it important that you have to sell your shares to cash out your stock investment?
Well, combine this fact with one I mentioned a few minutes ago. Firms don't sell much
stock directly to investors. You usually have to buy stock from someone else. Together,
these two facts imply that trading is an essential part of investing in stocks. You
may not trade very often, but you should know how to do it safely, and you should know what
your options are in terms of trading services.
Let's start to think about trading stocks by making clear what it is you're trading.
Stocks and all other financial instruments used to be physical documents. Companies
had special certificates made for their stocks, which often had designs on them that were
as elaborate as the designs on money. When people traded stock, they actually had to
physically deliver these certificates to each other in order to complete the sale.
Well needless to say, this can get a little cumbersome, and it isn't all that secure either.
That's why stocks and other securities have been largely dematerialized over time. That's
a fancy, almost science-fiction-y term, but all it really means is that we keep track
of stock ownership through electronic records rather than by possession of physical documents.
Specialized financial institutions called depositories are the official storage places
for most securities these days. The depository stores the shares electronically, keeps track
of who owns the shares at all times, and effectively transfers ownership of shares when they change
hands. It's an essential part of the financial market, but not one you hear about all that
much.
Stocks like most financial assets tend to trade in organized markets. Most investors
who buy and sell securities like stocks will have to go through an intermediary, a middleman
if you pardon the gender bias there. And there are two types of intermediaries in the financial
markets. How they differ and the way they earn a living is important to keep in mind.
One type of intermediary is a broker. A broker simply helps buyers locate sellers and vice
versa and arranges a sale. A broker may also help buyers and sellers agree on a price. The
buyer or seller or both pay a fee or a commission to the broker for these services.
One type of broker that most people have experience with is a realtor. A realtor helps bring
buyers and sellers of homes or other properties together, facilitates the sale, and collects
a commission for doing all that.
Generally speaking, if you want to invest in individual stocks, you'll need to set up
an account with a broker. A brokerage account operates a lot like an ordinary bank account,
except that, in addition to cash, your account also contains the securities that you buy.
When you buy stocks through a broker, technically the broker is registered as the owner of the
shares in the securities depository. But the broker's internal accounts will show that
you have a claim on your broker for those shares. This is done so that the shares can
be transferred very quickly, and this practice is known as holding the shares in-street.
You don't have to worry about holding your shares this way with a reputable broker. Brokers
have to comply with a lot of regulations that make sure that they can't misuse the customer's
money and securities.
And there is a fund, like the FDIC, that protects the value of your account if the brokerage
firm goes bankrupt. It's called the SIPC, or Securities Investor Protection Corporation.
You have lots of choices among brokers these days, but the main difference between brokers
boils down to two questions. The first question is how much human contact you want from your
broker. There are still lots of human brokers out there, and they'd be glad to take you
on as a new client. On the other hand, there are online brokers that will let you do almost
everything yourself at your convenience. And you can have some kind of mixture of the
two. Keep in mind that human brokers can be great resources. Their knowledge and experience
can go well beyond stocks into all areas of investing and financial planning. In fact,
many brokers these days double as financial planners. But that human touch and the advice
does come at a price. And brokers are people too with their own biases and incentives.
If you do choose to use a live person, make sure you know how the broker is earning money
by working with you. Brokers earn fees by providing services, and they earn commissions
from selling products. Good brokers will always be honest with you about what's in it for
them when they offer you any advice or product. With online brokers, the big issue is how
good their customer service and technical assistance are. Most online brokers will let
you poke around their websites without having to open an account, and I strongly encourage
you to do that before you settle on a particular online broker.
Besides the amount of human contact you want, you also need to consider the amount of services
you want from a broker. All brokers provide the basic services of maintaining your accounts
and executing the trades that you pay them to make on your behalf. But some brokers provide
additional services. For example, a full service broker will give you investing advice, as well
as access to the firm's own research on different companies and on different investment opportunities.
And some brokers will give you access to online screening programs that search for stocks
according to certain criteria that you specify, like stocks that pay high dividends.
Before you sign up for extra services, though, you should take a good look at what's available
for free. You may well find that for the type of investor you want to be, there's plenty
of good data, analysis, and advice to be had for the price of your monthly internet service.
Now let's talk about the other type of intermediary, the dealer. A dealer also connects buyers
and sellers, but does so indirectly. That's because dealers are traders themselves.
Dealers announce to the market that they will sell a specified security to anyone who is
willing to pay the dealer's asking price. We call this price the ask price for short.
At the same time, dealers also announce that they will buy this security from anyone who
is willing to sell at the dealer's offering price. We call this one the bid price. So
a dealer is always ready to sell to you at a price called the ask price, or buy from
you at a price called the bid price. This makes life convenient because you don't have
to wait for a broker to find someone for you to trade with. You can go to a dealer and buy
or sell immediately. Now the dealer earns a living from this by setting the ask price,
the price at which the dealer will sell a share of stock to you, higher than the bid
price, which is the price that the dealer will buy a share of stock from you. So when
the dealer buys a share of stock from someone and turns around and sells it to you, he or
she earns the difference between the bid price and the ask price, which is called the bid
ask spread. Now it may seem unfair at first that you have to pay a higher price to buy
than you'd get from selling. But the fact of the matter is that when you buy or sell
most financial instruments, you have to pay something. When you use a broker, you have
to pay a commission. I will say on the other hand that commissions tend to be smaller than
bid ask spreads on the same security. That is, a broker charges less. But there's a good
reason for that. A dealer takes on a lot more risk than a broker does. When you use a dealer
to sell shares, the dealer pays you right away, but he or she may not be able to find
a buyer for those shares very quickly. Well, that's the dealer's problem. When you use
a broker to sell shares, you bear the risk of not being able to find a buyer as quickly
as you want. In some financial markets, you'll mostly find dealers bringing buyers and sellers
together. While in other markets, you'll find mostly brokers. But in the case of stock
markets, there are lots of both. And not only are there both brokers and dealers, but many
people wear both hats. That is, they're broker-dealers. Traditionally, brokers have been associated
with stock exchanges, like the New York Stock Exchange. A stock exchange is an organized
market where people can meet and trade shares. But they're not open to everyone. You have
to be a member of the exchange in order to trade shares on the exchange. And to become
a member, you have to pay a fee. A really big fee. The members of the exchange earn
money not only by trading their own shares, but by trading shares on behalf of people
who are willing to pay them a fee, a commission, for the service. And thus, the members of
stock exchanges become stock brokers. But not all stocks are traded on exchanges. Many
stocks trade in a dealer market. Traditionally, this was called the over-the-counter, or OTC
market. Now, it's usually referred to as NASDAQ after the name of the electronic trading
system for the OTC market that was introduced in the 1970s. For years, the stock market
was roughly divided up into the exchanges on one side and NASDAQ on the other. Since
the advent of the internet, however, dozens of online trading systems have been created
that compete with NASDAQ as well as the traditional exchanges. Now, there's a large and frankly
confusing array of stock markets, and almost any company's shares can be traded on any
of these systems. Fortunately, though, stock trading has remained relatively simple and
dependable for investors despite the increasingly complex stock market. This is mostly because
you're paying your broker to handle the trading for you. In addition, the SEC requires trading
systems to show each other their prices, and it requires brokers and dealers to send
their customers' order to the market that has the best price that can be executed immediately.
So when you submit an order through your broker, the broker has to find the best price for
your shares. If that price is found on an exchange, then the broker trades on the exchange.
If the best price is found in a dealer-dominated market like NASDAQ, the broker trades with
one of those dealers on your behalf. In some cases, your broker will actually trade with
you directly, acting in their capacity as a dealer. In the end, all you see is that
your trade gets executed. Well, let's say you open an account with a broker,
spend some time crunching numbers, reading up on companies, and you find a stock that
really excites you. Before you plunge into your first or next stock investment, you need
to know a few things about lot sizes and types of orders. First, there's lot size. We tend
to buy things in standard quantities called lots. We buy eggs by the dozen, shoelaces
by the pair, and copy paper by the ream. You could buy a single egg, a single shoelace,
or a single piece of paper, but it's hard to do and more expensive. In the same way,
financial instruments also have standardized lot sizes. For stocks, the size of a round
lot is 100 shares. You'll get the best price and the fastest trade if you buy or sell in
multiples of 100 shares. Now I realize that this may put that stock investment out of
reach, at least for now. After all, 100 shares of Google is about the price of a new car.
But the higher price you'll pay per share for an odd lot makes it harder to profit from
the shares. Why put yourself at a disadvantage like that right off the bat? Now let's turn
to orders. We may think that stock trading is just a matter of hitting the buy or sell
button on a trading screen, but there are several different types of orders you can submit to
the market. Using the right language can help set conditions on your order that help protect
you from adverse market movements. First, let's start with a market order. A market
order is an order to buy or sell at whatever the current market price is. This is the type
of order that most of us have in mind when we think of trading stocks. The basic problem
with market orders is that market prices can move very, very quickly. You may have heard
a friend complain, for example, that they hit the buy button when the price on the screen
said $25, but they got a trade confirmation for buying 100 shares at $27 or $30 each.
Electronic trading allows orders to be placed very quickly, but it also enables prices to
move that much faster. You may have also heard about the infamous flash crash of 2010 when
the Dow Jones lost 1,000 points in just over 10 minutes. That's an extreme example, of
course, but it shows what kinds of price changes are possible these days. You could protect
yourself from nasty surprises like this by using a different type of order, the limit
order. A limit order places an upper limit on the price you're willing to pay or a lower
limit on the price you're willing to receive. In the above example, if you submitted a limit
order at $25 a share, you would ensure that you wouldn't end up paying any more than $25
for the shares, and you might actually end up paying less. Now, if the price moves up
above your limit order, the order won't be filled. But limit orders are customarily valid
for an entire trading day, so if you put in a limit order in the morning, the price may
bounce down below your limit and enable you to buy the price you want. Technically, what
happens is that your limit order has entered into what is called a limit order book, which
is maintained by the electronic trading system. The limit order book basically shows the demand
and the supply curves for shares. And as an economist, I just had to mention that. Placing
limit orders may mean that you don't end up buying or selling those shares. In addition,
limit orders do cost more than market orders, so you should be aware of the cost difference
and think about whether it's worth paying that extra money for the trade. But the protection
that limit orders provide may well be worth the cost. One more order that you should know
something about is the stop loss order. A stop loss order is an order to sell shares that
is triggered once the price of the shares falls below a certain level. So if you set
a stop loss order for 100 shares of Verizon Wireless at $80 a share, the sell order is
placed as soon as Verizon Wireless's price goes to $79.99 or less. Now the problem with
stop loss orders is the same problem with market orders. Once the price goes below the
stop loss level and the order is submitted, the price can keep falling dramatically. Even
though the stop loss was set at $80, the order might not be filled before the price fell,
let's say, to $71 a share. The point is that many traders think of stop loss orders as
a type of insurance, but it's not. If you think you need to use a stop loss order, you
should think carefully about where you should set the stop loss level. You should probably
also ask yourself why you're holding the stock in the first place.
At this point, I think we've covered just about everything you need to know about stock
investing except which stocks to pick. We learned some key facts about how stocks actually
work and some of these ideas will help us later when we learn about stock pricing. We
also learned a lot of important details about how stocks are traded. Well, I hope that this
information about this introduction to stocks has helped you feel more comfortable with
the idea of investing in stocks and other financial assets as well. As I said in the
beginning of the lecture, I really don't expect you to want to start your investing
career here, but I hope that at this point you're not ruling out the possibility that
you might find a great company that you want to own a piece of. In future lectures, I'll
be giving you a lot of information about how to find a great company or two. But in the
next lecture, I'm going to go over the basics of another investment, bonds. See you then.
