In the previous lecture, I introduced stocks by pointing out how stocks are risky but fascinating.
In this lecture, I'm turning to bonds.
Now bonds don't have quite the same reputation as stocks.
In fact, they might seem boring.
Well, it's true that bonds are not necessarily the sexiest investments out there, but they are extremely important.
And if you get to know them a bit better, you'll see that the variety and dependability of bonds can make them a very useful investment to have in your portfolio.
Bonds also play a starring role in economic policy.
Bonds enable governments to borrow.
And they're also the tool that central banks, like the Federal Reserve, use when they want to expand or shrink the money supply.
The bond market has become so large that governments have to worry about how it will react to their decisions.
In fact, an advisor to President Bill Clinton remarked early in the Clinton presidency that he would like to be reincarnated as the bond market because it was the only person who could tell a president what to do.
In this lecture, we'll learn the key features of bonds that make their returns more predictable and dependable than the returns on stocks.
I'm going to focus this lecture on how to pursue a buy-and-hold bond investment strategy, but I'll come back to active bond investing in a future lecture.
Although the returns on bonds might seem boring, I think you'll see that bonds themselves are really very interesting.
And besides, when it comes to investment returns, a little bit of boring is not such a bad thing.
As we do with stocks, let's begin learning about bonds by thinking about what bonds are.
I've mentioned before that bonds are contracts in which a borrower, the issuer of the bond, promises to make a set of payments to the buyer of the bond.
This sounds like a pretty simple arrangement, and you may suspect that the bond contract is just as simple as the stock contract, which we learned about in the last lecture.
But bond contracts are actually extremely complex documents, running to dozens if not hundreds of pages.
Why is this the case?
Well, it's about how much risk the buyer of the bond wants to take on, and the answer is not much.
The buyer of the bond is lending money to the issuer of the bond and wants to prevent the borrower from defaulting.
Naturally, the buyer of the bond can't completely prevent the issuer from defaulting, but what the buyer can do is make the issuer of the bond agree to a large set of terms and conditions, which are called restrictive covenants.
So a bond contract is long and complex because it's full of restrictive covenants.
Now some of the covenants require the borrower to do things that make the borrower financially stronger and less likely to default.
For example, covenants may require the borrower to keep a certain amount of cash in a reserve fund that can be used to pay off part of the loan.
Other covenants require the borrower not to do things that make them financially weaker and more likely to default.
An example of this type of negative covenant is one stipulating that the borrower can't take on any more debt.
Covenants effectively give bond investors some say over what the borrower can and can't do.
You may recall from the previous lecture that stocks also give their owners at least a little bit of control over the borrower's activities.
In both cases, having some control helps investors ensure that they get good returns on their investments.
And in the case of bonds, the restrictive covenants significantly reduce the risk of loss to the investors.
Fortunately, most bonds will have a standard set of restrictive covenants written into their contracts so you generally don't have to worry about reading through all the fine print yourself.
That way, you can focus your attention on choosing among other features that matter to you as an investor.
There are really three types of main features that distinguish bonds from each other in ways that should matter to you as an investor.
Who issued the bond, whether the bonds are secured, and the timing of the payments.
First, let's consider who issued the bond. There are three main types of bond issuers, governments, companies, and individuals.
Government bonds make up the largest share of the bond markets.
Their size has a lot to do with the fact that government bonds are usually considered the safest types of bonds because governments have the ability to raise taxes in order to pay off the bonds.
We know that there are many levels of government, national, state, and local, and each level can generally issue its own bonds.
Bonds that come from local government units are often called municipal bonds or munis for short.
Of course, foreign governments can and do issue bonds as well.
A general term for foreign government bonds is sovereign bonds or sovereign debt, which hearkens back to the days when foreign governments were kings and queens.
Many of the most popular government bonds have their own special names.
For example, everyone around the world calls U.S. government bonds treasuries or U.S. treasuries.
People use the term guilt for British government bonds, which goes back to the days when the bond certificates actually had gold leaf on the edges, true guilt edge securities.
And German government bonds are called bunds.
Foreign government bonds are usually issued in the government's home country, and of course the governments are borrowing in their home currencies, like British pounds for the British government and euros for the German government.
But increasingly, governments and even companies will borrow in other countries by issuing bonds in the foreign country's home currency.
For example, many foreign governments and companies borrow U.S. dollars by issuing their own bonds in the U.S.
But the bonds are priced in U.S. dollars. These bonds are called Yankee bonds.
In fact, there's a whole set of nicknames for bonds that are issued in foreign countries.
A Chinese bond issued in Hong Kong, for example, is called a dim sum bond.
Also, in many countries, governments own one or more large companies, or they have big stakes in these large companies.
For example, one of the largest owners of Volkswagen is the German state of lower Saxony.
When government-owned companies issue bonds, these companies usually have the implicit support of their governments, so many investors treat these bonds as if they were government bonds.
Yet another type of bond that is treated just like a government bond is a bond issued by an International Financial Institution, or IFI for short.
There are many large international institutions that function like banks but specialize in funding economic development projects in different areas of the world.
These organizations are owned by groups of national governments, so the bonds issued by them are treated like government bonds.
Many of these organizations issued debt in the U.S. on a regular basis.
As a matter of fact, I was looking at an online brokerage's website recently, found several bonds available from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, which is one of these IFIs.
These bonds can be attractive because they offer good yields, and the major IFIs are considered quite safe borrowers.
By the way, you'll notice that I go back and forth between using the words bonds and debt, as if they were the same thing.
Well, technically they are. The term debt includes all borrowing that doesn't involve selling stock.
We use the term equity as a synonym for stock.
Therefore, debt includes bank loans as well as bonds.
But if you think carefully about it, when you sign the papers on a bank loan, you've just issued a bond to your bank.
So debt and bonds really are the same thing.
Companies issue large amounts of bonds too, which we generally call corporate bonds or private debt.
But by and large, the private bond markets are much smaller than the government bond markets.
This is because in many parts of the world, private bonds are just beginning to take off, because most lending has traditionally been done through banks.
With corporate bonds, the danger of default is a major concern, and so this also limits the appeal of private bonds relative to government bonds, which keeps the market smaller.
Finally, individuals can also issue bonds, though generally these investments are far too risky to be considered an attractive part of your portfolio.
Of course, to every rule, there's an exception, and here's one.
The singer, David Bowie, issued his own bonds in the 1990s.
The payments on the bonds came directly from the royalties on Bowie's previous recordings, so investors were happy to buy these bonds.
So far, we've been looking at the first feature you need to think about when investing in bonds, who's the issuer of the bond.
The second feature that investors care about is whether a bond is secured or not.
A bond is secured if it's backed up by specific collateral.
For example, a company may secure a bond by pledging a factory, or perhaps even a portfolio of valuable patents.
If the company defaults on a secured bond, the lender gets to claim the specific assets that were pledged as collateral.
The bond owner literally gets to take the factory, the patents, or the other assets that were being used as the collateral.
If a bond is unsecured, on the other hand, this doesn't mean that a lender comes up empty-handed if the borrower goes bankrupt.
Instead, it means that the owners of unsecured bonds have to stand in line with all the other lenders and sort out who gets what from the bankrupt issuer.
This process takes a long time, and generally the bond buyers get a lot less than they would have if they had held a bond that was secured by some specific asset.
Now, one thing I should also mention is that defaults don't even occur until the stockholders lose the entire value of their investment.
So in a very real sense, the equity in a company which is owned by the shareholders provides a cushion that shields the bondholders from any losses.
This is another reason why out-and-out defaults are fairly uncommon in corporate bonds, which again means that bonds are a much safer investment than stocks.
The final characteristic of bonds that you should be aware of is the immense variety in the timing of bond payments.
Let's start with maturity, which is the length of time until the final payment on the bond.
The standard range of maturity available in the market runs from one day, well technically overnight, all the way out to 30 years.
Though in many markets around the world, the maximum maturity is closer to 10 or 20 years.
And some lenders, including the government of Mexico and the University of Southern California, have even issued bonds with maturity of 100 years, which is called century debt.
The wide range of maturities gives you the possibility of investing in a bond that will mature very close to the day you need to receive the cash from that investment.
By the way, some people still use three terms that categorize bonds by their maturity.
Bills are bonds that mature in less than one year.
Some people also call bonds that mature in less than one year, money market instruments.
So when you hear the term money market, you should think that this is the market for very short term bonds of less than one year of maturity.
The word note is often used for bonds that mature in one to 10 years.
And some people only use the term bond for maturities of 10 years or more.
When people refer to T-bills, for example, they're referring to government bonds that have less than one year of maturity.
And there is an instrument known as the medium term note, or MTN, which typically has one to five years of maturity.
Of course, the term bond is completely general, so it's not improper to call a three month T-bill a three month government bond.
The fact that you can buy bonds on the secondary market greatly adds to the range of maturities of bonds that are available.
You may remember the distinction I drew in the previous lecture between the primary market, the market for newly issued securities,
and the secondary market, which is the market for pre-owned securities.
On the secondary market, you'll find bonds with maturities of say four months, seventeen months, two years and two months and so on.
All of these bonds had been issued with much longer maturities, but time has passed and now they have many fewer months remaining to maturity.
The rates of return on these bonds are dictated by the current market for similar bonds,
so that the original maturity of the bond doesn't affect the rate of return on the bond nearly as much as the remaining maturity does.
For example, a 30 year bond issued 29 years ago, which still has one year remaining to maturity,
will be priced so that it gives an investor virtually the same yield as a comparable newly issued one year bill.
Another way that the timing of bond payments varies is in the number of payments and the sizes of the payments.
Some bonds make a single payment and these are called zero coupon bonds,
because you get no interest payments or coupons between the time you buy the bond and the time the borrower makes the payment to you.
The downside of zero coupon bonds is that you have to wait until the maturity of the bond to receive your interest.
The nice part of zero coupon bonds is that the price you pay for them is much lower than the payment that you receive at maturity.
For both of these reasons, zero coupon bonds are very similar to certificates of deposit.
Most bonds make multiple payments to their holders between the purchase date and the bond's maturity.
Generally, bonds make regular payments, but of course it's up to whatever the borrower and lender can agree on.
And the payments may all be of the same size or the size of the individual payments may vary.
Recurring payments consist of accumulated interest and possibly some principle as well.
When a bond payment contains interest only, the payment is called a coupon payment
and the bond makes a set of unequal payments because at maturity the borrower will have to make a big payment to repay the principle of the loan.
Bonds whose payments include both interest and repayment of principle are called amortizing bonds,
and they generally have equal payments, though of course they don't have to.
The vast majority of bonds that are available to investors have a common payment pattern,
no matter who issues them or whether the bond is secured.
So let me describe this standard bond, which is also referred to as a straight bond.
The borrowing arrangement on a straight bond goes like this.
The lender gives the borrower a sum of money today called the principal or par value of the bond.
In return, the borrower pays interest on the principal every six months
and then returns the principal or par value back to the lender at maturity.
So at maturity, the bondholder gets the final interest payment and the principal back as well.
That's a brief introduction to the variety of bonds out there.
Now I'd like to turn to the practical issues of investing in bonds.
In this lecture, I'll only be talking about pursuing a buy and hold investment strategy.
That is, I'll talk about buying bonds and holding them to maturity.
I'll get into more active trading strategies in a future lecture.
As we learned in the previous lecture, there's a distinction between broker markets and dealer markets in most investments.
And bonds, at least in the United States, are mostly a dealer market.
In some developing economies, the governments are forcing all bond trading to go through exchanges.
And there are bond exchanges in the U.S. as well, but they don't handle very much of the trading of bonds.
One of the reasons why the bond market in the U.S. tends to be a dealer market
is that there are so many different bonds out there.
Each bond has its own relatively small market.
That fact alone makes it hard to build a large enough pool of active traders to support an exchange for bonds,
especially when you consider that many investors plan to hold their bonds to maturity.
The downside of the dealer market for bonds used to be that information about current market prices was hard to come by.
The lack of information about bond prices meant that it was too easy for individual investors to overpay for bonds,
which, of course, lowers the overall return on your investment.
Fortunately, due to pressure from the SEC, as well as the development of the online discount brokerage business,
information about bond prices has become much more widely available,
so you can be confident that the price you pay for a bond represents a true market price.
Going through your broker is the main way to buy a bond on the secondary market.
Most brokers will have access to an inventory of corporate bonds, municipal bonds,
and government bonds from the U.S., Canada, perhaps other foreign countries,
and international financial institutions, as well.
When you buy a bond on the secondary market through a broker,
you'll have to pay a commission to the broker,
and you may also have to pay a markup to a dealer that the brokerage works with.
Generally, bond trading commissions have come down just like the commissions on stocks,
but in many cases, there are minimum commissions that you'll have to pay.
So, for example, a brokerage may charge you a $1 per bond trading commission,
but have a $10 minimum commission.
You can also buy many primary market bonds through a brokerage,
including both private bonds and government bonds.
But there's also a direct over-the-counter market in many bonds that you should be aware of,
and you may find this way of buying bonds cheaper and more convenient than using a broker.
For example, Treasury Direct is a service provided by the U.S. Department of the Treasury
that enables you to purchase U.S. Treasury bonds as well as savings bonds.
You open the account directly through treasurydirect.gov.
In addition, many large corporations sell notes and bonds directly to the public.
Companies do this because it's a cheap way for them to borrow,
and many investors like it because they earn higher interest than on their bank deposits
from a company they regard as safe.
For example, in one of my recent electric bills,
my power company included a flyer about their retail notes.
As you can see from this example,
many companies market their notes to their current customers or employees.
But you can also get access to these programs yourself if you're willing to look for them.
And many brokers offer access to these retail programs as well.
So I hope I've shown that it's more convenient to find bonds to buy than you might have thought.
But there are some other convenience issues with buying bonds that you should be aware of.
Bonds tend to have large lot sizes.
That is, they have minimum investments that tend to be big.
For example, most corporate bonds tend to have a minimum par value of $10,000
and are only available in increments of $10,000.
U.S. Treasury bonds, on the other hand, are available in lot sizes as small as $1,000.
Some corporate retail note and bond programs have minimum investments in the hundreds of dollars,
but many of them also tend to have minimum required investments of $1,000.
And to get a really attractive interest rate, you need to invest tens of thousands of dollars.
The lumpiness of bonds ties up a lot of money for potentially a long period of time.
If you buy a bond that matures in 20 years, for example, you won't get back that $10,000 for two decades,
though you will receive the interest every six months.
So it's not usually a great idea to run out and buy a set of 10 bonds that all mature in 5, 10 or 20 years from now.
You may have an emergency between now and then and need access to cash in a hurry.
This liquidity risk, the risk that you'll have a sudden need for cash,
leads most buy-and-hold bond investors to pursue a strategy called laddering.
The idea behind laddering is really simple.
A bond ladder is a set of bonds that has one bond maturing every year, every quarter, or maybe even every month.
As one bond matures, you can use the cash from the bond if you need to,
but you can also turn around and buy a new bond to replace it as well.
If you always buy the same maturity of bond, then what you end up with is a set of self-replenishing bonds that generates a steady stream of cash.
And you're always close to the maturity of one of your bonds, meaning that you'll have cash coming in if you need it.
Setting up a ladder of bonds is a little bit of a hassle at first, but once you build your ladder, it's easy to maintain.
Suppose you want to build a bond ladder with a 10-year bonds, so that each year one of the 10-year bonds matures.
To set your ladder up, you can buy bonds with maturities equal to one year, two years, and so on, up to 10 years.
In the case of U.S. Treasury bonds, you can buy almost all of your bonds on the primary market.
The Treasury offers one-year bills and notes with maturities of 2, 3, 5, 7, and 10 years.
So you then need to go to the secondary market and buy Treasury bonds with maturities of 4, 6, 8, and 9 years to complete your set.
Once you have the ladder in place, you only need to buy the new 10-year Treasury bond or bonds once each year.
And of course, you can also add to your ladder using the interest payments that you'll be collecting.
Speaking of what to do with the interest, one of the main risks of buy-and-hold bond investing is what economists call reinvestment risk.
When you build your bond ladder, your bonds may pay an average interest rate of, say, 5% per year.
Every six months, you'll get a set of coupons from your bonds and then have to decide where to reinvest this money.
But by the time you get the coupons, market interest rates may have fallen to, say, 4%.
So you'll have to reinvest your interest at a lower rate, which will drag down the average rate of return on your total bond investment.
Reinvestment risk is usually more of an annoyance than a real risk of loss, and sometimes interest rates will rise, so this risk can work in your favor.
But if interest rates fall dramatically and stay there for long periods of time, then you may want to reevaluate whether you want to continue to reinvest your interest payments into bonds,
and maybe you'll want to reconsider whether you want to continue with the entire bond ladder.
Of course, that also depends on what your other investment opportunities are.
There are certainly other more serious risks to the buy-and-hold bond investor, and one of them is inflation.
Bonds are often called fixed income securities by investment professionals.
In fact, I think I hear the term fixed income more than the word bonds when I talk to people who work with bonds for a living.
The term fixed income, of course, comes from the fact that once you buy a bond, the income you earn from it is indeed fixed. It won't change.
This means that the payments on a standard bond are especially vulnerable to inflation.
If you're holding a bond with long maturity and inflation starts to rise, then the purchasing power of your investment will fall dramatically by the time you collect that final payment.
For example, the final payment on a 10-year bond will lose over a quarter of its purchasing power if inflation is 3% per year.
Fortunately, the bond laddering strategy helps to mitigate the damage that inflation can do to your bond portfolio.
In general, the market interest rate on bonds will rise and fall with inflation.
So if you're buying new bonds each year to replace maturing bonds in your ladder, then the interest rate on the new bond will be higher than the interest rate on the bond that it's replacing if inflation is rising.
This won't completely shield you from inflation, but it will help.
The other adjustment you can make to your bond ladder is to shorten the overall maturity of the ladder.
The example I started out with was a 10-year bond ladder, but this has a high vulnerability to inflation.
If you change to a 5-year bond ladder, so your maximum maturity is 5 years, then this will again help to minimize the loss of purchasing power on these bonds.
If inflation rises and falls more gradually, then a 5-year ladder could give adequate protection against inflation and still enable you to take advantage of higher rates that you can earn for lending over longer periods of time.
Of course, we've seen that the price level can fall as well as rise.
If inflation is bad for the value of your bond portfolio, does this mean that deflation is good for it?
Well, yes and no.
It's true that if the price level falls, the purchasing power of the future payments on the bonds increases.
But the problem is that deflation is incredibly damaging to business.
Significant deflation leads firms into bankruptcy, because the prices they receive for their goods and services may fall below the cost of production.
So if you're holding corporate bonds, the likelihood of default on these bonds increases dramatically.
But don't think that you're necessarily shielded from deflation-driven default risk if you're holding government bonds.
Deflation is usually associated with recessions, and during recessions, government revenues at all levels decline.
So deflation can also make it difficult for governments to make ends meet, so much so that they may also default.
Now, it's true that nobody expects the U.S. government to ever default, and no U.S. state has defaulted on its bonds since the Great Depression.
But every now and then, a local government or authority does default on its municipal bonds.
Deflation is not the only cause of default, and default risk is increased when you pursue a buy-and-hold investment strategy,
because the longer you intend to hold any given bond, the greater your exposure to this default risk.
So we should discuss default risk in more detail, but this is such an important issue that we should take our time and learn about it in a future lecture on bonds.
For now, let's review what we've learned.
We've made a good start on exploring the huge variety of bond investments that are available to you,
and we've learned that bond investing has become much more accessible, cheap, and convenient thanks to the Internet.
Hopefully, I've helped you realize that there's a very diverse set of bonds out there that nonetheless has a high degree of safety and competitive returns.
If you shop carefully among the many options, you'll find the right set of bonds that fit your desired mix of safety and yield.
I've focused on being a buy-and-hold bond investor in this lecture.
If you're going to follow this strategy, you'll face increased default risk, inflation risk, and liquidity risk.
You can shrink the default risk by holding U.S. Treasuries or other government bonds,
and you can mitigate the effects of inflation and liquidity risk as well by laddering your bonds.
If you follow these steps, then the biggest risk that you'll have to live with is probably reinvestment risk.
That means that you'll always be looking for good opportunities to invest the coupon payments that you'll receive.
Hmm, finding a good place to invest all that cash coming in. Not a bad problem to have.
Sometimes, boring looks pretty good.
