For the last two lectures, we've been learning about the essential investments that belong
in every investor's portfolio.
We started with stocks, moved on to bonds, and now we'll learn about mutual funds.
On the surface, mutual funds shouldn't be very attractive investments.
After all, they're really nothing more than pools or packages of stocks, bonds, and perhaps
some other instruments as well.
Someone might look at a mutual fund and say, all you've done is bought a bunch of assets
and repackaged them to make them look different.
Where's the value in that?
Well, actually, when we combine and repackage financial instruments in new ways, we're not
just selling old wine and new bottles.
These new combinations of assets take on characteristics that are fundamentally different
from the characteristics of the individual assets that go into them.
For example, we'll learn in a future lecture exactly how diversification works to literally
reduce the amount of risk in a portfolio of assets.
So the risk profile of a diversified mutual fund can be very different from the risk profiles
of the individual assets in it.
There's value that ready-made diversification.
Repackaging assets in a mutual fund adds value in other ways as well.
If I wanted to buy my own diversified portfolio of bonds or stocks, I'd need to have a ton
of money saved up.
But a mutual fund divides up a large pool of stocks or bonds into bite-sized chunks
that even small investors can afford.
So even if I only have 50 bucks to invest, I can still buy into a globally diversified
stock index or a pool of emerging market bonds.
So mutual funds give us access to all kinds of investments that we couldn't dream of
holding otherwise.
And finally, repackaging takes advantage of economies of scale in management and advising.
I suppose if I wanted to, I could hire a money manager to look after my personal portfolio,
but that would be somewhere between sort of expensive and absurdly expensive.
It's probably not worth it unless I have a very large portfolio, and I don't.
But if I pool my savings with thousands of other investors to buy millions of dollars
worth of assets, we could hire a money manager to look after our portfolio and hardly notice
the cost.
So repackaging assets and the payments that flow from them really can add significant
value for the economy.
Mutual funds are a prime example of this.
They make stock and bond investing more convenient and affordable than buying and holding these
instruments directly.
This benefits households who get improved choice and safety in their investments.
But it also benefits companies as well.
They get improved access to the savings of households, which reduces their cost of borrowing
and makes it possible to invest in more projects.
So in case you haven't guessed already, we finally found what I consider to be the best
starter investment.
In addition to the benefits I've just mentioned, mutual funds also offer a tremendous variety
of products, low trading costs, and a high level of transparency.
It's possible to be a very successful investor and never hold anything other than mutual funds.
In fact, in these days of 401Ks and other defined benefit retirement plans, it can actually
be hard to hold anything other than mutual funds.
In this lecture, we'll learn that mutual funds are one of several types of pooled investments
available to you.
I'll explain how each of them works so you can decide which ones are attractive to you.
I'll devote most of the lecture, though, to the most popular type of pooled investment,
the open-end mutual fund.
Pooled investments similar to mutual funds originated in the European markets as early
as the 18th century, and they made it to the U.S. by the late 19th century.
The modern mutual fund didn't take shape until the 1920s, and although the industry grew
quickly in the 1960s, it really didn't come into its own until the 80s and 90s.
Two forces have driven the growth in mutual funds.
One of them is the rise in the value of the financial markets, especially the stock market,
which attracts new funds and managers, as well as investors.
The U.S. stock market started on a long-term upward trend in the early 80s and only had
one longer-term downturn before the year 2000.
That in itself attracted lots of money into mutual funds.
The other force was a change in pensions that took place beginning in the 1980s and accelerating
through the 1990s.
Employees replaced their defined benefit pension plans with defined contribution plans.
Instead of being promised a fixed salary after retirement, which is what a traditional pension
delivers, employees were switched to saving plans.
The saving plans are called defined contribution plans because employees typically set aside
a fixed proportion of their wages, like 5%, or a set dollar amount, which is then invested
into various instruments, usually mutual funds.
These defined contribution plans, of course, are the 401k, 403b, IRAs, and various other
plans that you all know about today.
Just to give you an indication of how dramatically the defined contribution retirement plans
have changed the financial markets, the share of Americans who owned stocks before 1990
was less than one-quarter of the population, but by the year 2000, over half of Americans
own stocks.
Much of that increase was driven by the switch to defined contribution retirement plans and
investment in mutual funds.
Now, I've been using the term mutual fund as if it were a generic term that includes
all pooled investments.
Actually, mutual funds are just one type of investment from a broader category of pooled
investments called collective investment schemes.
In the U.S., collective investment schemes are called registered investment companies
by the SEC.
I want to tell you about at least one other type of collective investment scheme because
they do exist in the U.S., and in many countries, they're a much more common investment tool.
In addition, this other scheme is simpler than a mutual fund, and I want to use this
simpler structure to explain some of the basics about how most kinds of collective investment
schemes work.
This other type of investment scheme is called the unit investment trust.
A unit investment trust buys and then holds a fixed portfolio of assets.
The portfolio could hold many types of securities, but usually the investments or stocks or bonds.
The assets are held by a trust, which is a legal vehicle for holding property on behalf
of someone.
The trust divides the ownership of this big portfolio of assets into many small shares
and then sells these shares to the public so that it works like stock in that respect.
The shares are technically called redeemable trust certificates, but are commonly called
units, hence the name unit investment trust.
As the word redeemable suggests, the holders of the trust certificates or units can sell
them back to the trust at any time.
The trust pays the holder of the unit the net asset value or NAV of the unit, which
is basically the market value of the portfolio on that day minus any liabilities of the fund
divided by the total number of units.
Unit investment trusts also have a set termination date on which the assets in the fund are liquidated
and the proceeds of the sale are paid out to the shareholders.
Unit investment trusts hold what we call a static portfolio, which means that the assets
in the portfolio don't change.
Once the assets are purchased, they stay in the trust until they need to be sold off to
pay off the unit holders, and no new investments or new assets are added.
Some people also say that unit investment trusts are unmanaged, by which they mean that
nobody tinkers with or manages the portfolio.
The unit investment trusts are managed in the sense that a trustee looks after them
and takes care of redemptions and so on.
So I prefer to use the term static or fixed portfolio to characterize unit investment trusts.
In the US, unit investment trusts only held about $51 billion in total assets in 2010,
which is a drop in the bucket compared to the $13.1 trillion in total assets held in
all registered investment companies that year.
But there were almost 6,000 different unit investment trusts, which is over a third
of the total number of registered investment companies.
So unit investment trusts tend to be small, but they're still very popular.
Now we can move on to mutual funds.
The big difference between mutual funds and unit investment trusts is that mutual funds
have dynamic portfolios, which means that the portfolios can and do change.
Someone has to make these changes, and that job rests with a fund manager.
So the SEC uses the term managed investment company to describe a mutual fund.
Again though, the word managed can be a bit misleading, and I'd rather use this idea of
dynamic or changing portfolio to distinguish mutual funds from unit investment trusts.
There are actually two different types of mutual funds that you need to be aware of.
One type is called an open-end mutual fund, and this is the type that most people have
in mind when they use the term mutual fund.
An open-end fund is always ready to issue new shares by selling them to investors, and
it's always ready to redeem shares from investors.
As with the unit investment trust, an open-end fund pays the holder of the shares the net
asset value or NAV of the shares on the day they're sold.
In fact, in the U.S., the NAV net asset value is always determined by the market prices as
of 4 p.m. Eastern time.
So effectively, you can only buy or sell shares in your mutual fund at the end of the day.
If I want to buy shares on Tuesday morning, I have to pay the NAV per share as of the
end of the day on Tuesday.
If I submit my order after 4 p.m., then the price I'll get is the NAV at 4 p.m. on the
next trading day.
There was actually a scandal at a handful of mutual funds back in 2003 in which some big
traders were allowed to buy and sell mutual funds after 4 p.m., say, at 8 a.m. the next
morning, but they got the 4 p.m. price from the previous day.
Naturally, that gave these traders an unfair advantage over everyone else because they
got to see more information that came in overnight that might have influenced how the markets
perform the next day.
Well you probably guessed that the other type of mutual fund is called a closed-end fund.
A closed-end fund is really different from an open-end fund.
Closed-end funds only issue shares once, and they don't redeem shares unless the entire
fund is liquidated.
Buying a share in a closed-end mutual fund is like buying a share of stock in a company
whose sole purpose is to hold and manage a portfolio of assets.
In addition, this company will never issue any more shares.
If you want to cash out your investment, then you'll have to find another investor to sell
your shares to.
In other words, closed-end mutual funds are traded just like stocks.
In fact, shares in closed-end funds are usually traded on exchanges.
And this means that just like stocks, the shares of closed-end mutual funds can take
on some fairly strange values.
We can calculate the net asset values for closed-end mutual funds just like we do for
unit trusts in open-end mutual funds.
And you'd think that the price of a share in a closed-end fund should be pretty darn
close to its NAV.
Well, guess again, the prices of shares in closed-end mutual funds leave most researchers
and investors scratching their heads.
Closed-end fund shares tend to be above their net asset values when the shares are first
issued, and then they tend to fall below NAV and stay there afterwards.
Now, because of these reasons, closed-end funds only make up a very small part of the
mutual fund market, just a few percent of the total.
Closed-end funds have experienced some popularity despite the puzzling behavior of their share
prices, because they traditionally offered focused investments in industries like energy
or in certain geographical regions like Latin America.
They're also very popular for municipal bonds.
But other less puzzling investments, like open-end mutual funds, have increased their
offerings of focused investments, so there really isn't a compelling reason for most
investors to use closed-end funds.
And so my advice for beginning investors is to leave them alone.
Okay, we've delved into the different types of collective investment schemes, and now
we can focus on open-end mutual funds.
As I mentioned at the beginning of the lecture, open-end mutual funds are by far the most popular
type of pooled investment.
At the end of 2010, there were over 8,500 open-end mutual funds holding over 11.8 trillion dollars
of assets.
They held nearly one-quarter of all U.S. corporate equity, and at least 10 percent of each major
category of bonds.
An open-end mutual fund is an actual company with shareholders and a board of directors.
The mutual fund investors are the shareholders naturally, and so if you hold mutual fund
shares, you'll occasionally get ballots so that you can vote in company elections.
The board of directors of the mutual fund hires a team of advisors who are the ones
who actually make the investment decisions for the mutual fund.
The sole purpose of the mutual fund company is to hold the investments selected by the
advisors.
A separate company, called a sponsor, actually sets up the mutual fund, takes care of all
the administrative details, and handles the task of selling and redeeming shares.
Mutual fund sponsors can be standalone companies like Fidelity or Vanguard, or they can be
other types of financial institutions as well, commercial banks like Wells Fargo, or brokerage
firms like Merrill Lynch.
Generally, you buy and redeem shares of a mutual fund directly through the sponsor.
In other words, if you want to buy shares in one of Fidelity's mutual funds, you have
to set up an account directly with Fidelity.
But some mutual funds also sell their shares through brokers and pay the broker a commission.
To protect shareholders, the SEC places a big set of restrictions and requirements on
open-end mutual funds.
The ones that are most important for you to be aware of are the restrictions on the assets
that mutual funds can hold.
Mutual funds are restricted to holding securities, so you won't find open-end funds that hold
commodities or other real assets.
Generally, they hold stocks, bonds, or a mixture of the two in their investment portfolios.
And of course, they also hold cash or other highly liquid assets in order to meet demands
for share redemptions.
Mutual funds are required to hold 85% of their investments in liquid assets that can be sold
for their full value within seven days.
Mutual funds also have a lot of restrictions on the concentrations of their portfolios.
The tax laws for mutual funds actually require a minimum amount of diversification.
Most mutual funds must hold securities from at least 12 different issuers.
And that's really just a lower bound.
Mutual funds can also elect to call themselves diversified.
And if they do, they're not allowed to invest more than 5% of their portfolio in any one
security.
In addition, diversified mutual funds are not allowed to hold more than 10% of the total
amount of any issuer's voting securities.
As a result of these regulations, mutual funds tend to be very well diversified.
The median number of diversified companies, or rather the median number of different companies
held by stock mutual funds in 2010, for example, was 101.
Mutual funds are also highly restricted in terms of taking on leverage.
Basically, open-end funds are prohibited from borrowing unless they set aside more than
enough assets to cover the debt.
We're talking two to three times the amount borrowed.
This tends to seriously discourage mutual fund borrowing, which is good news for investors.
You can be confident that there isn't some kind of leveraged time bomb in your mutual
fund waiting to go off.
Similarly, mutual funds aren't allowed to do any kind of short selling or buying on
margin.
They are permitted to hold derivatives, however.
But because some mutual funds have been using derivatives in a way that effectively mimics
the use of leverage, the SEC will probably narrow and refine the approved uses of derivatives
in mutual funds over time.
Like the restrictions on leverage, this is a good development for investors.
One of the more important requirements that the government opposes on mutual funds is
that they issue detailed prospectuses to their investors.
A prospectus is a document describing the objectives, operation, and risks of a mutual
fund.
It's really the best source of information on the mutual fund for prospective investors.
So it's crucial that you read the prospectus before you invest in any mutual fund.
And after you've invested, you should review the prospectus annually.
Fortunately, in 2009, the SEC simplified the format and the language of the mutual fund
prospectus that investment companies are required to distribute.
Mutual funds are now allowed to distribute an abridged version of the prospectus called
the summary prospectus that contains only the most essential information for investors.
The big advantage of the summary prospectus is that all of the most important information
is included in a standard order which enables you to compare information between mutual funds
very easily.
The only drawback is that some very useful information is only found in the full prospectus,
which you'll have to look up online or request from the investment company.
Now what I'd like to do next is highlight some of the standard sections in the summary
prospectus and tell you why each of these sections should matter to you as a potential
mutual fund investor.
Let's start with the fund's investment objectives and primary investment strategies.
The investment objective statement is the first thing the summary prospectus tells you.
This is a general statement about what the fund is trying to accomplish.
The primary investment strategies is actually the third piece of information the fund is
required to list and it's a more detailed statement about how the fund will actually
go about reaching its investment objective.
Both the investment objective and the primary investment strategy statements are legally
binding on the mutual fund.
They actually have to do what they promise in these statements.
In addition, a mutual fund can't change its objective or strategy without the approval
of the shareholders.
Together, these two statements give you most of the information about what the fund is
going to do with your money.
Why should you care about this?
Well, these statements really help you tell different mutual funds apart.
For example, one fund's investment objectives might tell you that its managers invest in
companies with high growth potential.
Meanwhile, another fund's objective may be to invest in companies that pay high and stable
dividends.
These are very different investment strategies.
Another thing you'll find in the primary investment strategy section is whether the
fund is actively or passively managed.
Actively managed funds buy and sell investments in an attempt to beat some kind of benchmark
return or simply to earn the highest return possible.
Passively managed funds, on the other hand, buy and sell investments in order to match
the return on some benchmark, such as the S&P 500 index.
Passively managed mutual funds are often called index funds for this reason because the benchmark
returns are almost always a return on some major index.
Now you may be wondering, why do index funds need to be managed?
Don't the organizers of the funds buy all the assets in the index and that's that?
Well, the assets in the indices actually do change.
The firms in the S&P 500, for example, are selected by a committee and every so often
the committee drops a company or two from the index and replaces them with other companies.
When that happens, passive mutual fund managers have to sell their shares in the outgoing
companies and buy shares in the incoming companies.
In any case, choosing an actively or passively managed mutual fund depends on your beliefs
about how efficient the markets are.
There's a lot more to learn about the choice between active and passively managed mutual
funds and we'll get into more details a bit later in the course.
Another piece of information the fund must give you in the summary perspective is a list
of fees the fund charges.
As I mentioned in my lecture on stocks, whenever you invest in something, you're going to
have to pay some kind of transaction cost.
Mutual funds aren't different from any other investments in that respect, but some of these
transaction costs are hard to understand.
I want to make sure that you're aware of all these different costs so you can choose carefully.
One of the main fees that mutual funds charge are sales fees, also called loads.
Some mutual funds charge a fee when you buy shares, usually a few percent of the value,
called a front-end load.
In addition, some funds also charge you a fee to redeem the shares, called a back-end
load.
Back-end loads do two things.
They earn money for the management and for the operation of the fund, of course, and
they give investors an incentive to leave the money in for longer periods of time.
That gives the managers more breathing room to pursue their investment plans.
In many cases, mutual funds that charge back-end loads will reduce these loads the longer you
wait to redeem your shares.
When this is the case, the back-end loads tend to start high, say about five or six
percent, and then they decline by something like a percent per year.
Now there's nothing intrinsically wrong with front-end and back-end loads, but they do
directly reduce the value of your investment, which means that the managers need to earn
even higher returns in order to make paying for all these sales loads worthwhile.
All I can say on that score is that some funds are worth it and some aren't.
Since the early 1970s, though, investment companies have offered no-load mutual funds
to American investors.
In these mutual funds, you pay the net asset value and no more when you buy shares and
you receive the full net asset value when you sell.
These days, there are hundreds of no-load funds, and they include both actively managed
and passively managed mutual funds.
Well, hopefully, this idea makes you a little skeptical.
Hmm, if the funds don't charge sales fees, then they must make up the money somewhere
since it takes a lot of resources to run a mutual fund and manage the portfolio.
Well, you're right.
And the way that fund managers make a living is to deduct their expenses right from the
value of your shares.
The expenses that may be claimed and deducted include the costs of operating the portfolio,
in other words, things like paying the fund manager.
Expenses typically run from 0.2% rather to 2% of assets, so it's a non-trivial charge
that can seriously reduce your returns if the expenses are high enough.
One more type of expense that mutual funds are allowed to deduct from assets are so-called
12B1 fees.
These are named after the SEC rule that allows firms to charge them.
These expenses are associated with the cost of marketing and distributing the mutual fund,
things like advertising, printing their prospectuses, and paying commissions to brokers who sell
the fund to investors.
A lot of investors are unhappy about this rule since they don't want to have to pay
the marketing costs of funds that they've already bought.
But on the other hand, the expenses are limited to 1% of the assets in the fund.
Also, part of the price of every product goes to cover the producer's marketing costs.
And finally, if the fund can't attract enough investors, it'll have to liquidate, or be
folded into another fund, or otherwise cease to exist.
So rather than be unhappy that these costs are existing at all, you should be looking
for funds that deliver the best performance relative to the fees they do charge.
Sales loads and expenses are confusing enough, but investment companies make your choice
even more complicated by offering different classes of shares.
Although every share in a mutual fund owns an equal fraction of the assets in the fund,
they don't share the expenses of the fund equally.
Most mutual funds divide up the shares into several classes, and each class pays a different
mixture of expenses.
Different classes of shares may have different front-end and back-end loads, and different
expense ratios.
Generally speaking, larger investments are eligible to be put into classes with lower
overall expenses.
Share classes go by different names, and many funds just use alphabet names like A, B,
C, and so on.
But other firms get creative.
For example, Vanguard uses designations like Admiral class shares to denote share classes
that pay lower expenses.
Having different classes of shares is good for the investment companies, because it gives
them a way to incentivize investors to invest more and keep their money in the fund longer.
For example, many mutual funds with sales loads will move your shares into classes with
lower sales loads if you leave the money in the fund long enough.
Similarly, if your investment in a no-load mutual fund grows to a high enough value, the
company can move your shares into a class with lower expenses.
Some 401k plans offered by big companies are able to negotiate favorable deals with mutual
fund companies so that all the employees of the company are able to buy mutual fund shares
in the classes with the lowest expenses, even though their individual investments are very
small.
This is something worth looking for if you're participating in a 401k plan at work.
Another possibility is to plan to grow one or more of your mutual fund investments quickly
so that you can move it into a favorable share class as soon as possible.
For example, if you're a passive mutual fund investor and you're planning to hold a global
stock index fund as one of your main investments, it might be worthwhile to focus your investing
into this global stock index fund so that it qualifies for the higher share class.
The savings from the reduced expenses accumulated over decades can be significant.
And if the investment is in a well-diversified mutual fund, you really aren't putting all
your eggs in one basket.
The next two pieces of information in the prospectus that appear after the fee table
and the primary investment strategy are the risk and return of the fund.
Unfortunately, the discussion of risk probably won't be very specific or enlightening.
The mutual fund must describe the main reasons for why the fund might lose money or might
not perform as well as the managers expect it to.
And it has to tell you that the fund is not FDIC insured.
This information is worth knowing, but in a future lecture, I'll tell you about the
risk you really want to know and how to measure it.
As far as returns go, the fund must present the past 10 years of returns in a bar chart
and it has to present the average annual total returns over the most recent 1, 5, and 10
year periods.
This on the other hand is specific enough to be very helpful as you make choices.
In particular, look at the last 10 years of returns to see how consistent the fund has
been at earning good returns.
A mutual fund that delivers a 4% return year in and year out is going to look a lot different
from a fund that earns a 10% return one year and loses 2% the next.
The remaining information in the prospectus is good to have, but it isn't nearly as important
as the information we've already highlighted.
It includes the name of the fund advisory company as well as the name of the actual fund manager.
Then the fund must tell you about the tax consequences of any trades that it does followed
by a statement of whether the mutual fund company makes payments like commissions or
to brokers or other intermediaries.
Well that wraps up the prospectus and it's time to wrap up this lecture as well.
We've learned that there are several types of pooled investments to choose from and at
least two of them are worth considering for the beginning investor, unit investment trusts,
and open-end mutual funds.
We've also learned that, thanks to all the rules that mutual funds have to comply with,
what you see is what you get.
That's great, but it means that the burden is on you to look at the prospectus and see
what the mutual fund is actually offering you.
If you get in the habit of doing this, then it will be much easier to tell the thousands
of investments apart and pick the right mutual funds for you.
We'll have a lot more to say about that in a future lecture.
