In the last lecture, we learned about the main model that most professional investors
use to help them pick stocks, the method of comparables.
But remember, at the end of the lecture, I said that once we identify a company that
looks good based on its PE or other ratios, we'll still want to get more information
about it.
We want to know as much as we can about that company and especially how it creates value
for its shareholders before we invest.
A great way to get this additional information is to see what other stock pricing models
can tell us about the value of that company.
Other models can give us insights into a company that help explain why it looks undervalued
based on its valuation ratios.
In other words, these models are sources of additional evidence that helps to confirm
or contradict the story that the method of comparables is telling us.
If all the information we gather tells a consistent story saying that a company is creating a
lot of value, then we can feel a lot more confident that it's really a good investment.
So with this in mind, let's introduce our next big stock pricing model.
It's called the dividend discount model, or DDM for short.
The DDM is a fundamentals-based model, and what does that mean?
Well, fundamentals-based models rest on two simple ideas.
First, the price of any investment should depend only on the cash that it's going to
pay you.
And second, cash paid to you in the future is worth less to you than cash you receive
now.
Any cash promised to you in the future has to be discounted, that is, reduced in value,
to reflect the fact that if you would have received the cash today, you could have invested
it and earned some kind of positive return on it.
Because of their focus on cash and discounting, fundamentals-based models are also called
discounted cash flow, or DCF models.
Well what does a fundamentals-based or discounted cash flow model say specifically about the
value of a stock?
Well, the cash flows that investors receive from stock are the dividends.
So fundamentals-based models of stock prices say that the current price of a share of stock
is equal to the present discounted value of the sum of all its future dividends.
Now, all future dividends sounds like a whole lot of dividends, and it is.
Technically, it's an infinite number of future dividends.
So this sounds like it might be a complicated, if not impossible, task to find the present
discounted value of all these dividends.
Now actually, there's a surprisingly simple formula for the present value of the sum
of all future dividends.
It's D divided by the quantity R minus G, where D is next year's dividend, R is the
expected rate of return on the stock, and G is the growth rate of the dividend.
This formula is called the dividend discount model.
When you hear someone say that they're using a fundamentals-based model to value a stock,
this formula should pop into your head.
There are other fundamentals-based stock pricing models, but this one is the simplest and by
far the most common.
The main assumption that this model makes is that companies try to make their dividends
grow at a low, constant rate.
In reality, dividends don't necessarily grow at a constant rate, but we can think that
the little G in the formula represents the long-run average growth rate of the dividend.
So G is a small number, like 3% per year, though of course it can be higher.
If you look at the formula carefully, you can see immediately that we need to make one
more assumption.
In order to get a sensible number from the DDM, we have to assume that G, the dividend
growth rate, is less than R, the expected return on the stock.
If G is greater than R, then we get an absurd result from the formula.
In that case, not only does the formula imply a negative price for the stock, which is silly,
but a negative value in this case would be the exact opposite of the true value.
If a firm's dividend did grow at a rate faster than the expected rate of return on the stock,
then the present value of all the future dividends would literally be infinity.
You should be willing to pay all the money in the world for a stock like that.
So it's very important to keep in mind that this formula only works for the case where
G is less than R.
Well D over R minus G. Hopefully you'll find the DDM easy to remember, but the more important
issue is whether it's easy to apply in real life.
Fortunately, the answer is yes, with a few conditions of course.
What I'm going to do next is to show you the ropes of applying the DDM to real companies
so that you can see how to do it and what the conditions are.
Now to make this easier to follow, I'm going to apply the dividend discount model to the
stock of AT&T.
AT&T's stock ticker symbol is simply T, and it's listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
Applying the DDM is a matter of getting three numbers that you need to work the formula.
The amount of the next annual dividend, D, the expected return on the stock, R, and the
growth rate of the dividend, G.
Next year's dividend, the D in the formula, is the easiest number to find.
Just about any free financial website that covers stocks will have an information page
about the stock that lists the annual dividend among many other pieces of information.
When I looked up AT&T's information, the annual dividend was given as $1.72 per share.
The next number I need is the expected rate of return on the stock, that's the little
R.
In the case of stocks, most people use a model of expected returns called the CAPM in order
to estimate expected rates of return.
CAPM is an acronym that stands for Capital Asset Pricing Model.
Even though many people don't believe the CAPM is true or accurate, most people still
use the CAPM as if it were.
Interestingly, the reason why people who don't believe the CAPM is true still want
to use it is that they probably want to know what everyone else is thinking so that they
can know the prices that other traders have in mind.
Either way, when you look on most free financial websites, you'll find the information you
need to use the CAPM to estimate a discount rate for a stock.
Now the number you need in order to use the CAPM is called beta, and indeed most financial
websites will list the stock's beta.
Beta is a measure of the riskiness or return variation on a stock, and in fact it's supposed
to be the number of units of risk in the stock, where one unit of risk is equivalent to the
amount of risk or return variation in the overall stock market.
According to the CAPM, the expected return on a stock rises about 7% for every unit of
risk it contains.
And if a stock has zero units of risk, then it's risk-free and should earn the risk-free
rate of return.
The risk-free rate is the rate of return that human beings demand simply because they're
impatient and need to be compensated for waiting for a loan to be paid back even if it's a
sure thing that the loan will be repaid.
We usually use the rate of return earned on government bonds as a measure of the risk-free
rate, because they're about as close to risk-free as any asset gets.
Now to use the CAPM to estimate the expected return or discount rate on a stock, we use
the following formula, e of ri equals rf plus beta i times the quantity e of rm minus rf.
Now in the formula, e of ri is the expected return of the asset that we want to find.
The rf is the risk-free rate, which we usually take to be the return on a 10-year treasury
bond.
I've explained what the beta is, and then the final term in the brackets is the difference
between the expected return on the entire market and the risk-free rate.
This is called the market risk premium, and it's also called the compensation for bearing
one unit of risk.
In other words, that's that 7% I just mentioned.
So we take 7% for the market risk premium, and we find the beta from the financial website.
For AT&T, the beta I found was 0.52, which means that there's just over half a unit
of risk in AT&T stock.
That just leaves the risk-free rate.
Here, there's a bit of a judgment call to make.
We could just take the current market rate on the 10-year treasury bond, but this rate
does fluctuate, and sometimes it takes on levels that are much higher and much lower
than normal.
A normal rate for the 10-year treasury rate, based on decades of experience, seems to be
around 4% to 6%.
I'll use 4% for the risk-free rate in my calculations.
So when I plug all my numbers into the CAPM expected return formula, I get that E of R
I is equal to 0.04 plus 0.52 times 0.07, which is equal to 0.0764.
Therefore, my expected return on AT&T stock is 7.64%.
As I've mentioned a couple of times already, we can also interpret this as the discount
rate used to find the present value of the dividends.
Well we found numbers for the dividend and the discount rate, so this just leaves G.
And now the fun really begins.
You see, G is supposed to be the average long-term growth rate of dividends on the stock from
here until, well, eternity.
How do we find that number?
Well, there are lots of ways we could do it, but I'll show you the three ways that I think
make the most sense.
I want to show you three different ways to estimate G because they capture different
ways of thinking about where the growth of the firm comes from.
And frankly, at any given time, these different ways may lead to very different price estimates,
where only one estimate of G may give you a sensible answer for the price of the stock.
Let's try the simplest thing you can think of to estimate the long-term average growth
rate of dividends, well, besides a pure guess.
You'd probably want to look at past dividend growth and see what it looked like and use
that as your estimate.
That's perfectly fine, and in fact, on most financial websites, you can find a link to
statistics on the dividends that a firm pays, and one of the statistics most sites list
is the average dividend growth rate over the past five years.
On the site that I looked at, the average dividend growth rate for AT&T over the past
five years was 5.39%.
Before we move on, let's see what kind of price this implies for AT&T.
To remind ourselves, the dividend is $1.72, the discount rate is 7.64%, and the growth
rate of the dividend is 5.39%.
The growth rate of dividends is less than the discount rate, so the price estimate won't
be absurd.
Plugging in the numbers, we get that D over R minus G is equal to $1.72 divided by the
quantity 0.0764 minus 0.0539, which gives us $76.44.
In other words, the DDM suggests that a share of AT&T should be priced at $76.44, assuming
that the historical growth rate of dividends will continue into the indefinite future.
In the interest of time, I'll move on to the other methods of estimating G, and then we
can compare outcomes.
The first method of estimating G used past data, and so we could call it backward-looking.
Can we find a forward-looking estimate of G that tries to project growth into the future?
Well, sure.
There are lots of people whose job it is to forecast all kinds of information about companies
into the future.
These are stock analysts, and one of the main things that they do is forecast the earnings
of a company.
They forecast both the dollar value of earnings, as well as the growth rate of earnings, and
over short-run, as well as long-run horizons.
So let's use these analyst forecasts somehow.
Now you may be wondering why we can use earnings growth rate forecasts as an estimate of the
growth rate of dividends.
Well, it turns out that one of the implications of the dividend discount model is that both
earnings per share and dividends grow at that same rate, G.
I'll show you why this is the case later, but for now, we can assume that the dividend
growth rate will be the same as the growth rate of earnings per share, or EPS.
Most financial websites will list analyst forecast numbers at several different horizons.
Since G is supposed to be a long-term average growth rate, you'll want to use the forecast
of long-term EPS growth.
On the websites, look for the mean of the analyst forecast of long-term EPS growth,
and this will be the estimate of the long-term dividend growth rate.
For AT&T, the mean of the analyst long-term EPS growth rate forecast was 4.27%.
That's not all that different from the historical average growth rate of dividends.
When I plug this estimate into the dividend growth rate into the formula with the same
numbers for the dividend, $1.72, and expected return of 7.64% as before, I get a price estimate
equal to $1.72 divided by the quantity 0.0764 minus 0.0427, which gives a price of $51.04.
Wow!
The second estimate changed the dividend growth rate estimate by a little bit, and only a
little over 1%, really, and this changed the estimate of the price by over $20.
This illustrates one of the main complaints about the DDM.
The price estimates are very sensitive to small changes in the estimated dividend growth
rate, and to changes in the discount rate as well, for that matter.
And of course, the variable in the DDM that we're least sure of is the dividend growth
rate.
So this uncertainty about the actual rate of dividend growth leads to a very large amount
of uncertainty about the correct price of the stock.
We're not through estimating the dividend growth rate, though.
There's one more method of estimating it, which depends on accounting data.
This method actually gets us to think about where the company's growth comes from.
If you recall my earlier lecture about stocks, then you might remember that we learned a
little bit about this already.
In that lecture, I explained that corporations are under no obligation to pay out their earnings
as dividends.
If they want to, they can retain their earnings and reinvest them into new projects.
It's this process of reinvesting earnings into new projects that creates growth for
the firm.
So the third method of estimating G assigns some numbers to this reinvestment process.
In the previous lecture on financial statement analysis, we learned that some of the terminology
and ratios that help us understand this method of estimating the growth of dividends.
When a company retains a dollar of earnings, this dollar is added to assets, but no liabilities
are added.
Therefore, this adds a dollar to the equity of the company.
You may remember from the lecture on financial statement analysis that we learned how total
equity was both assets minus liabilities, as well as the sum total of all paid in capital
and retained earnings over the entire history of the company.
When a dollar is added to equity, what does the company earn from this extra dollar?
Well, we learned the answer in the previous lecture.
It earns the return on equity, or ROE.
Most free financial websites will report the ROE of a company, often in several places
so it's easy to find.
So if a company takes all of its earnings and reinvests 100% of EPS back into the company,
then net earnings and EPS will grow at a rate given by ROE.
But in reality, only a part of EPS is reinvested.
The rest is paid out to the shareholders as dividends.
Analysts refer to the fraction of EPS paid out to shareholders as the payout ratio, and
they refer to the share of EPS that is reinvested in the company as the plowback ratio.
Plowback ratio because it's plowed back into the firm.
The plowback ratio is given by EPS minus D over EPS, or 1 minus the ratio of dividends
to EPS.
The payout ratio, of course, would then be dividends over EPS so that the payout ratio
and the plowback ratio sum to 1.
The fraction of EPS that is reinvested into the company makes net earnings grow at a rate
given by ROE.
But the fraction of EPS that is paid out doesn't cause any earnings growth for the company
at all.
So we can form a weighted average to find the implied growth rate of net earnings.
Here's the equation.
E is equal to plowback ratio times ROE plus payout ratio times zero.
And of course, we drop the term that is zero and simply say that the growth rate of net
earnings is equal to the plowback ratio times ROE.
But what about dividend growth?
Well, we're almost there.
If we assume that companies maintain a constant plowback ratio, then dividends will grow at
the same rate as net earnings and EPS.
This is important, so let me show you how it works.
For example, let's say that the plowback ratio is fixed at one-third of EPS and EPS is equal
to $3.
So $1 is plowed back into the company and $2 per share are paid out as dividends.
Now let EPS grow by 10% to $3.30.
With a fixed plowback ratio of one-third, the company reinvests $1.10 and pays out
the remaining $2.20 as dividends.
So the fixed plowback ratio means that the EPS growth rate of 10% is going to be the
growth rate of dividends as well.
Now you can understand better why it was OK to use the EPS growth rate forecast to estimate
G, the growth rate of dividends.
As long as we assume that the plowback ratio stays the same, dividends will grow at the
same rate as earnings, which as we've learned is given by plowback times ROE.
Actually just to draw one more connection here that you may find useful, the DDM not
only implies that dividends and earnings grow at the same rate, but the price of the stock
does too.
That is, the price of the stock will also grow at rate G according to the dividend discount
model.
That's because the price of the shares is proportional to the dividend, and the dividend
grows at rate G, so the price of the stock must grow at rate G as well.
This means that G is the rate of capital gains you should expect to receive each year on
your stock if the DDM is correct.
So I always tell my students that in the dividend discount model, everything grows
at rate G, earnings, dividends, and the stock price.
But let's get back to our price estimate using these accounting numbers.
So remember that G is equal to the plowback ratio times ROE, where the plowback ratio
is 1 minus the ratio of dividends over EPS.
Therefore we need three numbers to implement this estimate of G, the dividend, some measure
of ROE, and EPS.
As I mentioned a minute ago, many free financial sites carry all these numbers.
So let's take a look at AT&T once again and see what this method of applying the DDM
has to say about AT&T's price.
Now the EPS forecast I found for AT&T was $2.38, which together with the dividend of
$1.72 implies that the plowback ratio is 1 minus $1.72 over $2.38, which equals 27.23%.
The ROE was 12.39%.
So when I take the plowback ratio times ROE, I find that the estimate of G is .2723 times
.1239, which gives 3.44%.
This gives an even lower estimate of price than the other two methods.
When we plug this G into the DDM formula, we get that the price is equal to D over R
minus G $1.72 over the difference between .0764 and .0344, which gives us $40.91.
Now we've gone through a basic DDM analysis and showed how to use all three methods of
estimating the dividend growth rate to implement this valuation model.
What have we seen so far?
Well, confusion for one thing.
Let's quickly review what the three prices we came up with were.
When we used historical dividend growth to get G, the share price we came up with was
$76.44.
When we used analyst forecast of EPS growth, we estimated a price of $51.04.
And using accounting numbers, we formed an estimate of $40.91.
The prices we calculated disagree by fairly wide margins, and moreover, none are all that
close to the actual market price of AT&T when I obtained these numbers.
For the record, the value of the stock at the time was only about $28, which was much
lower than all of these estimates.
I mentioned part of the reason for this disagreement, which is that the DDM's prices are very sensitive
to small changes in the discount rate and the dividend growth rate estimates.
But another part of the problem comes from conceptual shortcomings in all three methods.
First, let's start with historic dividends.
These numbers on past dividend growth don't tell us anything about why dividends were
growing the way that they did.
So we have no idea whether the company can sustain this growth rate, or whether it even
intends to maintain it into the future.
Next, let's think about analyst forecast of future EPS growth.
Although stock analysts have access to much better data than the typical individual investor
does, and although it's literally their job to forecast how a company will perform into
the future, there's a big problem that offsets these advantages.
Stock analysts are notoriously biased in the positive direction.
It's been well documented that analysts buy recommendations outnumber their sell recommendations
by a huge margin, and that analysts typically overstate the future growth of the companies
that they follow.
Now, as an economist, all I can say is that it must be in their best interest to do so
because these people are generally pretty smart and pretty well informed.
And if you look carefully, you'll discover a lot of possible incentives for analysts
to be biased, ranging from their own compensation packages to maintaining a good working relationship
with the firms that they follow.
And finally, the accounting method of finding G also has its problems.
The main problem with this method is that both the plow-back ratio and a company's ROE
are subject to change.
And as they change, the estimated growth rate of dividends will change.
In addition, numbers like ROE are summary statistics that just don't tell us what we
really want to know about a company.
What we really want to know are the actual projects that the company hopes to use to
create the dividend growth in the future.
Specific information about a company's plans, which they do share with the rest of the world,
is what you need in addition to get the information you want in the DDM.
For example, let's think about the case of AT&T for a moment.
I mentioned that the DDM estimates not only disagreed, but they overstated the current
market price of AT&T by quite a bit.
Well, at the time I gathered the numbers that I showed you, AT&T had just received some
bad news about a major investment project.
AT&T had offered to buy T-Mobile's American Wireless Communications business, and the offer
was accepted.
This is a huge project for AT&T that could reshape the entire U.S. communications market
into a two-company market, which would mean good things for AT&T's future profits.
But the U.S. Department of Justice blocked the acquisition, which at the very least would
mean that the entire deal would have to be scaled back.
It could even mean that the deal is off.
If you knew these facts about AT&T, then you're in a much better position to use the information
from the dividend discount model.
For example, you may believe that the company will be able to go through with its acquisition
and sustain a dividend growth rate close to the ones that are implied by its plow-back
ratio or previous dividend growth rates.
If you really think this is the case, then you'd think that at its current low price,
AT&T is a great buy.
Of course, the market must not be thinking that AT&T will be able to support the dividend
growth rates we calculated because it's assigning a low price to the stock.
So in order to profit from buying AT&T, not only do you have to be smarter than the market,
the market also has to change its mind eventually and come to agree with you.
So all three ways of estimating the growth rate of dividends for the dividend discount
model have some serious issues that make the estimate seem less reliable than we'd
like them to be.
In addition to these problems, there's an even larger practical problem with the DDM,
which I mentioned earlier in this lecture.
Often, you can't apply the dividend discount model at all.
One reason for this is that many companies simply don't pay dividends.
Well, this problem is actually easier to deal with than you might think.
You may remember from the lecture on financial statement analysis that I discussed an alternative
measure of earnings called free cash flow.
Free cash flow is the cash that could be paid out to the shareholders as dividends.
Many analysts use free cash flow per share in terms of the dividend in the dividend
discount model, and you can use this method as well.
Another reason why we can't apply the DDM is that many times, G will be greater than
R.
This condition implies that the company is worth an infinite amount if the dividend continues
to grow this quickly forever.
But there's the problem, the assumption of constant dividend growth.
Usually, firms that experience very high dividend growth can't sustain it for long periods
of time, or at least not forever.
Even the fastest growing startup companies eventually mature and slow down.
Happens to all of us, I know.
Now relaxing the assumption that G stays constant can be done, but it requires more
intensive math than we have time to get into.
But when you encounter a stock that has G greater than R, you can still ask questions
about why G is so high for the firm right now, and how long you can expect the high
growth period to last.
The higher the growth is, and the longer it lasts, the greater the potential value of
the company.
Despite all these criticisms of the dividend discount model, it really is doing something
useful for us.
It's focusing our attention on information about dividend growth and its sustainability,
which are very good issues to look into.
But the full explanation of dividend growth and sustainability has to come from an in-depth
information about a company's investment projects, which can't be neatly summarized
in numbers like ROE and Plowback.
You'll have to supplement your number crunching with lots of readings about the companies
you're considering adding to your portfolio.
As you read, let the DDM guide the questions you ask and the directions that your research
takes.
Why did the company grow its dividend as quickly or as slowly as it did over the past five years?
What objective reasons are analysts offering for their long-term EPS growth rate forecasts?
What range of ROE can the company really expect from the projects they're disclosing to the
media?
All of these questions are great, and they're motivated directly by the DDM and one of the
three methods of estimating the dividend growth rate that we learned about in this
lecture.
And at the end of the day, I think these are the kinds of questions that successful stockpickers
like Warren Buffett, Bill Miller, and others typically ask.
So even though the fundamentals-based models won't win the Wall Street popularity contest,
and they don't necessarily provide all the answers, they do point us to key information
about a company's value.
What you need to do as you consider different companies is to use the dividend discount
model's estimates of dividend growth rates and stock prices to drive your search for
the stories behind the numbers.
Again, look for companies that tell a value creation story that's consistent across their
financial statements, their valuation ratios, and the dividends they pay out over time.
