In the last few lectures, we've learned how to pick the stocks of established companies
that have solid financial statements, long track records of paying dividends, and healthy
earnings.
But one of the most exciting types of stocks comes from companies that don't have any
of those things.
Companies that are about to have their initial public offerings or IPOs.
Even though the dot-com bubble showed the downside to being overly optimistic about
high-tech startup companies, investors still get very excited about the possibility of
becoming a shareholder in the next Amazon or Google, and they'll go to great lengths
to be one of the lucky ones who buys into these firms at or even before the IPO.
When you think that these days, only about a hundred IPOs come to market in the US in
an average year, it's not surprising that people are competing harder than ever to invest
in them.
But let's take a step back for a second and ask whether it's really worth all the hassle
to try to participate in IPOs.
People tell a lot of stories about the money to be made in IPOs, but the facts about who
really makes the money and what that means for individual investors will surprise you.
In addition, not every company is going to be the next Google.
Many turn out to be the next Pets.com.
Never heard of them?
Well, exactly.
They were the poster child of the dot-com bubble.
The only thing that remains of the company today is the sock puppet that was their spokesperson.
In this lecture, we're going to sort out fact from legend about IPOs, so you can make up
your own mind if you want to pursue them, and we'll also take a look at valuing the
high-tech startup companies that generate the most interest from IPO investors.
The initial public offering, or IPO, marks the transition from being a privately held
company that only 500 or fewer people can own to becoming a publicly held company that
literally anyone can own a part of.
In order to make this transition, a company must write a prospectus for a public offering
and have this prospectus approved by the SEC.
Once the SEC approves the prospectus, the firm has permission to solicit investors to buy
the shares that it's going to offer in the IPO.
It's important to understand the details of how IPOs work, because so many of the positive
and negative aspects of IPOs are the result of the particular way that most of them are
conducted, so let's take a closer look at the process.
In most IPOs, the company hires an investment bank to underwrite the public offering of
stock.
What this means is that on the day of the IPO, the company literally sells the entire
public offering to the investment bank, and then the investment bank turns around and
sells the shares to the general public.
So the investment bank, or banks, that underwrite the IPO, are really in charge of distributing
the shares.
It's important to realize that when they underwrite IPOs, investment banks are taking
on a big risk.
If the company that's going public turns out to be not very interesting to investors,
then the investment bank will be stuck with a ton of shares that it can't sell, and it
will probably end up taking a loss on the deal.
So the investment bank's number one priority is to make sure that it finds enough investors
to sell out the IPO shares.
And which investors have the ability to make that happen?
Well, it's institutional investors, pension funds, and especially the big mutual fund
companies.
If they choose to participate in an IPO, the shares will be fully subscribed, and the
IPO will be a success.
But if they don't, the investment bank may call off the whole IPO, or at least scale
it back severely.
So the institutional investors have market power in the IPO process, and they use it.
For each underwritten IPO, the investment bank contacts big institutional investors
called a roadshow, and it asks them about their interest in the IPO.
The investment bank says, if we price the shares at $20 a share, how many would you
like to buy?
What if we price the shares at $25, and so on?
Basically, the investment bank is building up a demand curve for the company's shares.
This process is called building an IPO book, or simply book building.
The institutional investors use their market power by understating their true interest
in the IPO.
That is, they underbid.
They want to hold the IPO price down, because this will increase the chance that any shares
they buy will increase in value after the company's shares start trading.
And because the mutual funds and other institutions make up such a large fraction of the demand
for shares, they almost always succeed in holding the IPO price down.
While you're probably familiar with the result of this behavior, the famous first day pop,
as it's called, in which the price of the firm's shares rise by 10% or more on the
first day of market trading.
The IPO pop is actually the result of the systematic underpricing of IPO shares.
There are several implications of this story that you need to keep in mind as an individual
investor.
First, the investment banks control who gets the shares of hot IPOs, and they use those
shares to reward their best retail customers.
The best customers are the people who generate big profits for the investment banks by maintaining
large brokerage accounts, buying high commission investment products, and trading a lot.
This means that it's really tough, if not almost impossible, for the average individual
investor to get an allocation of a popular IPO from a brokerage firm.
And unfortunately, this problem is only getting worse over time, not better.
One of the big differences between IPOs now and the ones of the dot-com era is the portion
of the company that's sold to the public in the IPO.
In the dot-com era, it was typical for the IPO to distribute at least half of the outstanding
shares of the company.
These days, however, it's much more typical for a company to distribute 30% or less of
its outstanding shares in the IPO.
Several of the biggest IPOs in 2011, for example, offered less than 10% of the outstanding shares
of these companies.
This further reduces the supply of shares that investment banks have to dole out to their
customers.
The second big implication of the book-building model of IPOs is that institutional investors
end up with a huge proportion of the new company's shares.
Now that means that your mutual fund company is probably ending up with a lot of IPO shares.
So you may be getting indirect access to a lot of IPOs without knowing it, if you own
mutual funds.
Well the good news about this is that you can brag to all your friends that you're actually
getting those hard to come by IPO shares.
The bad news, of course, is that the mutual fund managers make all the decisions about
what IPOs to buy and what to do with the shares.
Perhaps the mutual fund manager has already flipped them by the time you even find out
that one of your mutual funds has bought the IPO shares.
Yeah, there's something that just isn't as satisfying about that.
Part of the fun of getting a hold of IPO shares and then selling them for a big profit is being
able to brag to your friends, hey, I flipped those shares.
Well let's hope that somebody flipped them because this brings me to the third consequence
of the book-building process.
What do you suppose generally happens after that fantastic first day of trading?
Well the answer is something that financial economists call subsequent underperformance.
In other words, after the IPO the shares don't tend to earn very good returns over longer
holding periods on average.
This phenomenon has been well documented by financial economists and you can see why it
might be the case.
If everyone knows the IPO is underpriced, then people are eager to trade shares on the first
day to participate in that first day pop.
We don't know how big the first day pop is going to be, so it's easy for traders to
get carried away.
They keep on buying on that first day of trading and push the price even higher.
But after a while, somebody finally asks whether the company is really worth all that money
and then the share price will tend to languish.
So if you buy into the firm after the IPO hoping that the party will keep on going, you're
generally going to be disappointed.
Of course for some firms, the party lasts for quite a while.
And in some cases it gets a new burst of energy when so-called lockup periods expire.
The lockup period refers to a length of time after the IPO, usually on the order of 90
days, during which the employees of the company are not allowed to trade their shares.
In many, if not nearly every startup firm, a large portion of employee compensation takes
the form of stock in the company.
In addition to these shares, there are so-called friends and family shares.
And for many startup firms, the sum of these two types of shares represent a significant
fraction of the entire company.
The purpose of the lockup, as you can probably guess, is to prevent employees from flooding
the market with their shares and driving the share price down inadvertently on the first
day of trading.
When the lockup expires, there's a new supply of shares that comes into the secondary market.
So in some cases, the arrival of these shares drives the price down.
But for other companies, the arrival of these shares presents a chance for those people
who missed out on the IPO to get in on the fund.
Some firms experience a revival of interest in their shares around the expiration of the
lockup date.
So if you're holding employee shares in a firm that's about to go public, it's really
hard to predict whether your shares will still be rising in value by the end of the lockup
or whether they already have peaked.
And if you missed the IPO and are still sitting on the sidelines thinking about investing,
you may want to wait until the lockout expiration to see how this event affects the value of
your shares.
Well, after this discussion of the consequences of the book-building method of conducting
IPOs, you may be wondering, isn't there a different way to do this?
Well, there is, and it's called the open IPO or Dutch auction method.
A Dutch auction is a type of auction where the bids on the item for sale start at a high
price and then fall until all the units of the item are sold.
It works well whenever there are many, many units of something for sale, like flowers,
for example.
For IPOs, a Dutch auction method works this way.
Everyone who's interested in the IPO submits a bid for shares that tells what price they'll
pay and how many shares they want to buy at that price.
The person running the auction collects all the bids and then ranks them by price, starting
from the highest and then going to the lowest price offered.
Each price also has a number of shares associated with the bid so that the auctioneer adds up
the shares that each bidder wants, again, starting with the high bidders and working
her way down.
When the sum of the shares the bidders offer to buy is greater than or equal to the number
of shares the firm is offering to sell, the auctioneer looks at the price offered by the
last person whose bid was included and says that anyone who bid at least this price will
get shares.
But everyone pays the last bidder's price, so everyone pays the lowest winning bid.
Now, a few IPOs have been conducted in this way over the years and in fact Google's IPO
was supposed to have been conducted in this way.
But there were a bunch of changes in the auction format that were made to ensure that a minimum
price was paid by all the winning bids, so I really wouldn't say that Google used a true
Dutch auction method in their IPO.
For a while, Dutch auction IPOs were considered the wave of the future because they seemed
more fair and they promised to remove the problem of underbidding in those first day
pops.
But the advocates of the Dutch auction method failed to realize that the investment banks
really like the profits from book building and the companies going public are really
averse to bearing the risk that their IPOs won't raise very much money, so the Dutch
auction IPO remains a very small portion of the IPO market.
Nonetheless, you may be interested in participating in them since they really are more open than
traditional IPOs.
Well, so far I think I'm reigning on the IPO parade a little bit.
It's really hard to get your own allocation of shares from the traditional book building
IPOs and your mutual funds may already get the shares anyway, not that it does you all
that much good, but the long term performance of IPO shares isn't very impressive on average.
So why would anyone still be interested in IPOs?
Well, hopefully you're thinking to yourself, or maybe you're shouting at the screen at
this point, that there's still the chance that one of these stocks will be the next
Microsoft or Dell computer or any number of game changing companies that went on to deliver
amazing returns for shareholders over years or even decades.
Okay, fair enough.
So the question then becomes, how do I find the next Amazon or Google out of all the
IPO candidates that come to market?
Well, needless to say, that's a tough question because as I mentioned at the beginning of
the lecture, the firms that are being taken public don't have any of the things that we've
been using to value companies, earning dividends, even reliable financial ratios.
But what they do have is potential.
The whole reason we're interested in them is that they could generate lots of profits
and lots of dividends in the future.
So if you're really going to invest in IPOs or startup firms, you need to find a way to
put a price tag on that potential.
Wow, that sounds like a pretty tall order.
And in fact, it is.
But you can actually use some of the ideas that we've already learned during the past
few lectures to think about the value of startup companies.
You have to adapt them to the special circumstances that characterize these young, high growth,
high risk firms though.
That's what we'll learn about now.
The big secret of trying to put a value on a startup company is to project into the future
and work backwards.
In the future, one of several things can happen to this company.
First, it could be wildly successful and dominate the market.
Second, it could survive and be minimally to moderately successful, but nothing really
special.
And finally, the company could just go belly up.
Now what I've done here is to use a common technique in finance known as scenario analysis.
In scenario analysis, we simplify a terribly complex future down to just a few possibilities
that we regard as the most likely ones.
Each scenario is going to imply a different value for the company.
Then we choose a probability for each scenario, which should reflect our best guess about
how likely each scenario really is.
To get the value of the company today, I multiply the value of the company in each scenario
by the probability of that scenario and then add all these values up.
So the real skill required to value a startup company is the ability to put together scenarios
that are as realistic as you can make them yet simple enough so that you can easily work
with them.
And in order to construct these scenarios, you need to do your homework so that you can
put numbers on these scenarios.
For example, you need to be able to think about things like the size of the market,
the profit potential of the market, the market share of the firm, and so on.
You'll have to make a lot of assumptions, but that's simply how this works.
Everyone who's going to get a handle on the value of a startup company has to make their
own set of assumptions.
Well, to make this whole process more concrete, let me show you a valuation exercise I did
for Skype back in 2005.
That's when Skype was acquired by eBay for $2.6 billion.
At the time, Skype was the main pioneer in the world of VoIP, which stands for Voice
Over Internet Protocol, and millions of people were already using Skype's products.
But in 2005, the company was still making losses.
In fact, its first operating profit wasn't even expected until 2007.
So how could Skype be worth $2.6 billion back then?
Well, I used scenario analysis to try to find out.
The first thing I did was to simply think about the evolution of the market for voice
over internet, and what the profit potential was in that market.
In 2005, there were about 200 million users of broadband internet worldwide, mostly in
the US and Europe.
Since services like Skype only work well with very fast internet, I assumed that only broadband
internet users would use Skype.
But since Skype is so handy, and I noticed that just about everyone I knew who had a
broadband connection had at least tried Skype, I assumed that everyone with a broadband connection
would in fact use some kind of voice over internet service.
So the market consisted of all broadband internet users.
Next, I projected the market out into the future.
I thought that by the end of 2015, there'd be about a billion users of broadband internet
worldwide.
Two things really made me choose the number of billion, well, besides the fact that it's
a nice big round number.
First, I thought that broadband penetration would grow very quickly over the coming decade
after 2005, especially in developed countries.
But I noticed that in other developing countries, a lot of their communication development was
taking place in terms of mobile phones, not computers.
So that made me not want to push the number of broadband subscribers into the billions,
but to leave it at $1 billion.
Under the year 2015, I assumed that the number of broadband subscribers would continue to
grow at about the general rate of population growth, which is about 3 percent.
So there's the size of the market, $200 million now, rising to $1 billion over 10 years, and
then growing at a much slower rate of 3 percent thereafter.
Next, I thought about the profit potential of this market.
In 2005, I found a statistic that Skype was earning less than $2 per user per year, mostly
because the predominant users of Skype were individuals.
Individuals mostly use Skype for computer-to-computer calls which are free, and only occasionally
for calls to mobile phones and landlines which are the services that you have to pay for.
So I assumed that this $2 per user per year number was valid for all voice over internet
users at the time.
In addition, I also assumed that this number would grow over the next decade.
It would grow because, first, companies like Skype would try to get more businesses to
replace their traditional phone services with voice over internet, which would generate
higher revenues per user.
Second, I also thought that any company in the VoIP business would simply become more
clever at inducing individuals to use more services that they'd have to pay for.
So between these two considerations, I assumed that the amount of revenue per year would
grow from $2 per user per year to $6 per user per year during the following decade.
Since the average cost of providing voice over internet services was minimal, that's
one of those great features about the internet economy, by the way, I assumed that all revenues
more or less went right to the bottom line.
In other words, I assumed that even after figuring in the cost of producing the services, VoIP
companies would be making annual profits of about $6 per user per year.
Well, with all those assumptions, I have my projection of the profits at stake.
The global profit pie for voice over internet in 2005 was a measly $400 million, that's
200 million users, times $2 per user per year.
But this would grow to a $6 billion market in a decade, that's $1 billion users, times
$6 per user per year.
And I assumed that the growth over that decade was more or less constant.
Well, now comes the scenario analysis part.
How much of that global profit pie was Skype going to claim?
Well, I laid out three basic scenarios.
In the first one, Skype became the dominant firm in voice over internet and claimed 80%
of the market.
So that means that Skype earned $4.8 billion per year by the end of 2015.
Again, that's 80% of that $6 billion market.
In the second scenario, I imagined that other big telecom or internet or even software firms
could easily jump into this market and compete actively with Skype.
In a strongly contested market, I figured that Skype would have a first mover advantage,
and that would make it a big player, but not dominant.
So I thought a 35% market share would reflect that.
That would mean Skype would earn $2.1 billion in 2015 in this scenario.
And finally, I thought that it's entirely possible that Skype would fade to being a bit
player in this market who are next to nothing.
I used to call that the Netscape scenario until people started asking me, who's Netscape?
Another reason why Skype could fold is that some technological innovation could come along
that makes the entire market go away.
Or the market could become completely commoditized, meaning that prices on the premium services
all drop down to near zero, or at least down to their cost of production, which would leave
no profits for anyone.
So now I have my three scenarios.
How much would Skype be worth in each scenario?
Well we can calculate this in two ways based on what we've learned in previous lectures.
One way is to use the dividend discount model, treating all of Skype's earnings like one
big dividend.
Remember that the dividend discount model says that the value of a company stock is
given by that formula D over R minus G, where D is the dividend, little R is the discount
rate, and little G is the growth rate of dividends.
Remember I'm using the total value of earnings for D so I can value the entire company at
once.
I assumed a discount rate, which is the R in the formula, of 20% for Skype.
This reflects the really high risk of the firm.
I assumed a growth rate of 3% after 2015, which is the G in the formula.
So in the market domination scenario, the good one, Skype earns $4.8 billion per year,
growing at 3%, and I discount that at 20% per year.
The DDM formula then is 4.8 divided by the quantity 20% minus 3%, which gives $28.24
billion as of the year 2015.
Now if Skype only earns $2.1 billion as one of a few big players, we can apply the DDM
formula to this and get 2.1 divided by the quantity 20% minus 3%, which gives us $12.35
billion, again as of the year 2015.
And of course in the third scenario, Skype becomes nothing more than a pleasant memory,
unfortunately worth zero by 2015.
Well those are the scenarios, and I assign probabilities to each one of them like this.
First, I thought Skype had such a big lead on other firms that there was a 30% chance
of market domination.
On the other hand, the large number of possible competitors and the low costs of entering
the market made me think that there was about a 50% chance that Skype would be only one
of a few major players in this market.
And finally, I thought that there was also a non-trivial chance, about 20%, that Skype
or the entire market could crash and burn.
Notice that my probabilities, 30%, 50%, 20%, all sum up to 100, so I'm okay there.
These probabilities are subjective of course because I was simply making my best guesses
at the time.
If I could have found better information about the intentions of competitors or any of the
hidden vulnerabilities of Skype, I would have used that information to adjust my probabilities
for those different scenarios.
Well now we can find the value of Skype as of 2015 by multiplying the value of Skype
in each scenario by the probability I assigned to each scenario.
Now remember, my calculations implied that Skype would be worth $28.24 billion with probability
of 30% in the market domination scenario.
It would be worth $12.35 billion with a probability of 50% in the market sharing scenario.
And it would be worth zero with probability of 20% in the bust scenario.
When I do the multiplication and add the products up, I get that Skype's value in 2015 would
be, drum roll please, $14.65 billion.
Well that's as of 2015, so I needed to put that back in 2005's terms.
I do that by discounting this $14.65 billion price tag 10 years back to 2005.
I picked a high discount rate, that 20%, which implies that $1 in 2015 is only worth about
$1.6 as much in 2005.
So the price that I calculated as of 2005 was about $1.6 to $14.65 billion or $2.35
billion.
Now remember, eBay paid $2.6 billion for Skype in 2005.
So did eBay get a bargain?
Well, not if you know the rest of the story.
eBay was actually pretty disappointed with Skype and ended up selling Skype to private
equity investors in 2009 for only $1.9 billion.
But by that time, Skype was actually making money.
It had revenues of that year of over a half a billion dollars and was expected to have
net income of $90 million.
Now I wanted to show you this example for a couple of reasons.
First, I think this gives you the flavor of what you need to go through in order to value
a startup company.
And second, I wanted you to see just how many assumptions you need to make in order to get
an answer.
So on the one hand, it's very hard to take this estimate very seriously.
There's no way I'd bet on the accuracy of this specific estimate of a company's value.
But on the other hand, going through this exercise makes me think systematically and
clearly about all the important issues that really do influence a startup company's value.
I had to think about the size and the growth of the voice over internet market, Skype's
actual and potential competitors, and the amount of profits to be made.
These are exactly the sorts of questions you should be asking if you're looking at a startup.
And after you make your estimates, you should stop and ask whether these estimates are reasonable.
How fast does Skype really have to grow between 2005 and 2015 to reach a revenue level of $4.8
billion?
Well, it's about 28% per year.
Is this growth rate really reasonable?
In short, scenario analysis makes you take a serious look at how a startup company really
creates value.
If you can better understand how a startup firm intends to create and maintain value,
then you're in a much better position to decide whether you want to buy into their story.
And at the end of the day, it's more about whether you buy into a startup firm's long-term
value creation story and their ability to realize it than the specific numbers.
Remember, when venture capitalists decide who they want to back, the quality of a company's
management is at least as important as the company's products and ideas.
Well, I hope I haven't spoiled the fun of trying to get in on some hot IPOs.
But I really do think that in most cases, it's not worth the effort to pursue them.
The exception would be if you have the chance to participate in some Dutch auction IPOs
where you do your homework on the firm and you're able to name the price that you'd
want to pay for the shares.
One final thing I hope you've realized over the course of this lecture is that if a firm
is the next Google, it will still be the next Google six months after the IPO.
In other words, a great startup company is simply a great company that's out there creating
value for shareholders.
If you focus on finding those types of firms, perhaps by using the scenario analysis that
we've learned, then you'll have plenty of time to identify them after the IPO and still
enjoy great returns.
