In the last lecture, we learned that dividends and dividend information are tools that every
investor should understand and use.
In this lecture, we'll learn about a tool that every investor should understand, but
not necessarily use, at least not all the time.
We're going to learn about using leverage.
Leverage is a term that we use to describe how much of the money used to buy an investment
has been borrowed.
You may remember the leverage ratio from the lecture on financial statement analysis, and
we usually express leverage in terms of ratios.
For example, we often calculate leverage by dividing the total cost of the investment
by the amount the investor pays out of pocket.
The higher this number is, the more highly leveraged the investor is.
Leverage has become one of those emotionally charged words in finance, especially in the
wake of the financial crisis of 2008.
After the financial crisis, it was uncovered that some American banks were leveraged 30
to one or more, which means that for every dollar of equity the firm owned free and clear,
the managers had borrowed $29.
If you think that's bad, there were some European banks that were leveraged at 70 to
one on the eve of the financial crisis.
Excessive leverage, of course, was indeed one of the main culprits behind the global
financial crisis.
It's also behind millions of small private financial crises as well.
But leverage, when used wisely, is an important, if not essential, part of our investments.
Leverage enables us to control and enjoy assets that we don't fully own, and it enables
us to enhance our investment returns as well.
And besides, chances are that you're a leveraged investor already.
Don't think so?
Well, if you have a mortgage, then you're a leveraged investor.
In fact, if you have a typical American mortgage, then you're a highly leveraged investor.
For example, suppose you buy a $250,000 home with a typical American mortgage.
These usually call for a 10% down payment.
So you put down $25,000, and you borrow the other $225,000.
Well, congratulations.
You've just borrowed $9 for everyone that you've contributed out of your own pocket,
so your leverage 10 to 1.
True, you might respond, but somehow, using a high amount of leverage to buy a home just
doesn't seem all that dangerous.
Using leverage to buy other assets, like stocks, is a lot more risky.
Well, you have a point.
Houses tend to have much more stable values than other financial assets, so it's not as
likely that the value of your investment will be completely wiped out by a fall in the price
of your home.
Many financial investments have prices that bounce up and down much more, which dramatically
increases the danger that a drop in prices will leave you with nothing, or possibly less
than nothing.
In addition, we use leverage to buy our homes because we have to.
It would take decades to save up enough money so that you could buy a house without having
to borrow anything.
If you want to have enough time to get your money's worth of enjoyment out of the house
while you're still alive, you need to take out a mortgage to buy a house.
What's the benefit of borrowing money just to invest in stocks or bonds?
Well that question is a great place to start our discussion of leverage.
I'll get into the details of how you actually do the borrowing later in the lecture.
But for now, let's simply talk about why any investor would want to take on a leverage
investment in a financial asset.
The main reason is that leverage is a return multiplier.
You can greatly increase your returns on investments by using leverage.
Let me illustrate this by thinking about a leveraged investment in a $100 per share stock.
Suppose the expected return on the stock is 8%, so this is not the world's most exciting
stock.
Maybe it has a really good dividend yield though, or you've seen that its price doesn't
tend to fluctuate all that much.
You want to buy 100 shares of this stock, which would cost $10,000 of course.
But you only want to spend $5,000, so you need to borrow the other half of the money
that you need.
For now, don't worry about how much interest you'll have to pay and who'll lend you the
money.
I'll get to that in a bit.
But just suppose, for the sake of argument, that you're able to borrow the $5,000 and
combine it with your own money to buy the 100 shares of stock for $10,000.
You're now leveraged 2 to 1 because you've bought assets worth twice as much as what
you've paid for out of your own pocket.
Well, let's say a year goes by, and true to expectations, the stock returns exactly 8%.
Just to make this concrete, let's assume that the stock pays a dividend of $3 per share,
which is a 3% dividend yield, and the price rose to $105 per share, which is a 5% capital
gain.
So when you sell the shares, you get $10,500 for the shares, and you've been paid $300
in dividends, so you've received $10,800 in total value.
Since $800, which is the increase in value that you had, is 8% of $10,000, then the stock
has indeed met its expected return of 8%.
But what's the actual return on your investment?
Remember, you've only contributed $5,000 out of pocket.
So during this one year, you invest $5,000 but earn a profit of $800.
Well, $800 is 16% of $5,000, so your actual return here is 16%, not 8%.
Your 2 to 1 leverage means that your return is multiplied by a factor of 2.
In other words, your leverage ratio tells you how many times the gross returns on the
investment are multiplied when you use this amount of leverage.
If your leverage ratio is 4 to 1, for instance, your gross returns will be quadrupled, and
gross returns don't include the interest or any fees associated with the loan.
Now your actual return will be less when you also factor in the interest and any fees you
have to pay on that $5,000 loan.
I really just want to highlight the return multiplier effect first, which is very transparent
if we ignore that interest or fees on the loan for just a moment.
Of course, leverage's multiplier effect on returns cuts both ways.
Now suppose that instead of increasing in price, the stock actually falls in price to
$95 a share.
That's not a disaster because the stock still pays that 3% dividend, so when you sell the
shares a year later, you end up with $9,800.
So your total money return is a negative $200.
That's negative 2% of $10,000, but you've invested $5,000.
So your actual return is minus 200 divided by 5,000, which is minus .04 or negative 4%.
So the 2 to 1 leverage ratio doubled your rate of loss.
It turned a 2% loss into a 4% loss.
And the real danger of leverage is that a change in price can more than wipe out your
investment.
You could actually end up losing more than what you've paid out of pocket.
Again, let's stick with our simple example of 2 to 1 leverage.
So you pay $5,000 and you borrow $5,000 in order to buy $10,000 worth of shares.
Now let's suppose there's a terrible stock market crash and the price of the stock falls
from $100 a share down to $40 a share.
Ouch.
Also, let's assume that the company cuts the dividend to zero in this case.
So when you sell the shares, you only get $4,000 a year later.
Well, you've not only lost all of your $5,000, but you owe an additional $1,000 on the loan,
which you'll have to come up with somehow.
So you've lost $6,000 on a $5,000 investment.
Wow.
Incidentally, the leverage multiplier still works in this case.
You have a negative $6,000 payoff, which is negative 60% of $10,000.
But the negative $6,000 is actually minus 120% of $5,000.
So your actual return is minus 120%.
Well, this possibility of losing more than you actually invest is the really scary part
of using leverage.
Indeed, one of the most devastating effects of the financial crisis was that millions
of homeowners ended up underwater on their mortgages.
That is, they owed more on the mortgage than the house was actually worth.
When this happens, one of the likely outcomes is that the borrower will default on the loan,
which is bad news for both the lender and the borrower.
So most of the ways that investors are allowed to use leverage are set up so that it's very
unlikely that the investor will lose more than the value of their investment.
That protects both the investor and the institution that loaned the money to the investor.
Well, let's actually get into the details now of the ways that investors use leverage.
There are basically two ways that investors can use leverage directly.
One of them is by buying assets on margin and will start there.
I'll give the precise definition of what margin is in a few minutes, but for now, all we
need to know is that buying assets on margin is nothing more than borrowing part of the
money that you use to buy the assets.
In order to buy shares on margin, you generally have to go through a broker.
The broker will actually be lending you the money that you use to buy assets.
And since the broker is also handling the asset purchase transaction, they can handle
the leverage in a pretty seamless way so that it looks like a normal asset purchase to you.
In some countries, banks and other lenders will actually lend money to you to buy stocks.
In the US, most lenders won't lend you money if you tell them that you're going to use
the money to buy shares.
Now when you buy assets on margin, each broker will have a list of assets that they're willing
to allow you to buy on margin.
Brokers refuse to make margin loans on some types of highly risky assets, so not every
asset out there is available for leveraged investing.
The broker will also tell you the minimum stake that they'll require you to hold on
the asset expressed as a percentage of the value of the asset.
The minimum stake implies a maximum degree of leverage that they allow you to use on
a particular investment.
So for example, if the minimum stake in an investment is 50%, the maximum leverage they
allow you to use is 2 to 1.
Now I bring this up because the government establishes limits for margin buying that
also specify the minimum ownership stake that an investor must take in the assets that they
buy on margin.
Do you know what branch of the government actually sets these limits?
Well, you'd think it would be the SEC, but for somewhat complicated reasons I don't have
time to go into, it's actually the Fed.
Well, anyway, there are actually two types of minimum required ownership stakes, which
are referred to as margin requirements.
The word margin actually refers to the share of the asset owned by the leveraged investor.
For example, a 40% margin requirement means that the investor must own 40% of the asset
that they're using leverage to invest in.
The first margin requirement is called initial margin, and as its name suggests, it's the
minimum ownership stake that you have to take in order to start a leveraged investment.
For stocks, the Fed has currently set the minimum initial margin requirement at 50%.
So when you buy stocks on margin, the most you'll be able to borrow is half the value
of the shares.
As I mentioned a minute ago, brokers are also free to impose higher margin requirements
on riskier shares, and also they're free to refuse to lend on margin on risky investments
entirely.
Now if you borrow from a broker and buy assets on margin, then the margin will fluctuate
with the market price of the asset.
If the asset price rises, then your margin increases, and if the market price falls,
your margin decreases.
I want to show you how this works, and in order to do that, I'll need to define margin
more carefully.
Your margin in an investment at any time is given by the value of your equity stake in
the asset, divided by the total value of the asset.
The value of your equity stake is the net value of what you own, and we calculate it
by taking the current value of the asset and subtracting off the amount of the loan you
took out to buy the asset.
So let's stick with our simple example of using margin to buy 100 shares of stock, selling
at $100 per share.
The initial margin requirement is 50%.
So you invest $5,000 out of pocket, and borrow the other $5,000.
Now let's see what happens to your margin as the price of the asset changes.
If the stock price rises to $105 per share, then the total value of the shares rises to
$10,500.
But you still only owe $5,000, so your equity in the shares rises to $5,500.
That means that your margin is given by the following formula, $10,500 minus $5,000,
take the whole thing and divide it by $10,500, and that gives us 52.38%.
So the margin does rise as the price of the asset rises.
Well that should mean that margin falls as the price of the asset falls.
So let's see what happens when the price of the shares falls to $90 a share.
The total value of the shares falls to $9,000, remember we have 100 shares.
But you still owe $5,000 on the margin loan.
So your equity, the difference, falls to $4,000.
And now your margin is $4,000 divided by $9,000, which gives 44.44%.
So margin did fall when the price of the asset fell.
Thinking about what happens to margin when the price of the asset falls brings us to
the second type of margin requirement, which is maintenance margin.
Maintenance margin is the minimum level of equity that you have to maintain at all times
after you make the initial leveraged purchase.
Maintenance margin is usually set below the level of initial margin.
Setting the maintenance margin limit below the initial margin requirement allows the
price of the asset to fall a little ways without requiring the borrower to take any action.
But it also protects the lender if the price falls too much.
Here's how it works.
Generally, brokers require maintenance margin of 30% on leveraged purchases of stocks.
So if the price of the stock falls so much that you're equating the shares, your margin
goes below 30%, you get a margin call.
Now a margin call is a request from your broker to deposit cash or securities into your brokerage
account in order to bring your equity of the shares at least back up to the maintenance
margin level.
Basically, the broker is requiring you to pay down your loan so that your equity in
the shares goes back up to the minimum level specified by the maintenance margin.
If you don't make your margin call, what happens?
Well, the broker has the right to liquidate your position in that case.
That is, sell off your shares in order to pay off that loan.
Of course, that proposition raises two important questions.
First, when will I get a margin call?
This is a good calculation to make for anyone if they're going to engage in buying on margin.
If you calculate the price of the asset that triggers a margin call, then you can watch
the markets and be ready to act if the price of the asset falls to that trigger price.
Again, let's use our stock example.
Let's let capital P stand for the price of the shares that will trigger a margin call.
According to our definition of margin, this is going to happen when the quantity P times
100, that would be the market value of the shares, minus 5,000, the amount that you owe,
divided by the market value of the shares, P times 100, is less than 0.3 or 30%.
This isn't too hard to solve, just a couple of steps of algebra.
And when you do solve it, you find that P equals $71.43.
That's rounding up to the nearest penny.
I've calculated it that way so that you know as soon as P drops to $71.42 or below, you'll
get that margin call.
So now for the second question.
If I can't make the margin call and the broker liquidates my position, will I still owe money?
Well, that depends on how quickly the price of the asset continues to fall once you get
that margin call.
Just suppose for the sake of argument that you get a margin call in the stock investment
and just don't have the cash or securities you need to bring the account back up to at
least the maintenance margin level.
Let's say also that the broker liquidates your position and by the time the broker is
able to sell the shares, they fall into $70 per share in value.
Well, the broker sells your 100 shares at $70 each, raising $7,000.
So there's enough to pay back the $5,000 loan principle and probably enough to pay back
the interest and any fees on the loan as well.
I think this example clarifies why brokers want you to keep a fairly high level of maintenance
margin on many of the assets that you can use leverage to buy.
The maintenance margin gives the broker a cushion to protect their interests in case
you can't meet your margin call.
And it also protects you from having to come up with even more cash to repay the broker.
Now less risky assets like government and municipal bonds will generally have much lower levels
of initial and maintenance margin.
The initial margin on U.S. Treasuries, for example, is about 10 percent and the maintenance
margin can be as little as only 2 percent for very short-term bonds.
But even long-term bonds have maintenance margin levels of only about 6 or 7 percent.
The reason for this, as you can probably guess, is that there's usually a lot less variation
in the prices of government bonds than there is in the prices of stocks and other assets.
Before I move on to the next use of leverage, I want to point out again that when you use
leverage to buy on margin, you're borrowing from the brokerage.
And the broker is going to charge interest on that loan.
Since this is fairly risky lending, you should expect to pay a higher rate than you would
on other types of borrowing that you do, say for mortgage loans, home equity lines of credit,
or car loans.
Oh, and don't forget all the trading fees on top of that, too.
So when you calculate your net or all in return from a leveraged purchase of any asset, you
need to remember to take account of the margin interest, trading fees, and any other fees
from the transaction you paid.
Well does all that sound too complicated?
If it does, then one simpler way to make leveraged investments is to buy the shares of leveraged
companies.
A lot of high-achieving companies use fair amounts of leverage to maintain their high
returns.
For example, McDonald's, Merck, and Coca-Cola all leverage about 2 to 1.
McDonald's, another high-achiever, is leveraged about 3 to 1.
And even General Electric has leveraged at 6 to 1.
Well up to now, I've been talking about using leverage by borrowing money and investing
the borrowed money into assets.
But you can also borrow securities themselves.
The main reason why you'd want to borrow securities is to engage in what's called a
short sale.
In a short sale, an investor borrows securities, sells the borrowed securities immediately,
and then hopes to buy them back at a lower price.
So you borrow securities when you believe that their value is going to fall.
Keep in mind that when you borrow securities, the lender doesn't want to be repaid in money,
the lender wants the securities back.
That makes borrowing securities and short selling especially interesting and risky.
To make this concrete, I'll explain borrowing securities and short selling in terms of stocks,
though of course you can sell just about any security short, at least in theory.
Now the first step in borrowing stocks and selling them short is actually locating someone
who's willing to lend you the stocks in the first place.
Because of the extra risk involved in short sales, securities lenders are extra particular
about who they lend to.
So even if you identify a stock that you'd like to borrow and sell short, it could take
your broker days to find another broker willing to lend you the shares.
By the way, short selling any security without having borrowed it first is illegal.
That transaction is called a naked short sale, and in most markets around the world it's
prohibited.
But in the U.S. as well as Europe during 2011, there were complaints in the markets
that professional traders were being allowed to engage in naked short selling, at least
to the extent that they sold the shares first and then worried about finding some place
to borrow them later.
Once you borrow the shares, you still may not be allowed to sell them.
Well, why?
Well, many markets have special rules called uptick rules.
An uptick rule is a regulation aimed directly at limiting the practice of short selling.
It says that a short sale cannot take place while the price of the asset is falling.
In other words, the last tick or price movement must be in the upward direction before a short
sale can take place.
Now the SEC had uptick rules in place in the stock markets for years and years, but removed
most of them right before the financial crisis.
But once the crisis occurred, it actually banned short selling of certain types of stocks
like bank stocks.
As you can guess, uptick rules make it that much harder to profit from short selling because
they put you at a bit of a disadvantage right off the bat.
Well, if you manage to sell the shares that you borrow, then you have to keep in mind
that if the shares pay a dividend, you have to pay any dividends earned on the shares
to the person you borrow the shares from.
That person is the true owner of the shares, but you borrow the shares and sold them to
someone else.
So there are two people expecting dividends from those shares.
You have to pay the dividends to the lender out of your own pocket, and that further adds
to the cost of short selling.
And the lender of the shares has the right to ask for them back at any time.
So you can sell them short one day, and the lender may change your mind and ask for them
back the next day.
If that happens, you either have to quickly arrange another loan of securities, or you
have to go back out into the market and buy the shares back.
That transaction is known as covering your short position.
The danger is that you'll have to cover your short position well before you're ready to
sell, and in particular before you've made any money.
And don't forget that you're using leverage, so you'll need to post margin to your broker.
First, your broker will hold on to all the cash generated by the short sale.
And on top of that, you'll have to deposit more cash or government securities in order
to put your own skin into the game.
Just like the case of buying something on margin, when you sell something short, you
have to establish an equity position in the trade.
The margin requirements for short-selling stocks are usually the same for short sales
as they are for leveraged purchases, 50% initial margin and 30% maintenance margin.
But you calculate the equity in your account differently for a short sale than you do for
a leveraged purchase, and I'll show you that now.
For a short sale, your equity in the trade at any time, as a percent of the value of
the shares, is the ratio of the net value of what you own divided by the current value
of the shares.
The net value of what you own is the total cash held by the broker minus the current
value of the shares that you sold short.
Remember that the total cash held by the broker is equal to the proceeds of the short sale
plus the cash that you deposit for your initial margin.
So let's use our stock example again to make this concrete.
If you borrow 100 shares of a stock currently selling at $100 per share and then sell them
short, that generates $10,000 of cash that your broker will hold.
Then you have to deposit another $5,000 with the broker to give yourself an initial margin
of 50%.
Remember that the margin for a short sale is the cash held with the broker minus the
current value of the shares all divided by the current value of the shares.
So the cash held by the broker is $15,000 in total, and the market value of the shares
at the moment you sell them short is $10,000.
So when we put these numbers into the margin formula for a short sale, we get the quantity
$15,000 minus $10,000, that quantity divided by $10,000, and that's exactly 50%.
Now just as in the case of buying on margin, your margin will go up and down as the price
of the shares does.
But in this case, your margin goes up when the price of the shares falls and it falls
when the price of the shares rises.
And again, your big fear is that the price of the shares rises after you sell them short,
which will lead to losses.
Also, you'll want to know the price of the shares that will trigger a margin call from
your broker.
Using a 30% maintenance margin and P for the price of the shares that triggers the margin
call, we know that you'll get a margin call when the value of your equity in the trade
falls below 30%.
So this happens when the quantity 15,000 minus 100P, again 100P is the current market value
of the shares, take that quantity divided all by 100P and set it less than 0.3 or 30%.
Again, this only takes a couple of steps of algebra to solve, and when you do, you find
that you'll get that dreaded call, email or text message, probably all three, when the
price of the shares rises above $115.38.
Again, if you get that call and don't have the resources to bring the equity in your
account back up above 30%, then the broker will cover the short position and end the
transaction.
If the broker is forced to do that at, say, $120 a share, then this will cost $12,000 to
buy back the 100 shares.
Since there's $15,000 of cash in your account, at least you won't owe the broker any more
money, but you'll sustain a hefty loss on the money that you did put in already.
Now, if I make short selling sound like a highly scary and dicey proposition, that's
because it is.
Our financial markets are skewed toward buying and holding, not short selling.
So unless you really, really know what you're doing, you should stay away from short selling.
Now that isn't to say that people don't make money doing it, but those who do are willing
to take risks, and they do their homework.
In my opinion, you have to do even more research on the companies you want to short than the
companies you want to buy.
That's because the deck is seriously stacked against you when you sell short, as we've
learned.
Well, in this lecture, we've looked into using leverage and learned both the tempting rewards
of using it as well as the potentially harsh punishments.
As I mentioned at the beginning of the lecture, I'm not against using leverage as an investor.
I'm completely in favor of using it wisely.
Individual investors and companies can always use a little bit of leverage to turn otherwise
boring and predictable investments into more exciting ones.
But perhaps the best way for individuals to use leverage is to invest in the companies
that use it wisely.
