In the last lecture, we learned about picking bonds as part of a buy and hold bond investing
strategy, such as building a bond ladder.
But this isn't the only way to invest in bonds.
You can also trade bonds if you like, and this can be just as exciting and risky as
trading stocks.
For example, one of the most daring and successful bond trades in recent memory happened back
in the year 2000.
Back then, the U.S. government was running a huge budget surplus because of the booming
economy, and in February of that year, it decided to start repurchasing treasury bonds
on the open market.
Now, PIMCO, or the Pacific Investment Management Company, anticipated the government's move
by buying large quantities of treasury bonds starting in late January.
The government's purchases of bonds drove bond prices much higher, so the values of
PIMCO's bonds rose tremendously.
It was reported that in just one week, PIMCO earned over $200 million in trading profits
on these long-term treasury bonds.
Try matching those profits by trading stocks.
If you want to trade bonds, though, you'll need to know a lot of details about bonds
that I've been saving up just for this lecture.
There are many descriptive terms, and even some bond jargon, that you'll absolutely
must understand if you're going to trade bonds.
There are also many standard practices regarding how bond rates and prices are quoted that
generally aren't well explained to new bond investors.
Everyone assumes you already know them.
In fact, there are so many of these terms and practices that bonds almost seem to have
their own language, which I like to call bond speak.
You also have to understand a little bit about bond pricing and really understand the relationship
between price and yield.
Even if you don't think you're going to trade bonds, you'll still want to learn these important
terms and ideas.
I think that one of the things that puts people off of bond investing is the potentially
confusing terminology associated with bonds, including how bond rates and prices are quoted.
If you know these things, you'll be a much more confident bond investor, even if you
never actually trade bonds.
In addition, we'll also learn about a bond trading strategy later in this lecture that's
so simple that you can pursue it even if you're primarily a buy-and-hold bond investor.
Did that pique your curiosity?
Well good, then let's get started.
I'm calling this lecture bond school because it's really a language lesson in bond speak.
In the previous lectures on bonds, we've already learned a few terms that describe the parts
of a bond.
For example, I've mentioned that the interest payments on bonds are usually called coupon
payments or coupons.
This is because, back in the days of physical bonds, a bond contract would actually include
a sheet of coupons that the bond holder would have to clip off with a pair of scissors every
six months and then mail to the issuer of the bond in order to receive the interest payment.
In addition, we've learned that the principal on a bond is called the par value, and for
most bonds, the principal amount has been standardized to some round number.
In the U.S. for example, most corporate bonds have par or principal value of $10,000.
We've also learned one standard practice in the bond markets, which is that bonds generally
make semi-annual interest payments, that is twice a year.
If we put these three pieces together, we can visualize the payments on a standard or
straight bond by drawing a simple diagram.
We'll let the par value be $10,000 and we'll let capital C stand for the coupon payment.
Let's assume that the bond has maturity of three years, just to keep it simple.
Since the payments on the bonds are semi-annual every six months, this means that there will
be three years times two payments per year or six payments in total.
Well now that we've visualized the bond payments, we can start to think about the rate of return
on the bond and the size of the coupon payments.
In order to do this though, I need to tell you a little bit about the way that rates
of return are quoted in bond speak.
Now as we'll see shortly, there are many different rates of return associated with bonds and
all of these various rates of return on bonds are quoted using a special form of return
called a stated annual rate of return.
Now a stated annual rate of return that is quoted properly always contains two pieces
of information.
First, it tells you an annual rate of return and second, it tells you the number of times
per year the rate is compounded.
This is important because the convention in the bond market is to quote every rate of
return that has to do with a bond as an annual rate compounded semi-annually.
The compounded semi-annually part has to do with the fact that the interest on a straight
bond is actually paid twice per year.
Well, great, but what do I do with that information?
Well, the whole point of quoting rates of return as stated annual rates is to give you
a shortcut to finding a semi-annual rate of return which is basically an interest rate
for a six month period.
To find a semi-annual rate of return given a quoted bond rate, simply divide the quoted
rate by two.
Again, every single rate that people quote for a bond is in terms of the annual rate
compounded semi-annually, so you need to get used to dividing those rates by two.
Now, most of the time bond yields are quoted improperly.
That is, the person or the website who's telling you about the bond assumes that you
know that the quotation convention in the bond market is that all rates are annual rates
compounded semi-annually.
So they leave off the compounded semi-annually part because it's a hassle to say all the
time.
But you should assume that every interest rate associated with a bond is actually an annual
rate compounded semi-annually unless you're told otherwise.
With that tidbit in mind, we can finally start to think about coupon size and the price of
the bond.
The coupon size is determined by the coupon yield, which is basically the value of the
annual coupon amount divided by par.
So let's assume that the coupon rate of the bond is 3% compounded semi-annually.
This means that the annual coupon amount of the bond is 3% of $10,000 or $300.
So I take my coupon yield and divide by two to get 1.5%.
Now this tells me the semi-annual coupon yield for the bond, which means that the bond is
paying a coupon of 1.5% of par every six months.
Since par is $10,000, 1.5% of 10,000 is $150.
So the bond is paying $150 every six months.
This happens six times for my three-year bond.
And then at the end of the three years, the bond also pays me back to $10,000.
So that final payment is the final coupon plus the par value for a total of $10,150.
How's the coupon rate usually set?
Well, the standard practice is to set the coupon rate equal to the market rate of return
for the bond at the time the bond is issued.
The bond market decides on an appropriate rate of return for the bond based on the issuer's
risk and market conditions.
And this market rate is used for the coupon yield.
Once the coupon yield is determined, it's set.
It won't change over the life of the bond, so the size of the coupons stays fixed.
After the bond's issued, however, the market rate of return will go up and down according
to market conditions and the financial strengths of the borrower.
Now the changes in the market rate of return on the bond will change the price of the bond.
How?
Oh, I'm so glad you asked.
The price of a bond at any time is the present value of all its payments.
The market rate of return on the bond is used as the rate of return in the discounting formulas
that we use to calculate the present value of the bond payments.
Bond pricing is a fairly straightforward discounting calculation and we'll learn about how to do
these discounting calculations in a future lecture.
The main point I'll make about bond pricing for now is that the bond price depends on
the relative sizes of the coupon yield and the market rate of return on the bond.
I'll have more to say about this in a few minutes.
Well talking about the market rate of return on a bond makes me think of yet another bond
term I should mention.
I told you there are a lot of them.
This bond term is the current yield.
The current yield is the annual coupon divided by the market price of the bond.
The current yield expresses the rate of interest that the coupons represent if you buy the
bond at the current market price.
For example, if our three-year bond with a 3% coupon yield had a market price of $9,375
exactly then the current yield would be 300 divided by $9,375 which gives .032 or 3.2%.
All this is really saying is that the annual coupons represent 3.2% of the market price.
This isn't actually quite the market return because the total market return would include
both the income from the coupons and the capital gain or loss from holding the bond.
To get an idea of the total market return we have to use a different concept of yield
and this is a yield to maturity.
A yield to maturity is the average yield earned by a bond investor who buys the bond at the
current market price and holds the bond to maturity.
The market return on the bond is usually expressed as a yield to maturity.
Now we know from the introductory lecture on bonds that bond markets are dealer markets
so when you go to buy a bond on the secondary market you'll pay the dealer's ask price
for the bond.
Therefore, you'll often see the term ask yield for a bond which is basically the yield
to maturity using the dealer's ask price as the market price.
Even though we use the yield to maturity as if it's the return that you'll actually
earn on the bond, there are two hidden catches in the yield to maturity.
First, the yield to maturity is only exactly accurate if you actually hold the bond to
maturity.
If you sell it before maturity, your actual return will be different depending on the
actual market price of the bond when you sell it.
Second, the yield to maturity also assumes that when you receive the coupon payments
from the bond, you're able to reinvest those coupon payments in a way that earns the exact
same return as the market rate of return on the bond.
Now for example, if the bond is quoted as having a 5% yield to maturity, we assume that
when you get your coupons you're able to reinvest them somewhere that will give you a 5% return.
So a yield to maturity is a projected average return assuming that you hold the bond to maturity
and that you reinvest the coupons at a rate equal to the market rate of return on the
bond.
But in reality, your average return on the bond will probably be different from the yield
to maturity because you probably won't be able to reinvest your coupons at exactly the
same market rate and you might have to sell the bond before maturity as well.
So your actual average yield could be higher or lower than the yield to maturity.
Now that we've learned all about the ways that we see the bond market rate of return
quoted, we can get back to thinking about bond pricing.
What I'm going to do next is talk about an extremely important aspect of bond investing,
that relationship between price and yield.
The first thing we'll do is see how the relationship between the coupon yield and the market return,
like the ask yield, influences the price of a bond.
As I mentioned a few minutes ago, the amounts of the coupon payments on bonds are fixed when
the bond is issued and they don't change after that.
This is why, by the way, many people refer to bonds as fixed income instruments.
Once the bond is issued, the market rate of return on the bond can and does change as market
conditions and the financial condition of the borrower change.
Remember that the bond we've been using in our example is a three-year bond with a par
value of $10,000 and a coupon of 3%, which is an annual rate compounded semi-annually.
And to begin with, let's suppose that the market rate of return on the bond is 4.5%.
Just as a reminder, remember that I'm quoting all bond rates as annual rates compounded
semi-annually.
With an ask yield of 4.5%, the price of the bond is $9,583.41.
This is for a bond with a $10,000 par value.
But bonds can come in virtually any principal amount.
Even bonds from the same issue with the same coupon yield and market rate of return may
have different principal amounts.
For example, GM may issue bonds with a total principal value of $10 million, but the issue
could be divided up into, say, 5 bonds of a million dollar principal each and 500 bonds
of $10,000 principal each.
It would be tedious to have to recalculate and quote all the different prices for different
amounts of principal, so the bond market has adopted a special pricing convention.
Dealers quote bond prices in percent of par.
So to find the price of any bond, you take the quoted price in percent of par and multiply
it by the principal amount to get the actual dollar price you'd have to pay to buy the
bond.
In our example of the 3-year straight bond, the dealer would quote the price as $95.8341.
So one thing we can say for sure, and this is true of all bonds, is that the bond price
is less than par when the market rate of return is higher than the coupon yield on the bond.
Bond price less than par when the market rate of return is higher than the coupon yield
on the bond.
Okay, now let's see the price of the bond when the market rate is less than the coupon
yield.
Now suppose that the market rate of return on the bond is 2.5%.
That market rate of return is indeed less than the coupon yield on our bond, which we
assumed was 3%.
So when we calculate the price of the bond, we get $10,143.65.
A dealer would quote this price as $101.4365.
Hey, that's higher than the par value.
What's going on?
Well, this is what happens when the market rate of return on a bond falls below the coupon
yield.
The price rises above its par value.
So when the market rate is above the coupon yield, the price is below par.
When the market rate is below the coupon yield, the market price is above par.
And when the market rate of return is exactly equal to the coupon yield, the price is exactly
equal to par.
That explains why most bonds set their coupons so that the coupon yield is exactly equal
to the market rate of return when the bonds are issued.
This makes it so that the price of the bond is equal to its par value, which is really
just done for the convenience of the borrowers and lenders by giving nice round dollar amounts
like $10,000.
These facts about the relationship between coupon yield, market rate of return, and market
price hold true at every time between issuance and maturity, by the way.
The other important fact that you need to know about the relationship between price
and yield is what it actually looks like.
Let me show you a graph I made that pictures this relationship.
I used a 10-year bond with a 6% coupon yield, because this helps to emphasize the feature
of the yield-price relationship.
But this basic picture is similar for all bonds.
The graph has the market rate of return on the bond on the horizontal axis, and the price
of the bond on the vertical axis.
So the graph shows what happens to the price of the bond as interest rates go from 1 tenth
of 1% per year to 25% per year.
Now as you expect, the graph slopes down, because as the market rate of return on the
bond rises, the price falls.
But notice how the line bends.
It's not a linear relationship between yield and price.
Now this means that there can be some very attractive opportunities for people who want
to trade bonds actively.
A small change in the market rate of return on the bond can translate into a relatively
large change in price.
That means that if you think you can predict changes in the market rate of return on a
bond, you could make some very attractive returns as a bond trader.
Hmm, suddenly bonds sound a lot more exciting, right?
Now if you want to take advantage of the relationship between price and yield by trading, you may
want to know that the longer the maturity of the bond, the steeper the yield-price
relationship becomes, the steeper that graph becomes.
In other words, the price of a 30-year bond rises much more than the price of a 10-year
note when the market interest rate falls by half a percent.
So people who are bond traders like to trade straight bonds that are 10 years or longer
in maturity.
Of course, a consideration here is also the size of the market.
If the market for a 10-year bond is much larger than the market for a 30-year bond from the
same issuer, then trading the 10-year bond would probably make more sense.
Any loss in price sensitivity would be compensated by the improved ability to trade quickly.
The chance to take advantage of large changes in bond prices as bond interest rates change
is the big attraction, rather, of active bond investing.
In order to be a successful bond trader, you need to predict correctly when bond interest
rates will change.
And you need to become very skilled at predicting when interest rates will fall.
Remember that bond prices rise as interest rates fall, so falling interest rates mean
that any bonds you hold become more valuable now.
Now there are two basic reasons why a bond interest rate will fall.
One reason is that general economic conditions change in a way that makes interest rates fall.
For example, it's well known that in recessions and other economic slowdowns, bond rates fall.
In addition, if inflation falls, then bond rates will also fall.
There can be basic supply and demand reasons why bond interest rates fall as well.
The supply of new bonds can simply decline if governments and companies don't need to
borrow as much as before.
Even though there are many reasons why bond interest rates may fall or rise, interest
rates are notoriously hard to forecast.
Even the big trading companies find it hard to consistently earn profits on bond trading
that is based on these broader economic trends.
If you really want to trade bonds, you should ask yourself why you think you have more insight
into changes in economic conditions and their impacts on interest rates than all the other
professional traders and the economists who work full time for them.
The difficulty of predicting generalized increases and decreases in bond rates explains why many
bond traders prefer to make bets based on the second reason why bond rates might fall.
This reason is specific to individual issuers of bonds, and it is simply that a government
or a company might have their bonds upgraded by a bond rating agency.
For example, a company may have its bonds upgraded from triple B to single A as its financial
condition strengthens.
This upgrade will reduce the risk premium that investors demand in order to hold the
bonds so the interest rate on the company's bonds will fall.
This in turn will make the price of the bonds rise.
Predicting that a company or a government will experience a ratings upgrade depends on
the same sort of financial analysis that we learned about in the context of stocks.
You'll also need to do some research into the average financial characteristics of firms
in each ratings category, so you can have some ideas about when a ratings upgrade might
be likely.
Again though, keep in mind that you're competing with thousands of other investors who are
also thinking about whether a particular borrow will be upgraded.
If you wait too long to make up your mind, other investors will buy the borrowers' bonds
in anticipation of the ratings upgrade, so the price of the bonds will rise even before
the upgrade happens.
Does that remind you of the arguments we learned about in connection with the efficient market
as a hypothesis?
It should.
So even though this type of bond trading is well within the ability of an individual investor
who's willing to do some homework, it's still made risky by the fact that in order to make
good profits doing this, you have to act early.
In other words, when any upgrade is still highly uncertain.
But some investors nonetheless like to pursue this strategy, and one of the most lucrative
and risky areas of the bond market to try it in is the area of high yield or non-investment
grade debt.
You may also know this part of the bond market by its less flattering name, junk bonds.
Now in the old days, bonds became junk bonds because the companies or governments that
issued them fell on hard times.
The only bonds that could be issued to the markets were investment grade bonds, but over
time some borrowers would weaken and their bonds would be downgraded.
Bonds that start out highly rated but then get downgraded to junk status are often called
fallen angels, and there are plenty of fallen angels in the bond markets today.
But starting in the 1980s, it became possible for companies and even governments to issue
brand new non-investment grade bonds to the markets.
The markets were willing to take a chance on these borrowers because they were young
firms or developing economies that could tell convincing stories to the markets about their
future growth.
In addition, the interest rates on these bonds were very attractive.
So investors not only enjoyed the high interest rates on these bonds, they also bet that
these firms would prove their financial strength to the markets and eventually experience upgrades
on the bonds.
This reasoning behind investing in high yield debt, by the way, is still valid today.
Of course, this is a very risky investing strategy.
Many of these young firms didn't make it.
They fell back instead of rising up.
The default rates on non-investment grade debt, as we learned in the previous lecture, are
quite high.
And in many cases, it may be difficult for investors to get adequate information to judge
the financial strength of the company, especially if the company is small.
So although this market does have a lot of potential, it's best left to the professionals.
If you think this is a good opportunity, try to find a mutual fund or other pooled investment
vehicle that also invests in high yield bonds.
This idea of earning a high interest rate and then a juicy capital gain on top of that
sounds like the ideal bond trading situation.
Wouldn't it be great if relatively safe opportunities like this actually existed?
Well, the answer is that they do come along once in a while.
And you can take advantage of them even while pursuing a buy and hold bond investing strategy.
This trade is called riding the yield curve, and here's how it works.
To understand this strategy, you have to understand what the yield curve is.
The yield curve is a graph that shows the relationship between yield and maturity for
a certain type of bond, most often for government bonds.
In fact, when people talk about the yield curve, they usually mean the yield maturity
relationship on treasuries.
The yields are the current market rates of return, so the yield curve changes every day
as these market rates change.
Now here's a chart I made of a pretend yield curve.
The annual yields on the bonds are on the vertical axis.
The horizontal axis shows the standard maturities that we measure the market yields at.
Notice though that the horizontal axis isn't drawn to scale.
Since the time, as the maturity of a bond increases, its yield increases.
So a 10-year note pays a higher interest rate than a 5-year note.
When we see this relationship in the market, we say that the yield curve slopes up, just
like in the chart.
If the yield curve slopes up, then as time passes and a 10-year note becomes a 9-year
note, the yield on the note has to fall in order to bring it into line with the market
rate of return on all the other 9-year notes in the market.
But just as we saw, when the market rate of return on a bond falls, the price of the bond
rises.
So the price of the bond should rise as its remaining time to maturity falls, again assuming
an upward sloping yield curve.
What this means is that if you buy a long-term bond, you'll experience capital gains on the
bond as time passes.
Now this realization suggests that you can make extra returns on bonds by buying longer
maturity bonds than you actually intend to hold to maturity and selling them after a
few years.
This is the strategy called writing the yield curve.
For example, you want to hold a bond for 5 years, but instead of buying a 5-year note
and holding to maturity, you buy a 10-year note and hold it for 5 years and then sell
it.
If the yield curve slopes up, then you'll earn some capital gains in addition to the
coupon payments you receive.
Writing the yield curve generates the highest returns when interest rates are fairly high.
If we look at the history of interest rates over the past 50 years, we can see that interest
rates have been high and low, but they generally haven't gone much above 20 percent and they
really can't go any lower than 0 percent.
And on average, even long-term treasury rates are in the high single digits.
What this suggests is that there does seem to be a set of long-run average interest rates
that the economy tends to return to.
So if interest rates are too high today, they'll probably fall to normal levels in a few years.
Well that in turn gives an opportunity to make significant profits from writing the yield
curve.
The strategy is to buy long-term treasury bonds like 20 or 30-year bonds and hold them
until yields fall back to normal levels.
You not only get the benefit of big capital gains if interest rates fall back to their
normal levels, but you also earn high coupon payments while you wait for that to happen.
So if you're a buy-and-hold bond investor with a ladder of treasuries, all this requires
that you do is to buy treasuries that have longer maturity than the ones you usually buy.
If you don't think you'll be put in a position where you have to sell these bonds, then you
can do a little yield curve writing and really not bear much risk at all.
In fact, in early 2008, when the Federal Reserve started to raise interest rates every six
weeks, I started making plans to do my own yield curve writing once rates got high enough.
But before I could get started on that strategy, the economy went into a big recession and
you probably know the rest of that story in terms of where interest rates went.
Hopefully, you have a good understanding now of what it takes to be successful if you want
to trade bonds actively.
Maybe you have a better understanding of why most individuals prefer to be buy-and-hold
bond investors.
I really hope, though, that you consider this strategy of writing the yield curve.
I realize that this may not be the time in your investing life when you want to be holding
a big position, big portion rather, of your investments in bonds.
But if interest rates ever do start to look unusually high, think about whether this strategy
might make sense.
Also, when it does come time to move your more aggressive investments into bonds, consider
buying some longer maturity bonds than you need and writing the yield curve with part
of your bond ladder.
Well, I think I hear the bell.
Class dismissed.
