For the past few lectures, we've been learning about how to pick stocks and bonds.
Now, it's finally time to turn to mutual funds and exchange traded funds.
I've saved the discussion of picking mutual funds for now,
even though you probably have more money invested in them
than you do in stocks and bonds put together.
The main reason I did this
is so that you have a better understanding of the types of decisions
that mutual fund managers may be making on your behalf
if you invest in actively managed mutual funds or ETFs.
Hopefully, you'll also be in a better position now
to think critically about the stories that fund managers will tell you
about their investment strategies.
And you'll also be able to make a better decision
about whether you want to invest in actively managed mutual funds at all.
As we learned in the introductory lectures on mutual funds and ETFs,
there's an amazing variety of funds out there to choose from these days.
So it's worth spending some time learning how to tell them apart.
Your friends might choose mutual funds based on their names,
but there are better ways to tell what a mutual fund's goals are.
Not surprisingly, they have to do with reading the prospectus.
Hmm, now where have I heard that before?
One of the reasons for the large and increasing diversity of mutual funds and ETFs
is that the markets are responding to investor demands
for more choices in their investments.
This is basically a positive development,
but it means that you need to be more selective and careful than ever
when you choose the funds that you want to invest in.
One of the potential sources of trouble for investors
is that financial markets are just as fad and fashion-driven
as the markets for clothing and music.
A lot of people devote too much time in financial markets
chasing after the highest returning mutual funds
or the investment that's the flavor of the day.
I'm going to show you why this strategy mostly leads to disappointment.
A far better strategy is to think about what you want as an investor first
and then find the funds that best meet your needs.
I think the best place to start is to spend a few minutes
trying to assign some broad categories
to the incredible diversity of mutual funds out there.
This is actually fairly difficult
because there are already over 10,000 different mutual funds available on the market
and another 1,500 or so ETFs, and this number keeps growing.
There's a lot of experimentation going on all the time
in terms of the mixture of assets offered in these mutual funds.
But let's see if we can find some useful categories.
Generally, we categorize mutual funds by the assets they hold
and what goal they're trying to achieve.
The vast majority of mutual funds focus on stocks and bonds as their main investments,
though there are some funds that include other securities
in their portfolios as well, including derivatives.
Many funds are equity funds that hold only stocks
while bond funds hold only bonds.
Balanced fund is the term we give to mutual funds that hold both stocks
and bonds in their portfolios.
Equity funds can be further broken down
according to the specific types of equity and the investment goals of the fund.
Many mutual funds invest in a certain size of firm
where firm size is measured by its market value,
also known as market capitalization or market cap for short.
So a fund manager can focus on large cap or small cap firms,
and their mid cap funds out there as well.
At the same time, there's a distinction between two investment goals.
On one hand, you have growth as an investment goal,
which is a shorthand way of saying that the manager is looking for firms
that are likely to grow rapidly, like Starbucks or Facebook did.
On the other hand, you can have value as an investment goal,
which means that the manager is looking for firms that are underappreciated
so that their current price doesn't reflect their true value.
If I take this large cap versus small cap size distinction
and pair it with the growth value difference and objective,
this gives me a nice set of four boxes that I can use to characterize
a lot of equity mutual funds.
One of the most popular pairings is large cap growth funds.
These funds invest in the Coca-Cola's of the world.
Other funds might be bargain hunters looking for so-called value investments.
For example, a large cap value fund might invest in large companies
that have temporarily fallen on hard times.
Right after the financial crisis of 2008, for instance,
you could argue that a lot of the big banks, like Citibank,
were candidates for value investors.
One of the nice things about this four box view of mutual funds
is that it gives you a different dimension to diversification.
You may be attracted to several good funds,
but discover that they're all small cap growth funds, for example.
You could arguably do a better job of diversifying
if you spread your investments around to all four boxes.
Another type of equity fund is called an income fund
because its focus is on earning high dividend income.
This focus is different from growth or value,
which are both more focused on earning high capital gains.
But, of course, you don't necessarily have to settle on just income
or just growth or just value.
There are also so-called blend funds,
which try to select equities based on two different investment objectives.
For example, a popular type of blend fund is the growth and income fund,
which tries to invest in the stocks of companies that are growing quickly
but still pay high dividends.
You may remember from a previous lecture that some companies like 3M
managed to do both of those things quite well.
A final type of equity fund that appeals to many investors is the sector fund.
Sector funds invest in the shares of companies in the same sector or industry,
like telecommunications, entertainment, consumer products, and so on.
Now, sector funds are for investors who intentionally want to undiversify.
They want to take on concentrated risk in a particular industry
because they believe that the industry as a whole will earn high returns
relative to other industries or maybe relative to the rest of the market.
There's also a lot of diversity in bond funds,
though the distinctions between the types of bond funds usually follow bond characteristics
like maturity, the type of issuer, and the credit rating of the issue.
For example, different bond funds may hold long-term bonds with maturities over 10 years.
Intermediate bonds with maturities closer to 5 to 8 years.
And short-term bonds with maturities of 2 to 3 years.
There are even so-called ultra-short bond funds that invest in bonds with less than one year left to maturity.
What bond funds all have in common is that the prices of shares fluctuate a lot
due to changes in interest rates.
That makes holding bond funds a bit different from buying and holding bonds to maturity.
If you hold bonds to maturity, then you're insulated from the price changes.
But since the bond mutual fund has to report its net asset value daily
and since it also has to continually replace bonds that mature with other bonds,
you never escape this price risk with bond funds.
Don't forget, though, that the investment known as a unit investment trust
can make long-term buy-and-hold investments and portfolios of bonds.
This option is worth considering if you want to buy-and-hold a piece of a well-diversified portfolio of bonds.
Balanced funds put both stocks and bonds into the portfolio,
so you'd think that this combination would increase diversification and smooth out the return on the fund.
And indeed, this is the case for many balanced funds.
Also, if you move your investments from equity funds into balanced funds,
this effectively places more of your portfolio into bonds
and helps protect the value of your portfolio from sudden market drops
as you get closer to your financial goal.
In fact, some balanced funds now call themselves target date funds
and try to adjust the portfolio over time, just as a financial planner would suggest.
So if I buy a 2050 target date fund,
then I'm basically telling the manager of the fund that my target retirement year is 2050.
When I first buy into the fund, most of the investment will be in stocks.
But as my retirement date gets closer,
the fund manager takes care of shifting an increasing proportion of the fund into fixed-income instruments.
Many defined contribution retirement plans are now using target date-type balanced funds
as the default mutual funds for the employees.
These funds are a great innovation for people who don't know much about investing
or who just don't want to be bothered with all the details of managing their own portfolio.
On the other hand, when you invest in a target date fund,
you're handing over all the important financial decisions about what to buy
and when to shift your portfolio into bonds to the managers of the fund.
Now, there's a cousin of the balanced fund that's actually a fairly aggressive investment.
These mutual funds go by the name of asset allocation funds.
And their strategy is to switch between bonds and stocks whenever the market seems to favor one investment over the other.
So in other words, when the fund managers believe the stock market will outperform the bond market,
they'll shift the portfolio heavily into stocks in order to benefit from this opinion.
And when the bond market looks like it will turn in better returns, the portfolio swings back into bonds.
Needless to say, these big swings back and forth are fairly risky,
and they generate a lot of portfolio turnover, which as we've seen can increase the tax bill from your mutual fund.
So it's important to investigate these funds carefully before you take the plunge.
A final element of mutual fund diversity that I should mention is the international angle.
In order to protect American investors, the SEC is very strict about allowing foreign mutual funds to offer their shares in the U.S.
Consequently, most foreign mutual funds won't allow Americans to invest in them.
Therefore, if you want to diversify your portfolio geographically, you'll either have to buy foreign securities yourself
or invest in American mutual funds that do it for you.
I'll have a lot more to say about this in a future lecture.
There's a small but important distinction between types of mutual funds that invest in foreign assets.
On one hand, funds that invest only in assets from outside the U.S. are called international funds.
But many funds will invest in American and foreign assets, and these are called global funds.
So it's important to know which one your fund is.
Speaking of knowing what your fund is holding, there are additional sources of information about a mutual funds investment strategy
and actual investments that you should investigate before you buy into any mutual fund or ETF.
In the introductory lectures on mutual funds and ETFs, we learned about the summary prospectus.
But there's plenty more information in a more detailed form in the other documents that investment companies are required to disclose to the public.
When you start getting serious about a mutual fund, you really need to go to these documents and read over the following information.
First, you should go and have a look at the full prospectus.
This document contains much of the same information as in the summary prospectus,
but at a much higher level of detail that can give you better insights about how the fund managers will make their investment choices.
For example, I compared the summary prospectus and the full prospectus from Fidelity's Equity Income Fund,
a very standard large cap blend fund.
The discussion of investment strategies in the full prospectus informed me that the fund was allowed to buy and sell futures contracts and ETFs,
which the summary prospectus didn't mention.
In fact, if you want a full listing of exactly what a fund's buy law is allowed to invest in,
you can go to another document that a fund will publish called the Statement of Additional Information,
which is usually distributed with the fund's annual report.
There's a section in the Statement of Additional Information that details exactly what the fund is allowed to invest in,
as well as any restrictions on the amount of each security it's allowed to invest in.
Each fund will tell you both the hard or fundamental rules that govern its investments
and the non-fundamental rules that really describe the fund manager's intentions.
Fundamental rules can only be changed by shareholder vote,
but non-fundamental rules can be changed by the fund managers at any time.
Finally, there's no substitute for looking over the actual holdings of a mutual fund or ETF
if you want to know what the fund is really doing with your money.
The annual report of the mutual fund will give you a complete list of the holdings of the mutual fund,
usually as of the date of the annual report.
So far, I've been talking about mutual funds,
as if every one of them hires a team of professional stock and bond analysts and sets off to beat the market.
But there are thousands of mutual funds that are passively managed.
A passively managed mutual fund simply tries to mimic the return on some kind of benchmark asset.
Usually, this benchmark asset is an index, like the Dow Jones Industrial Average,
the S&P 500, or the Euro Stocks 50 index.
Generally, the managers of the fund simply buy and hold the assets that make up the index,
or they invest in futures contracts or other simple derivatives
that directly substitute for holding the assets in the index.
There are two big advantages of passively managed mutual funds.
First, you pretty much know exactly what you're getting,
as long as you understand what the benchmark asset is.
The other advantage of passively managed mutual funds is that generally their expenses are much lower
than those of actively managed mutual funds,
because the managers don't do nearly as much trading as active managers do.
So what's best for you?
Should you hold actively managed funds, passively managed funds, or both?
And if both, how much of each?
Well, let's see what you need to consider.
First, there's the issue of whether you should invest in all passively managed funds,
or in all actively managed funds.
This depends in part on how efficient you think the markets are.
If you're a big believer in market efficiency,
then you know that the best you can do as an investor is to buy a slice of the entire market and hold that.
Well, passively managed mutual funds and ETFs give you a great opportunity to do that.
These days, there are indexes that cover just about every stock market in the world,
as well as regional indexes,
and there are major bond indexes as well,
that cover just about all the main bond markets and types of bonds in the world.
So if you want to own a slice of the entire world market for stocks and bonds,
it's possible to do that.
On the other hand, if you think the market isn't completely efficient,
then there's room for skilled fund managers to earn market-beating returns over long periods of time.
And if that is the case, then you're passing up a great opportunity if you only stick to passively managed mutual funds.
The problem with this view, as we learned in the lecture on the efficient markets hypothesis,
is that most of the actively managed mutual funds out there don't beat the market.
But the truth is that some do, and some managers do turn in market-beating returns for years on end.
Now, the trick is to find those really gifted or lucky managers who do produce long strings of market-beating returns.
This is a big question, and I'll come back to that in a few minutes.
In my opinion, there should be room in your portfolio for both kinds of mutual funds and ETFs.
I think it's a good idea to hold a fair amount of your portfolio as a slice of the entire market,
which includes not only global diversification, but diversification across asset classes like bonds and real estate,
and even other things in addition to stocks.
Personally, I like to weight my portfolio more toward the passive broad indexes
and make a couple of carefully researched bets on what I consider exceptional actively managed funds.
But it's your choice. My main point is for you to be intentional about this choice.
Now, one potential downside about passively managed mutual funds is the explosion in the number and types of indexes out there.
Just as the number of country indices has exploded, so have indexes for sectors, company size, bond maturity, bond issuer, and so on.
For just about any kind of niche investment you can think of, there's an index now, and usually there are several.
On the one hand, it's a good thing that gives us benchmarks to compare performance to.
But on the other hand, the proliferation of indexes has introduced some of the problems of actively managed mutual funds to passively managed mutual funds.
What I mean by this is that it's now easy to lull yourself into a false sense of security that you have a well-diversified portfolio when you really don't.
If you hold a bunch of index funds, but the indexes are the small cap growth index, the high yield bond index, and the emerging market stock index,
then you really aren't that well-diversified in your holdings.
In fact, you're really just making the sorts of bets that actively managed mutual funds make.
On the other hand, the increase in the number of indexes means that actively managed mutual funds can generally find some index to compare the returns to that makes them look good.
You may notice, for example, that hardly any actively managed mutual fund compares itself to a broad market index anymore.
They all compare themselves to some niche index that describes their investment objective.
And surprise, this fund beats its tailor-made benchmark.
Now, I'm not suggesting that all mutual funds play this game, or that none of the specialized indexes are reasonable benchmarks.
But I do think you need to be skeptical of claims that actively managed mutual funds make about beating this or that benchmark.
There's no substitute for looking at their actual returns and their risk over time.
Speaking of actual returns and risk, we know that mutual fund perspectives are required to show the average returns of the fund over the past one, five, and ten-year periods,
as well as the year-by-year returns for the past ten years.
This is good information that helps you see both the level of returns and the consistency of returns over time.
If you want to, you can even go into the one of the many free websites and download price data on just about any mutual fund out there.
Even though they're not actively traded, mutual funds do have stock ticker symbols,
and most online sites will give you free access to their daily and monthly historical prices.
You can use these historical prices to construct your own measures of returns and risk for that mutual fund.
I'll be more specific about how to do both of these things in a couple of future lectures.
But the point that I want to emphasize is that this plain information about year-to-year returns and their consistency is better information than index comparisons made by most actively managed mutual funds.
Well, if you buy into my argument that there's room in your portfolio for at least one actively managed mutual fund, which one should you pick?
Well, here's your chance to think carefully about both your preferences as well as your beliefs about the market and choose funds that you think will be great investments.
As I keep mentioning, there are funds that cater to just about every investment interest out there.
For example, you may want to make a big bet that Brazil's markets will continue to grow and add lots of value.
Or you may think that the next big thing is solar energy and you want to invest in that industry.
Or you may think that this strategy of finding high dividend-paying firms is the right way to pick stocks, so you want to find a fund manager who pursues that strategy.
Chances are, if somebody thinks something's a good investing idea, there's probably a fund for it by now.
Keep in mind, though, that many of the specialized funds are likely to be ETFs these days, especially if the investing idea you have in mind involves an alternative asset.
A few popular but controversial active management strategies that might appeal to you are also worth mentioning specifically.
Two of these are growth and value investing, because there's been a long-running debate over which one's the better long-term strategy.
There have been a number of successful growth-oriented mutual funds out there, and some growth-oriented managers, like Peter Lynch, have deservedly become the stuff of investing legend.
What's interesting to me, though, is that the most successful growth investors seem to have a tempered approach to growth.
That is, they still want to get good value, so they always think in terms of the growth for the price.
On the other hand, there have also been some very successful value investors.
Two that come to mind are Warren Buffett and Bill Miller, who is one of the co-managers of a mutual fund called the Legmason Capital Management Value Trust.
Value investors usually have a lot of patience, since they're betting that the market will eventually recognize that a company is worth a lot more than previously thought.
One thing you should keep in mind is that both the growth and value strategies make sense, and can be winners.
The question is whether the managers have both the skill to pick the investments that really deliver, and the discipline to stick to their investing program.
Yet another mutual fund strategy that's getting more and more attention is the so-called socially responsible fund.
These mutual funds pursue high returns, but avoid investing in companies that engage in activities that some people find objectionable.
Firms that these funds avoid may make particular products like tobacco, or engage in particular production or employment practices,
or do business in countries that don't abide by international standards of human rights, for example.
The idea behind these funds is that investors may be willing to accept somewhat lower investment returns for the satisfaction of knowing that their savings don't support commercial activities that they object to.
Only time will tell if this idea has staying power in the market, but there seem to be plenty of investors who think so.
Beyond these ideas, I should note that there aren't any magic secrets to picking winning mutual funds.
As with any other investment, you need to do your homework.
Suppose an investing idea really does resonate with you.
Then find the group of funds that seem to pursue this idea.
Look at their summary prospectuses to find the funds that claim to do what you're interested in.
Then examine the performance information in terms of their average returns and the consistency of these returns over the past 10 years, or more.
Those two steps should help you narrow down your list of mutual funds.
Then, once you get the field narrowed down to just a handful of funds, go into the details in the full prospectus, the annual report, and the statement of additional information.
You should be able to see the similarities and differences between the funds fairly clearly.
And if the funds are actively managed, find out who the managers are and look them up on the internet.
Mutual fund managers like to get media exposure for their funds, so they'll often appear in the media discussing their investment philosophies and what investments they're considering now.
This can be a great source of information that can help convince you either way about investing in a particular mutual fund.
Think about buying into a mutual fund as the start of a long-term buy-and-hold investment.
I realize that most of us will be investing in mutual funds through a 401k or similar plan that calls on us to make monthly contributions.
And I also know that it's relatively easy and almost costless to switch between the various mutual funds offered in your company's saving plan.
But please, please, please don't become one of those investors who chases after the latest fad or the mutual funds with the hottest returns this quarter.
This is a terrible investing strategy that too many people fall into.
Let me explain why I'm so down on this investing strategy.
Suppose I'm a bright young investment manager who actually has some good insights about how to value companies and their financial assets.
And I'm pretty good at picking stocks or bonds.
For a while, my mutual fund hums along, racking up very nice returns, but I stay under the radar because my fund is fairly small.
But at some point, my mutual fund gets noticed by some personal finance website or some magazine or money management guru.
Suddenly, my name is in lights and my mutual fund is the flavor of the day.
Well, what happens then?
Well, the money comes flooding in.
Suddenly, I now have to find places to invest tens of millions of dollars at once.
When a few months ago, I was making investments on the order of a few hundred thousand dollars.
First off, it's likely that I can't keep investing in the same companies as before.
When I start spending a million dollars at a time on a smaller company's stocks or bonds, this will start to push the company's price around and make the investment much less attractive.
So now I have to find bigger companies to invest in.
And maybe I'm not that great at investing in bigger companies.
In addition, I've got to come up with a bigger number of investing ideas.
I have so much money coming in that I need to spread it around to 50 new investments.
But what if I only have 30 good ideas?
Well, then I have to start investing in the ideas that I know aren't so good.
Or I have to hire a bunch more managers to help me out.
But they don't necessarily share my investment philosophies or insights.
But if I take the investor's money, I have to do something with it.
Sure, I could close the fund to new investments, but that's hard to do because my salary is based on the size of my fund.
So after the money comes rushing in, my returns fall back toward the average.
That helps explain, by the way, why many fund managers have a great year once in a while, followed by disappointing years.
Part of the reason is they can't invest the flood of new money that comes in very well.
Hopefully, this story will help convince you that if you keep moving your investments from one hot mutual fund to the next,
you'll probably end up with a string of disappointing returns.
You'll be part of that flood of money that swamps many mutual funds and drives their returns back to the average.
So my advice is to seek out long-term commitments with mutual funds that have demonstrated that they haven't been ruined by success.
That's one more criterion you can add to your list when it comes time to decide on an actively managed mutual fund.
Well, it's time to wrap up.
I hope I've convinced you that unless you're going to put your savings in a target date mutual fund and leave the driving to someone else,
you need to do the same kind of homework on mutual funds that you would do on stocks, bonds, and other investments.
Remember that neither passively indexed nor actively managed mutual funds are perfect,
and that you'll probably be happier with a well-chosen mix of both.
But whatever funds you do choose, treat them like long-term investments.
Don't chase last year's high returns.
With so many different mutual funds and ETFs available, this is one of those rare chances in life
when you can make the world conform to your wishes rather than the other way around.
Think carefully about what you want in your investments and make the most of this opportunity.
