In this lecture, I'm going to finally address the D word, derivatives.
You may have noticed that I haven't mentioned derivatives all that much so far, and when
I have, I haven't had many good things to say about them.
And that's mainly because derivatives are specialized tools for advanced investors.
They're usually bit players in an investment portfolio, used for hedging certain kinds
of risk.
Or if they're the main focus of your investing, then you're probably doing a lot of short
term speculating that really isn't the sort of investing that I think most people have
either the time or the stomach for.
But in this lecture, I'm going to introduce you to one of the most fascinating derivatives,
options, and try to convince you that options have a place in your portfolio.
And it's not just for hedging either.
It's a long term, return enhancing role that can help your money work harder for you.
And best of all, the option strategies that we'll learn about in this lecture have extremely
low risk.
I know it sounds like crazy talk, but when I, when you see exactly how these investing
strategies work, I think you'll become an options believer.
So let's get right down to thinking about what options are and how they work.
As we've learned repeatedly in this course, all financial instruments are nothing but
contracts.
And an option is just a specialized type of contract.
An option is a contract that gives its buyer the right, but not the obligation to take
some action.
Only the action involves buying or selling something.
Now if you have the right to do something, but you're not required to do it, you'll
only do it if it makes you better off, right?
Well, that's the beauty of options.
If you hold an option to do something, you'll only do it if it's in your best interest.
If it's not, you'll walk away, and all you've lost is the cost of the option.
Financial options give you a choice, and having more choices is always a good thing.
Financial options are usually the right to buy or sell a particular asset at a pre-agreed
price on or before a certain date.
The right to buy an asset is called a call option on the asset, while the right to sell
is called a put option on the asset.
If you exercise your right to buy or sell, we say that you're exercising the option.
The pre-agreed price is called the strike price of the option, and the last day that
you're able to exercise this right is called the expiration date of the option.
Now the options that I'll be talking about in this lecture are stock options and index
options.
Stock options are rights to buy or sell shares of a particular company.
Index options are actually options on futures contracts on stock indexes.
I realize that I'll have to explain those index options more carefully when I get to
them later in the lecture, so don't worry about them just yet.
In addition, the only options we'll be learning about are call options, the right to buy stocks
or futures contracts on stock indexes.
Put options, the right to sell these assets are also interesting, but the main reason
you'd want to invest in put options is to protect your portfolio from a fall in stock
prices.
Put options do provide insurance against a drop in stock prices, but this insurance is
definitely not cheap.
Using put options to protect your portfolio against a drop in market prices is so expensive
that I recommend against using them, especially in a long-term investing context.
Instead, we're going to learn about the return enhancing opportunities presented by call
options, but before we do that, we'll need to know something more about call options.
As I said earlier, a call option on a share of stock is the right to buy the share at
a pre-agreed price called the strike price.
To make this concrete, let me introduce an actual option.
How about options on Nike?
Now, options are traded on exchanges just like stocks.
So I looked up the prices of exchange traded options, searched for Nike, and this takes
me to a big table of option price quotes, and all of them are for options on Nike shares.
There are so many contracts because these vary in three main ways.
First, there's the basic distinction between call options and put options.
Since I'm only interested in call options, which again give the holder the right to buy
shares in Nike, I'll ignore the put options.
Now we can look at the strike prices and expiration dates.
Strike prices of option contracts cluster around the current market price of the stock
for reasons that I'll get into in a minute.
Suppose the price of Nike's stock today is about $88 per share.
Then there will be strike prices at $90, $92.50, $95, $100, and so on.
The strike prices go up in minimum increments of $2.50.
So there are contracts with a $90 strike price, some with a $95 strike price, and so on.
There are also strike prices below the current market price because the contracts go out
for up to two years ahead.
So two years ago, the price of Nike was lower and people set the strike prices at lower
values like $80 or $85.
We can have multiple contracts at the same strike price because the contracts can also
have different expiration dates.
Most exchanges offer a rolling set of contracts that expire every three months.
Some contracts have expiration dates in March, June, September, and December, and others
have a different cycle.
For Nike, the expiration dates are January, April, July, and October.
So we can have several contracts with a $95 strike price.
We can have one contract with a $95 strike price that expires in October, another one
with a $95 strike price that expires in January, and so on.
I'm going to assume that it's currently late September and I'm going to work with a call
option on Nike that has a $100 strike price and expires in January.
Option contracts expire mid-month, actually on the 18th of the month, usually.
The price quote on the January call options with a $100 strike price says $2.80, which
means that each call option would cost $2.80.
The price of an option is also called the premium.
The connection to insurance premium, by the way, is actually intentional.
If I pay that option premium of $2.80, then I own the right, but not the obligation, to
buy one share of Nike at a price of $100 on or before the expiration date in January.
So if I do buy this call option, then I am hoping that the price of Nike shares rises
above $100 per share between now, late September, and mid-January.
If that happens, if the market price of the stock goes above the strike price on the call
option, then I say that my call options have gone into the money.
This simply means that I can make a positive profit by exercising them.
So suppose the price of Nike shares does go up to, say, $108 a share.
Then what I can do is exercise my call options by one share of Nike at $100 per share for
each of these call options I own.
Since the market price of each share is $108, then I can turn around and sell these shares
for $108 per share and make an immediate $8 per share profit on each share I've bought.
This profit of $8 per share is the gross profit from the trading.
Remember that I paid $2.80 for the call option, and I'll have to pay trading commissions
for the option trade as well as the stock trade.
So my net or all-in profit will be smaller than $8 a share.
Of course, the higher the price of Nike shares goes before you exercise the call option,
the higher your profit will be.
Your profit rises by $1 for each dollar the price of Nike rises above $100 per share before
expiration and before you exercise the call options.
So if I wait a little bit and the price rises from $108 to $111 per share, then my profit
rises from $8 to $11 per share.
Now what happens if the price of the stock stays below $100 per share?
For example, what if the price of the stock rises from $88 now to $98 or even to $99.99
between now and the expiration date in January?
Well, sorry.
If you exercise the option, you'd have to pay $100 per share for Nike, but the market
value of the Nike shares is below $100 per share.
Why buy something for more than the market price if you don't have to?
So in this case, instead of exercising the option, you'd let it expire.
You'd just walk away.
You've lost $2.80 per option that you bought, plus the commission and any other trading
costs.
But that's all you've lost.
I know that it's a bummer to lose any money, but really you've only lost a fraction of
the value of the stock.
So notice that there's an asymmetry in your profits.
If the price of Nike shares rises above the strike price, your profit rises at a dollar
for dollar rate.
If the price of Nike stays below the strike price of the call option, you lose the price
of the option no matter whether the price of the shares rises to $99.99 or falls to
a penny per share.
Financial economists represent this behavior with what they call a payoff or a profit diagram.
Here's the diagram, which has the price of the stock on the horizontal axis and the
amount of the profit from the option on the vertical axis.
What I'm going to do with this diagram is show you the graph of what your profit looks
like for each possible price that the share of Nike stock can be at the expiration date
of the option.
I'll be assuming that the price of the option is $2.80 and the strike price of the option
is $100.
I'm going to ignore the trading commissions in this diagram, but keep in mind that most
brokers will charge a flat rate per trade and so you'd have to figure out the commission
per option from that flat rate.
Now we just learned that if the price of the share stays below the strike price of $100,
the option will have zero value at expiration.
If that happens, then the option pays you zero and you've paid the price of the premium
so you've lost that amount.
And you lose this amount no matter whether the price of the share is a dollar or $99.
That means that we can represent the profit on this option as a flat line at minus $2.80
running between zero and 100.
If the price of the share goes above $100 though, the option goes into the money and
starts to profit.
For each dollar the price of the share goes above $100, the profit on the option rises
by $1.
That means that the profit line changes when we pass $100 on the horizontal axis.
The profit goes from being a flat line to a line with a slope of 1.
Now this is the classic diagram of the profit from buying a call option.
This clearly shows the asymmetry in the profit that I mentioned.
And this asymmetry is the big attraction of options.
This diagram says that when I buy this call option, I have the potential to earn a lot
of profit, but my losses are going to be limited.
Losses and the potential to enjoy gains are the distinctive characteristics of insurance.
One thing you're probably wondering is how we determine the prices of options.
Why does this call option on Nike cost $2.80 and not $0.13 or $0.50?
Well, there really are two answers, but they're related.
The first answer is that it's supply and demand, just like in any other financial market.
But the second answer is that many of the suppliers and demanders of options also know
the theory of option pricing, and these theories lead to some easy-to-use option pricing formulas
that give a ballpark estimate of the value of an option.
I won't go into those theories, thank goodness, but I can tell you the general idea behind
them.
As we've seen in the profit diagram, a call option will give you a profit if the price
of the stock goes above the strike price of the option.
So option pricing is really about the likelihood that this will happen.
In other words, the more likely someone thinks it is that the price of Nike will rise above
$100 a share before January, the more they'll be willing to pay for the call option.
There are basically five things that affect this probability in general, but the three
big things are the strike price of the option, the time to expiration, and the amount of
variation in the price of the shares.
In general, the higher you set the strike price of a call option, the less likely it
is that the stock price will rise above the strike price.
So call option premiums fall as the strike price rises.
Second, the more time you have until expiration, the better the chance that the stock price
will eventually wander above the strike price.
So the option premium on a call option, with six months until expiration, will be higher
than the premium on the identical call option, with only three months left to maturity.
We can see that in the options price table we looked at earlier too.
There's an April call option with a strike price of $100, which is selling for $5.60,
which is double the price of the same call option that expires in January.
And finally, the more the price of the stock bounces around, the higher the chance that
it will bounce up above the strike price of the call option.
Also stocks with more variation in their prices will have more expensive call options.
Well, if we keep this up, you'll be an options trader before we know it.
But my purpose isn't to turn you into an options trader, it's to make you comfortable enough
with the options contract to think about making a couple of investments that I'll turn to
next.
The first options investment that I'll talk about is called a covered call.
The covered call is a combination of a stock and a call option that you can use to enhance
returns on stocks that you own.
People generally use the strategy on stocks that they intend to own for a long time, but
they want to squeeze some more income out of them.
For example, I had a teaching assistant about 10 years ago who funded his skydiving hobby
by writing covered calls on some Microsoft shares that he owned.
The covered call strategy involves writing, which is another word for selling, call options
on shares of stock that you currently own.
For example, if you currently own 100 shares of Nike, then you could write 100 call options
on Nike as part of your covered call strategy.
I'll show you exactly how in just a minute.
Now the covered call strategy requires you to sell call options.
As I hinted at a couple of minutes ago, anyone can buy or sell call options.
When you sell or write call options, you're selling to someone else the right to buy shares
from you at a pre-agreed strike price.
So when you write call options, you're creating an obligation for yourself.
You're obligated to sell your shares or actually to pay the buyer of the call options the difference
between the market price of the shares and the strike price if the price of the shares
rises above the strike price.
Wait a minute, you might be saying, that sounds dangerous.
Well it is if you don't already own the shares.
But the whole point of the strategy is that you're going to be writing call options on
shares you already own.
If you write call options on these shares and the options go into the money, you simply
sell your shares.
You use the proceeds to pay the holder the call options and then figure out what to do
with the leftover cash.
In other words, when you write call options on shares you already own, you're covered,
hence the name covered calls.
Now if you sell call options without already owning the shares, you're doing some pretty
risky speculation.
So one of the things that's so fascinating about the covered call is that owning the
shares converts this risky transaction of selling call options into an extremely safe investment.
Let me give you an example to show you what I mean.
So suppose it's late September and you notice that the January call options on Nike shares
with a strike price of $100 are selling for $2.80 per option.
You already own 100 Nike shares and the current market price is $88 per share.
So you decide to write 100 of these call options.
So you collect $280 less trading commissions and you wait to see what happens between now
and January.
Well one of two things can happen.
The first thing is that Nike stock doesn't go above $100 per share.
Nike shares would have to go up $12 per share in a little over three months in order for
these options to go into the money.
That's a rate of increase of about 67% on an annualized basis, talk about swoosh.
So it's probably not that likely to occur.
If it doesn't actually happen, you keep your $280 minus trading costs.
So it's like an extra dividend that you've earned on the shares.
Using $88 is the price, this is a dividend yield of just over 3% in three months or an
annual rate of over 13%, not too shabby.
Of course that's ignoring trading costs so the actual return would be a little bit lower.
Still, given that Nike's actual dividend yield is only about 1.4%, it's a vast improvement.
And of course you could repeat this transaction again in January once the options expire.
The trick is to pick a strike price for the options that's high enough so that it seems
pretty unlikely that the share price will rise that high before expiration.
But on the other hand, you need to set the strike price low enough so that the option
premium makes it worth your while to do this trade.
So there's a trade-off at work and you may not think that the trade-off is worth it for
all your shares, or at least not all the time.
This strategy tends to work well for popular stocks that also have active options trading
surrounding them.
Now the other possibility is that the options actually do go into the money.
Suppose for example that Nike's price rises to $110 per share and the holder of the options
exercises them.
Now in most cases, options are cash settled, which means that you would have to simply
pay the difference between the market price of the shares and the strike price of the
options.
So in this case what you do is sell your 100 shares at the current market price of $110
per share for a total of $11,000.
Then you'd owe $10 per share times 100 shares to the option holder for a total of $1,000.
Of course you also have to figure in trading costs.
But let's think about your return in this case.
You sold your shares for $11,000, paid $1,000 to the holder of the call options, and you
earned $280 on the calls.
So you have $10,280 from this transaction before trading costs.
Now if we again treat $88 as the starting price, you've made a 16% return in three months.
Whoa, that's pretty good.
You can have that cash in hand now so you can reinvest it into whatever you want.
For example, you could actually reinvest it in those Nike shares if you think the stock
still has the potential to appreciate even more.
Or you could find another company stock to invest in and play the covered calls game
with a new stock.
Notice that with either outcome, I haven't even mentioned the possibility of losing
money.
In fact, the only thing you've really lost in any sense is that you've lost out of some
part of some really high returns if the options do go into the money and get exercised.
So you'll have to settle for a smaller return in that case, but never a negative one.
And that's why I think this strategy is an important one to consider.
It's very safe, easy to do, and it can improve the return on any stock that has options traded
on it.
Now if you like the idea of using covered calls, but are still hesitant to try this
on your own, or if you don't think you'll have the time to do this, then you can try
the alternative.
There are actually actively managed mutual funds that pursue covered call investment
strategies.
The fund managers invest in stocks that they think will deliver high returns through following
a covered call investment strategy.
So look for those funds if you like covered calls, but don't want to do it by yourself.
In addition to covered calls, there's another investment strategy that uses the power of
options to offer a great opportunity to investors.
The general name for these investments is structured products, and they often go by
the name of bull CDs, as in bull market CDs, but I like to call them option embedded CDs.
Now if you're familiar with the causes of the global financial crisis of 2008, then
you know that some types of structured products were heavily implicated as causes of problems
in the markets.
But there are literally hundreds of different types of structured products out there.
The name structured product means that some clever financier has figured out a way to
combine different financial instruments into a new one, or that the payments from a financial
instrument are being sliced and diced in different ways.
Some structured products are clearly aimed at the professionals and risk lovers out there,
while other ones are clearly aimed at prudent individual investors who know a good deal
when they see one.
Of course, I'll be talking about a structured product that goes in the latter category.
This type of structured product is available through many banks, brokerages and other dealers,
and it's commonly referred to as a CD, but it's a CD with a couple of special features.
The first feature of these CDs is that instead of paying just a flat rate of interest, they'll
pay you the return on some index, usually a stock index like the S&P 500.
That's already quite different from your average CD, but it gets better.
If the S&P 500 falls during the time that you own the CD, the CD will actually give
you your initial deposit back, so you won't suffer any losses, except of course for the
fact that you earned a zero return.
Compared to an actual investment in the stock index, that's fantastic.
Of course the question is, how can they do that?
You may also ask, is that legal?
Well, I'm happy to say that not only is it legal, but it's also pretty safe for the
buyer of the CD as well as for the company that offers it.
Notice that the payoff of this special CD is a lot like an option payoff.
You get to enjoy any gains in the S&P 500 index, but you don't have to suffer any of
the losses between now and the maturity of the CD either.
Limited losses, but lots of upside potential.
That's an option for sure.
And that explains, by the way, how a bank or other company can offer such a product.
Here's how they work.
First, the bank takes your deposit and invests it in some kind of asset.
For example, a bank may simply make loans with your deposit.
The loans are going to earn some kind of interest and the bank takes the interest from those
loans and buys call options on the S&P 500 index with the interest.
Ah, there are those stock index options I mentioned earlier.
Stock index options are actually options on the stock index futures contracts.
For example, there's a very actively traded futures contract on the S&P 500.
The futures contract on the index is a great substitute for holding the index directly
because it's cheaper to buy and its price movements are strongly tied to the movements
of the actual index.
So an option on the futures contract is a great substitute for an option directly on
the S&P 500 index, and the options are fairly cheap too.
In fact, the interest earned on the loans that the bank makes using your deposit is
enough to pay for options on the stock index futures contract, and there will still be
enough money left over to compensate the bank for arranging the CD.
Hey, the bank's got to eat too.
Then if the stock index goes up in value, the options go into the money, and the bank
will give you the profit on the stock options.
The profit on the options will yield the same rate of return as the stock index.
If the stock index goes down, the options expire worthless, but the money you deposited
at the bank isn't in the stock market, so the value of your deposit isn't at risk from
a stock market decline.
The money you deposited has been loaned out to the bank's customers, so the money is at
risk, but it is the same risk you take with any deposit offered by any bank.
So thanks to the power of options, banks and brokerages can offer investors a product
that looks too good to be true.
You get the appreciation of a stock index with very minimal risk of losing any of your
principal.
These CDs can be great products for investors who are highly risk averse or who want to
try to improve the returns on their portfolio but simply can't afford capital losses.
Now a word of caution is in order here.
There are some bull CD products that promise twice the return on the index if the index
rises or possibly even more.
These products work the same way as normal bull CDs, but they multiply returns by purchasing
more call options.
They can afford to buy more call options because they invest your deposit in much riskier loans.
So they're much riskier than normal bull CDs and I don't recommend any bull CD that promises
to multiply the returns on an index.
Take with the plain products that simply offer the gain on the index with no multiplier.
And never buy a bull CD that doesn't promise to return your full deposit if the index goes
down.
Well on this lecture we've learned a couple of things.
First, certain types of options really can enhance the return on your investments with
minimal risk involved.
And second, financial engineering doesn't just produce financial Franken signs, it can
also create products that are useful and safer than the ingredients that go into them.
Covered calls for example take one of the riskiest derivatives positions out there and
turn it into a no lose way to juice the returns on your favorite stock.
And option enhanced CDs deliver the upside return potential of a stock index with none
of the stock's downside risk and only a minimal risk that you lose anything at all.
You should definitely consider adding these option enhanced investments to your short list
of investment options.
