Well, so far, we've spent a lot of time in this course learning about all different types
of investments.
But I think it's time to move on to some other very important issues that all investors
should understand.
The issue we'll learn about in this lecture is the role of economic cycles in financial
markets and what they mean to you as an investor.
If you pay even a little bit of attention to the financial press, you've probably seen
many different articles claiming that now is the time to buy consumer stocks, or now
is the time to dump your bonds, or any number of similar claims.
Each one urges you to buy or sell some broad category of investment, and some even advise
people to get out of the market completely.
All of these articles claim that some economic cycle that predicts the market or even drives
the market has reached a critical turning point.
And this means that investors need to rearrange their portfolios right now in order to benefit
from the opportunity or to avoid disaster.
These claims are virtually guaranteed to raise your anxiety level as an investor.
So in this lecture, we'll try to ease that anxiety.
We'll learn about three important cycles that affect the financial markets.
And we'll also learn whether the existence of these cycles means that you can or should
try to time your investments according to these cycles.
Let's start by looking at price cycles in financial markets, exemplified by the bull
and bear market cycles in the stock market.
It's hard to deny that most financial markets seem to go through periods of generally rising
prices and optimistic sentiment about future prices, followed by periods of widespread
decline in prices and investor pessimism.
The existence of bull and bear markets leads investors to try to time their buying and
selling of stocks and other securities.
According to market timers, the best times to buy are actually at the ends of bear markets
and the beginnings of bull markets, because at those times the market prices are relatively
low and they're on their way up.
And of course, the time to sell is at the end of the bull market when prices are peaking.
Well, it sounds great, right?
There's only one little problem.
How can you tell when a bull market is ending or a bear market is beginning?
Prices don't rise smoothly during bull markets or fall smoothly during bear markets.
They tend to bounce up and down day to day.
And while it's true that in a bull market, the increases in price outweigh the decreases,
even in the middle of a bull market, there can be some pretty big market losses.
For example, consider what people called the greatest bull market in U.S. history, which
ran from 1982 until late in the year 2000.
In October 1987, there was the Black Monday crash, when the market lost a quarter of its
value in just a few days.
Now put yourself in the shoes of an investor who just experienced that loss.
You'd have to ask yourself, is this the end of the bull market, which has already lasted
five years?
Well, how could anyone have predicted that this would turn out to be just a hiccup, albeit
a pretty big one, in a bull market that would run for another 13 years?
I certainly don't recall anyone making that kind of an argument at the time.
Figuring out when bull and bear markets are coming to an end is, to say the least, pretty
difficult.
But there is an investment strategy that actually does try to figure out whether price trends
will continue on or reverse themselves.
It's called technical analysis.
But because it relies heavily on examining charts and graphs of stock prices, the practitioners
of technical analysis are often called chartists.
Technical analysis uses information in prices, as well as in the volume of trading, to make
predictions about future price movements.
Now, judging by the abundance of technical analysis tools on investing websites, most
investors seem to believe that technical analysis is useful.
Just about any free financial website that provides price quotes will also enable you
to use some technical analysis on past prices.
So I take this as a sign that this method of technical analysis must be in high demand
from investors.
I think the appeal of technical analysis comes from the fact that when we look at prices,
we can see obvious trends in past prices.
Technical analysis tries to identify current price trends so that we can take advantage
of them.
There are many different technical analysis tools, but I'll talk about three of the most
common.
As I mentioned a minute ago, one of the hallmarks of technical analysis is the charts and graphs
that analysts make.
These charts and graphs often track moving averages of prices over time.
Let me explain what a moving average is by giving you an example.
Now suppose I have data on the daily closing prices of a stock or a stock index over the
past 10 years.
Then I have roughly 2,500 daily prices.
Instead of looking at only the graph of these prices, I'm going to do the following mathematical
operation on these prices and then add this to the chart.
So what I'm going to do is to take the first 50 days of data, call them days one through
50, and I'm going to calculate their average price.
And then I'll take days two through 51 and calculate their average price.
And then I'll take the average of day three through 52 and so on until I reach the end
of the data set.
The resulting set of numbers is called a 50 day moving average.
Moving averages are tools that help reveal the trends in a set of data because they smooth
out the short term bumps.
The technical analysis is all about looking for trends in prices.
What technical analysis usually does is to calculate not one but two sets of moving averages.
One set of moving averages will typically be this 50 day moving average.
The other set of moving averages will use the same data but take a 200 day moving average.
Then the chartist will put both moving averages along with the actual prices on the same graph.
The chartist looks over the graph to see whether the actual daily price line rises above or
falls below both sets of moving averages.
If the price line rises above both sets of moving averages, this is a bullish sign that
the price will continue to rise.
And if the price falls below both moving averages, it's a bearish sign.
Of course, there are also specific formations in these moving averages that some technical
analysis will look for.
But these are highly subjective and much less simple to see.
In addition to these charts of moving averages, technical analysis uses data on breadth and
trading volume.
The breadth of the market is simply the number of companies that gain in value during some
period of time minus the number of companies that lose value during that period.
People who talk about breadth usually convert the numbers to ratios so they use phrases
like gainers outnumber losers 2 to 1 or similar language like that.
The stronger the breadth on the side of the gainers, the stronger the bullish signal is.
And the stronger the breadth on the side of the losers, the stronger the bearish signal
is.
The final technical analysis statistic that's worth understanding is the so-called TRIN,
which is short for Traders Index.
The TRIN is a ratio formed by taking the average number of shares traded of the companies whose
price fell and dividing this by the average number of shares traded of the companies whose
prices rose.
So this is related to breadth but also factors in the volume that is the number of shares
traded as well.
If the TRIN is greater than 1, it's a bearish signal to investors.
It means that there are a lot of sellers pushing the losing shares down but not as many buyers
pushing the gaining shares up.
So on net, there's negative pressure on prices.
If the TRIN is less than 1 though, it's a bullish signal.
These technical analysis tools are intended to identify existing trends and prices and
also to predict when the trends are about to reverse themselves.
Those things would be really good to know, especially if the information is reliable.
So is it?
Well, this question has been studied extensively by economists and generally the answer is
mixed.
Some studies find that technical analysis works, at least a little bit, while other studies
conclude that it doesn't work at all.
But even the studies that find some benefit from technical analysis tend to find that
the benefits are so small that they are more than offset by the increase in trading costs
that you'd incur if you let technical analysis tell you when to buy and sell.
One of the big problems with technical analysis is that its predictions always look better
in hindsight.
That is, once you see how the market actually performed, it's easy to go and find patterns
in the prices.
It's much harder to make a successful bet before you know whether there's really a trend
or just a false signal of a trend.
Another type of price cycle that would be good to be able to detect, especially given
the experiences in various financial markets during the past two decades, is a price bubble.
If an asset's price has a bubble in it, then we could get out of that market and wait until
the bubble bursts, right?
Well, that depends on whether we can actually tell when stock prices or the prices of any
other assets have bubbles in them.
The challenge of identifying price bubbles captured the attention of economics researchers
back in the late 80s when the question of a stock price bubble came up in connection
with that great bull market.
What the economists found was that they couldn't come up with a reliable test for the existence
of bubbles in any asset's price.
The reason why is actually pretty simple, and it has an important lesson for investors.
When an economist wants to test whether an asset price has a bubble in it, the economist
first has to assume some fundamentals-based model of the asset's value.
Well, there are several different fundamentals-based models and lots of variations on each one.
If an economist finds a bubble in the price of an asset, she can't be sure whether there's
actually a bubble or whether her fundamentals-based model of the price of the asset is wrong.
So we really can't know, at least in a statistical sense, if a bubble is present.
Hopefully, this brings to mind what we learned in the lecture about fundamentals-based stock
pricing.
Small changes in those parameters of the dividend discount model, D, R, and G, led to really
large changes in the implied values of the companies.
So it's entirely plausible that a fundamentals-based model that seems okay actually leads to a false
conclusion about the existence of a bubble.
Since there aren't any reliable tests for bubbles, investors tend to use other measures
of value, as well as their own intuition about what's happening in the markets.
For example, PE ratios or other comparables-based measures are commonly used to make arguments
about bubbles.
In fact, after the company LinkedIn went public in 2011, people pointed out that its PE ratio
was a whopping 666, and used this as evidence to argue that we were witnessing the start
of a second dot-com bubble.
In addition, investors also used anecdotal evidence of herd behavior and other forms
of so-called irrational exuberance to argue that bubbles have formed.
For example, one rule of thumb that it has existed at least since the 1920s takes the
form of, if your cab driver is giving you stock tips, it's time to get out of the market.
Bubble markets seem to be taken over by a gold rush-type atmosphere in which people who
never cared about investing before are suddenly drawn to a particular market.
You remember the day trading craze the dot-com boom?
Well, how about all those house flippers who invaded the real estate market in 2005 and
2006?
The invasion of a market by inexperienced investors who don't even believe they need
to learn the ropes is, in my mind, one of those hard-to-measure but easy-to-see signals
that a bubble has formed in a particular market.
Now, knowing or suspecting that there's a price bubble and staying out of the market
are two different things.
As we've seen before in the dot-com boom, as well as in the real estate bubble of the
mid-2000s, these episodes can go on for years, and it's hard to watch lots of other investors
get rich, at least on paper, and it's tempting to think that you can join in the fund for
just a little while and then get out of the market before the party ends.
On the other hand, some people become convinced that the bubble has to burst very soon and
they try to take short positions.
Either way, bubbles are so unpredictable that neither strategy is really advisable.
If you really do think there's a price bubble in some market, you should try to stay out
of it until you're sure that the bubble has burst or you're sure you were wrong about
the bubble.
In the meantime, find other good investments for your savings.
So it's really tough to call the turning points of asset price cycles, even in markets
that seem to have bubbles in them.
Because of this difficulty, a popular rule of thumb has developed over the years that
avoids trying to call the turning points but still tries to time the market.
This rule of thumb simply says, buy on the dips.
That is, wait to buy into the market until there's a significant fall in prices, say
5% or so.
This advice seems pretty attractive, but how does it work as an investment strategy?
Well, unfortunately, it doesn't seem to do that great either.
Some dips are just interruptions in a longer upward trend, but other dips occur right before
the market falls.
In other words, there's nothing really special about small dips in the market that would
lead you to believe that the dips are at better time to invest than any other time.
And if you try to increase the size of the dip, say, to 10%, then your strategy just
starts to look like plain old market timing.
So far, we've been learning about price cycles in financial markets.
Let's move on to the second major type of cycle that investors pay attention to, the
business cycle.
The business cycle is the cycle of expansion and recession that characterizes our overall
economy.
The typical business cycle tends to last about four years, and we spend a little over half
the time in expansion and the rest in recession.
During the past couple of decades, though, economists noticed that the business cycle
was getting longer, and the amount of time spent in recession was getting shorter.
Economists referred to this as the great moderation.
Now, whether the great moderation is a permanent development or just a temporary phenomenon
remains to be seen.
But regardless of the length of the business cycle, it has definite impacts on the markets
for various investments.
Stocks are especially sensitive to the business cycle, because corporate earnings react strongly
to the state of the overall economy.
But the flow of credit to business and the risk of default also depend on the state of
the business cycle.
So bond returns also vary significantly over the business cycle.
Many companies' fortunes are so strongly tied to the business cycle that they're referred
to as cyclical companies or cyclical stocks.
These are the manufacturers and distributors of big-ticket consumer items like cars, appliances
and furniture.
When the economy is expanding healthily, families are more willing and able to purchase a new
car or appliances, generally on credit.
But when the economy turns down and families worry about layoffs, they postpone any big
or non-necessary expense.
So these products are among the first expenses that families cut in a recession.
So the companies that make these products have high profits during the boom times and
low profits or even losses during the recessions.
Their stocks vary over the business cycle, which means that some investors try to move
investments into these industries when the business cycle turns up and move investments
out when the recession comes.
A similar strategy involves luxury goods and lower-priced goods.
During expansions, incomes are rising and people tend to buy more luxury goods or higher-priced
name brand versions of the products they buy every day.
For example, they'll buy tie detergent instead of the store brand.
And of course, this is reversed when the economy goes into recession.
This leads to an old rule of thumb that says, in recession, sell whiskey and buy beer.
In other words, sell off your investments in companies that make or market luxury goods
or name brands and buy investments in companies that make middle-range or discount goods,
things like store brands or even generic products.
This trading down and trading up behavior of consumers gets more pronounced the stronger
the expansion or contraction and the longer it lasts.
Of course, you need to be careful when you pursue this strategy to make sure that your
impression of a company and its products really matches the reality of what people
actually buy.
For example, some manufacturers of name brand products also have a thriving business in
producing store brands, so they'll do well in either an expansion or a recession.
If you don't know that, though, you could mistakenly sell their shares at the start
of a recession.
It's also crucial to remember that stocks are priced based on future earnings and dividends
so that the market is always pricing stocks based on their future performance.
This means that stocks actually predict the turning points of the business cycle, not
the other way around.
In fact, the S&P 500 stock index has been one of the components of the index of leading
economic indicators for a long time.
What that means for investors is that they can't wait until the recession comes or the
recovery for that matter to make adjustments to their portfolios.
They need to act ahead of time because stock prices recover and start to rise before economic
growth actually picks back up.
This makes the job of the investor who times the market based on the business cycle that
much more difficult.
Many investors who want to time the business cycle search for all kinds of interesting macroeconomic
data that are hopefully the earliest leading indicators.
The idea is that these special indicators can reveal business cycle turning points even
before most companies experience them.
If you're the first one to know about the change in the business cycle and can rearrange
your portfolio before the rest of the market realizes what's going on, then you could
generate good returns.
Everyone who follows this strategy has their own favorites out of indicators, but I'll
mention three interesting ones here.
First, there's the price of copper.
Copper is still a staple good in most manufactured products since everything runs on electricity
these days.
Nothing seems to work for electric connections quite as well as copper.
Because of its nearly universal presence, the price of copper rises and falls as businesses
expand and contract their production.
This relationship has performed so well over the decades that some people call copper doctor
copper because it diagnoses the state of the economy.
And since copper is an input, its price will start to rise well in advance of an upturn
in the economy and fall in advance of a downturn.
A second indicator, which also has a great name, is the Jolt's Survey.
It's published the second Tuesday of each month by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The name Jolt's stands for Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, and it gives a much
more in-depth picture of the labor market than the unemployment rate does.
The Jolt's Survey shows how many job openings there are, it breaks down whether people are
quitting or being laid off of work, and it shows what industries are doing all the hiring.
As with Dr. Copper, the Jolt's Survey can help people spot emerging trends in the labor
market whose impacts won't be felt in the overall economy for a while.
For example, one key part of the Jolt's Survey is the number of people who quit their jobs.
If the quit rate rises, this is a sign that more people are finding better jobs, which
is a positive sign.
Finally, one indicator that shows just how arcane these indicators can be is the sales
of corrugated cardboard boxes.
The idea there is that big-ticket merchandise like electronics, furniture, and appliances
is all shipped in big cardboard boxes.
When the companies order more of these products, their suppliers need to order more boxes to
ship them in.
So the demand for cardboard boxes goes up when companies anticipate that they'll be
selling more of these big-ticket items.
Incidentally, this was supposed to be one of Alan Greenspan's favorite indicators back
when he was chairman of the Federal Reserve.
Mentioning the Federal Reserve brings me to the third important cycle you should know
about, the interest rate cycle, or the credit cycle.
As I mentioned a few minutes ago, interest rates tend to vary over the business cycle,
but they march to a slightly different beat.
That's because of the large influence of our central bank, the Federal Reserve, on interest
rates and credit.
The Fed is responsible for two things.
On the one hand, it's an inflation fighter, but on the other, it's also responsible for
helping the economy maintain high employment and robust growth.
So sometimes the Fed's actions are motivated by fears of inflation, while at other times
its actions are intended to stimulate the economy.
This dual mandate, as it's called, means that the Fed isn't always reacting to the
state of the business cycle.
In fact, most of the time the Fed is trying to act before inflation or recession get to
be real problems.
For example, one former chairman of the Fed, William McChesney Martin, famously said that
the job of the Fed was to take the punch bowl away just when the party was getting interesting.
When the Fed takes action in the financial markets, it does so in ways that raise and
lower the cost of borrowing.
And this in turn affects the returns on other assets like stocks, since stocks are substitutes
for bonds.
So whenever the Fed takes strong action against inflation, borrowing costs go up rapidly and
credit shrinks.
On the other hand, when the Fed tries to stimulate the economy, interest rates fall
and credit becomes easier to get.
Now the influence of the Fed on the economy is always debated, but its impact on the financial
markets is pretty clear.
When the Fed makes interest rates go up, prices of financial assets tend to fall, and when
the Fed makes interest rates fall, asset prices tend to rise.
In fact, the influence of the Fed on the financial markets is so strong that just about every
bank and financial company has at least one economist who is in charge of what we call
Fed watching.
A Fed watcher sorts through all the public statements of the Federal Reserve's Board
of Governors and its other economists, looking for clues about what the Fed will do to interest
rates and to credit at its next open market committee meeting.
These meetings take place about every six weeks.
If you anticipate that the Fed will decide to cut interest rates or otherwise push more
money into the economy at its next meeting, then you can try to boost your holdings of
stocks and bonds to benefit from the increases in stock and bond prices that should result
from this decision.
Now here's the problem, and it's the same problem with trying to time your investments
over the business cycle too.
There are thousands of professional investors out there who are already watching the Fed
and all these economic indicators.
They're actually calculating the probabilities of changes in interest rates and other indicators
based on what's been happening in the markets.
And most importantly, these other investors are already adjusting their portfolios to
reflect their beliefs about the future of interest rates and the future of the business
cycle.
So if you're going to try to time the market, you're automatically putting yourself into
competition with thousands of investors who are more informed and have more resources
at their disposal to make predictions and strategies.
And they're already pushing market prices around.
Again, this should sound a lot like the efficient markets hypothesis to you, because that's
what's going on.
The professional investors are making market prices reflect what they know and what they
believe about the future.
So in order for you to be a successful market timer, you have to somehow do a better job
than these professionals at predicting when the business cycle will turn a corner or when
the Fed will decide to raise and lower the interest rates.
Because if you don't, then you can't expect to earn anything more than the average return
for all your efforts.
Hopefully I've convinced you that even though there are some strong cycles in the financial
markets, trying to use them to time the market just isn't worth your trouble.
The signals that these cycles give on a day-to-day basis just aren't clear enough to be reliable.
So you could end up buying or selling at terrible times, all the while thinking that you're
doing the right thing.
So where does that leave you?
Well, I almost hate to say it, because it's one of those things you've probably heard
a hundred times, but your best bet is to use dollar-cost averaging.
This is also known as investing a certain amount each month and staying fully invested
in the market at all times.
If you do that, your investing will naturally tend to smooth out a lot of the short-term
bumps and dips in prices.
This happens because some months your investments will be cheaper, and you can buy more units,
and other months they'll be more expensive, and you can buy fewer units.
The average cost of your investments will end up on the lower side of the range, which
gives you a good chance to earn solid returns over the long haul.
In addition, if you stay in the market long enough, then dollar-cost averaging also helps
to smooth out the much larger dips and bumps as well.
For example, suppose you invest a certain amount each month in stocks and a price bubble
forms for a year and then bursts.
If you stay in the market for several years after that, the effect of the bubble on your
investments will fade, because you only invested a small portion of your wealth into these
overpriced shares, and even those shares will have time to recover.
The thing to remember about investing is, to steal a phrase from the technical analysts,
the trend is your friend.
Not the short-term trends that many investors chase, but the long-term trends that drive
economic growth.
Big theory says that in the long run, the size of our economy and our financial markets
is driven by the size of the population and the level of technology.
As long as both of these keep growing, there will be solid growth in the economy, as well
as in the prices of the assets that form the foundation of the economy over the long haul.
The longer you can stay invested in the market, the more your wealth will benefit from and
come to mimic these long-run growth patterns.
So when you see the articles urging you to buy now or sell now, relax.
Yes, the markets will cycle, spin, gyrate, and make all kinds of other moves as well.
But they're all just wobbles around the long-run trend, which is moving steadily upwards.
Use dollar cost averaging and stay invested in the market so you can take full advantage
of that.
