In all the lectures up to now, I've been talking about buying.
Buying stocks, buying bonds, buying mutual funds, ETFs, even options.
But once you buy all these investments, you're eventually going to have to sell them.
And as you might imagine, knowing when to sell an investment is as important as knowing what to buy.
It turns out, though, that selling an investment can be really hard to do.
Oh, the transaction itself isn't hard at all, unless the market for the investment is small and illiquid,
and we've learned to steer clear of those kinds of investments.
What's hard is actually making the decision to sell.
You may recall that we learned all the way back in the first lecture that we're offering our own worst enemies when it comes to investing.
Well, selling is one of those times.
Selling is so hard that behavioral economists have developed a special term for the main problem that people have when they should be selling an investment.
It's called the disposition effect.
This effect says that people hate to sell losing investments.
They'll hold on to them for years, hoping that some miracle will push the price back up to what they paid.
Behavioral economists also say that we tend to sell our winning investments too quickly.
But I'm not as convinced by that effect.
I think that people are also reluctant to cash out a big winner because it may still go up in value.
If you're holding a stock that's already doubled in value, but you think it's the next Google, you'd be a fool to sell it, right?
Either way, it seems that our emotions can get the better of us when it comes to selling our investments.
And the only effective way to mitigate this emotional influence is to have a plan in place that tells you when you're going to sell.
In this lecture, we'll learn about the different reasons why you'd want to sell your investments so that you can formulate your own selling plan.
I'm going to start by tackling that disposition effect head-on.
So I'm mainly thinking about an investing context in which you've bought a particular asset, like a stock, or maybe an actively managed mutual fund.
This discussion really isn't aimed that much at passive investments like indexed mutual funds and ETFs.
Let's talk about when to sell those investments in a few minutes.
Now, the whole key to selling individual assets is to have a plan in place that provides discipline you can actually live with.
So what I'm going to recommend are not so much hard and fast rules, but guidelines, and reality checks, really.
And these reality checks are based on the following principle.
If I'm going to buy and hold an individual asset, I should have a pretty compelling reason to hold it.
And if I don't, I should just sell the investment.
The way that you should implement this principle is to translate it into some concrete numbers.
If you buy an individual stock, it must be because you expect it to deliver some kind of solid return.
If you buy a stock because of its high dividend yield, then presumably you can hold it as long as it keeps delivering that high dividend for you.
If it stops doing that, you should reevaluate the stock with the presumption that you'll sell it unless you find some other compelling reason to hold it.
There's a similar reality check for actively managed mutual funds you may invest in.
Presumably, you invest in an actively managed mutual fund because you expect it to deliver some kind of solid return over the long haul, like 8% per year.
And you're confident about this because you've done your homework and checked the mutual fund's long-term performance, as well as its actual investments.
As long as the mutual fund delivers this average return, you should keep on holding it.
But if reality starts to look like it can't deliver anymore, then you should sell your shares in it and move your money to a different investment.
This is a little trickier than selling off a stock that doesn't pay good dividends anymore,
because the mutual fund manager may simply be having a bad year, and that happens.
So in general, don't rush out to sell shares in the mutual fund just because of one year of bad performance.
But if the fund has two really lackluster years in a row, or delivers inconsistent returns over several years, start your investigation.
Of course, sometimes the entire market isn't doing well, and your fund is actually doing better than others at holding on to its value.
If you think that's the case, there's not much reason for selling.
But if you look into the fund, find that the managers have changed, or the fund's investments have changed significantly,
it may be time to look for other investments to switch into.
Now let's consider when to sell stocks that you're holding because you expect capital gains from them.
The capital gains are your compelling reason to hold them.
If you buy a stock because you think the price will go up, then set some kind of a target that would cause you to reevaluate the stock.
For example, set a target of a 25% increase in price.
If your stock's price rises by 25%, then take the time to reevaluate whether you still think it has significant appreciation potential.
For most stocks, my guess is that if they go up that much in a relatively short period, then it's hard to think that they'll keep going up significantly.
But once in a while, you'll find stocks that have a really large potential for a continued appreciation,
and you'll want to keep hanging on to those shares.
Also, you should set a target for reevaluating if the price falls.
But here you have to be careful with the target.
Remember the danger of that disposition effect.
The more the price falls, the harder it's actually going to be to make yourself sell the investment.
So my suggestion is to set the target at a smaller loss, say 10%.
Again, you're not committing to sell if the price falls 10%.
You're just going to reevaluate the investment at that point.
Some you'll actually want to sell, but others you'll end up putting on probation,
or if you're a fan of the old movie Animal House, like I am, double secret probation.
The idea with probation is that you continue to hold an investment if you really think the price will rebound.
But if the price drops some more so that the total decrease in price is, say, 15% below what you paid, then you'll sell it.
Now, I know that some successful investors set targets based on the gains and losses in the overall market,
rather than on their individual investments.
For example, some investors recommend that you sell off some of your winners when the overall market rises by 25%,
and buy investments that you've had your eye on whenever the market declines by about 10%.
The good thing about this strategy is that it imposes discipline on your buying and selling,
and for the most part, that's a good thing.
But relying on the overall market strikes me as a bit too much like trying to time the market, which as you know, I'm not a fan of.
I'd much rather consider investments on their own merits, but still use this idea of targets to impose some discipline on my selling.
I'd also like to have the flexibility to hang on to investments that go on impressive runs.
Again, the idea is that I want to be able to hold on to an Amazon or a Google during their heydays
as long as I think that their increase in value is coming from some legitimate source and not just speculation.
But in order to make this work, you have to be honest.
Do I really think this stock is a great company, or is it just wishful thinking?
Here's where it helps to have a spouse or a friend to bounce ideas off of and to defend your decisions to,
having someone to explain your decisions to with a skeptical ear is the best reality check that I know of.
Now let's move on to the next big reason why you'll want to sell, portfolio rebalancing.
In order to learn about portfolio rebalancing, we should first learn more about portfolio allocation.
That is, how you have your investments divided up across different investment categories.
So let's talk about portfolio allocation now, and then later we'll turn to rebalancing.
Given what we've been learning about in this course, you can probably guess that there are two dimensions
along which you'll want to think about portfolio allocation.
One dimension, of course, is the type of investments you want to hold.
In this course, we've learned about several big categories of investments, such as bonds, stocks, real estate, and commodities.
We've also learned about mutual funds and ETFs,
but these actually represent different ways to invest in each of these main categories of investments.
For example, you could hold 20% of your portfolio in bonds,
and this could be a mixture of bonds you hold directly and shares in bond mutual funds.
The second dimension to your allocation decision is geographic.
How much you want to invest in the U.S. or your home country market versus other markets around the world.
You could see this as a simple decision between the U.S. and the rest of the world,
or you can break down the geography in different ways.
For example, you could simply divide up the world regionally, Europe, Latin America, Asia Pacific,
Middle East, and Africa, for example.
Or you could divide up the rest of the world between foreign developed markets and emerging markets.
However you decide to divide up your allocation choices, it's helpful to represent the options in a table.
We'll let the rows of the table correspond to the different geographic options,
and the columns of the table represent the different instruments.
I'd put these columns in it that stand for the main categories of investments,
cash, bonds, stocks, real estate, commodities, and other investments.
Note that I've added two categories to the ones I mentioned a minute ago.
One is cash, and this could be in the form of a short-term bank deposit,
money market mutual fund, or money held in your brokerage account.
The other category is other investments, and that's simply a catch-all category.
For example, you still may want to invest in foreign currency or derivatives,
even after learning about their risks.
As far as geography goes, I'll keep it simple and put rows for the U.S.,
developed foreign markets, and emerging markets.
But you should build your table to represent the main options that are important to you.
If you want to be more precise about how you allocate your portfolio geographically,
go ahead and add the relevant rows.
Similarly, you may want to further break down the types of investments you want to represent in your allocation.
For example, you could break down the bonds category into government bonds and private bonds,
or you could break down the stocks category into large cap and small cap categories.
The key is to make your table as simple as you can,
but still reflect the allocation options that are important to you.
Once you have a table, now comes the hard part,
actually filling in those boxes with numbers that represent the share of your portfolio
you want to hold in each of these different assets.
How you decide to allocate your portfolio across these two dimensions depends on your preferences and beliefs,
things we've been talking about throughout this course.
What I'll do now is discuss how some key preferences and beliefs
affect how you want to divide up your investments across instruments and across countries.
Let's start with the most important preference, risk aversion.
Notice that I've set up the table so that the safer assets are on the upper left-hand side of the table.
So the safest asset you can invest in is cash held in the U.S.
The more risk averse you are, the larger the numbers you'll put in the upper left-hand corner of the table,
and the smaller the numbers will be as you move toward the lower right-hand side of the table.
Just keep in mind that there are plenty of very safe investments available
so that you don't have to put all your money into government bonds.
You can get the benefits of higher returns and diversification while still having a pretty safe portfolio.
Similarly, if you're risk averse, this may change your understanding of the broad categories of investments we have listed in the table.
Bonds to you may then only mean government bonds,
and stocks may only mean broad index mutual funds or high dividend large company stocks.
That's fine.
The idea isn't to force you to hold things you aren't comfortable with,
but simply to help you see where your savings are and help you manage that.
Now let me turn to your beliefs about the markets.
The one belief that makes the biggest difference in how you invest, of course, is how efficient you believe the markets are.
The more efficient you believe they are, the more of your portfolio you should be investing into broad indexes
that mimic the makeup of the entire financial market.
Now it's hard to find a single index that covers the entire market.
For example, a popular stock index is the S&P 500 index, but that only covers the largest 500 companies.
If you hold only that, then you'll be missing all the mid cap and small cap companies,
so you'll need to also buy indexes that hold those stocks.
When it comes to holding the market, another consideration is whether you want to include assets beyond stocks and bonds.
For example, in the U.S., the real estate market is about the same size as the bond market,
and each of these markets is actually larger in total value than the stock market.
So if you really want to mimic the breakdown of the U.S. market,
you need to spread a little over one-third of your savings into the bond and real estate markets
and a little over a quarter into the U.S. stock market.
And that doesn't even include other assets like commodities.
And don't forget that the U.S. market is only a part of the global market.
You may remember that the U.S. bond market makes up about a third of the value of the global bond market
and about a quarter of the value of the global equity market.
Good information on the value of the real estate market globally is hard to find,
but it's difficult to imagine that the U.S. market makes up much more than 10% to 20% of the value of the world's real estate.
Now, all this information about the actual makeup of the U.S. and global financial markets may make your head start to spin.
But the point I want you to remember is that the financial market is composed of a lot of different assets,
and a lot of it is held outside the U.S.
If you take market efficiency really seriously, then technically you want your portfolio allocation
to mimic the actual allocation of the entire global market.
Now, there are some good reasons, though, why you might not want to do that.
As we learned in the lecture on foreign assets, just because a foreign market is large,
that doesn't mean it's efficient or even safe for investing.
This is mainly true for emerging markets, though even established markets in Europe and Asia
have different practices and different degrees of efficiency.
So my best advice is not to try to mimic the actual allocations of assets in the world markets.
But as I look across the advice that's commonly given to savers,
I think that people are missing out on great opportunities by allocating too little of their savings to foreign assets.
There's tremendous growth potential in many emerging economies,
which translates into great growth opportunities in their financial markets also.
In addition, as these economies grow, it's inevitable that their markets will become better regulated,
more transparent, more representative of their economies, and more efficient.
So I think that it's a good idea to put up to about a third of your portfolio into foreign assets.
Of course, that's my opinion.
If this makes you uncomfortable, then decrease this share.
Maybe you don't want any foreign assets in your savings.
As long as it's your own decision, that's fine.
Now, if you're not such a strong believer in efficient markets,
then you can put more of your savings into individual assets
and actively manage mutual funds that you think will beat the market return.
My only caution is not to bite off more than you can chew.
The more of these assets you put in your portfolio, the more frequently you want to check them,
and the more of your time you'll need to spend looking for the next round of investment candidates.
This can be fun to a certain extent, but it can also become a huge chore.
And just like professional fund managers, you probably have a limited supply of really great investment ideas.
So my advice to all investors is to include at least some investments that you think will beat the market,
and at least some investments that track the market.
For example, even if you think the markets are very efficient,
you can still put 5-10% of your savings, if you wish, into a couple of attractive investments.
Or, if you're on the other end of the spectrum, you may find that putting, say,
15% of your portfolio in index funds that you don't have to worry about
will help you find the time to manage the other 85% of your portfolio that you're actively investing.
Finally, the last asset allocation issue to keep in mind is the relative return.
Although it's tempting to keep all your savings in ultra-safe investments, and you can certainly do that,
these investments tend to have very low average returns.
You may remember an earlier lecture when I mentioned that short-term government bonds, for example,
barely even keep up with inflation.
Most investment advisors, therefore, recommend that everyone invest a significant portion of their savings into stocks,
since their average returns have tended to be much higher than the returns on bonds over the long run.
For people who've just started their careers, I've seen recommended allocations of up to 85% stocks.
And even for people who are close to retirement, many experts still recommend allocations of up to 40% in stocks.
Now, I tend to agree that stocks deserve a big allocation in your portfolio,
even if you're close to retirement, for two reasons.
First, if you have enough time, then I think stocks will indeed deliver significantly higher returns than bonds over the long run.
And even if you're on the verge of retirement, chances are that you'll go on to live for quite a few years.
So you still have more time than you think.
The second reason that I think it's good to have a high allocation of stocks is that, as we've learned,
there are lots of safer options for stock investments.
For example, we've learned about high dividend stocks and preferred shares.
And we've learned about using covered calls to improve the return on stocks.
So there are ways to stay invested in stocks so that you can keep the chance for good capital gains,
but at the same time earn steady income.
Well, that's a long discussion about asset allocation,
but I hope that it helps you think through the choices that you need to make.
Now that we've learned about the allocation step, we can move on to learn about portfolio rebalancing.
Rebalancing is the second big reason why you'll want to sell assets.
Remember that the first reason to sell is because your investment falls in price
or otherwise fails to reform as you expect it to.
The rationale for rebalancing goes like this.
As time goes by, some of your investments will have great returns and really grow in value.
Other investments will grow a little and some will even lose value.
This means that after as little as time is one year,
the asset allocations that you spent all this time agonizing over are totally out of whack.
Let me show you what I mean.
Now, just for the sake of an example, let's suppose that you have $100,000 invested
and your preferred allocation is 50% U.S. stocks, 30% foreign stocks, and 20% U.S. government bonds.
So you have $50,000 in U.S. stocks, $30,000 in foreign stocks, and $20,000 in U.S. government bonds.
Well, let's say a year goes by, you look at the current values of your investments.
Let's suppose that U.S. stocks had a poor year and only returned 4%.
This means that your U.S. stocks increase in value to $52,000.
But foreign stocks had a great year, gaining a total of 20%, so they increase in value to $36,000.
And government bonds gained 5%, so they went up in value to $21,000.
Now, if you add up all the new values, your portfolio has increased in value to $109,000.
So your total return was 9%, which is actually pretty good.
But now, notice that the shares of each investment in your portfolio have changed.
Now your U.S. stocks account for $52,000 out of $109,000, which is only 47.7% of your portfolio.
The foreign stocks account for $36,000 out of $109,000, or 33.0% of the portfolio.
And the bonds make up the remaining 21,000 out of 109,000, or 19.3%.
So the higher return on the foreign stocks means that they now make up a larger share of your portfolio,
and the shares in your other investments have actually fallen.
Well, you might look at this and say, so what? That's not a very big change.
Well, that's true for one year, but what if this goes on for several years?
After three years of these same returns, and assuming no new investing into any of these assets,
the share of your portfolio in foreign stocks has grown to 39.5%,
and the share in U.S. stocks has shrunk to 42.8%.
Now it's starting to look like a much different portfolio than the one you started with.
And that's the problem.
If you don't go back occasionally and adjust your portfolio,
then the differences in returns will gradually reshape your portfolio into something you don't recognize.
Your portfolio could increase its sensitivity to assets you don't want much exposure to,
and it could become concentrated in a few assets.
Both of these situations could lead to nasty surprises.
For example, if you let your portfolio run wild, so to speak,
and you end up with a much larger share in foreign bonds,
then a foreign market crash can do much more damage to your portfolio than you expect.
The answer, of course, is to recheck your allocations at least once a year and rebalance your portfolio.
That means that you sell off parts of the investments that now take up a larger share of your portfolio than you like,
and use the money to buy more of the investments that have become underrepresented.
For example, after one year, if we wanted to preserve our original allocation of 50% in U.S. stocks,
30% in foreign stocks, and 20% in U.S. government bonds,
then we'd sell $3,300 of the foreign stocks,
invest $2,500 of it into U.S. stocks,
and the other $800 of it into U.S. government bonds.
Now, notice that portfolio rebalancing actually has a little bit of market timing to it.
When you rebalance your portfolio, you end up selling portions of the assets that have gained the most,
and buying shares of the assets that have had the lowest returns.
So if you're disciplined about rebalancing, then you don't have to feel as bad about giving up market timing.
Economists have found that portfolio rebalancing can add a few tenths of a percent to your investing
if you stick with it, and a few tenths of a percent can make a significant difference over the long haul.
Of course, your target allocation for your portfolio won't necessarily stay the same over time.
In fact, most experts recommend that you change your allocation significantly
as you get older and closer to your investing goals.
In particular, everyone should increase the share of their savings in low-risk assets,
like government bonds, as they get closer to needing the money that they've saved.
Experts disagree over exactly how much you should have allocated to bonds as you get older,
but most recommendations I've seen actually have people increase their bond holdings twice in their lives,
first when their kids get to college, and then again for retirement.
For example, the share of bonds goes up to 40% when college expenses start,
and then it falls back to around 25% or even less until people get close to retirement.
When you get close to retirement, the share goes back up above 40% to between 50% and 75%.
The rationale for doing this is quite sound, and I discussed it all the way back in my very first lecture.
You don't want to be in a position where you need to spend cash tomorrow,
but a market crash wipes out your savings today.
But as always, what looks good on paper is much harder to do in real life.
I think that most people who take charge of their investing do so because they want to earn high returns
and squeeze as much value as they can for as long as they can out of their investments.
So for many of us, myself included, it's really hard to think about investing over half my portfolio in bonds.
I don't want to give up my exciting high-yielding stocks for boring old government bonds.
Fortunately, though, I think there's a fairly painless way to do this,
and it works through what we've just talked about, portfolio rebalancing.
Each year, when it comes time to rebalance your portfolio,
this is your chance to cash out some of the gains you've made from your investments and put that cash into bonds.
You can think of it as a way to make sure that you hang onto the gains that your high-yielding investments have earned.
And you need to remind yourself that you're still invested in these high-yielding instruments,
so if they continue to do well, you'll get those gains too.
In fact, if it makes you feel better, you can tell yourself that professional gamblers often use the strategy
of taking some gains off the table as they win them.
See what I'm doing?
I'm appealing to my own emotions, a sense of self-esteem, to make it easier to do something that I know is good for me.
But I find it hard to do, so the bonds I buy from this strategy are more than just a responsible thing
I have to do to be grown up and prudent.
As the pile of bonds that I buy from this rebalancing grows,
I'm building a financial monument to my own clever investing.
Doesn't that sound great?
Well, in this lecture, we've really gotten into the financial planning issues that I mentioned all the way back in my first lecture.
If you're an active investor trying to beat the market, you need to set realistic targets for gains and losses,
and be sure to re-evaluate your investments when you hit those targets.
You also need to draw out an allocation table like I did and fill it in.
And you can't do it just once, either.
You need to map out your broad allocation between riskier investments and safe investments over time
so that you can keep sheltering more and more of your portfolio from sudden market drops.
And once you write down an allocation, don't treat it like it's written in stone.
As you learn more about how the markets work and about your own skills and preferences as an investor,
you can adjust your allocation goals.
Remember that there's no ideal portfolio out there.
Build one that suits your needs.
Finally, also remember that selling is always going to be tough,
so you need to set rules and follow them.
Setting targets and sticking with annual rebalancing will help.
And once in a while, you may even need to do a sales job on yourself
to make sure that you sell assets when you need to.
