During this course, we've learned about some of the most fundamental and important ideas
in investing, like the efficient markets hypothesis and the relationship between risk and return.
I don't think you're really ready to invest until you understand these ideas and make
up your own mind about where you stand on them.
In addition to understanding ideas, you also need to master some skills if you really want
to take charge of your own investing.
So in the final three lectures of the course, I'm going to introduce some essential skills
that will help you turn your investing ideas into concrete actions.
These skills really complement the ideas we've been learning, and they seriously enhance
your ability to evaluate investment choices and make financial plans.
In this lecture, we'll learn three skills that are essential to making good decisions
about investing, comparing returns across different investments, projecting the future
value of an investment, and estimating a reasonable price for an investment.
All three skills involve calculating and comparing numbers that describe your investments.
I believe that it's extremely important for you to learn how these calculations and comparisons
work.
First, you may want to do some of these calculations yourself, or need to do them yourself, in order
to make investing decisions.
But even if you have somebody else generate these numbers for you, you'll still want to
know where these numbers come from and what they mean.
That's why in this lecture, we're going to learn to use a few of the most useful tools
in investing, the time value of money tools.
The time value of money tools I'm going to introduce in this lecture include the timeline,
rate of return calculations, compounding, and discounting.
These four tools work together, first to help you picture, literally, picture an investment
or investing decision.
And then this picture, plus some handy formulas that we'll learn, help you find realistic
numbers that you can use in your investing decisions.
And best of all, these tools are actually pretty easy to learn.
They don't rely on complicated mathematics.
In fact, you probably learn much of the math that I'll use in this lecture in grade school.
Hmm.
Just imagine how different fifth grade would have been if your teacher would have said,
I'm going to teach you math that can make you rich someday.
I'm going to introduce the timeline, the time value of money tools by asking some simple
questions related to the three essential investing skills that I introduced a minute ago.
Now the first skill I mentioned was the ability to compare returns across investments.
In order to build up this skill, we have to start with a really basic question that every
investor wants to know the answer to.
What's the return on my investment?
Now to make this concrete, suppose I buy a share of stock for $50 and hold it for a while.
One day I check the price and see that it's gone up to $59.
In addition, the stock has also paid me some dividends that I put into a bank account.
The total value of the dividends is $3.25, including interest, on the same day that I
check the stock price.
So the total value of my investment when I check the price is $59 plus $3.25, which gives
us $62.25.
Now notice that I haven't specified the length of time that I've been holding the share
of stock.
I'm not concerned yet with the return per year, I just want to know how to calculate
the return I've earned so far.
When I ask this question, what's my return so far without really caring that much about
how long it's been, I'm asking what the holding period return is on my investment.
The holding period return, also simply called the periodic return, is the return that you
earn for holding an investment for one period where the period can be any length of time
you want.
As we'll see, this is a very important way of calculating and quoting the rate of return
on an investment.
The first step in calculating the periodic return on my investment is simply to visualize
what's going on.
So the first time value of money tool I will introduce is the timeline.
The timeline is one of those simple but surprisingly powerful tools that can help you organize
your thinking when you're faced with complex situations.
As its name suggests, the timeline is nothing more than a line that you draw to show the
amount and timing of income and expenditures.
It can also show you how much something is worth at a point in time.
What we do is draw a line, divide it up into units of time, years, months, days, whatever
time period you want to use.
We usually start the timeline at time zero, which we think of as now, or the start of
some investment project that we're considering.
Time one is one period from now, time two is two periods from now, and so on.
I usually number the periods below the timeline and write in the amount of money coming in
or going out above the timeline.
Now let me use the timeline to visualize this stock investment.
I'm assuming that I buy the stock at time zero and check the value of the stock and
the dividends at time one.
Again, the length of time between time zero and time one is completely arbitrary for now.
So here's what the investment looks like so far.
I have the value of 50 at time zero and the stock price of 59 and the dividend of 325
added together at time one.
Note that the total value is the value of the stock plus any dividends.
Since I want to be able to think about the general definition of the periodic rate of
return, let me redraw this investment using P for the price of the share and D for the
total value of the dividend.
I'll use subscripts to denote the time when I measure these prices and these other values.
So I buy the stock at price P zero and when I check the price of the stock at time one,
the price is P one.
Also the total value of the dividends that have been paid between time zero and time
one is D one.
Now I'll calculate the periodic return.
I take the total value of my investment at the end of the period, which is $62.25 and
subtract off what I paid for it, $50.
That gives me the dollar value of my periodic return, which is $12.25.
In general terms, using the P's and D's, the dollar value of the periodic return is
P one plus D one minus P zero.
If I group the P's together, I get P one minus P zero plus D one is my dollar return.
I like to write it this way because it shows that the periodic return on any investment
is the sum of two parts.
One part is the change in the price of the investment, which is called the capital gain.
The capital gain can be positive or negative and a negative change in price is often called
a capital loss.
The second part of the return is the income paid by the investment, which I'm calling
a dividend in this case.
On the example stock investment, the capital gain is $9 and the dividend is $3.25.
So again, the periodic return in terms of money is $9 plus $3.25 or $12.25.
Now we usually express returns as per cents, so I divide the dollar periodic return by
my starting price to convert it to a decimal.
The answer gives me my return as a percentage of what I paid for the investment.
So I take $12.25 divided by $50, which gives .245 or 24.5%.
So the fraction, which is given by the quantity P one minus P zero plus D one, that quantity
divided by P zero, gives me my return between now and time one.
This return is a periodic rate of return, since it's the return over a single period
of any arbitrary length.
The length of the period could be a year, a month, a decade, literally any length of
time you want it to be.
And in general, I can measure the return between any two points in time, call them t and t
plus one, by using the formula r sub t plus one is equal to the quantity P sub t plus
one minus P sub t plus D sub t plus one, that quantity divided by P sub t.
Notice that I use the t plus one subscript on r, the periodic return, to remind me that
that return is earned between time t and t plus one.
So if I plug the numbers from my example into this definition of the periodic return, the
calculation looks like this.
rp is equal to the quantity 59 minus 50 plus 325.
Take that quantity divided by 50 and I get .245 or 24.5% just like I found a minute ago.
The advantage of the periodic rate of return is that it's the correct way to measure a
return over any length of time.
All you need to know are the starting value and the ending value of the investment, including
the dividends or income, if any.
Now it may seem like periodic rates of return aren't very useful, but in fact they're used
all the time.
You can use periodic rates of return to calculate how much interest you've earned or how much
you owe during any period.
You may have noticed, for example, when you read your credit card statements, that your
credit card company calculates any interest you owe them by multiplying your balance by
a periodic rate of return.
For most credit cards, the company calculates your average daily balance and then multiplies
that by a daily periodic rate to get the daily interest you owe.
Then it multiplies this interest by the number of days in the billing cycle to get the total
interest that you owe.
The drawback of periodic rates is that it's hard to compare periodic rates of return to
each other unless the periods are exactly the same length.
For example, if I earn a periodic rate of return of 200%, it sounds great, if the period
is one year.
But what if the period is, say, 25 years?
Well, then it doesn't sound so amazing.
We'll come back to this problem of comparing returns in a bit.
First though, I'll ask a simpler question related to my periodic rate of return.
Remember that we found that the periodic rate of return was 24.5%.
Wow.
What will my investment be worth in the future if it keeps up this return?
This is something that most investors want to know about their investments, especially
when the investments are doing well.
Note also that this is the second skill that I mentioned at the start of the lecture.
Keep in mind that we want to know the future value of the investment, but we haven't specified
the length of each period, so we'll ask the question in terms of periods.
Don't worry, we'll bring in days, months, and years in a little bit.
For now, though, suppose we ask, what will this stock investment be worth five periods
from now, assuming that the periodic rate of return is 24.5%.
Well, we need to use another time value of money tool to answer that, and this tool is
called compounding.
Compounding is one of the basic ideas behind the time value of money.
You're probably already a little familiar with it if you've ever left some money sitting
in a bank account for a while.
Compounding describes the fact that if you leave money in an investment, the interest
earned during one period will start to earn its own interest in subsequent periods, and
so on.
To illustrate how compounding works, let's say you put $1 in a bank account today.
Then after one period, the account will be worth $1 plus R, where R is the periodic rate
of interest paid by the bank.
If you leave the money in the account for another period, then the bank will pay you
interest on the total amount in the account at the start of the period.
So at the end of the second period, your account contains the money you started the
period with, which again is $1 plus R, but the bank also pays you interest on that amount,
which is R times the quantity $1 plus R. You can, of course, simplify that to the quantity
$1 plus R squared.
This works for any number of periods, so that if you put $1 in the bank today and leave
it there N periods, then the value of the account at time N, that is, N periods from
now, is $1 plus R, that quantity raised to the N power dollars.
This is easy to visualize on the timeline.
Here the timeline shows that a dollar deposited in a bank at time zero will keep earning interest
and growing for as long as you leave it in the bank.
For example, if I put $100 in a bank deposit that earns a periodic return of 5%, then the
value of my deposit at the end of period 3 will be 100 times 1.05, that's 1 plus R there,
raised to the third power, 3 for the number of periods.
When I multiply all that together, I get $115.76.
This compounding calculation is called the future value calculation.
Future value is the value of an investment or a debt at a future date N periods from
now.
If I know the periodic rate of return on an investment, I can forecast what its future
value is by applying this compounding formula.
Formula says that FV of N is equal to PV times the quantity 1 plus RP raised to the N.
In this equation, the FV stands for future value at time N, that is, N periods from now.
PV stands for present value.
Present value, of course, is what something is worth now at time zero.
The RP is the periodic rate for whatever compounding period is used to calculate your returns.
Notice that we use periodic rates of return whenever we do compounding.
Very important to remember that.
Let's use the timeline to visualize the future value equation.
At time zero, we have some investment worth PV.
After N periods, the investment is worth FV, future value, which is equal to PV times
1 plus RP raised to the N.
Well now let's return to our original investment.
We wanted to know what our investment would be worth after a certain number of periods
if it kept up a certain rate of return.
We can answer our question by applying the future value formula.
Remember that the present value of the stock investment is $62.25 and the periodic rate
of return we're assuming is 24.5%.
Let's calculate a future value assuming that the investment keeps up this rate of return
for five more periods.
Then the future value equation becomes FV, our future value, is equal to 62.25 times
the quantity 1.245 raised to the fifth power, which gives us $186.20.
So this is what the stock investment will be worth after five more periods if it maintains
that 24.5% return per period.
Not too bad.
Well, that's all very nice, but most of us like to think of returns in terms of years.
So let's ask a question about our stock investment in these terms.
We'll use the same numbers as we started with, but now let's say you've held the stock for
three years.
What's your return per year if the stock price went up from $50 to $59 and you earned a total
of $3.25 in dividends in three years?
Well now we can visualize the stock investment a bit differently than before.
Instead of one period of unknown length, now we're assuming that you've held the stock
for three one-year periods.
So the picture on the timeline looks like this.
But notice that it's the same basic picture as we used to visualize the future value equation.
So we can use the future value equation to find our annual rate of return.
We know the present value of the investment, which is $50.
Remember that on the timeline, now is time zero, so I put the $50 present value at time
zero.
We also know the future value of the investment, which is $62.25.
We also know n, which is 3, for three years.
The thing we don't know and want to find out is rp.
Well, here's the equation.
This equation isn't hard to solve.
We have $62.25 is equal to $50 times the quantity 1 plus rp, that quantity raised to the third
power.
And with a little algebra, we find that rp is equal to .0758, or 7.85%.
This method works for fractions of years, too.
Suppose, for example, that I bought the stock in our example on October 1, 2011, and sold
it on July 31, 2013.
The length of that period is one year and nine months, or 1.75 years.
We can solve for the rp again using the future value formula as before.
Only instead of using 3 for the number of periods, I use 1.75 for the number of periods.
So now we have $62.25 equals 50 times the quantity 1 plus rp raised to 1.75.
When I solve for rp this time, I get that rp is equal to .1334, or 13.34%.
Now, since we're assuming that the length of the periods are measured in years, that
means that this rp is an annual rate.
But it's more than an annual rate.
It's the average annual rate, or better yet, the compound average annual rate.
The idea behind the average annual rate of return is that it's the rate of return that
you effectively earn on an investment each year, assuming that this return stays the
same and is compounded each year.
Many people also call this average annual rate of return an effective annual rate of
return, or the compound average rate of return.
Before I move on to use the average annual rate of return, let me show you the connection
between the periodic rate of return and the average annual rate.
The periodic rate and the average annual rate are simply two different ways of expressing
the same information about a return.
If the periodic rate and the average annual rate are really just different ways of looking
at the same thing, then you should be able to go back and forth between them.
To see that this is indeed true, let's take yet another look at the future value equation.
All I'm going to do is write the same future value equation in two ways.
First, let's pretend that the length of the periods in the future value equation is one
year.
That means that the periodic rate of return in the future value equation is an average
annual rate, and in fact, let's call it R sub AAR.
So we can write our future value equation as Fv equals PV times 1 plus R sub AAR raised
to the N. This means that this is the future value equation for an in-year long investment.
Now if we take that future value equation and divide both sides by PV, the present value,
we get Fv over PV equals 1 plus R sub AAR raised to the N.
So what, you ask?
Well, now let's write the same future value equation in a second way.
This time, we'll assume that the period length is just one period, but this one period is
N years long, so it covers the same amount of time as our previous future value equation.
The future value equation for a one period investment is simply Fv is equal to PV times
1 plus Rp, where Rp is the periodic rate of return for this one period.
When we divide both sides by PV this time, we get Fv over PV equals 1 plus Rp.
Now since the future value and the present value are the same in both equations, this
means that I can set the right hand sides of each equation equal to each other, so that
1 plus Rp equals 1 plus R sub AAR raised to the N.
This shows you how to convert back and forth between periodic rates of return and the equivalent
average annual rates of return.
All you need to remember is that in this equation, N is the length of the period measured in
years.
In other words, if Rp is the periodic rate for a month, then N equals one-twelfth since
one month is one-twelfth of one year, and if Rp is the periodic rate for one day or a daily
rate, then N equals one over 365.
For example, we saw that the average annual rate of return on our stock was 7.58%.
What kind of return would that be on a daily basis?
Well, we can use the formula I just showed you.
The R sub AAR, the average annual rate of return is 0.0758, and N equals one over 365.
When we put these numbers into the formula and solve, we get 1 plus Rp is equal to 1.0758
raised to the one over 365 power, which gives us Rp is equal to 0.0002 rounded to the nearest
10,000th.
I wanted to show you this formula because it's extremely important for being able to
compare rates of return between different investments.
Although some investments will tell you their average annual rate of return, mutual funds,
for example, will do that.
Many times you can't find that information directly and you'll have to calculate it yourself.
Here's an example that shows you what I mean.
Suppose you and a friend are comparing rates of return on your investments.
You say that you made a 15% return over two years, and your friend brags that he earned
23% over three years.
Well, who did better?
Well, these are two periodic rates where the periods are of different lengths, so you
can't tell just by comparing returns.
And don't just divide the return by the number of years.
That's a totally incorrect way of finding an average annual return, and it can lead
to big mistakes.
You have to use the formula I just showed you to convert the periodic returns to average
annual returns, and then compare the average annual returns to each other.
That's the only reliable way to compare returns on different investments.
So let's settle your argument over who's a better investor.
For your investment, rp equals 15%, and n equals 2, so the equation is 1.15, that's
1 plus rp, equals 1 plus r sub aar raised to the second power, which means that your
average annual return is 0.0724 or 7.24%.
For your friend, his equation is 1.23 equals 1 plus r aar raised to the third, which means
that his average annual rate of return is 0.0714 or 7.14%.
So you did just a teeny bit better.
Okay, so far we've used this example of a stock investment to learn several time value
of money tools.
Now I'll shift gears to a different example to introduce the final time value of money
tool for this lecture.
Suppose someone wants to sell you a bond that promises to pay you $10,000 six years from
today.
You know that the average annual rate of return on this bond is 4% per year. How much would
you be willing to pay for the bond now?
Ah, this question stands the compounding question on its head. Instead of trying to project
the future value of an investment, we're trying to find what something is worth today.
That's the third essential investing skill that I mentioned at the start of this lecture,
finding the right price for an investment.
Well to find this price, the first thing I can do is simply draw the payment schedule
on the timeline.
We can visualize the bond as a single payment of $10,000 at time six. So I know the future
value and the rate of return, but I don't know the present value.
Well, I can still use the future value formula, but I'll have to solve it out for the present
value this time.
That's not too hard though. I get that pv equals fv over 1 plus r raised to the n.
All we do to find the present value of an investment is to divide by the compounded
rate of return. We call this operation discounting because it shows that the present value is
going to be less than the future value of the investment for any positive rate of return.
As an important note, remember that the rate of return is the appropriate periodic rate.
We always use periodic rates when compounding and discounting.
Discounting is one of the most powerful tools in finance. You may remember from my very
first lecture that most financial assets are contracts that promise to give you payments
in the future in exchange for lending money today. Discounting gives us a way to find
the value of something that's promised to you in the future. In other words, discounting
the future payments from an investment is one of the standard ways that we use to find
the right price for an investment today. So in finance, we often say that the price of
any investment today should be equal to the sum of the present values, the discounted
values, of all its future payments. You may remember a statement like this from the lecture
on fundamentals-based stock pricing. According to the fundamentals-based view of stock prices,
the price of a stock should be equal to the present discounted value of all future dividends.
Well, let's return to the bond pricing example. To find its price, we can use the discounting
formula. The future value is the bond payment of $10,000. The rate of return is 4% and the
number of annual periods is 6 since the bond pays you 6 years from now. Then the price
you'd be willing to pay today is the present value of this $10,000 payment, which is given
by PV is equal to $10,000 divided by 1.04 raised to the sixth, which gives us $7,903
and 15 cents. What if someone wants to sell you a bond that makes two different payments
on two different future dates? Well, you can use the same basic approach. Find the present
value of each payment separately and then add the two present values together. The sum
will give you the total present value of that bond. Suppose, for example, that the bond we
just examined makes a second payment of $10,000 in another 6 years after the first payment,
or 12 years from now, in other words. How much is this two-payment bond worth if the
average annual rate on the bond is still 4%? Well, we can get out the timeline again and
show those payments. There's a payment of $10,000 at time 6, and then a second payment
of $10,000 at time 12. We know the present value of the first payment, that's $7,903
and 15 cents, and the present value of the second payment then is $10,000 divided by
1.04 raised to the 12th, which gives us $6,245.97. Then the sum of these payments is $14,150
and $49.12, which is the price you should be willing to pay. This example highlights
a very useful property of present values, their additive. That is, the present value
of a set of payments is always equal to the sum of the present values of each payment
calculated separately. So if I have an investment that makes 6 payments, its present value is
simply the sum of the present values of each individual payment.
Well, in this lecture, we've learned just about all the time value of money tools you'll
need to take charge of your financial planning and investing. More importantly, we've learned
how to combine these tools in ways that give us real investing skills. For example, one
of the main things we've learned is the right way to calculate returns and compare returns
across investments. That's a key skill because this information about returns isn't presented
in a uniform way in the financial markets. Also, we've learned to calculate future values,
and we've made a good start on present values as well. In the next lecture, we'll learn
how to put these time value of money tools to work to help us make financial planning
decisions.
