Well, it's hard to believe, but we've reached the final lecture in the course.
By now, I hope you feel ready to take control of your investments.
We've already learned about most of the essential investment opportunities and issues that
you should be aware of.
But there are still a few important issues and products that we need to cover, and most
importantly, we need to think about the big picture, or rather, your big picture.
In the past few lectures, we've been learning about financial planning, including when to
sell your investments.
I'm going to stick with this theme of financial planning and get into some of the practical
issues that you'll need to deal with as you turn your financial plan into financial reality.
The first practical issue I'll start with is tax-advantaged savings plans, IRAs, 401Ks,
and the like.
Although most people talk about their saving plans as if they're investments, I hear people
talk about putting their money into their 401Ks all the time, these saving plans are
simply a package that holds your actual investments.
But as we've seen before, the packaging is important too, especially since in this case,
the packaging has significant tax implications.
Over the years, Congress has created a number of tax-advantaged saving plans to encourage
saving, especially for retirement.
The proliferation of different plans means that there are special plans for people in
various economic situations, and depending on your employer and income, you may be able
to take advantage of more than one plan.
On the other hand, the confusion level has definitely risen over the years as new plans
have been introduced.
In an attempt to keep it simple, I'm going to draw one big distinction between the various
saving plans out there, and mostly lump the different saving plans into one of two categories.
That distinction is whether the contributions to the plan are taxed.
Most of the saving plans that you're probably familiar with have the feature that their
contributions to the plans are not taxed.
These plans include traditional IRAs and employment-related saving plans such as 401Ks, 403Bs for employees
of nonprofits, SIMPLs for employees of small companies, and CEPs for the self-employed.
These plans are commonly called tax-deferred saving plans, which refers to the fact that
you're deferring the income taxes on the contributions that you make.
You should keep in mind, however, that you still have to pay Social Security and Medicare
taxes on these contributions.
The idea behind tax-deferred saving plans is that it gives an incentive for people to
contribute more money to these plans as they're working, and the investments in these plans
will grow without being subject to income or capital gains taxes each year.
But eventually, you will owe taxes on these savings.
The withdrawals you make when you make them will be taxed as ordinary income.
This seems like a good idea because most people will face a lower tax rate after retirement
than they do now while they're working.
Remember that in our financial planning lecture, we learned that most people are trying to
plan to live on 70% of their pre-retirement income after retirement.
This drop in income is likely to mean that your withdrawals from the saving plan will
be taxed at a lower rate.
And though it's tempting to think that you might not withdraw any of the savings and
leave a big pot of money for your kids, keep in mind that the federal government has what
it terms mandatory withdrawals.
That is, once you reach the age of 70 and a half, the government assumes that you're
starting to withdraw money from your tax-deferred accounts, and it will charge you a minimum
amount of tax based on this assumption, even if you don't actually withdraw any money
from it.
Now the other big category of saving plans.
Tax your contributions, but don't tax the withdrawals.
The main example of this type of plan is the Roth IRA, which was introduced in 1998.
Employers are also allowed to offer so-called Roth 401K plans that are employer-sponsored
saving plans that carry the same tax treatment as the Roth IRA.
If you invest in a Roth IRA, you pay income taxes on the contributions, but not on the
withdrawals.
As long as the withdrawals have been held in the account long enough, and you're older
than 59 and a half.
Now many observers have correctly pointed out that if you leave your investments in the
accounts long enough, and your investments deliver at least an average positive return,
then you'll end up paying less tax on each dollar invested in a Roth IRA than you would
in a tax-deferred saving plan.
How much, of course, depends on a lot of assumptions, and it might not necessarily be that large
of a savings.
But because of the tax savings, many financial advisors urge people to put as much money
as they can into Roth IRAs.
Of course there are limits on the amount you can place in a Roth IRA each year, and this
amount is currently $5,000 per year, or $6,000 if you're age 50 or older.
In addition, if your income is too high, then you're not eligible to contribute to
a Roth IRA.
But since 2005, it's been possible for everyone with the traditional deferred saving plan
to move their savings from that plan into a Roth IRA if they choose.
But in order to do that, you have to pay income taxes on the accumulated savings in these
plans.
So if you're serious about making the conversion, you need to sit down with a financial planner
or your tax advisor and crunch some numbers.
This is definitely a decision that you'll want to get some outside help with.
Now the Roth versus tax-deferred comparison that we've just learned, it ignores one key
aspect of employee-sponsored saving plans, which is the possibility of matching contributions.
Suppose your choice between saving plans boils down to an employer-sponsored tax-deferred
401k plan versus saving money in a Roth IRA.
Now if your employer matches part of your 401k contribution, this can easily tip the
scales in favor of the tax-deferred saving plan.
Now the possibility of matching contributions leads me to the subject of your choices of
investments within an employer-sponsored saving plan.
Most employers contract with a few investment providers and give their employees a limited
set of choices for their tax-deferred investments.
It's generally not an awful choice.
Only I saw that the average number of investments offered in 401k plans was about two dozen,
but compared to the thousands of mutual funds and ETFs available, it's still fairly limited.
Most employers will offer a set of options that try to cover the range of risk preferences
out there, from very conservative to fairly aggressive, but they won't necessarily offer
a very broad range of assets beyond American stocks and bonds.
In addition, as I've mentioned before, most employers will also have a set of target date
funds available for people who just don't want to worry about how to invest their savings.
Hopefully, your employer will offer a decently diversified set of investment options.
By decently diversified, I'm hoping that it includes the following investments.
First, there should be some ultra-safe options, like a money market mutual fund, super safe
private bonds called guaranteed investment contracts, and some kind of government bond
fund.
There should also be at least one riskier fixed income investment available, such as
a corporate bond fund or a bond index fund.
The plan should also include a selection of U.S. stock mutual funds, including at least
one broad market index fund, like an S&P 500 index fund.
In addition, the plan should offer some actively managed mutual funds that really differ from
each other in terms of their investments.
And finally, there should be at least one international or global mutual fund option
available.
And all this is in addition to the target date funds that most companies have been making
available.
Hopefully, your 401k menu will be more diversified than that, and also give you some choices
between passively managed funds and actively managed funds.
But what should you do if your company's choices don't really deliver what you want
as an investor?
Well, in that case, you have to be more strategic.
The first step is to figure out how much you want to invest in total to meet your financial
goals.
You may remember that we learned about this process in the lecture on financial planning.
In my opinion, you should always take full advantage of your company's matching program
if it has one.
Even if the investment options aren't the best ones for you, think of the matching
contribution as extra return that you earn on these funds.
Then, if you still want to save more, you should open a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA
and fill in the gaps in your company's offerings by using one of these saving plans.
Please note, though, that the ideal amount or the total amount, rather, that you can
contribute to your IRA is $5,000 annually.
If you hit that limit, then you may want to go back to putting more money into your employer's
401k plan just to take advantage of the tax break.
Financial goals can save up to $16,500 per year through 401k or 403b plans before the
employer match, so you probably have more capacity for tax advantage saving than you
have money to save.
Remember, though, that there are income limits that you must satisfy in order to be able
to contribute to any kind of IRA.
If your income is higher than these limits, then your effective contribution limit is
$16,500 per year currently.
That's the maximum amount you can put in your 401k.
And you may well want to save more than that.
In this case, my advice is still to take advantage of the employer match, if any, as well as
any tax advantages you get through a 401k-type program.
But you will want to be more strategic about what to keep in your 401k and what not to.
Once again, the name of the game is to be smart about taxes.
For example, if you want to hold bonds as part of your savings, then you can hold tax
advantage bonds such as treasuries, tips, or municipal bonds in a taxable investment account.
Since most of the interest on these bonds isn't subject to federal income tax, you can hold
these bonds as part of your taxable savings without too much of a cost in terms of foregone
return.
Then you'll have the riskier, higher returning investments in your tax-deferred savings.
On the other hand, passively managed ETFs can also help in this situation.
If you hold a passive ETF for longer than one year in a taxable account, then any gains
are taxed as capital gains rather than as income when you sell the ETF.
Again, keep in mind that this only applies to passive ETFs.
If you hold mutual funds, then you'll have to pay annual capital gains taxes as well
as income tax on the dividends collected by the funds.
And all your contributions to taxable accounts are themselves taxable, so this puts these
funds at an automatic disadvantage to tax-deferred investments.
Another factor that you should consider if you're choosing whether to do some of your
savings through individual IRAs is behavioral economics.
One seemingly trivial advantage of company-sponsored programs that turns out to be important is
that they're automatic.
Even though IRAs and other individual investments that you make yourself can be more attractive
than your employer's program, the one big thing your employer can do is actually force
you to save.
Well, they can't actually force you to save, but once you enroll in the program, chances
are that you won't be quick to pull out of it.
So every pay period, money will be automatically put into your 401k investments.
And that consistency is worth a lot.
It's certainly worth a lot more than good intentions.
One problem that many people have with individual IRAs is that they intend to make an IRA contribution,
but they want to invest the whole year's contribution in a lump sum right before the
tax deadline for IRA contributions, which is generally April 15th.
But when it comes to April 15th, the money isn't there to put in the IRA.
So if you intend to do part of your saving through an individual saving plan, you really
need to make sure that you can commit to making those contributions.
One final issue with regard to your investment options within a 401k plan is what form the
company's matching contributions take.
In many companies, the matching contribution takes the form of stock in the company.
The idea behind this is to improve employees' incentives to work hard, as well as to keep
the cost of the matching contributions low for the company.
Since the company isn't obligated to match at all, it's hard to be too choosy about
the forms that these matching contributions take.
But if you stay with an employer for a long time, then these matching contributions can
really add up and your investments can become seriously over-weighted toward your employer's
stock.
This isn't just a theoretical issue.
When firms like Enron went bankrupt in the early 2000s, employees lost millions of dollars
in savings that took the form of company stock.
So if your matching contributions do take the form of company stock, you need to take
a look at the fine print of your company's saving program to see whether and under what
conditions you're allowed to trade in some of your shares in the company for shares in
the other investment options in the 401k plan.
And to the extent that you can, you need to periodically convert some of these shares
and invest in other assets so that your portfolio stays as diversified as possible.
This can be really hard to do if your company stock is rising fast.
But just remember the example of firms like Enron and realize that you need the insurance
that diversification provides.
You're already relying on the company for your income, right?
Finally, if you don't like the investment alternatives that your company provides, then
by all means, talk to someone in the Human Resources Department about it.
Companies do respond to employee concerns about the savings plans, as well as to the
government's mandates about the programs.
So it can't hurt to let the HR department know that you'd like to see more choices
of mutual funds or more diverse investments offered.
So the first practical set of decisions regards how to allocate your investments between all
the different savings plans that are available to you.
You'll need to take your list of desired investments, which hopefully you've been forming throughout
this course as you've learned about different investments, and compare your ideal list to
the actual options that are available to you through your employer's 401k or other tax
advantage saving program.
Make your best choices, keeping in mind that the tax advantages and potential matching
contributions of an employer-sponsored program can do a lot to offset a less than ideal set
of investment options.
And if you do find that you want to use individual IRAs or even taxable accounts to fill in
the gaps left by your employer's program, make sure that you can commit to the contributions.
You may want to look into whether you can arrange automatic withdrawals through your
bank or whether your employer offers supplemental saving programs that basically do the same
thing.
Once you get started investing, the next practical issue is to do routine maintenance on your
investments.
Seriously, think about it as having the same importance as getting your car's oil changed
on schedule.
Sure, you can probably live without doing it for quite a while, but if you make the
time and effort to do it regularly, you'll get much more performance and enjoyment out
of your investment, and you'll dramatically cut the risk of an unexpected breakdown, which
is always followed by an expensive overhaul.
The first step in this process is simply gathering together the information on all your investments
so you can see where you stand.
If you're like me, then you probably have multiple investments spread between 401Ks
with current and former employers, your spouse's 401Ks, your other tax-advantaged accounts
you manage yourself, your brokerage accounts, and of course, let's not forget any bank accounts
you're also holding as investments like long-term saving accounts or possibly even money market
deposit accounts.
Oh, and don't forget any real investments that you want to count like your home or other
property and any other possessions that you count as investments.
You probably know, roughly speaking, where you keep all the statements and about what
your investments are worth, but have you ever sat down and put all the information in one
place?
I know, you're thinking, what a great idea, but at the same time you're thinking, what
a hassle.
Actually, setting up a spreadsheet won't take all that long, and once you have it, you
can update it just once a year.
All I have in mind is a table that has a separate column for each investment you own, where
each specific mutual fund or individual security gets its own column, even if it's held as
part of a 401K or other plan.
Each row of the table is a year.
You can put in a new row in the table every year where you measure the value of all your
investments as of the end of the year.
You can do the updating as often as you like.
For example, most mutual funds will send you quarterly statements, but you only need to
do this update once a year, and it's best to do it as of the end of whatever tax year
you're using.
Since most of us use the calendar year for our tax year, you should put the value of
the investments as of December 31st.
And if you're feeling really ambitious, you could also add a worksheet that describes
exactly what each investment is and why you started investing in it.
You could also include information about what price you bought the investment at or what
your expected return is for the investment.
And for individual investments like stocks, you can put in the prices that will trigger
your reevaluation exercise that we learned about in the lecture on when to sell investments.
If you have all this information in one place, then you don't have to hunt around for all
this information when you really need it to make an investing decision.
It will also serve as a reminder to actually exercise that selling discipline that's so
important.
Of course, you don't need to go to all the effort of setting up a new spreadsheet if
you don't want to.
There are some great personal finance software packages out there that will do a lot of this
stuff automatically, and that can be a great way to go.
My point is that you really don't need all the bells and whistles and up to the nanosecond
updates on your investment values to be a successful investor.
All you really need to do is sit down and look over how your portfolio is doing at least
once a year.
You need to see the big picture and think about whether to make some adjustments.
As we learned in the lecture on knowing when to sell, one of the most important tasks you
should do is rebalance your portfolio, especially so you can gradually move your winnings into
safe bonds and lock in those gains that you made.
You'll also have all the information in front of you so you can ask whether you want to
make bigger changes to your portfolio.
For example, maybe when you start investing, you decide to stick close to home and invest
most of your saving into U.S. stocks and bonds.
But as you get experience in the markets, you realize that you want to shift your portfolio
more heavily into foreign assets.
Having all the information in front of you about what you have now will make this decision
much easier to visualize.
You can make decisions about exactly how much money you want to invest in foreign assets
and how much of your existing holdings you want to sell to get the cash you need.
Invest of all.
If you consolidate your investing information in one place, you'll be able to see your total
progress toward your financial goals.
Now, I realize that when markets go down, we don't necessarily want to know how our
investments did.
But being able to see the progress, whatever it is, is crucial for you as an investor.
If you're going to need to make adjustments to your financial plans, it's best to know
about them sooner rather than later.
Okay, so as you invest, bring in your portfolio for an annual checkup and tune up.
Eventually, though, it will be time to start spending the savings that you've accumulated.
And you may think that then the hard part of your job is over, and in some respects it
is.
When you get to retirement, for example, you don't have to worry about saving.
But the truth is, you still have to worry about investing.
In fact, many people think that once you retire, you face the most difficult and confusing
investment decisions of all.
That's because you need to find a way to make your savings stretch out over the rest of
your life, and you don't know how long that will be.
And the investment products that are commonly offered to retirees tend to be extremely difficult
to understand, so it's hard to know whether you're getting a good deal on them.
So let's spend a few minutes learning about your post-retirement investment strategy.
Now, the first thing to keep in mind is to plan to stay invested in the market.
By that, I mean that you should plan to keep a significant share, say, one quarter of your
portfolio invested in stocks, mutual funds, and other long-term investments.
That's because if you live to retirement age, you can generally look forward to a very long
retirement.
So think of the money that you leave invested in the market as your insurance policy against
outliving the rest of your savings.
As for the rest of your savings, you should have moved it into safe assets like government
bonds and tips by the time you retire.
So you shouldn't have to worry about a sudden crash and the prices of your investments.
But the question here is how to convert your holdings of bonds to cash so that you have
a steady income stream.
Well, there are fundamentally two options.
Option one is for you to manage that conversion yourself.
If you're invested in government bonds and tips, for example, you can set up bond ladders
that liquidate every month or every few months, providing a steady stream of cash.
With a little assistance from a financial planner, you can calculate exactly how much
you can liquidate each month depending on how many years you want your bonds to last
after you retire.
The other option is to buy an investment product that will dole out the money to you.
These products are called annuities, but they're generally very different from the annuities
that we learned about in the financial planning lecture.
The standard annuity product differs from a regular annuity in two ways.
First, the annuities that most retirees buy don't have a set ending date.
They go on until you die.
The second way that the typical annuity sold to a retiree is different is that it is a
variable annuity.
That is, the payment from the annuity will fluctuate depending on the returns on some
investment portfolio that the company offering the annuity invests in.
So when you buy a variable annuity, the company offering the product takes your lump sum payment
and invests it in some assets that the company hopes will earn a high return.
The company will guarantee you a minimum investment return, but it could also pay you a higher
return if its investments do well.
Well, it sounds like a great idea, right?
And it can be if the price is right.
Now, the company offering this product is taking on your mortality risk, just like an
insurance company does.
So it's little wonder that many of the firms offering these products are insurance companies.
The company is going to charge you for bearing and managing this risk.
In addition, the company is going to be investing the money you give them, just like a mutual
fund does.
And again, it'll build management fees into the price of this product.
And to the extent that it guarantees you a minimum payment on the annuity, the company
is also bearing the risk that its investment returns will be less than the returns that
is promising you.
So the net result is that the annual payments the annuity company offers you are going to
be a fairly small percentage of the total cost of the annuity.
For example, the payment you receive each year may be something like 4 or 5% of the cost
of the annuity.
I'm not saying that this is necessarily a bad deal because the annuity company is taking
on several risks, but I'm also saying that it isn't automatically a good one.
You need to be careful to investigate the details of the annuity and make sure that
you're not giving up excessive fees to the annuity company.
Remember that your alternative is to set up a ladder of tips or other government bonds
that collect some fraction of the total amount set aside for your retirement income.
You can compare how much you'd be able to collect from this do-it-yourself strategy
to the amount that an annuity company is offering to get some idea of whether it's really worth
it to have the annuity company take on the risks of managing your retirement income.
Again, just as in the case of the choice between Roth IRAs and tax-deferred IRAs, the annuity
decision is one where just about everyone could benefit from some professional advice.
Well, that about does it for the practical issues you need to consider for your investing.
We've learned about allocating your investments across all the tax-advantaged saving plans
so that you find the right place to hold all the great investments you've been learning
about in this course.
And we learned about how important it is to get all your investment information organized
into one place so that you can do an annual portfolio tune-up.
And finally, we tackled the big question of how to invest after you reach retirement.
We've demystified annuities and we've learned a simple do-it-yourself alternative that you
can use to manage your own retirement income or to do comparison shopping for annuities.
Wow, we've come a very long way in this course.
You may remember that my first lecture was about how to stop worrying and start investing.
Well, I hope that by now you've stopped worrying and are excited to start looking for the right
kinds of investment opportunities for you.
In this course, we've learned about the full range of products that I think all investors
should at least consider.
I hope I've changed your mind about a few investments that you thought were too dangerous
or too boring to consider before.
And I've also showed you a couple of attractive investments that I hope you weren't aware
of before.
More importantly, I hope I've convinced you that you can chart your own path to investing
success.
No matter what you believe about market efficiency, no matter how risk-averse you are, and no
matter how much or how little time you have to devote to investing, there are lots of
good investment options to suit your particular needs.
There's no need to ever just follow the crowd.
Do what's best for you.
In this course, we've learned a lot of dos and don'ts of investing.
I hope you remember them all, but let me leave you with two of the most important ones.
First, don't invest in anything that you're not comfortable with.
Hopefully, this course has raised your comfort level with many investments.
But if you're ever offered an investment that you don't understand or that doesn't
seem right, just remember that example of Warren Buffett and say no thanks.
Second, do keep saving and do keep investing, even if you haven't found your ideal investments
yet.
It's okay to take your time to look for great investments.
In fact, I encourage you to take your time.
But in the meantime, put your money to work in one of the many safe and flexible investments
like money market funds or tips that we've learned about in this course.
It's essential that you put time on your side by investing sooner rather than later and
making a long-term commitment to regular investing.
I hope that this course has made you eager to get your current investments organized
and to make plans for your future investments.
In other words, I hope that you really feel prepared now to find good investment opportunities
and take advantage of them.
And I hope you feel confident that you can use what you've learned in this course to
reach your financial goals.
Now, I'm going to stop lecturing and get out of your way so you can get out there and
do just that.
Good luck and happy investing.
