Welcome back to my favorite universe. We've spent several lectures talking about death
and destruction by virtue of black holes or meteor impacts and the like. Let's take a
pause from that and talk about life, what it is to be alive, and what influences around
us force us to take pause in our daily routine and ask what is our place in the universe.
When I think of influences that have forced me to take pause, being an astrophysicist,
I'm prone to select images of the cosmos that do this. But I'm not alone in this regard.
Many people, you don't have to be an astrophysicist, have been inspired, uplifted, have been influenced
in very positive ways by images that have been brought back from space, either by astronauts
themselves or by telescopes placed in orbit. And that forces us to ask the question, what
are the limits of our vision? And once we reach those limits, what influence does it
have back on our dreams? One of the first of these powerful photographs was one taken
of the Earth, not full Earth, taken back in the 1960s. It was not a full Earth, it's a
gibbous Earth, but Earth nonetheless. Earth seen from space enabled you to see clouds,
large scale weather patterns for the first time. People looked upon the continents of
the world and did not see political boundaries so carefully etched on globes and maps that
we buy and we learn about in civics class. The cosmic perspective is different from the
political perspective. And that had an impact. At around that time in the 1960s people viewed
us as spaceship Earth. Remember distinctly the introduction of that as a phrase into
common parlance, spaceship Earth. And before that image no one thought of us as that. Here
we are together, this fragile little world in orbit around the sun, like a spaceship.
This image was followed by another image that for me was equally as inspiring. This next
one was not taken by an astronaut, it was taken by an unmanned probe in orbit around
the moon. This Earth rise on the moon in all its black and white splendor. Black and white
pictures, you know they precede the color picture, so they give you a sense of history
sort of encoded in just the fact that it's in black and white. That is the lunar landscape
in the foreground, Earth in the background. On the moon, the moon has a sky, it has a
horizon. It's got Earth in the sky just the way from Earth we have the moon in the sky.
It's another world. The fact that Earth in our own mind was not the only world in town.
The moon was another world, the place that we might visit. And in fact shortly thereafter
Apollo 8 became the first astronauts to leave Earth orbit and venture to the moon. They
did not land on the moon, but they went in orbit around it and the act of going into
orbit afforded them the opportunity to watch Earth rise from the moon. And here a full
color image is in fact the most recognizable photograph ever taken. And it's known simply
as Earth rise. For me this image is that much more compelling, that much more emotionally
rich than the first image we just showed of Earth just from slightly high up. Because
now it being in color we see Earth is not just some featureless orb out there. In fact
it is richly blue. We're reminded that by contrast we're reminded that the surface
of the moon has no water. It's got no atmosphere. It's got no weather. It's got no clouds.
And there's Earth in the distance. This fragile marble. Almost a glow. This image
forced me to take pause. Not simply as an astrophysicist, but as a human being and as
a citizen of planet Earth. This march continued. In fact the title of this lecture is Onward
to the Edge. I don't know where the edge is, but we're moving onward toward it. The
act of moving onward means we pass these signposts. One of them was first leaving Earth. The
next one is hanging out on the moon. What's next? The planets. We haven't sent people
to the planets, but we sent our robotic emissaries. I'm okay with that because they can take photographs
just as good as an astronaut can. And beam them back. You don't even have to feed the
robot. You don't even have to bring the robot back. Very affordable way to do your exploring.
And in the 1970s, late 1970s, early 1980s, spacecraft that had been launched in the 1970s
finally reached their destinations. The Pioneer 10 and 11 space probes. Voyager 1 and 2 space
probes, especially Voyager, had close encounters with Jupiter, enabling you to see the rich
detail across Jupiter's surface. You thought Earth has weather. Jupiter's got weather. It's
got weather bands, turbulent eddies. It's got a storm system, the great red spot we call
it because it's a big red spot on Jupiter's surface. That's a turbulent storm that's been
raging for at least 300 years when it was discovered. 300 years ago, we passed by Saturn. Saturn
2 looks, we see the cloud cover on Saturn, the rich texture on the surface of these orbs.
All of a sudden, the planets were not just some other thing out there. They too became
worlds in our conscience. Now, up until then, we knew planets had satellites, sure, moons.
We knew that, but they were just little docks of light. You look through the eyepiece of
the telescope, it's a dot of light. When we went there, we found out that in fact all
the action was among the moons. The terrestrial action, Jupiter's moon Io, the closest moon
in orbit around Jupiter, has a volcano on it, an active volcano. In fact, it is the most
active volcano in the entire solar system. It's not on a planet, it's on a moon of Jupiter.
Another moon, Europa, moon of Jupiter. By the way, these moons had been discovered by
Galileo. Out of respect for his efforts in this regard, we call it a set of four moons,
the Galilean satellites of Jupiter. You look at Europa. Europa has a sheet of ice covering
its surface. You look there now, there's certain patterns of fractures on the ice. Look there
in a month, that pattern has changed, telling us that maybe there's liquid oceans beneath
the ice on its surface. These are worlds, maybe there's life there. These are no longer
abstractions of an astronomy textbook. They have become extensions of our backyard. They
have changed how we think about Earth simply by recognizing that we're not the only world
to think about. It may be, for example, that Venus, which has a runaway greenhouse effect,
is 900 degrees Fahrenheit on Venus. Hot enough to bake a pizza, a 16-inch pizza in nine seconds.
Something went wrong on Venus. We've got a greenhouse effect going on Earth, and we
got knobs returning, not knowing what the effect will be, the long-term effect. I don't
want Earth to look like Venus. Venus is a world, a world that I can now think about in relationship
back to Earth. These images of these planets force me once again to take pause at our place
in the cosmos, not only for me as an individual, but for Earth. Of course, given the scale
of the galaxy and of the universe itself, these are worlds unnumbered. In the 1990s,
another image came by, an image brought to us by the Hubble Space Telescope. The Hubble
Telescope, let me remind you, was the world's first orbiting observatory specializing in
visible light, ordinary light that our eyes are sensitive to. It's an ordinary telescope
that has been endowed with the capacity to do extraordinary things. Early, it had a bad
mirror. You might have remembered this from the news, the shape. We fixed that. We were
able to fix it because the Hubble Space Telescope was shuttle-launched. There's a problem, oh,
and then those sent up a second shuttle mission, retrieve it, fix it, put it back, and come
back down. Space, at its finest, actually, going up to repair something. It's like orbit
is your garage. That just felt good realizing that we could do that. It's a space-based
optical observatory. We put it out in space, lifted above the atmosphere of the Earth.
We've had optical telescopes for 400 years. Ever since Galileo made his telescope and
looked up with it, he didn't invent it, but he was the first to look up. That was 400
years ago. What could Hubble possibly do for us that we haven't already done here on Earth?
What it did for us is enabled us to see the universe without the turbulent effects of
Earth's atmosphere. As light comes from the distant depths of space, it travels in a
perfectly straight line. You get a sharp image. Here it is coming in. It hits the atmosphere?
Uh-oh. Variations in temperature and density force that light path to become refracted,
dispersed, smudged, smeared, and by the time you take a photograph of whatever that cosmic
thing was, it's a blur. Not a total blur, but small things are total blur. Big things,
okay, you can allow a little bit of blurring because the features are much larger than
the extent to which it's blurring your picture. But suppose you want to look at small features,
you're hosed. You know it's there, you just can't describe it. What Hubble enables us
to do is see the universe above the atmosphere where you don't have this blurring problem.
Hubble has sharp vision, high resolution. I can analogize this. This was a story described
to me. I happened to have 20-20 vision, so I found the story fascinating for someone
who has uncorrected vision. The person said they got glasses very late in life. She got
glasses very, and I said, well, what was the effect when you first put on a set of glasses
that she said, well, she knew intellectually that lawns had blades of grass, but never
actually saw blades of grass. In fact, it just looked like a carpet. You put on glasses,
they're blades of grass, collectively making a lawn. And so that if you denied the precision
of that vision, you are severely crippled in your capacity to theorize about the cosmos.
And so Hubble gives us that vision. Now, the Hubble Deep Field is the name of a single
photograph taken by that telescope, which for me is more profound than any picture from
the Apollo era. More so than spaceship Earth, Earthrise, even more so than the beautiful
and richly detailed images of the planets in our solar system. The Hubble Deep Field,
let me tell you what that is. First of all, if you want observing time on the Hubble telescope,
what you have to do is apply. You write up a proposal and you apply. And about anywhere
between two and 10 times, more requests for time are submitted than are allocated. So
it's oversubscribed. It's simply called. It's an oversubscribed telescope, as are most
good telescopes. Now, what do I say? I want to look at this object because I think it's
interesting for these reasons and you go on and on and on and on and on. And the committee
reviews, oh, we agree that's a good object given time. But suppose I've provided a proposal
to say, I want to pick a part of the sky completely randomly. And I want to blow 10 days of exposures
on that one spot on the sky and just see what comes up. It would be laughed out of the room
because there's so many other worthy proposals. People wanting to discover the nature of quasars
or black holes or the spectra of gas clouds in the universe. So what this took is something
called director's discretionary time. The director of every observatory, including the director
of the Hubble Telescope, has time that he or she can allocate on a whim. Doesn't have
to go through peer review. Doesn't have it yet. They can just assign it according to
their discretion. Maybe someone, if it's ground based, was clouded out on one of their observing
runs. And they have a special interest in that project. They give them some extra time
just so that maybe it's a student who needed the time for the thesis. That's typically
how the discretionary time gets allocated. This particular case, the director said, I'm
going to take 10 days consecutively of the observing time of this telescope. And I'm
going to select a completely random, but especially boring part of the night sky. How boring
is it? I don't want any bright stars there. I want it to be away from the plane of the
Milky Way galaxy because the plane is very thick with dust and gas and things that would
obscure your view. I want to pick a part in the sky where Earth doesn't get in the way
because Hubble Telescope is orbiting very close to the surface of the Earth. And as
Hubble Telescope orbits Earth, there are actually some directions it can look. Where
Earth, no matter where it is around the Earth, it can always look into that direction. So
you've found a spot continuously visible. Avoid clusters of galaxies that we already
know about because we won't be learning anything. Just find the most uninteresting part of the
sky you possibly can. And they did. It's a little swatch of sky near what happens to
be the Big Dipper in the northern cap. Here's the north pole of the Earth, the Big Dipper
on any given night is tracing circles around the north star. A continuously visible zone.
The Hubble Telescope found that one spot took 342 consecutive exposures of the identical
scene. You take all those exposures and then you add them together to make one image. Very
high quality image. The amount of time allocated to this photo was larger than any other observing
project ever granted by the Hubble Telescope. You know how much of the sky this image represents?
The field of view of the Hubble is not that large. It's not that large. And this particular
picture was one one hundredth the area of the full moon on the sky. One one hundredth the
area of the full moon. Now give you an idea of that. Take a penny. Take a penny and hold
it at arm's length and ask yourself how big is the size of Abe Lincoln's eyeball? That
is the size of the patch on the sky represented by the Hubble Deep Field. Let's take a look
at that image. Here it is. That is the Hubble Deep Field. One of the most boring parts of
the night sky. And what does it reveal? Thousands of galaxies. Practically every splotch of light
in that image is an entire galaxy not much unlike our own Milky Way. Bearing hundreds
of billions of stars each. Each. What's extraordinary about this image is given the
precision of Hubble's imagery. You can get close to the picture and look in on the galaxy.
I've seen pictures sort of like this before taken by ground based telescopes. And it's
got just as many got but they're just all smudges. They're just smudges. I look at it
and it's okay. You get a little closer to the smudge. It's just closer to a smudge. Here.
As I look real close, I can see structure. I see spiral arms. I see regions of extra
star formation. I see different colors. Some galaxies are larger. They're likely closer.
Other galaxies are smaller. They're likely farther away. Where does it get the colors?
Why are some galaxies blue? Some stars are blue. Those galaxies are highly represented
and that's species of star. How about the red galaxies? Some stars are red. Some stars
are white. We have red, white and blue and everything in between. Remember this is the
size of Abe Lincoln's eyeball on a penny held at arms distance projected on the background
sky. So this is not simply a picture of something flat. It is a being through the universe.
Looking at nearby things as well as objects that are the most distant, all compiled into
one image. The farthest known galaxy in all the catalogs is in this picture. The farthest
known galaxy in all the catalogs is in this picture. The farthest known galaxy in all
the catalogs is in this picture. It's a red dot. How did it turn red? Well there's this
expanding universe effect. We're in an expanding universe and light from galaxies, the wavelength
of the light in an expanding universe gets stretched. If you stretch light, you give
it lower and lower energy and red light has less energy than blue light. So if you start
out a blue galaxy and you're very far away in this expanding universe, receding quickly,
your blue color has become red. And so the farthest galaxy in this picture is actually
red. Let's see if we, right there. We zoomed in on a little piece of the Hubble Deep Field
and that little red thing in the center there. That galaxy, we see that not as it is but
as it once was, nearly 13 billion years ago. That galaxy is one of the first galaxies
known. Its light has been traveling for 13 billion years to reach us. And it represents a signpost
for what the universe was like in the distant past. Once again, you can see every other
smudge there is a galaxy and just to the right of our red smudge is, you see structure in
another spiral galaxy very distant. And what we can do is, we can extrapolate our view
into the Hubble Deep Field and say, suppose every patch of the sky looked like this. Then
how many galaxies are there? You know what you get? You get about 50 billion galaxies. So
if you add up, you say, okay, this, we got several thousand here and several thousand
here and you just keep doing that. You can do this statistical exercise, you get about 50 billion
galaxies. Well, let me reiterate the ground based telescopes, some much larger than the Hubble,
the Keck telescope in Hawaii, is 10 meters in diameter. The Hubble telescope, about two
and a half meters in diameter, it's much bigger. It's much bigger. It has much greater
collecting power. It can detect everything that Hubble detects, but it's not seeing the detail.
And without that detail, the images taken by ground based telescopes do not operate on my
imagination. They influence it only barely because like I said, if you just show me a picture
of smudges and tell me they're galaxies, okay. But if I can see into their soul, if I can
see what kind of galaxy it is, what color they are, what shape they take, and the knowledge
that each one of those galaxies, based on ours as a representative case, contains 100 billion
stars, 100 billion stars, that every point of light, except for one or two, every point
of light is one of these galaxies, I have to take pause. I get weepy thinking about that.
The sheer scale, size, and magnitude of the cosmos. Just panning across the image. And
as we pan, you see different galaxies go by. And I wonder, are they looking at us? Is there
life on those galaxies looking back at us, asking the same question? Once again, by analogy
to the planets, becoming from an abstract orbs that are out there to becoming real worlds,
the Hubble Deep Field, for me, turned galaxies from abstract things out there in the cosmos
into worlds. Once again, worlds unnumbered. Now this area of the sky, the Hubble Deep
Field, in a way, has been sanctified by the Hubble Telescope. And what I mean by that is,
people now take other kinds of telescopes and train them on that same spot on the sky.
To see if you can add information to it. Hubble Telescope is only an optical telescope.
It's looking in red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet light, and a little bit of
ultraviolet. Let's take other kinds of telescopes and point to that same area. Do you see anything
different? Combine the information. So the race was on to find out how many extra observations
we can add to it to create a total picture. A total picture. I've got an area, this same
area now, taken with the Chandra X-ray telescope. As Hubble was a famous astrophysicist of the
past, so too was Subrahmanian Chandra Sekar. A famous astrophysicist died recently as a
Nobel laureate. It's a telescope named in his honor. A telescope as grand as Hubble, but
specializing not in visible light, but in X-rays. Notice the scene looks very different.
That's good. That tells us that X-rays are looking at something different. In fact, black
holes, we learned in a previous lecture, the accretion disk that surrounds black holes and
neutron stars can give off X-rays. So what we're doing now is tracking, tracking the
presence of black holes. And I have no doubt that every one of these dots of light in this
image is a supermassive black hole in the center of a galaxy, dining happily on gas clouds that
have come too close. It tells us something different about that spot on the sky.
We've got a lot of unanswered questions. Do we have the right to extrapolate to the whole
cosmos what happened in this one little patch of the sky? Maybe the sight line through the
big dipper, maybe there's something bad or non-representative about that spot. So let's
take another spot, and we did that. In the diametrically opposite direction, the Hubble
Deep Field South. We don't expect it to look exactly the same because there's a different
direction on the sky, but it looks statistically the same. You have about the same number of
galaxies, about the same distribution of colors, about the same array of shapes and sizes. The
analysis bears that forward. So I ask, now we've looked at two spots, do we now have the right to
extrapolate to the whole sky? I'm extrapolating to the whole sky. I have no reason to believe that
this side of the universe is going to look fundamentally different from that side of the
universe. And we've got it in two directions. I think it'll be a waste of time to go to
every single postage stamp, plus it'll take a billion years to do that, given how small
this region is. So let's assume that. But questions still remain. This is such a beautiful view
to the edge of the cosmos. I'd ask, are the laws of physics the same? Everywhere? Through
all of time? In every nook and cranny? Are the laws of physics yet to be discovered that will
grant me greater insight into what's going on in this image? Just as our first views of the moon
was like, let's go there and then find out more about the moon. Our views back to Earth. We now
know more about Earth for having been in space to look back to Earth, and we did been on Earth
looking up. So now I'm looking out to the cosmos, to the edge of the cosmos, and I want to know
more about it. But occasionally I worry, are there enough laws of physics known to come to the
understanding that I seek? Planets around stars, among those unnumbered galaxies, do they have life?
They have life as that life intelligent as we define intelligence. And like I asked earlier, are they
looking through their telescopes at us? Is there a hobble deep field for their planet? And are we a
galaxy sitting on their photograph, and are they asking the same questions we are? Or are they just
looking for shelter, food, and sex? Like most life forms on Earth do most of the time? I don't know.
But I do know that this hobble deep field for me is a window, and I think of reaching out through this
window. And I've reached through it. Someone has actually turned it into a window spread out in three
directions. A colleague of mine, Ken Lanzetta, took the hobble deep field, and took all the galaxies,
which are spread through time and distance, and created a fly-through of the hobble deep field,
adding the dimension of distance to it, which makes it that much more compelling to me as an intellectual journey,
as a place to gaze upon and wonder, especially since that gaze is a gaze that takes you to the edge of the cosmos.
When you go out under the night sky and look up, what are you doing? You're stargazing.
But when I look through this window that is the hobble deep field, I galaxy gaze. I galaxy gaze through time.
And in so doing, I revel in the diversity of colors and forms and shapes and structural detail exhibited the objects of that photo.
And when I do this, the boundary between my knowledge of the cosmos and my ignorance calls to me.
And when I reach for the edge of the universe through the hobble deep field, I do so knowing that along some paths of cosmic discovery,
there are times when, at least for now, one must be content to love the questions themselves.
