Welcome back to my favorite universe. In this lecture nine, we're going to do something
special. I'm going to present to you what I'd like to call the greatest story ever told.
And in it, I have the privilege of synthesizing for you the greatest discoveries of physics,
of astrophysics, chemistry, and biology, and present to you a coherent story of the
cosmos from the earliest times right up to the present. We're not the first to have
wondered about cosmic evolution. Go back to Lucretius. He says here, the world has persisted
many a long year, having once been set going in the appropriate motions from these everything
else follows. How prescient that quote was, given how long ago it was written, to realize
that the universe is a describable place and that the universe, using the methods and tools
of science, allows us to determine how it was born, how it evolved, and where it will
go in the future. Before I begin this story, the greatest story ever told, I want to first
describe a famous equation. An equation, I think it's the first equation we all learn
in elementary school. It's E equals MC squared. We learn that equation before we even know
what it means. We know it has something to do with Einstein. Well, it has a lot to do
with the birth of the universe. Let me remind you, if you once knew, and tell you for the
first time, if you've never known, that if you have particles take a proton, for example,
you can actually ask the question, what is the energy equivalent of the mass of that
proton? That's a perfectly legitimate question. And you know how much energy is contained in
that proton? Plug it into that equation and find out. Plug in the mass on one side, multiply
it by the speed of light square. That's the C. And out on the other side, you find out
if you converted that proton into energy, that's how much energy you're going to get.
It works in the reverse. If you have a concentration of energy and you want to ask, what kinds
of particles can I make with this energy? Go look up on the table and find out which
particle has about the same energy equivalent as the energy I have. Then I can make that
particle. And so this two-way street that exists between matter and energy as described
by equals mc squared is rampant in the early universe. It's rampant in particle accelerators.
You just hardly ever see it at home or in the street or on the sidewalk or in the park.
So let us begin now armed with that important piece of physics. Where else shall we begin
but in the beginning? How long ago, some 12 to 14 billion years ago, all the space and
all the matter and all the energy of the known universe was contained in a volume less than
one trillionth the size of the point of a pin, the point of a pin. And that size is
about the size of an atom. So imagine the entire cosmos compressed down to something
that small. Conditions were so hot that the basic forces of nature that collectively describe
the universe, they were unified. They were one. The unification of forces is not a new
concept. In the 1800s electricity was known as a force as to was magnetism. Until later
in the 19th century it was revealed that in fact electricity magnetism were two sides
of the same coin. There was a theoretical formalism that enabled you to look at those
two forces as the same thing manifested in different ways just depending on the circumstance.
That was the first time two forces were unified. Electricity magnetism becoming electromagnetism.
That's an example of a unified force. We have reason to believe that all the known forces
of nature were unified in these early times in the cosmos. Now for reasons unknown this
pinpoint cosmos began to expand rapidly. When the universe was a rather warm million trillion
trillion degrees and a rather young one ten million trillion trillion trillion of a second
old before which all of our theories break down and we have no clue what was possibly
happening in the universe before that time. Black holes were spontaneously forming and
disappearing out of the energy contained in that unified field. The energy density was
so high that it wasn't just making particles switching back and forth on this two way street
between matter and energy. It was making entire black holes and black holes as you know from
an earlier lecture. As you know black holes as described by Einstein are the curvature
space and time. The fabric of the universe is reacting to the presence of black holes
and if you have black holes forming and unforming spontaneously in the early universe all contained
in a small volume the structure of space and time becomes severely curved and it gurgles
into a spongy foam like structure. Laws of quantum mechanics tell us this and we have
a term for it. We call it quantum foam. The quantum foam. Now during that period a fascinating
thing was happening. The subject of quantum mechanics discovered and invented in the 1920s
to describe matter on its smallest scales and general relativity the modern theory of
gravity put forth by Einstein describing the nature of the entire cosmos. Those two theories
do not intersect. They operate on completely different domains of the cosmos. One is the
smallest one is the largest and we're worried about that because you can't look at one theory
and infer the existence of the other yet they both accurately describe the cosmos. We worry
about it because how can two things that don't know about each other be simultaneously true
in the same universe? So we're working on that but what we know is that there's back
in the early times of the cosmos the whole universe was small. So we have this kind of
shotgun wedding between quantum mechanics and general relativity. They can't avoid looking
like each other because I got the whole universe down in the size of an atom. I got an atom
containing the entire universe. Quantum mechanics and gravity were one. They had to be. There's
nothing else they could have been but one under those conditions. And as the universe
continued to expand and cool from those times gravity splits away from the other forces
of nature. Gravity splits away. As forces split from each other they begin to occupy
the domains in which we have come to know that they matter. So gravity splits away.
Gravity starts looking like a force unto itself with no identity shared with the other forces.
And that's fine. Let's keep going. Quickly after that the strong nuclear force and the
electro-weak force split from one another. What happened then? We believe that was accompanied
by an enormous release of stored energy. Energy that was stored in the merged fields. You
split these fields, energy gets released. So much energy that it forced a 30 power of
10 expansion on the size of the universe. A rapid expansion. In fact we call that the
epic of inflation. This release of stored energy is not unlike the latent heat of freezing
that you may have remembered from your chemistry class. It's very much like that. Where if
you have water and you put it in the freezer and you watch the temperature of the water
drop, there's a point where the temperature stops dropping because it's now converting
itself into ice. Then when it's completely ice the temperature drops again. What was
going on in there? You try to take heat out of the system and how come the temperature
didn't continue to drop throughout the time it was becoming ice? Because there's a latent
heat in the liquid form of that water that is not there in the solid form of that water.
That latent heat got released into the environment. No making ice cubes doesn't make the universe
expand but when you're splitting forces in the early universe you have the kind of energy
that does. That does impose itself on the structure of the cosmos. This rapid expansion
stretched the cosmos. Much of the variation in density and structure and form of the universe,
if you stretch it by 30 powers of 10, whatever might have been a heavy fluctuation in the
early days becomes softened. We measured this. We measured this. That smoothing of the universe
is now down to one part in 100,000. How smooth is that? Imagine a two mile wide lake and
you put a ripple in that lake. Ripple's in the lake. How big should the ripple be compared
to the size of the lake? The ripple be an inch tall, an inch, a two mile wide lake. That's
a fluctuation of one in 100,000. We'll get back to those fluctuations but it turns out
to be significant because it's in those fluctuations where ultimately matter once it finally forms
will coalesce. When we look at the large scale structure of the universe and ask where are
all the galaxies, we're going to find those galaxies where those ripples were. The imprint
of what the latest structure of the cosmos will be is being shaped in this time. Continuing
onward with now what is laboratory confirmed physics rather than the theoretical speculation
that has come before this. The universe was hot enough for photons, now particles of light,
photons, particles of light to spontaneously convert their energy into matter, antimatter
pairs. In fact, light loves to do that when it has enough energy. What are antimatter,
matter, antimatter pairs? It'll make a proton and an antiproton. It'll make a neutron and
an antineutron. Pick your particle, it'll make the matter, antimatter pairs. By the
way, antimatter is real. It was all over the early universe. We make it in particle accelerators.
It's not just an invention of science fiction. It is real. It's just not familiar in every
day life. Not often you have an encounter with antimatter. If you did it would be your
last encounter. So this interplay between the photon that has so much energy can start
spawning particles and the particles, you have matter and antimatter pairs, you know what
happens if they get together, they form the photon again. They annihilate. So we have a
two-way street going back and forth. It's a soup, a matter, antimatter, photon soup.
Once again, invoking E equals MC squared to make that happen. For reasons unknown, the
symmetry between matter and antimatter in these conversions was broken. Broken. This is profound.
We don't know why that symmetry was broken, but it was broken. And what that meant was
one out of a billion, one out of a billion photons that would normally convert itself
into a pair may just a matter particle without the antimatter counterpart to broken symmetry.
So in other words, for every hundred billion, excuse me, for every billion matter antimatter
particles on this two-way street, there's one matter particle that has no mate. The symmetry
was broken. As the universe continued to cool, the matter or antimatter got together. It's
like a square dance. You match it, you pair up with people. And if you're the odd one
out, everyone else is paired up and you're left over. You're left over. These matter
antimatter pairs made photons. The photons continued to cool. They dropped below the
energy level to make particles. So we just froze out some photons from what was formerly
a two-way street, got rid of the hundred billion paired matter, antimatter particles. And what
are you left with in the end? You're left with a matter particle and a hundred billion
photons, excuse me, a billion photons. And it's these matter particles that are responsible
for all the structure of matter that we know of in the cosmos, the stars, the galaxies,
and the like. Now these forces that spawned seem to have come out of nothing in the early
universe. In modern day, they reveal this force, separate forces, having started as
one in the early universe. There's the strong force already mentioned. That force binds
particles in the nucleus of the atom. Protons, they have positive charges and they're sitting
next to each other in atomic nuclei. How's that even possible? Like charges are supposed
to repel. In fact, they do repel. Unless they get close enough, the strong force takes
over. That's why we call it a strong force. It's stronger than their tendency to want
to repel each other. Strong force keeps nuclei together. The weak nuclear force is responsible
for the decay of atomic nuclei. There's a third force, electromagnetism. Like I said
back in the 1900s, they were two separate forces, where they're now one. One force even
in our own lives. Electromagnetism is revealed in the, that which keeps matter together, matter.
The bonding of atoms, human flesh, wood, carpet, it doesn't matter. Stuff that's in our everyday
lives that's bound together by electromagnetic forces. And the fourth of those, the one that
has the largest range, the one that has the greatest impact on the events of the cosmos
is gravity. So while the energy of the photon continued to drop, because the universe is
expanding and cooling, no longer can the photon make particles. Not possible anymore.
So, gone is the era where we're manufacturing particles out of the energy of the universe.
It stops. It stops. It'll still happen, but in very restricted places, like the centers
of stars. So we move on. 300,000 years after the break,
the big bang. Universe continues to cool. Right now, we went from those very high temperatures.
The temperature now is about 2000, 3000 degrees Kelvin. Up until then, protons and neutrons
had combined and made the lightest elements on the periodic table. They made hydrogen,
helium, and even lithium. But the electrons were free to roam. It was not cool enough
yet for an electron to settle down into the atom. So we had nuclei flying around and protons
flying, and electrons flying around. Turns out, light likes electrons. If an electron
sees a photon of light, it'll bat it back and forth. They interact with each other.
So they scatter the light. So light did not have a free trip through the universe. It
was kind of like a random walk, like a pinball moving through a pinball machine. So before
300,000 years, the universe was opaque. Our telescopes today cannot see through that wall
of light, like the frosted glass in a bathroom window. But at 300,000 years, the temperature
dropped to a couple of thousand degrees. That's cool enough for electrons to be bound to the
atoms. The universe becomes transparent. And all of the photons left over from that period
are still in the universe. But as the universe has expanded, they have continued to cool.
What then was a temperature represented as 2,000 or 3,000 degrees? The universe is now
a thousand times bigger than it was back then. And it's a linear relationship between the
two. Right now, the temperature of the universe is 3,000, is 3 degrees. We went from 3,000
to 3 degrees Kelvin. That's what it is today. That's the famous microwave background. Because
a 2,000 degree object actually radiates infrared and visible light. You can see that. But if
it's 3 degrees, it's not visible to the human eye. But it is to a microwave receiver. And
it's everywhere. So we call it the cosmic microwave background. Now over the first few
billion years of the cosmos, now that we've got matter ready to do something interesting,
electrons are bound to the atoms, we're ready to start building the cosmos. And in those
first few billion years, galaxies were manufactured. The Milky Way was one of them. Our Milky Way
was one of them. How many galaxies were made? Somewhere between 50 and 100 billion galaxies.
Each containing up to 100 billion stars. Each of those stars undergoing thermonuclear fusion
in their cores. There are stars that with more than about 10 times the mass of the sun,
they're very special in the evolution of the universe. Because they have enough mass to
create enough pressure, to create enough temperature to turn their cores into an element factory.
An element factory. They manufacture dozens of elements over their lifetime, beyond the
birth elements from the Big Bang, beyond hydrogen and helium and the little bit of lithium. These
stars make the elements that we are composed of. They make the carbon and the nitrogen
and the oxygen and the iron. They undergo thermonuclear fusion to do that. Thermo uses
heat. Nuclear, what are you doing with the nucleus? Fusion, you're bringing them together.
The anatomy of that word. Actually, so what if the star just made the elements? They're
no good inside the star. We got to get them out of the star somehow. Turns out those stars
explode. They blow their guts to smithereens in the galaxy. At the end of their lives, that's
how they die. They're visible. We see them. We call them supernovae. So fortunately, their
chemical enrichment is now returned. That return was manufactured there for the first
time and is now distributed across the galaxy. In fact, the universe might view it as pollution.
But since we're made of the stuff, I think of it as enrichment. Now after 7 or 8 billion
years of this enrichment in every galaxy, but in particular the Milky Way galaxy, an
undistinguished star, the sun, was born in an undistinguished region, the Orion arm, of
an undistinguished galaxy, the Milky Way, in an undistinguished part of the universe,
the Virgo supercluster of galaxies. I like to think of that as your cosmic address. It's
what you put on an envelope if you wanted to mail something to another, mail a letter to
someone else in another galaxy, in another part of the universe. The gas cloud that made
the sun had a big enough supply of heavy elements that spawned a system of planets, 10,000
asteroids, trillions of comets. While most of the universe is hydrogen and helium, everything
else on the periodic table is what you really need to flesh out the rest of what the universe
is about. You don't make planets with just hydrogen and helium. You need the rest of
the ingredients as well. Make rocks and people and oceans. The only part of the Earth? Earth
spent 600 million years suffering the bombardment of debris left over from the formation of the
solar system. Every time an asteroid hits, it heats up the area where it hits. If you are
ambitious, you get destroyed. If you're hit often enough, you raise the temperature of the
entire surface of the Earth until you're basically sterilized. For 600 million years in the early
history of the Earth, nothing could form, even though it had the native ingredients in it. It
had the water. It had the organic molecules. It couldn't make anything. It was too hot. The
vacuuming subsides. There's not an unlimited amount of debris left over. 600 million years of
it. That's enough. It begins to subside. Earth's surface cools. We start making complex
molecules. Complex molecules. What else is important to life? Liquid water is important to
life. Where did Earth form? No, it didn't form too close to the Sun. Otherwise, all our water
would have evaporated. It didn't form too far away from the Sun. Otherwise, all the water
would have frozen. There's a zone, a nice habitable zone, where Earth was formed. So now we have
the right temperature. Think of that as the Goldilocks effect. We've got the right ingredients
and the temperature has subsided after the end of the period of bombardment so that now
we can do some interesting things. Within the chemically rich liquid that was our oceans, by
mechanisms still to be learned in the community of biologists, life began from organic
matter. Organic non-life became organic life. That time took about 200 million years. From
the end of the period of heavy bombardment to the point of our oldest fossils, 3.8 billion
years ago. So we start out with a 4.6 billion year old Earth. 600 million years goes by.
We're at 4 billion years. Heavy bombardment ends. 200 million years go by. Life begins. This
early life, it was single cell organisms. They weren't doing calculus. They had very simple
lives. There was no oxygen so they were anaerobic. They thrived in the carbon dioxide rich atmosphere
of the Earth. As a waste product, they released oxygen. In fact, they ultimately died in their
own excrement, this oxygen. Oxygen is very bad for you if you are anaerobic, but it's very
good if you are aerobic and enabled a whole generation, a whole population of the Earth
to take over that was full of aerobic creatures thriving on the oxygen made by the previous
generations of single cell organisms. Oxygen in the oceans as well as in the atmosphere.
That oxygen not only enables aerobic life. That's O2 in the atmosphere. There's another
version of oxygen, O3. We call that ozone. That was formed as well. It gets to rise up in the
atmosphere and protect us from the ultraviolet radiation from the sun. Ultraviolet photons
have enough energy to break apart molecules. It's hostile to life. It's hostile to the stability
of life. So we simultaneously get air to breathe and oxygen metabolism and protection from
solar UV radiation. We owe the remarkable diversity of life on Earth to something profound.
That among all the elements that are in us, there's one that's quite special and it's the
element carbon. Carbon is plentiful in the universe. Made in manufacturing in these crucibles
and the centers of stars. Spread into the galaxy. Carbon, you can make more kinds of
molecules with carbon than you can with all other elements combined. It is a fertile element
with which to make your experiments on life. And you look at the diversity of life on Earth
and you say there's only one element that could have been responsible for that and that's carbon.
We are carbon based life. But life is fragile. Life is fragile. Not as often as it once did
but it still happens. Asteroids come and slam into Earth. Completely changing the ecosystem
if only briefly. 65 million years ago the 10 kilometer asteroid came and slammed into the tip
of what is now Mexico, the Yucatan Peninsula. Made at 200 kilometer diameter crater. If you were
there, you were vaporized. If you're on the other side of the Earth, the trillions of
tons of Earth's crust that was thrust into the stratosphere, cloaked the Earth, blocked
sunlight, took out the base of the food chain. If you didn't die from the impact, you died
because you starved. 70% of all species of life on Earth's surface went extinct at that
moment, including the classical dinosaurs that we've come to know and love and respect from
afar, like T-Rex. Some animals survived. There was a tree shrew running up and down trees
and underfoot trying to not get eaten by T-Rex. That spawned all the mammals that followed
because tree shrews survived that collision. It pried open a whole ecological niche that
was not previously available to the tree shrew. They didn't have T-Rex chasing after them,
turning them into appetizers. And so, one branch of these mammals became primates. One
branch of those primates became homo sapiens, these big brain things that have what we call
intelligence. And that intelligence enabled homo sapiens to invent methods and tools of
science, to invent astrophysicists, and to deduce the origin and evolution of the universe.
Yes, the universe had a beginning. Yes, the universe continues to evolve. And yes, every
one of our body's atoms is traceable to the Big Bang and to the thermonuclear fusion that
went on in the center of a high mass star that gave its life to us. We're not simply in the
universe. We are part of it. We are born from it. One might even say that we've been empowered
by the universe to figure itself out. And we've only just begun.
