Welcome back to this, the final installment of my favorite universe, and I have saved
for last the subject that occupies a disproportionate fraction of my intellectual energy, and I
know from experience, my empirical encounters with people of the public, that it also occupies
your mind as well. And that subject is, of course, the search for life in the universe.
No question looms greater in the minds of the public than that question. Are we alone?
Now it turns out we don't know the answer to that question yet, but we have enough information
to make for a formal discussion about how to think about that question and how to think
about the answer. Now this all began with a renewed fervor just about 10 years ago,
early 1990s that was, where people, we started discovering planets beyond the planets of
our solar system. And these planets, clearly if you're going to imagine life somewhere
other than Earth, you imagine it on a planet, not somehow living inside a star. So the discovery
of planets fueled that curiosity, and the act of having found planets now that number
rising through 100, more planets known outside of our solar system than within it, that the
prospect of finding life dramatically increased just by the fact of this knowledge. Now generally
it's bad practice to make sweeping generalizations because life on Earth is our only example
of life anywhere. And so to presume that just because of what we know on Earth, and Earth
is teeming, and no matter where you look on Earth, no matter under what rock you turn
there's life there, to presume that such fertile circumstances exist elsewhere in the universe
may be a little strong. Maybe. Until you realize how big the universe is, that even if life
was something rare, all you need is a big enough sample of occurrences. All you need
are enough stars and enough planets that no matter how rare this thing is we call life
was on Earth, you figure it's likely to have formed some place else. And these numbers,
the sun's got a bunch of planets of its own. Eight, nine, ten planets, it's got a lot of
planets. The sun is an ordinary star. There's 100 billion stars in our galaxy, 100 billion
galaxies in the universe. A sextillion stars. More stars in the universe than grains of
sand in all beaches on Earth. So no matter how rare you want to think life is, you would
be inexcusably bigheaded, inexcusably egocentric to presume that we are alone in the cosmos.
The sort of anthropic assumption is have misled people for generations. Anthropic assumptions
that somehow we are special, that we are privileged, we have the centralized view on the cosmos.
That is reversed the progress of science every time somebody comes up with such an idea.
And right now we're a little more mature in this line of investigation and what we do
is invoke the Copernican principle. The Copernican principle named after famous, important Polish
astronomer Nikolai Copernicus, born in the 1400s, did his greatest work in the early 1500s,
culminating in the publication of a book, The Revolution of Us. And what that book did
was put the sun back in the center of the known universe. Until then, Earth had been
in the center. Earth, and there it had been in the hearts and minds of people ever since
3rd century BC, when an early suggestion by the Greek philosopher Aristarchus was put forth
that perhaps the sun was in the middle of the known universe. It never caught on because
it assumed that if the sun is in the middle that we are moving around the sun and if we're
moving around the sun, we should see stars swinging back and forth because of a change in
angle of view on them and nobody saw that. Plus, it didn't feel like you were moving,
so why should we believe the guy? So the geocentric view caught on, worked its way into Aristotle's
teachings and Ptolemy's teachings and the teachings of the Catholic Church where it
became codified as law. It was generally accepted, and of course it was also basically self-evident,
just looking around. Of course, it looked like everything was going around the Earth. It was
not only self-evident, but surely God would have it no other way. We, being Earth dwellers and
being special creatures in the mind of God, surely we occupied a special place in the cosmos.
But what we came to learn by the work of Copernicus was that, no, that is not the world. That's
not how the world is assembled. The sun is in the middle, and in fact we're just another planet.
We have no greater rank than other planets out there in the solar system. So we're not special.
The sun is not special. We just happen to be really close to it, so it's important to us,
but in a big picture, it's not special. You look out in the night sky, get close enough to them.
They'll look like our sun in whatever is the planet going around there. It's their nighttime sky.
So we on Earth, as a planet, are not special. Our star is not special. For a while, we looked around
and thought we were in the center of the galaxy, the Milky Way galaxy. We must be. Upon acquiring
embedded data, we found out, no, we're not in the center. We're not even on the edge. We're somewhere
in the nondescript suburbs. Look around. It looks like we're the center of the universe. All the
galaxies are receding from us in every direction. Looks like we're in the center. No, no, let's not
fall for that again. We learn from Einstein's general theory of relativity that no matter where
you are, it'll look like you're in the center. It's a product of the fact that you have this
enormous universe stretching in every direction. And no matter where you are, it'll look like
you're the center and everything's moving away from you. Like raisins and a raisin cake that's
baking and the cake grows. Whichever raisin you're on, you think you're stationary and all the other
raisins are running away from you. So I think it's a conservative posture to say that Earth
is not, Earth and life on it is not immune to the Copernican principle. Just going on the basis of
history. So let's use that as a first step. What can we learn from biodiversity?
Well, on this one planet we call Earth. There are extraordinary ranges of life forms.
Among this list, you can make the list forever, of course, but let me hand pick a few just for the
sake of this conversation. I want to hand pick a few and I'll tell you why I pick these in just a
moment. The rhinovirus, the virus that gives you the common cold, algae, beetles, sponges, jellyfish,
snakes, condors, and giant sequoias. Okay? I hand pick those from the animal kingdom, animal and
plant kingdom. Line them up in size place. You got the virus over here, the giant sequoia over
there. Check them out. Line them up. You look at these creatures, a jellyfish, a tree, a snake.
You would wonder whether they came from the same universe, much less the same planet.
Look at that. Add to these creatures that are all living creatures in modern times. Add to them
trilobites. Here we are. Here's a fossil trilobites. It was a day when they ruled the world
500, 600 million years ago. Put those on a scale too, but they're extinct. Put them there. That's
life that used to exist here on Earth. And we don't have to stop at trilobites. Come somewhat later,
you get good old Tyrannosaurus rex, dinosaurs, coexisting with this range of life.
I'd like to think, suppose you visited some alien planet and you came back describing,
giving the following account of some life form that you just saw on this planet. You ready?
You ready? You coming back to your friend, you say, you've got to believe me. I saw this animal.
It can stalk its prey with infrared detectors and it swallows whole live animals five times
bigger than its head. It has no arms or legs or any other appendage, yet it can slide along the
ground at about two feet per second. And you say, wow, what an exotic creature that is. Well,
of course, you just described a snake. Snakes have no arms or legs. They can infer not all,
but many have infrared detectors. They could eat things five times bigger than the head.
That's a scary creature if you've never seen any other kind of creature in your life.
So I'm thinking to myself, with this breadth of biodiversity, if I may take just a quick
diversion, this being the last lecture, I'll give myself a diversion here. When I think of
Hollywood aliens, how good a job are they doing? You know, they're embarrassingly poor in the
diversity of form that they grant their aliens. There are some good examples. Not all of Hollywood
was bad. The 1950s classic, The Blob. That was a good one. The Blob. That didn't have any arms or
legs, but it was clearly alive and intelligent. It was a creature. That was good. Also, the film
2001, A Space Odyssey, they didn't even show the aliens. They just showed this monolith thing that
the aliens used to communicate with. So they didn't even go there. I thought that was brave,
because everyone wants to see some wizard thing coming out of the mountain.
But the rest of the Hollywood aliens, what do they have? They've got arms, they've got legs,
they've got a head, shoulders, knees, toes, fingers, maybe three fingers, but they got fingers.
All right, they got a neck, maybe a little longer. They got a head, probably a bulbous
forehead, because we assume they're smarter than us. But in the end, if these are your anatomical
properties, you're basically identical to a human being. Compared with this list of animals I put
up here in front of you just a moment ago, every alien I've ever seen in a movie is identical to
humans. As far as the diversity of life on Earth is concerned. So I'm not that impressed, but I'm
thinking if we're going to find life on another planet, it better at least look as different
compared to us as other life forms on Earth look compared to us. It's got to look at least
that different for growing up on another planet. We have DNA in common with every life form on this
size scale. Jellyfish, viruses, sequoia, there's some percent of our DNA that's identical to all the
life that's on this form. So go to another planet and I don't know whether it's DNA, whatever is
their magic chemical, whatever it is, I'm going to assume it looks more different. And I think I have
the right to assume that. But that's just the diversity of life. But there's certain things
about the science of life that I think are inescapable. And that would be the chemistry.
We are made of by definition organic molecules. A key ingredient in organic chemistry is carbon.
We are carbon based life. Carbon, you may remember from an earlier lecture,
is produced in vast quantities inside of stars thrust out of the stars by mechanisms
that release the outer layers of a star or just blow up. It's released into the galaxy,
enriching clouds that then collapse and form stars and planets and people. And everything in between.
And everything in between. Carbon chemically combines in more ways to make more kinds of molecules
than all other molecules that exist. So in other words, if you were to pick an element upon which
to base the diversity of life, there is no contest. Carbon is your element.
Life, which is opportunistic, relies heavily on the fact that carbon can bond with itself and with
other elements in many and varied ways. Ways that, in fact, we're still discovering.
The famous Buckminster Fullerene, a big molecule of carbon, 60 carbon atoms, making a sphere that
looks like a soccer ball. That you can take that and make tubes, make bucky tubes out of it.
Diamond is carbon. The lead in a lead pencil is carbon. Carbon is a versatile element.
It's also plentiful in the cosmos. If we're going to find life based on some kind of chemistry,
I'm a betting man, I would tell you it's going to be based on carbon chemistry.
I don't know what it'll look like, three eyeballs, two heads, and teni, but it's going to be based on
carbon chemistry. The sheer fertility of it is inescapable.
Now, the other thing, it's not just carbon out there, we've got hydrogen in us,
which we owe to the Big Bang. Big Bang endowed the cosmos with 90% of all atoms,
or hydrogen atoms. That's convenient. We also have nitrogen and oxygen. These are abundant
elements in the cosmos. And in fact, we owe the distribution of these ingredients and the
existence of the ingredients in the first place to the remnants of stars that have exploded.
Here we have the crab nebula, actually it's a little segment of the crab nebula.
It is a nebulosity formally contained inside the core of a star, a star that blew up.
In fact, this one was observed to blow up 1,000 years ago, and that's what remains of it today.
And it's still rapidly expanding into space, and each of those color variations in this image
represent a different chemical species, manufactured in the thermonuclear crucible
that was the center of that star before it exploded and during the explosion.
And that spreads out to the galaxy, once again, enriching the next generation of the formation
of stars, allowing solar systems to have more ambitious things than just a star in their center.
Without these heavy elements, you couldn't make planets with surfaces that contain
ingredients that were not products of the Big Bang itself.
Now I hear something interesting. How special are we?
You still want to think we're special, do you? Well, check this out. Let's list the ingredients
within the human being in order of frequency, the number one element in the human body.
Well, the number one molecule is water. We knew this from biology class.
80 some percent of your body mass is water. Fine. What's water made of? Hydrogen, H2O.
So we've got more hydrogen atoms in our body than any other kind of atom.
What's next in our body? Oxygen is next. What's third? Carbon is third. Next, nitrogen.
And you go on down the list. I bet you didn't know that if you made a same list for the entire
universe, it would match one for one the ingredients of the human body and all life on earth.
Hydrogen, number one ingredient in the universe. Number two is helium. Helium is chemically inert.
You can't do anything with it anyway except inhale it and sound like Mickey Mouse or something.
So it's fun to play with helium, but it has no chemical utility. Next in the universe is oxygen.
After oxygen is carbon and then nitrogen. Right on down the list. We are of this universe.
If we were made of business or some isotope of uranium, extremely rare ingredients in the cosmos,
you'd have an argument. You'd say we are special because these ingredients, you don't find it
just any place. You only find it here on earth, but that's not the case. That's not the case.
So where are you going to look for a planet that might have life? Life as we know it requires
liquid water. So if you're going to look around for a planet, you want a planet that's not too
close to its host star because whatever liquid water it might have had would have evaporated,
not too far away, it would freeze. You want it to be just right. It's the Goldilocks effect.
You want it to be in a sort of habitable zone around a host star. And in that way you have a
chance of finding life that resembles us in some fundamental way. Surely it will resemble us in
chemistry, but the need for liquid water, I don't know if that's a universal truth or not.
But we know we need it and we exist. Why not impose that at least in the first pass in our
search for life? Now it turns out this notion of a green zone, a habitable zone around a host star,
not too close, not too far. That's a little naive, it turns out, because we've learned
that Jupiter's moon, Europa, Jupiter's way outside of the habitable zone, Jupiter's moon,
which is covered in ice, is actually being stressed by the tidal forces of Jupiter and the
surrounding satellites. Jupiter has, I lost count, 20, 30 satellites. And that's stressing of the
physical body of the moon, Europa, to impart heat into the interiors of this moon. And that heat
melts the ice. If you look from one week to the next, one month to the next, at the ice patterns,
the frozen ice patterns on the surface, the next week it's shifted, as though it's been carried
on a liquid underlayer. We think there's an ocean on Europa, we think it's been there for a billion
years. Good evidence shows that life had some major advancing that it did within our own oceans.
So we're going to look for life in the universe. Why not start in our backyard? I want to go ice
fishing on Europa. I want to melt down through the surface and put a little submersible and look
around and see if anything swims up and licks the lens. That's what I want to do. Not only Europa,
Mars. Some experiment went real bad on Mars. Mars has all kinds of evidence of running water,
dried riverbeds, and flooded plains where you see material had been carried down on flood waters.
There's not a sign of life there now. Nowhere on Mars do we see not a Martian surface. Where the water
go? We think it's subterranean, a permafrost. Where the atmosphere go that once supported the water?
Nobody knows. Some knob got turned, rendering Mars wholly inhospitable to life. Same with Venus.
Venus is 900 degrees Fahrenheit. Planet same mass, same size as Earth. Some experiment went
more, a runaway greenhouse effect. What are we doing on Earth that might have Earth end up like
these two planets as we go forward? We better keep an eye on that. In any case, if Mars once had
running water, maybe it once had life. If it once had life, if I'm going to go to Mars, I'm going to
bring a geologist and a paleontologist with me, because I don't know how to go rummaging through
rocks and find fossils. I know how to look up. I've never spent much time looking now, but I'm
going to bring them with me. Check for fossil evidence. Now, how about intelligence? What is
intelligence? At the end of all of our questions, it's, is there life? Yes or no? We'll find out.
If there is life, is it intelligent? This is an important question.
What is intelligence? We have a hard enough time defining it in ourselves and in other species
to suggest that we would know it and be able to define it for an alien. But getting back to
Hollywood just for a brief moment, I have seen some stupid aliens in the media. I remember I was
driving from New York to Boston and I was had on AM radio and there was a radio play, a radio play.
There were aliens swooping down, it was fun listening to a radio play, thinking of what
my parents did before TV, but here I am driving and aliens were swooping down on earth. Why?
They were sucking up the water. Why? Because these aliens thrived on hydrogen and they needed
the hydrogen in the H2O of earth's oceans and this was creating global catastrophe. They had
to fight off the aliens and I'm thinking these are stupid aliens. 90% of the whole, 90% of all
atoms in the universe are hydrogen. You don't have to come to this little pipsqueak planet and suck
up the, suck up the thin layer of H2O that resides on its surface. How about the thousand
solar mass gas cloud you drove past on your way to earth? Why don't you wake up, take a
intro astronomy class or something before you start running around sucking up earth water?
I got another one. This one, you know, you remember Close Encounters of the Third Kind?
Brilliant film, nicely timed and everything, but I got a pet peeve. There's a scene where the
aliens are announcing where they're going to land, but nobody knows this. They're sending these
signals to their teletype back before they had computer monitors. So the teletype is typing
out this series of numbers and they said, oh, it's been sending the signal. We don't know what
it is and some clever guy says, I know what that is. That's the longitude and latitude on earth.
I bet that's where they're going to land. And sure enough, they went to, to, to, to
Devil's Tower, Wyoming or whatever the place was and set up a runway and lights and sure enough,
they landed there. And I'm thinking, how do they know longitude and latitude of earth?
Latitude goes from zero degrees to 90 degrees. That's kind of arbitrary. It could have gone to
100 degrees. That's just our own, that's our longitude. Longitude is especially arbitrary.
That was a political decision from 150 years ago. The primary thing goes through London.
It goes through Greenwich in England. It might have gone through Palace.
Hell, it could have gone through Hawaii. If Hawaii had kept records at the time,
that's completely arbitrary. To know what our longitude system is means you know our culture
so well, you know, all the politics of what led to it in the first place. If you know that much
about our politics, why not just send over the teletype? We're going to land to the left
of Devil's Tower Monument. Send it in English for goodness sake. If you know that much about our
culture, so, but they got to do it the mysterious way and the way that just is stupid. If you know
that much, just give us some other kind of sign instead of cryptic numbers in base 10. Come on
now. Plus they had a runway. If you come, if you come from another galaxy in a flying saucer,
you don't need a runway, okay? One way is for people who use the air for lift. Flying saucers
don't use air for lift. That's why they're flying saucers. So we need more people in Hollywood to
take this video course. How does life get around? We got life here on earth. You know something?
You may remember the news stories from a few years ago. We found a rock on earth that came from Mars
and it had tantalizing evidence of there possibly having been life inside the cracks of the rock.
Stowaways journeyed through the void and vacuum of interstellar space, landed on earth,
landed in Antarctica, was collected in the Allen Hills,
a place where people go meteorite hunting, but meteorites fall all over. But if it's in the ocean,
you're not going to find it. If it's in a forest, you're not going to find it. It'll look like any
other rock. If it falls on an ice sheet, it's a meteorite. Ice sheets don't have rocks sitting on
them, generally. So with this, you say, well, how did it get here? Something thrusted off
of the Martian surface. That's curious, because if that's possible, that meant Mars was hit by
something really big a long time ago, and pieces of its material were thrust into space, floating
and lands here on earth. That tells me that Mars, with its wet history, may be Mars formed life
before life formed here on earth. And if it did, maybe that life stowed away, just need single
solid luck, just stowed away on a rock that landed on earth four billion years ago. And if that's
the case, it would mean that all life on earth has a Martian origin, making all of us Martian descendants.
That's entirely possible. It's called penspermia. Penspermia. So if we go to Mars and find life and
find that the life here, there has DNA, we won't know whether DNA is an inevitable molecule of a
chemical soup, or whether we got our DNA from them in the first place. One way to assess
how to think about these questions is something called the Drake equation, attributable to the
American astrophysicist, Frank Drake. He came up with an equation that enables you to organize your
ignorance. It's not an equation in the classical sense of a mathematical equation, it's just a
sequence of probabilities that affect the search for life. So you ask, well, what percentage of
stars live long enough for life to evolve? And of those stars, what percent have planets? And of
those that have planets, what percent have a planet in the nice zone? And what percent of those in
the nice zone actually gave birth to life? And of those that had life, what percent evolved life
to intelligence? And of those that had intelligence, what percent evolved a technology? Because you're
not talking across space without some kind of device. You're not sending smoke signals across
the galaxy, you need something a little more sophisticated. So you can set up these probabilities,
multiply them all out and see, starting with the total number of stars in the galaxy,
how many civilizations might you communicate with? Well, some of the terms in that equation
need to be modified. This green zone is now broader than we had ever imagined. If you can warm up a
moon of Jupiter through means that have nothing to do with the sun, your source of energy is
quite fertile. Your sources of energy are many more count, many more in number than simply the sun.
Also on earth, the bugs and life forms that thrive in boiling liquids in the undersea vents,
hot water that's deep down heated, back where the, where you have magma that's heated,
boil, girdles up, dissolve salts are there, and it deposits those salts upon hitting the cold
bottom of the ocean into these chimneys and in those porous chimneys is life forms thriving
on geochemistry rather than on the sun. So the number of places we can find life and the
hardiness of life is far greater than anything Frank Drake imagined in the first place.
So how are we going to talk to them? It's too far to travel based on any way we know how to get there.
Take you 7,500,000 years just to get to the nearest star. Forget it. See these radio waves
moving at the speed of light. What kind of signal are you going to send? You're going to say,
Hey, I'm here. Say, parler vous français? No, no, of course they don't speak our language, not
our normal language derived out of our national borders. No, no, if they speak any language,
they're going to speak math. Math is the language of the cosmos. So we got to be clever about how
we construct sort of little math statements just to compare to see if we're speaking
literally and figuratively the same language. The duration of technology matters.
Suppose aliens talk, try to send signals to us and the signals got here 100 years ago.
100 years ago, we didn't have technology to receive and decode and send back signals.
They would presume that there was not intelligent life on earth or at least not intelligent life
that had technology because we have no way to respond. We've only been technologically
capable for about the last 50 or 75 years. Out of how long? 4.5 billion. That's nothing.
Make a timeline of that and throw a dart. Most of the time that dart hits the earth timeline,
earth will just have boring single celled creatures trying to change the atmosphere of
earth from its carbon dioxide ingredients to oxygen. That's what's going to happen. Most of
the times you throw the dart. Maybe sometimes you hit the last 100,000 years. It's still a pretty
uninteresting time technologically. We're running around butt naked through the forests.
There is a time after the oxidizing atmosphere and life gets kind of interesting,
the last 30,000 years of this four and a half billion year timeline,
you'll catch cavemen drawing pictures. Cavemen. You're not going to exchange technology with them.
You might compare and contrast paintbrushes, but that's about it.
Actually, we have been communicating with civilizations unwittingly. For the past 60 years,
our TV signals have been emanating from earth, moving at the speed of light.
AM radio doesn't escape the earth. It gets reflected by the ionosphere, but FM radio escapes.
Is anybody listening? There are a few planets that we've discovered in that zone.
What would they be hearing? Alien anthropologists would be decoding the earliest signals that
came from earth, the earliest signs of our intelligence. They'd be decoding the Howdy Duty
show. They'd be decoding Amos and Andy. I love Lucy. This is how they would learn how humans
interact with each other. This is what they would surely use to deduce that there are no signs of
intelligent life in the cosmos. And so ends 12 lectures of my favorite universe, each drawn
from one of my monthly essays that appeared in Natural History Magazine. My goal, however,
was to turn the subject of this series into your favorite universe. Consider these lectures a kind
of hors d'oeuvre, perhaps peaking your interest in the cosmos, just enough to have learned that
in life and in the universe is always best to keep looking up.
