Let's return to our case of Carol, a 30-year-old, smart, gainfully employed accountant who's
socially anxious.
Others see her as quiet, shy, maybe distant, but generally kind and pleasant, but Carol
is very lonely and she's very anxious.
She tries to cover her feelings and she tries to be invisible, she hates drawing attention
to herself.
Now, she did okay in college and she does okay at work, but she regularly exerts a
good deal of effort just finding the courage to speak to other people.
She longs for closer friends and she longs for a romantic partner.
She wants to feel like she belongs.
She wants to be happy.
Many have argued that we've evolved multi-layered, complex social relationships in order to help
us survive and thrive, and we've developed some rather complex and nuanced rules about
how those relationships should work, rules that are always evolving and are only partly
derived from biology.
Now it's cliche to say that people need people and this idea of love and attachment is of
course the thing that music, art, literature and movies are made of, but is it true?
Can't being alone or even totally isolated be just fine?
In the classic studies of Harry Harlow, he studied maternal separation and social isolation
and infant monkeys taken from their mothers.
He began to systematically tease apart what it was that made infants bond to their mother.
He assumed it was food and survival.
He took infants away from their mothers and placed them in a variety of different conditions
with fake mothers made of either wire or terry cloth complete with a fake face that the infants
came to recognize.
The infants bonded to their mom.
He then wanted to see if food was the key factor or if it was touch and sensation.
He put two mothers in the cage, a wire one and a cloth one.
Sometimes the wire mother had a bottle connected to the food and sometimes it was the cloth
mother.
In both instances, regardless of where the food was located, the infants clung to the
cloth mother.
They received all of their nurturance and love from touch.
It wasn't just about food.
But what about the widower that dies shortly after his wife even though he seemed to be
in okay health?
What about the socially isolated elderly man who can't seem to bounce back after a relatively
mild heart attack?
What about the 35,000 suicides per year involving many people who are socially isolated and
depressed?
While true that some people are more social than others, extroversion and introversion
are real, we all need relationships.
We don't have to be popular, but we need at least one key relationship to help us get
by in life.
Not having any relationships is bad both for your mental health and your physical health.
So what is it that gets in the way?
If relationships are so critical, then why are there so many people who are lonely?
Why does Carol long for attachment but spend most of her time being alone and feeling terrified
of other people?
How do you assess both the quality and the quantity of relationships and how can you
explain a deficiency in either?
So what are some of the things that I would look for as a therapist?
Well, I want to look for impairments in social functioning and they can come from a variety
of places, namely two places that I like to look.
First I want to look at whether or not an individual has a skills deficit.
Do they have those basic skills necessary for human interaction to reach out, connect
and have some sort of social reciprocity with another person?
Now I would derive this partly from self-report but also from observation and maybe from some
in session exercises.
The next place I would look is maybe they have sufficient skills but there's something
blocking their use of those skills.
In this case it might be social anxiety.
Maybe Carol knows exactly what to do but she's so anxious she forgets or she's not able
to perform those particular skills.
And of course we want to look for other diagnoses such as depression or maybe there are other
circumstances that causes an individual to be anxious.
Let's move now to our first clip of Carol where we're doing an assessment of her social
skills and other possible interfering factors.
So Carol we have your anxiety surveys and you've been great about sharing a lot of information
about yourself and your history and your family.
All of which has helped us put together the formulation for you and to set some goals.
And you did mention that one of your goals was having more friends and deepening the
friendships that you do have and ultimately you would like to begin to romantically date
and have a significant other.
So in thinking about those goals and the steps it will take us to get there.
One of the things we need to do is something called just a social skills assessment.
So whenever someone is unsatisfied with their current social network it could either be
maybe they haven't yet learned the skills it takes to connect with other people or it
might be they have the skills but the anxiety gets in the way of using those skills.
So we need to decide for you which is it or maybe it's a little bit of both.
And I'll tell you part of what I have been noting and part of the data that I'm using
whenever I first talk with a patient over the phone you get a sense of how comfortable
are they speaking.
When they come in for a first visit do they make eye contact or not, do they send non-verbal
signals like you're doing with nodding your head and smiling and so you've already shared
a lot of data with me that you have those skills in place already.
The other thing I look at is whether or not you have existing friendships and you mentioned
that you have some good friends from college, you have your family members, you have your
sister, you've dated in the past before.
So to me it says that there must have been some skills to be able to make those connections
and those connections some of them have been maintained since college so 10 years or more
for those relationships.
But there's a lot of different levels of social skills so one of the ways we ask about social
skills is to give hypothetical scenarios, social encounters and then you tell me what
you might do next.
And no right or wrong answer, it's just what do you believe is the best next move?
Not would you feel afraid or feel anxious that's the emotion part but what would be the appropriate
social response assuming there's no anxiety that's around.
So we'll start with an easy one, let's say that you're at work in the cafeteria, you're
eating lunch and someone comes over and sits down and says hello, what's the most appropriate
social response?
Saying hello back.
Right, right and then what would you say?
How are you?
Okay, alright and they might say how are you back so how are you?
Good.
Then what?
I don't know, then I would probably just eat my lunch.
Okay so you'd probably feel a little bit of anxiety so knowing an opener or a conversation
extender or something, maybe, assuming they wanted to continue talking, alright.
Let's go to the next hypothetical scenario.
Let's say you are standing on a busy street corner and a stranger comes up to you and
says hey could you give me directions to 17th and Madison, you have no idea where
that is, so what's the socially appropriate response?
I would say I'm sorry I don't know how to get there.
Okay and what if they say oh come on, it looks like you're a local here, can you tell me
where 17th and Madison is?
I'd say no, sorry I'm not local, yeah, that's probably what would happen.
Okay, alright, so let's go to another hypothetical scenario, let's say that you are at a holiday
event, a holiday party of some sort and a guy comes over to you, he's about your age,
you think he's kind of attractive and he says hey how's it going?
What do you say next?
What should I say or what would I say?
So what is the socially appropriate response at that point?
I guess now I'm all in the tizzy, I can see those emotions coming up, I don't know, if
you asked me how I was doing I'd say good, how are you?
Okay, alright, so you would respond and also give him a question so that you could volley
the conversation back and forth.
Yes, I would probably try not to hide under the table.
Okay, alright, alright, and let's say that your sister does something that hurts your
feelings and you're pretty angry about it, maybe she forgot your birthday or something
and this is like the third year in a row that she's done that and you want to talk to her
but you don't really like conflict so what do you do?
What's the socially appropriate response?
I guess maybe saying something like I don't know, I wouldn't want to accuse her of forgetting
my birthday but that's what happened so I guess it may be appropriate to say something
like hey this really upset me but again it's like okay I understand that maybe that's what
should happen but I still wouldn't want to, I'd prefer to just avoid having that conversation
all together.
So remember we're trying to decide for you as we want you to build more relationships,
is it a skills deficit or is it anxiety or emotions that are getting in the way and to
me it sounds like it's more the anxiety and the emotions getting in the way.
Does that sound right to you or what do you think?
I think that sounds right, I think you know in my head I know what I should be doing but
I just can't do it.
Okay well what I would like to do is to give you a few things to read about conversation
and I know it might sound funny of we all learn to talk and you don't have to be trained
in how to talk but the art of conversation is something that we often don't learn like
what's a good opener, what's a good conversation extender, what's a good conversation closer
sometimes people get stuck talking to someone and they would really like to move on to the
next person at their cocktail party but it's hard to do so it's just a lot of little tips
and suggestions and things that you can try out and some of them will fit your style and
some of them won't but I think that's the kind of thing that you can read on your own
and you can try out as a behavioral experiment and see if it works for you.
For me it sounds like we're really needing to focus on the anxiety part and if we can
turn down the intensity of that anxiety then you can start accessing and using those skills.
So let's review Carol's assessment.
As we might predict she's overly modest and she downplays her social skills.
She doesn't have the social network she wants so she deduces that she's no good at social
activities or social interactions.
Do you agree based on what you saw?
What counter evidence did you see?
What about her job?
Her family?
Her relationships?
Her past friendships?
Recall her answers to the hypothetical scenarios.
She knows the answer or what to do but that doesn't mean that she can actually do it.
Notice her in-session behaviors.
I immediately started gathering data from the first point of contact.
She called me and although nervous she was totally appropriate and pleasant and when
she came to our first session again she demonstrated a mastery of those basic and expected social
skills in social exchanges.
So the bottom line with Carol is that while some social skills practice couldn't hurt
a skills deficit is not the primary driver of her social isolation.
We'll do a quick brush up on skills but we'll focus more of our energy on managing her interfering
emotions, cognitions and behaviors specifically her social anxiety.
Now the obvious obstacle her social anxiety is what we'll tackle but that only begs the
question of why her anxiety is there.
Now I would ask you to recall the layers from the cognitive model.
So you would first use the CBT triangle and you've learned to look at cognition and behavior
to help you understand emotions.
We would start with cognition and again we start up at the top and we work our way down.
So starting at the top or the surface she shared a couple of different examples of being
called on at work, of needing to talk to a co-worker, of passing people on the street,
that's the activating event, she then has beliefs she's not liked, she doesn't know
what to say, she's going to be rejected, that's on the surface.
But below that we have rules or conditional assumptions like the if then statements.
So she might believe or might say to herself if I say hello then people will be irritated.
If I reach out to connect with another person then they'll reject me.
Now beneath those rules, those conditional assumptions we have core beliefs, those irrational
deeply held beliefs about ourselves, our world and the people around us and related to that
are our values, what matters most and why.
What might you hypothesize her beliefs to be?
Remember we can often boil things down to loveability and achievement.
Now the primary driver of anxiety for Carol is avoidance and safety behaviors.
Now Carol for instance at work, she often times will time her arrival at a meeting so
she's one or two minutes late because she doesn't want those unstructured few minutes
where she'll have to interact with other people.
When a meeting ends she's the first one out the door because again she doesn't want those
unstructured interventions.
Other things that she will do if she needs to talk in a meeting, she will not make eye
contact and she will talk rapidly.
If she has to engage someone in a conversation she will ask them lots of questions so she
doesn't need to disclose anything about herself.
All of these would be considered her sort of safety behaviors.
Of course her behavior of preference is just to avoid social interactions at all.
She feels safest when she's alone or when she's at home with her pets.
Now recall from our anxiety lecture when we did some somatic quieting.
We did an ABCD, we did a thought record, we talked about exposures and with Carol we
created something called the suds hierarchy, the subjective units of distress, where she
started at the bottom of her hierarchy and started working her way up.
We are also targeting those interfering factors, cognitions and behaviors but we're pushing
against that tendency towards avoidance and we're pushing against those safety behaviors
which she likes to do.
But having skills and tamping down anxiety isn't enough to create new relationships.
How can we move her forward?
Now of course there's the issue of personality, she seems like more of an introvert to me.
We know that introversion and extroversions conceptually sound, there's a number of measures,
the Myers-Briggs probably being the most common that looks at introversion and extroversion
and among a number of other things.
But remember that introversion indicates a preference not an ability and it doesn't prevent
an individual from having meaningful social relationships.
So what is social support if this is what we're trying to give to Carol?
Social support has been conceptualized in a number of different ways and in fact it's
a notoriously slippery concept to define and even harder to measure.
Now the common definition of social support is that it is the perception that one is cared
for, has assistance available from other people and that one is part of a supportive social
network.
In research studies you hear the term social support but you also hear social integration,
social connectedness, social support networks and each has a slightly different angle on
this complex and difficult to measure idea.
So what are some of the characteristics?
Well first let's look at structural characteristics that might include the size of your social
support network, the density or the distance or all your friends gathered locally in the
same geographic area or maybe they're dispersed around the country or even the world.
What is the diversity of individuals?
Are they all approximately the same age, the same gender, the same background or is
there a wider range?
What's the level of reciprocity?
Does the individual always give support but receive less or vice versa and of course we
want to know whether or not it goes beyond that inner circle of familial relationships.
We might also want to look at some of the functional characteristics.
Does an individual receive emotional support?
Do they receive informational support?
Do you have friends that can give you advice or help you work through problems?
Does an individual receive tangible or practical support?
Do they have someone that can help them with the dinner, help them pay the mortgage or
drive them to a doctor's appointment?
Of course do they have someone that can provide companionship or belonging?
Other key features to keep in mind as you're doing a social support assessment is the idea
of perceived versus actual.
We can look at actual indicators, the density, the shape, the structure, the function but
it's really an individual's perception of their social support and the quality that
they receive which is most important.
We also want to look at is the individual giving or receiving support and does that seem to
be in balance.
Now sources of support might include significant others or family and friends and even though
you may see greater levels of intimacy and romantic relationships it doesn't have to
be the case.
Emotional closeness is often about shared life experiences so it could certainly be
platonic.
Let's go on to look at our second clip where we're setting up a social support assessment
exercise for Carol.
So Carol let's continue our assessment of your social supports and social support network
and I thought we could do that by visually representing who's in your social support
network and what kinds of support they can provide.
So let me explain the diagram that I've drawn up here just a little bit.
So here you get to be the center of the universe so you're right in the middle there and these
are sort of the rings of orbits I guess and what I want you to do is to put a person's
name, anyone that you would consider a social support somewhere in this universe and if
they're close to you they're going to be in your inner orbit so they're going to be in
your inner circle here.
If they're a little further out you place them a little further out on the circle and
if they're just somewhere sort of floating in space but there should be on the map somewhere
we'll write them out there and what we'll do from there is and then I'll have a series
of questions to talk about what kinds of support they might be able to provide.
But for now why don't we just get the names on the map and we'll see who's in your networks.
I'll let you write those up there.
So who's would you consider a social support?
I guess my parents.
Okay so mom and dad.
Okay so mom and dad are in your inner circle so you would consider them close supports?
Yeah well I mean I guess close, closer than most people.
So the closest supports that you currently have and are they about the same or are you
closer to one or the other?
I think it's about the same but in like different ways.
Okay that makes sense, that makes perfect sense.
So now you can see how we start the exercise.
Carol then goes on to fill in the names of her sister, her brother and her friends then
she starts to think about how she could rank or qualify the level of intimacy with each
of those individuals.
Let's see how she does that in our next clip.
So we have one, two, three, four, five, six humans that are on there and we have three
that are in your inner circle and three on your outer circle.
And when you look at this figure and the people that populate your social support network
what's the first thought you have, what reaction do you have?
I feel like there should be more people on there.
You feel like there should be more people, okay and why is that?
It just looks kind of empty to me.
Okay it looks empty and do you have a sense of what you think would be the right amount?
Not really, I don't know, I think it was, I mean it was kind of hard deciding if anyone
should even go on the inner circle for me but if I had to call someone and ask for help
then those would be the people who would do it.
In one way there's no right number or right quantity of social supports to have, it's
really about are they high enough quality that your social support needs can be met,
that you're having sort of intimate satisfying friendships, relationships, sort of family
connections with them or not.
And one of the ways that we can see if you have the right sort of balance or the right
quality is looking at the kinds of support that the different people are able to provide.
And we typically divide support up into these three categories.
We have practical support, so if you need a ride to the doctor or you need help paying
your rent for the month or someone to cook you dinner, that's a very practical, supportive
thing to do.
It might be emotional support, so this is the good listener, the shoulder to cry on,
you don't really expect them to do anything to change the situation but it's really nice
to be listened to.
And the last one is the, we call it informational support, or these are the folks that are good
at giving advice, so let's say that you have to choose between job A or job B or college
one or college two and someone who's just really good at thinking out loud with you
and can help turn things over.
So practical advice, emotional advice, or informational advice, some people are good
at just one, some people are good at two or maybe all three of them.
So what I want to do then is to visit each of these people on your social support network
and I want you to think about what kind of advice or what kind of support that they're
good at.
Is it practical, emotional, or informational?
And we'll just start with your mom.
So is she practical, emotional, informational, or all of the above?
I think she would definitely be practical and emotional, informational, I feel like
she kind of just takes over the whole conversation, so it's not much of one, so practical and
emotional.
Okay.
And do you feel emotionally supported if she's taking over the conversation or is that
just when you're making a decision on the, what's that?
I mean, I think, I don't know, maybe it's a mom thing, but if it's me asking for advice,
then she'll take it all over.
But if it's me, like if I'm upset about something or, you know, something's happened, then she'll
usually listen.
Okay.
So let's just put a dash and P and E after her so she's good at those two kinds of support.
And how about dad?
Is he a P, an E, or an I?
I think he would be P and I.
Okay.
So let's put him as P and I.
And how about Stephanie?
Stephanie would be E and I.
E and I.
Mm-hmm.
And Alicia?
I think Alicia is just an I.
It's an I.
Okay.
All right.
And we can stop there.
It gives you an idea of where we're going with this.
And again, it's not about the number of social supports.
It's the kind of support they can provide.
And we want you to have enough close support of all different varieties.
And if we look at the folks in your inner circle, it looks like we have a couple of P's.
We have a couple of E's and we have a couple of I's.
So even if one person isn't available, there's a second person that you could go to.
So this helps me feel a little bit better.
We can still work on adding more people.
We can still work on building intimacy.
But it tells me in terms of social support, you have some that's there.
You're not fully satisfied with it yet and that's important and that we can work on it.
But you have most of your bases at least minimally covered.
Okay.
Now, the next step then would be to decide are you going to add brand new people or are
you going to sort of lasso those folks in the outer space and sort of pull them in closer.
So you're going to pull Jacob in, you're going to pull Alicia in, you're going to pull Sarah
in.
But let me start with the first question.
Are there new people that you'd like to add?
Maybe people you've met once or twice.
They're not even really acquaintances, but there was a little spark there or something,
some kind of connection you were in sync with someone, anyone you can think of.
Sure.
There's another person at work who, he's in a different department, but I mean, we have
said hi a couple of times, but it's, you know, nothing.
Okay.
Okay.
So he's a possibility.
If you're going to set a goal to meet new people, he might be a good place to start.
Yeah.
He seems nice enough.
Okay.
And then, I don't really know, I guess there are some people who I used to hang out with
in college that maybe I could reach back out to, you know, I mean, we were friends in
college and just haven't really talked since then because we got jobs.
People graduate and scatter all over and, okay.
And how would you find them?
Is that, I guess Facebook's good for that, right?
Probably, yeah.
Some of them live close, so it's not, I mean, I just, I haven't really made much of an effort.
Okay.
So you have a pool of people from college and you have this other coworker.
What about the possibility of becoming closer to Alicia, Jacob, or Sarah?
Is that a possibility that you're interested in or?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, I like them fine and Alicia and I, talking off, I think, so we already have some
interaction going and Jacob, I'd be interested to pull him in, but I don't know.
I think it might be a little weird just because we never really talked a whole lot, but I
mean, I don't know, I might be willing to give that a try.
Okay.
All right.
Well, I'll let you think about it a bit.
So you have those two options.
They're not mutually exclusive.
I mean, you can work on adding new people at the same time that you're working on deepening
current relationships.
You don't have to do it all at once.
We don't want it to feel overwhelming, but we do want you to sort of push yourself a
little bit to decide how can I enrich this circle by adding more people or by pulling
existing people in a little bit closer to the center.
All right.
Okay.
So I'll let you think about that and then next time we'll develop a much more concrete
plan about the steps we'd like to take next.
Okay.
So what did we learn with Carol?
Well, we've learned she's not totally isolated.
She's been close to family and friends before, but it takes her a very, very long time before
she starts to feel comfortable with someone.
She doesn't reach out to her social supports or nurture those relationships as she could
and she wants both more quality and quantity in her social support network.
So let's first talk about quantity or adding new people to your network and what exactly
is the right size and does it get harder to form new relationships as you grow older?
First I wanted to address a recent phenomenon of social networks and the use of things like
Facebook in order to connect to other individuals.
Could we consider this a source of social support?
Do social networks maybe fill in the gap if we have gaps from our personal relationships?
A study done by Jonathan Cummings at Carnegie Mellon looked at both bankers and college
students that were using the internet, social networks, phone and in-person meetings to
connect with others and then compared the quality of those meetings and again perceived social
support.
As you might guess, even though people enjoy things like Facebook, the quality of social
support that they received was inferior to in-person relationships.
Speaking of quality, when we look at the types of support we receive, we want to ensure that
an individual has adequate amounts of each type of support, informational support, practical
support, emotional support or companionate support, but we need to remember that it's
Carol's or the support-needers' responsibility to know what kind of support you need and
then to go to the right person to ask them for that support, specify what you need and
speak up if you aren't getting what you want.
So how could Carol grow her network?
So first she needs to identify her target.
So is it someone that's already on the diagram and she just wants to pull them into an inner
circle and improve intimacy or does she want to meet new people entirely?
And she probably wants to do a little bit of both.
We want to set expectations and we want to have her have a system of how she can capture
even tiny steps forward because this isn't something that changes overnight or even over
a couple of weeks.
We want her to keep a success diary because we can predict that she might get discouraged
that it's not going quite quickly enough.
The last source of support I wanted to address is based on a question I often get from other
individuals and that's does my social support network have to be composed just of humans?
And this actually came up with Carol as well.
An example by Erika Friedman published in a study published in 1995 in the American Journal
of Cardiology looked at individuals who had suffered a myocardial infarction or a heart
attack.
They looked at individuals who owned a dog versus those that don't own a dog.
They looked at human social supports versus those who don't.
And in both cases of dog and human that social support was important and helped to increase
rates of survival.
The last thing I would like to leave us with is a frequently asked question about how cognitions
influence intimacy.
Do they help or hurt?
How?
Well, of course, the answer is both.
Remember that CBT isn't necessarily seeing the glasses half full or half empty.
It's about balance.
It's about interpretation.
But I think it's most relevant to intimacy if we remember one of those habits of mind
is mind reading.
And I think just naturally we try to guess or we make assumptions about another individual's
motivations or what they might be thinking about you.
Oftentimes we don't check those assumptions.
We just make them and we act accordingly.
In order to resolve conflicts or improve intimacy, it's important, of course, to check out those
cognitions and their accuracy and see if they're helpful to relationships or hurtful.
Now in our next lecture, we will continue along the lines of talking about CBT and conflict
and you're going to meet Michael's wife.
Thank you.
