Victor Frankl tells us, life has a meaning to the last breath.
The possibility of realizing values by the very attitude with which we face our dust
and suffering exists to the very last moment.
He who has a why to live can bear with almost any how.
In 1942, Victor Frankl, a prominent Jewish psychiatrist in Vienna, was arrested and sent
to a Nazi concentration camp.
His pregnant wife, parents, and extended family were also arrested and sent to other camps.
He immediately noticed that some prisoners gave up right away while others continued
to struggle and survived even long after they should have rightfully died given their injuries
and malnourishment.
Over the psychiatrist, he couldn't help but ask why.
He quickly understood that it was about meaning.
He who has a why to live can bear with almost any how.
Frankl's meaning was his family, reuniting with his wife, imagining her as a light in
the darkness.
He looked for small joys, a sunrise, a bird singing, a farmhouse in the distance.
When the war ended and the camps were liberated, he learned that all of his family, with the
exception of his sister, had been killed.
His wife and his unborn child were dead.
His meaning was gone.
But he did something extraordinary.
His meaning became sharing the importance of meaning with the world, of founding a new
field of therapy called Logotherapy and writing, according to the Library of Congress, one
of the ten most influential books of all time.
Man's search for meaning.
In this lecture, we'll move past finding explanations for why events have happened,
and begin to think about what those events mean in our broader perspective and how our
reactions can be intentionally shaped depending on our personal values.
Well, shifts in mood states are beneficial to health and relationships.
Sometimes larger changes to perspectives or attitudes are necessary to meaningfully change
our quality of life.
I hope to show you that CBT can provide tools to support those shifts in perspective in
meeting.
As John Gardner puts it, meaning is not something you stumble across, like the answer to a riddle
or the prize in a treasure hunt.
Meaning is something you build into your life.
You build it out of your own past, out of your affections and loyalties, out of your own
talent and understanding, out of things you believe in, out of the things and people you
love, out of the values for which you're willing to sacrifice something.
So how can we adopt or maintain a constructive and balanced perspective?
The very nature of loss or trauma is that we develop tunnel vision.
We become focused on the event.
We want to understand it for a variety of reasons, to prevent it, to solve it, to absolve ourselves
from blame.
But finding perspective means broadening our vision.
It means considering our life course, our families, our communities, and recalling events
both tragic and triumphant that we have survived or even grown from.
It's not about discounting, it's about adopting a bigger picture and remembering that sometimes
today's low point sets us up for tomorrow's high.
At first it may seem like the ultimate exercise in cold rationality or maybe even sophistry,
but timing is critical as we all need time to experience our loss and grieve, but then
we need to find perspective, then we need to construct meaning.
Eventually the calculus has to be done.
What does this mean?
How bad is it?
Can I survive this?
The event has to be put into perspective.
So how do we do that?
We need to place the event on a personal timeline.
Is it the worst or best event we've experienced ever?
Where does it occur in our life course?
Is the outcome of the event likely to stay the same way?
Is our perspective likely to stay the same?
Are there other things going on that might balance what happened or things that might
happen in the near future?
Have there been times in the past when all seemed hopeless, but things changed?
Have there been times when you thought you wouldn't make it, but you did?
Place it in the greater context of family, place it in the greater context of community.
In part we evolve systems of belief to help us find the answer to why questions and to
provide instructions on how we should live our lives.
Basically we tap into our own system of belief.
Now we all have our different systems of belief and there's no one right system.
You might believe in karma, you might believe in God's plan, you may believe in the physical
or scientific laws of nature, and often time these systems of belief, although they've
been with us our lives, our whole lives, they're activated following a tragedy or with a medical
illness.
Remember that meaning is something that we construct.
We get to choose how and where we find our meaning.
I would encourage you to take a moment and just think about what matters to you the most.
Is there a larger picture?
Is there a grand scheme?
There may or may not be, but I think we can all agree that we have values, we have priorities,
things that bring joy and satisfaction and sometimes we lose sight of these.
This next clip shows how Maria addressed this very issue.
So Maria, I think next I would like us to try a different kind of activity.
We've been capturing behaviors and even scheduling behaviors and activities.
We've been capturing cognitions, we've been wrestling with cognitions with ABCDs and thought
records and so on.
This is a little bit different and it asks us to take a step back and to think about
values, and values are things that are important to you.
Relatives, areas of life, relationships that you feel are of value and are important and
deserve time, attention and resources.
They call this the values clarification exercise because it asks you to step back and just think
about your own value system in these different categories, how important they are to you,
and then it asks you to think about how you currently spend your time, energy and resources
and whether or not your time and energy is going to things you value the most.
So the way the rating system goes, it's usually zero to five, so zero, if it's in this it's
not important at all and five it's very important, and this column of zero would be, it gets
no time, energy or resources and a five is, it is maxed out in terms of getting everything
it could possibly get.
So why don't we just start up at the top and we'll go through importance first.
So for you, and there's no right or wrong answer, just what's important to you and what
do you value?
You are a marriage, so a zero to five, where was it?
To five.
Absolutely a five.
Okay.
All right.
And parenting, so I know your kids are adults and you have grandkids, and yes, so.
It was very important to me when my children were young, but it's less important now, maybe
a three.
Maybe a three, right, and once a mom, always a mom, but yeah, grandkids, sure.
And family, and family really means the broader unit, so that would be brothers, sisters,
cousins, nephews, nieces.
I don't have a lot that are living near us, so I would put that a little lower, maybe
a two.
A two, okay.
So it's really about the marriage and your kids and your grandkids, that's the unit.
The social category includes friendships, social relationships.
Friendships have always been very important to me, and I think that's one of the things
that I'm missing the most now.
So I would give that at least a four.
Okay, so that's a four.
The next one is about career or employment, job.
My career as a teacher was very important to me.
I love doing that, but I don't do it anymore, so I guess at this point it must be a zero.
I don't plan to go back.
So not important at this point.
The next one is about education or maybe personal growth, learning things.
That's always been really important to me, and again, that's something I haven't done
much lately, but I'd rank that a five.
That's a five, all right.
And recreation.
Well, as I say, we used to sail, we used to dance together, we used to hike in the woods
and mountains.
We don't do any of that now, and I don't know what to say really.
I guess it's less important than it used to be.
So I want you, and not necessarily to think about the actual column yet, but if with resources
and time and stressors aside, so how important or how much do you value those activities?
Well, let's say a three.
Okay.
Next category, spirituality.
What do you mean by spirituality?
Well, it's sort of a broad category.
It doesn't have to mean organized religion, but it can.
So a belief in a higher power and a higher organizing principle of a connection to something
larger than yourself that gives you a source of meaning.
That's hard to say.
I'm not sure about that.
I think in the grand scheme of things, we humans don't matter all that much except perhaps
to each other.
I don't know, maybe give it a two.
A two, okay.
And citizenship.
Well, I vote, and I pay my taxes, try to drive sort of near the speed limit, but it's not
very important to me, but we give it a one.
And your physical health, and this is your health.
My health.
Yeah, your health.
Anything else that I think is really important, because if you don't have your health, you
don't have anything, all of the rest of it is gone, you don't have that.
So let's give that a five, too.
This is a five.
Okay.
So if we look at the things you value the most, we have your marriage, you have education
and personal growth, you have your physical health, and your friendships are pretty high
up there as well.
So let's do the second column then, and again your rating, not how important it is to you,
but how much of your current time, energy and resources go towards that category.
So for your marriage, zero to five.
It's about a six.
Okay, well, we'll give it a six, so that's, that is where it's all going.
How about to be, we'll jump to the social, how about the social category?
That's gone practically to zero, I think, I just haven't had time, and I haven't been
able to keep up relationships.
Right.
And education, personal growth, have you?
That's a zero, too.
You know, I do a little bit of reading, but it's so hard to concentrate, I just can't
think long enough to really learn anything new.
And how about your physical health?
I'm not sick, I can still do things, but I don't feel as good as I once did.
I don't have the energy, I feel, I feel many times like I'm in pain.
Sure.
So again, it's the amount of time, energy, and resources you're spending in that particular
category.
So how much time, energy, and resources are you spending to improve your personal health?
Well, lately, since I've been coming here, I've been trying to do a little more, taking
a walk when I can take a walk, maybe two or three times a week, a short walk, maybe a
two.
Sure, a two, all right.
Just coming here maybe gives me a two, trying to get better.
And we'll just hit these other threes here, because those are still pretty important.
Parenting, how much time energy goes in there?
Well, you know, I don't spend, I used to email and text with my grandchildren all the time,
and I really haven't done that very much lately, maybe a one for that.
All right.
And recreation?
It's just about zero.
That's about zero.
Okay.
All right, we won't do these others, but you get the gist of how this goes, and we're looking
for the difference, so where the largest discrepancies are.
So we have a difference of two here, four here, five here, and three here.
There's only so many hours, and there's only so much energy in the day, as you well know.
But I think in each of us, when we're not devoting or dedicated sufficient time to the
things that matter to us, to our values, we feel that something important is missing,
and you feel guilty.
Yes.
Yes.
And you not just feel guilty, but you're losing sources of meaning.
You're losing sources of positive reinforcement, or of pleasure and enjoyment.
That's true.
That's true.
So if we're looking for the highest yield places to direct some of your time and your
energy, it looks like it's your friendships, education, and personal growth are probably
the first two places to go.
When you see this, what's your reaction or thought about this?
Well, my feeling is that I know I've been trying to do a few more things in the day,
and I find that I can do a few more things, because just doing them gives me enough energy
to do them.
I could call my friends.
I could start being more social.
I think that's a place that I could really start.
I don't know about the education and growth.
As I say, it's very hard for me to concentrate now, and I have so many interruptions and
things that I can't control, so I don't know if I can do much there.
But certainly, I could try to contact my friends.
Okay, so I'm going to just put a star by this one.
This is the place you're going to start, and I think as you've mentioned before, energy
is an issue, motivation is sometimes an issue, and as we learned with the activity scheduling,
sometimes action precedes motivation, so even if you don't really feel like calling
a friend, sometimes it takes that leap of faith, pick up the phone, make a call, and
once you've activated yourself to do that, you might find that you're actually enjoying
it and you're feeling more motivated once you've already begun the activity.
I'll certainly give it a try.
So why don't we all hold on to this, and I'll sort of keep it in our notes, and we'll come
back and revisit it.
What we want to do is have you begin to sort of reshape and redirect resources.
Obviously, your marriage is important, and caregiving is going to be a big part of what
you do, but we also want to help you share that responsibility with other family members
and with caregivers, so you can take care of some of these other categories as well.
Okay, thank you.
I would encourage you to try the act, values, clarification, or meaning exercise on your
own, and I think it's worth reviewing those core categories, and remember for each of
those categories you rate how important they are on a scale of one to five for you personally,
then you rate how you currently spend your time and resources, five most intense, one
least intense.
Do your values match where you're spending your resources?
So those categories, your intimate relationships, parenting, family, friendships and social
relationships, education or lifelong personal growth and learning, your career, recreation,
spirituality or religion, your physical health, or helping others.
Karen Wyatt, a family physician and spiritual writer, tells us that there are five key components
that we need to consider as we're thinking about meaning, and particularly meaning in
our lives following a trauma or a negative event.
She tells us that first we need to have perspective.
We need to remember that life is limited and precious.
We have to acknowledge the fact that we're mortal and life will end someday.
Two is prioritization.
There's no room for squandering or throwing away our precious moments of life, but we
have to identify what does matter and it requires us to think, to dig, because our values change
as life progresses.
The third element is preparation.
There's no substitute for planning ahead and being ready for some of the changes that
will come, especially changes later in life.
And last or fourth is practice.
Finding meaning in life requires effort and that effort's best devoted to some sort of
daily practice such as meditation.
But whatever activity can help you remember those sources of meaning and those values
that requires the discipline and the skills you'll develop to find and hold on to that
meaning.
And last has to do with presence.
Of living in the present moment.
It's become a common catchphrase, but if you recall our lectures on mindfulness, it's
important that you're able to appreciate where you are in the moment and what's around
you in the moment in order to hold on to that meaning of life in the present.
Now in this next clip we see an example of loving-kindness meditation or compassion meditation.
Now in this form of meditation it isn't just about mindfulness or presence, although it
includes those elements.
It's also about reminding us of our shared connection with others.
For many, it helps to reconnect them with an important source of meaning.
And now what I'm going to ask you to do is just to close your eyes and start taking
some deep breaths.
And I just want you to focus on your breathing.
That's the sensation of pulling air in, maybe the sensation of breathing air out.
Your mind's going to wonder because that's what minds do, legs walk, minds wonder.
That's what happens.
Just bring yourself back to your breath.
There's any tension in your body, just imagine yourself letting the breath blow it right
away.
As you sink down into your chair, you relax your shoulders, relax your back, that's it.
And continuing to focus on that breath and bringing your attention back.
Now what I would like you to do is to pick an image of a person, just a mental image.
It could be your wife, it could be your son, whoever you'd like.
And just imagine you're looking at that person, and then you're breathing in, and now you're
focusing on that image.
Now we're going to say a simple mantra and I want you to imagine we're saying it to
that person.
May you be free, may you find peace, may you find grace and courage.
May you be free, may you find peace, may you have grace and courage, and I want you just
to keep saying that over and over to that one image.
May you be free, may you be free.
May you find peace, may you find peace, may you have grace and courage, may you be free,
may you find peace, may you have grace and courage, may you be free, may you find peace,
you have grace and courage.
I'd like you to change the image, and I want you to imagine you're looking in the mirror,
so you're looking at yourself, and I want you to say those same mantras to yourself.
May you be free, may you find peace, may you have grace and courage, may you be free,
may you find peace, may you have grace and courage, may you be free, may you find peace,
may you have grace and courage, may you be free, may you find peace, may you have grace and courage.
Okay, now if you could maybe just take a few more breaths with those of your fingers and toes a bit,
you can open your eyes when you're ready.
How are you feeling right now?
Very calm.
So physically we get activation of the parasympathetic nervous system,
so your heart rate, respirations going down, it's sort of the anti-stress response that you're having.
What was it like to look at those images and then to say those three things?
It was much easier for the first image I found.
Who was the first image?
Your wife.
Much easier, and I felt immediately calm and positive, I guess good, about saying those things to that image.
It took me a moment to want to say those things to my image,
but as I went along I actually began to feel that sense of calmness,
and I don't know, it's okay to say these things to myself.
If you recall the work we did on the case formulation for you,
when we drilled all the way down to core beliefs and loveability
and whether or not you thought you were lovable and deserving,
was sort of at the bottom of all of that.
It's interesting that it was hard for you to say kind things to yourself.
But it's the first step.
It's the first step, it's the first step.
And as I mentioned, this is an exercise, it should be done most days,
I would say at least five days or so a week.
You know, we ultimately shoot for at least 20 minutes, but start with five minutes,
start with seven minutes is do as much as you can.
I would recommend starting with an easy image like your wife or son or someone,
and then include yourself and you can even think about people that you've had conflict with.
That gets a little bit tough, people that you might be angry with
and imagining them and saying kind things to them can stir things up a little bit.
But you've noted just from a couple minutes that we were doing this exercise
that it can really change the way that you feel physically and emotionally.
Yeah, I felt that.
And you can learn something about yourself.
Thanks.
Okay, so why don't we put that as a homework assignment
and you'll try it out these next few weeks.
Note if you have any thoughts about it or if you have any difficulties,
you have any successes, that's all.
Like I said, grist for the mill and bring it back next time.
I'll do that.
Okay.
Thank you.
So what do we hope this exercise will do for Michael?
Most simply, it'll give him some somatic quieting
and we hope a more compassionate way of thinking about others.
This is especially important when given his history of anger.
But remember that this practice also employs presence, focus,
and in some respects, mindfulness.
All that we believe are related to perspective and meaning making.
An interesting study done by Lambert in 2013
tested the idea of whether or not a sense of belonging
was linked to an individual's having meaning in life.
Now in this study, they actually did four linked studies
where they looked at 644 individuals.
In the very first study, it was a simple survey study
where they wanted to see if there was a correlation
between feeling like you belong
and having a sense of meaningfulness.
They found that there was very much a strong positive correlation.
The more you felt like you belong,
the more meaning you felt you had found in life.
In study number two,
they wanted to look at this relationship longitudinally.
So at time point one, they looked at an individual's sense of belonging
and they wanted to see if it predicted meaning
at some point down the road, about three weeks down the road,
and again, they found that there was a relationship.
In studies three and four, this is where they reached in
and wanted to manipulate an individual's sense of belongingness.
So what they did was to prime participants
with feelings of belongingness.
They read stories, they talked about social supports,
they talked about social values.
They essentially increased their sense of feeling like they were connected
and they belonged to other individuals.
They found as anticipated that by increasing the sense of belonging,
they were able to subsequently increase a sense of meaning.
Belongingness and meaning may be different,
but they do seem to be closely related to one another.
But what if someone feels like they don't belong?
What if they're isolated or alone?
Here's where you would break out your core CBT skills
and begin working on both cognitive and behavioral levels.
So consider our core CBT skills.
So those cognitive skills might include journaling.
So we start writing stories.
We might do some self-monitoring.
We might also do some cognitive restructuring.
We would want to recall the habits of mind.
We would want to do exercises like the ABCD
or the DTR, the dysfunctional thought record.
We want to consider our core behavioral skills.
So what activities are there that help you to feel a sense of connection?
You want to do the behavioral analysis of why you are
or aren't doing those particular activities.
You might want to do some behavioral activation
to increase the prevalence of when and how you do those activities.
We want to do activity scheduling.
You might want to do behavioral experiments
in order to test out particularly strong negative cognitions
that cause you to feel disconnected from others.
And of course we'll want to increase social contacts,
hopefully increase intimacy,
and we might even want to add in somatic quieting, prayer, or meditation.
So in summary, we've all been knocked to our knees
and we've all had trouble standing back up.
We need to find perspective.
We need to be present and we need to connect to meaning.
But remember, that meaning is constructed.
It is actively built and we can be its architect.
Let's move now to answer two frequently asked questions.
The first, it seems like every time I turn on the news
there's a new disaster or a terrorist attack
or an earthquake or a famine.
How can CBT help us in the face of such pain and suffering?
My first reaction is an empathic recognition
that life is full of pain and suffering,
end of joys and triumphs,
but there's no doubt that these horrible things happen.
And CBT cannot provide us an explanation
for why these things occur to innocent or to good people.
But what I think CBT can provide,
it can provide a toolkit to help us to understand
the reactions that we're having,
and if necessary, to manage or to change those reactions.
I think CBT can provide tools to help us
to remember to reach out to stay connected to our social supports
or to our sources of meaning.
So that even though we can't explain
or prevent events like disasters,
we can at least manage the responses
that we have to those disasters.
The second frequently asked question
asks, while appealing,
much of the positive psychology stuff,
and the CBT stuff in general,
sound kind of polyanna-ish
or maybe just derivative of the classic Norman Vincent Peel book,
The Power of Positive Thinking.
How's it different?
Well, it's a good question,
and it's actually one that I get often,
because when we talk about our toolkit,
we talk about wrestling with cognitions,
it's often when we're treating depression or anxiety.
So we're lifting people up,
and in essence, we are inducing or creating
more positive emotion while we're decreasing negative emotion.
But remember, the goal of CBT
isn't to put on rose-colored glasses
and only see the glass as half full.
The goal of CBT is to teach us to be fair
to ourselves and to others,
to teach us how to think of things
in ways that are balanced and even.
We want to think about thoughts
as either being helpful or hurtful,
and sometimes it's helpful to be sad.
Sometimes it's helpful to be anxious.
Sometimes it's helpful to think about
the negative side of things,
or if we've made a mistake
in how we might make amends.
So CBT is about balance, not positive, not negative,
but it gives us the tools to think about
what we should do next and what would be most helpful.
So for our next lecture,
we're going to move from the realm of
positive and negative emotion.
We're going to move from mental illness
and mental health and psychiatry,
and we're going to start talking about medical illnesses.
And I hope you see that even though
we're talking about depression
or talking about diabetes or cardiovascular disease,
we still have an important role
to play for cognitions and for behaviors.
We want to empower patients to connect with their providers
and be able to help in the management
of their chronic diseases.
Thank you.
