In our third lecture, we discussed how to create a case formulation and used an extended
video clip of me teaching Michael about the layers of cognition that go into a formulation,
the automatic thoughts, the conditional assumptions, or rules of life, the schemas and the core
beliefs. We populated those categories with real examples from Michael's life giving the
formulation salience and hopefully improving its accuracy. In this lecture on anger, we'll go back
to those real-world examples and explore how we selected and analyzed them to better understand
his anger and what to do about it. Let's move to our first clip about Michael, where he shares an
everyday event that triggered his anger and how he responded to it. I think what we want to do is
to start hearing stories and I think of stories as their data, they're grist for the mill and they
help us to begin to see patterns in the way you think, the way you feel, and the things that you do
and it's not right or wrong or good or bad, it's just these are things that have happened recently
or maybe in the distant past that we will start to chain together and see if we can see any common
themes that are emerging for you. Now you mentioned the fight with your wife and usually fights with
significant others have all kinds of dimensions to them. You mentioned it wasn't a new one, the
issue about conflict over smoking. So I would guess there's a whole lot of layers. There's a history.
There's a history for sure. So I would suggest we start with maybe another example that's a
little more recent, maybe with a stranger or something that wasn't really that big of a deal,
but it was a time when you felt pretty angry. What we'll do is we'll start with that. We will start
looking at the elements of that event, putting it into different buckets, into triggering events,
into emotions, into cognitions, things that you're thinking, and we'll eventually work our way to
the argument with your wife. Okay. All right. And I think probably the best way to keep all that
organized is to do a little bit of board work. So why don't we do that? Okay. Okay, Michael,
why don't we start digging in with some of those stories? And you mentioned that you
had in mind a recent event where you had felt angry. Do you want to tell me about that? And
we'll start putting this into different buckets. Sure. It's a little embarrassing, but I guess
it's a good example. Starting on the good side, actually, we talked about maybe getting some
exercise and I did get a gym membership. And I'm trying to make good use of it. And so that's
where the story actually begins. I was going to the club and the parking lot there is really small.
I don't know why. You figure you'd have a big parking lot because you want a lot of folks coming
to your gym, but it's a really small lot. Well, anyway, I'm getting there in my car and I'm going
to park and I'm waiting for someone to pull out. I've even got my blinker on so anybody else can
see I'm claiming that spot, right? So there I am. The person pulls out and just as I'm about to
pull into the parking spot, this guy in a white Prius cuts in front of me, goes right into the
spot instead of me. I had the blinkers on, right? Anybody would have seen that means he's claimed
this spot. Well, I was really, really pissed off. I have to say it just seems to be outside the
bounds of common courtesy. So, you know, I, I gestured at the guy, said a few things inside
the comfort of my car that maybe he wouldn't have been happy to have heard. He gets out of his car
and gives him one of those sarcastic waves, like how you doing, pal? Look who got the spot, huh?
And so he gives me one of those waves and that doesn't make the situation worse,
if you can imagine. So I'm very hot. I find another space and I'm thinking what I'd like to do is key
this guy's car. I'm just really, really mad. But I feel okay. Well, that's not the thing I should do.
So what I decided I would do just to vent a little bit, to show this guy that he really
shouldn't be able to get away with this in a just universe, right? I had a can of Coke that was open
and so I went over to the car and I, I guess I drunk about half of it. So I poured the other half
on his car. You know, okay, we'll figure it's at least he's going to get the message that somebody
was displeased. It leaves a little bit of stickiness and no big deal. So that's that. I'm going inside
and I didn't, I began to feel, hey, that was kind of childish and a little silly. Plus, I guess
there's a possibility that that could do some damage to the paint job in the long run. I don't
know. So I'm feeling that was a stupid thing to do. So I actually went inside and filled a bottle
up with water and I went back and kind of rinsed off the spot. So again, kind of embarrassing,
a little bit childish, but I must say, you know, the fella kind of deserves something. And I kind
of still feel that I don't really know how to handle it when people think they can get away
with this kind of thing. Okay, great example. So you can see here, we're using the basic ABC model,
the activating event, the beliefs and the consequences in order to start fleshing out and
teaching Michael the cognitive model of anger. So Michael and I are in the phase of collecting data,
and in this case, stories relevant to anger. We're going to use these stories as a way to educate
him more about the cognitive model and again, increase salience, but also to continue assessing
him and to work on his case formulation. We go on to use this story to illuminate what you know
is the ABCs, the active activating event, the parking issue in this case, the beliefs or thoughts
that he was unjustly treated and the consequences is pouring the coke on the car and later going
back to wash it off his emotions and his behaviors. I do want to point out though that the richness
of the event he shared isn't just captured in the ABC. After he acted on his anger, poured the
coke on the guy's car, he left, but he started to feel guilty. Now why would that be? According to
CBT, a new set of thoughts must have emerged that generated this new emotion of guilt instead of anger.
There wasn't really a new event, but there was a shifting chain of cognitions that caused a shift
in his emotional state. It tells us that he does have a moral code, that he does have a conscience,
and that he can self-regulate. We just want to help him work on his impulse control.
So what is anger about? Of course, we're going to look at cognitions and we've talked before
about Beck's cognitive model, beliefs about the self, the world, and others. And in anger,
the typical family of cognitions have to do with the perception of being unjustly treated,
wronged, or cheated in some way. We know that there's a biology to anger, often driven by our
amygdala deep in the center of our more primitive animal brains that give us this quick surge of
adrenaline or of energy. Michael often calls it his blip of anger that he then tries to grab
and pull back down before he starts to act on it. We also know though that anger is regulated by
both culture and potentially rules about how a particular sex or gender might be able to act.
I see many more men that come in with anger issues than women, and oftentimes those men
aren't necessarily angry, but they're depressed. And society tells them it's not okay for a guy
to be vulnerable or depressed, but it's more acceptable for him to be angry. Hence, he becomes
the angry guy. Now, if we look at the cognitive model of anger, we're going to want to look at
the triggering event. And this varies from individual to individual. Because remember, it's not so
much about the activating event. It's about the way we interpret the event. It is the activating
or the automatic thoughts that we have. So we want to first work on his level of general arousal,
or I think of it as sort of his pre-anger state. If someone's reserves are unempty at a particular
point in time, their trigger is going to be much more sensitive in order, in terms of responding
to a negative event. We want to look at the appraisals of those events, those automatic thoughts,
and two cognitive errors that we often see are over-personalization, and we see magnification.
We might want to reach in and see if we can do something in terms of changing his autonomic
nervous system. And here I'm thinking about a relaxation response. It is nearly impossible
to be extremely angry, but to be relaxed at the same time. The two are mutually exclusive.
So if we teach someone to have more reserve, to be closer to a state of relaxation, they're
less likely to get angry. We want those changes in cognition. We want those changes in behavior.
So how does anger management work? And of course these days, it's definitely out in the popular
press, and there's even a TV show about it. But there is a long-standing tradition of research
looking at how individuals can manage their anger. There's a lot of different flavors to
different anger management programs, but they include some of the following common elements.
So one of those elements involves first the improving the early detection of how you're
feeling. Now I think of anger as something that picks up steam over time. If you catch it very
early in the process, you have a much better chance of grabbing it and being able to pull it down,
to regulate how you're feeling and to not act out behaviorally on a particular impulse. The
longer you wait and the more angry you get, the less likely you're going to be able to control
your angry reaction. The next common element has to do with identifying the cause of the anger.
So there was something out in the environment, or there's something that you remembered,
or something you think might happen in the future that caused you to be angry. Now remember that
emotions, including anger, are important. They often tell us information about our environment,
and they're often what we notice first. So if you find yourself at home, maybe alone,
maybe in the office, and suddenly you feel anger, that's a signal that you need to pause and reflect,
and to pull out those cognitions about whatever event you were just imagining that triggered your
anger. The next component of many anger management programs is an assessment of whether or not it's
worth the investment of energy and resources to get angry. There are small triggering events,
and there are very large triggering events. We know that anger, whether it is in response to
something small or large, takes a toll on our bodies, particularly takes a toll on our relationships.
So is it worth the investment? The final common component of anger management programs has to
do with problem solving. Is this a problem, this event that happened, this wrong that occurred?
Is this something that can be changed? Is this something that can be rectified?
Now, from a CBT perspective, we would do, of course, cognitive restructuring, and here we're
going to look at those automatic thoughts, and we're specifically going to look at habits of
mind, such as personalization and magnification. We will work to hopefully decrease what are called
hostile fantasies, or when an individual is triggered for anger, then they start to imagine
all sorts of things they're going to say or they're going to do. How many of us have had
arguments with our significant others when the significant other isn't even there?
An anger management strategy teaches you to capture that process early and to take your mind elsewhere.
Remember, what we've learned from third wave therapies is it's not necessarily effective
just to tell yourself not to think angry thoughts. Sometimes that actually makes you think angry
thoughts. But use distraction, use relaxation, get yourself preoccupied with something else
to take your mind out of those angry ruminations. The last piece we would want to teach, Michael,
is somatic quieting. There's a number of different modalities that he could try from meditation
to deep breathing. Other interventions that we might try, particularly if we're talking about
a couple's therapy or a family therapy, if individuals are getting a little bit too hot,
if they're unable to think clearly and to communicate constructively, we'll often call the
time out where we'll ask individuals to step out to do some somatic quieting and to cool off.
We also, of course, want to look for other things that might be impairing an individual's judgment.
So if someone is drinking too much, it lowers their inhibitions and makes their anger more
readily available, makes it more difficult to regulate their emotions. And as I mentioned
before, sometimes anger is simply the surface manifestation of something else. The individual
may be very stressed, he or she may have a lot of physical or psychic pain, or they may be fatigued.
If there's an underlying cause, we want to make sure we get to that underlying cause.
Now, one potential cause of poor anger regulation is a failure to remember the humaneness
of the object of your anger or the impact that your rage might have on them.
Email flames, a relatively recent phenomenon, are a classic example where the human being
has been removed from the equation so that anger is no longer well regulated.
Many people, when angry, will say something in a particular way in an email that they would never
say to another person if they were face to face. Of course, one of the things you want to determine
up front is whether or not an individual feels remorse or guilt as a consequence of their anger.
If they do, you're in luck. You have something that you can build upon.
So if we want to build empathy, then what can we do?
Let's watch this next clip of Michael working through another event.
You have one more thought record. Shall we do the third one?
Yeah, let's talk about the third one. And this is actually, I must say, of the three,
the one where I felt most embarrassed about. But it's a very simple one. Everybody goes through
this. I was at home. I guess it had been kind of a long day. So I'm at home and the cell phone
rings and I answer it and not a number. I recognized what I answered it. Maybe that was
a silly thing to do, but I did. And it's a telemarketer who's now got my number. It's a
telemarketer. So, okay, yeah, I blew up. I blew up and got very angry and in fact,
ripped into this telemarketer. Okay. All right. So trigger telemarketing unwelcome,
telemarketing call. Very unwelcome. At home. The emotion was. It was irritation. Irritation.
Annoyance. Any sort of fury? There's there's there's there's hostility there. Okay. Yeah.
All right. There's definitely hostility there. And if you're rating on a zero to 100 intensity
scale, at that moment, I would say probably 70% 70% 70%. Okay. All right. And the behavior then was
to lash out to lash out. Okay. All right. What were some of the thoughts? So you got the call,
you sort of feel your blood pressure rising, that anger, hostilities building up. And what was
going through your mind? What thoughts did you? Well, a couple of the thoughts that that I that I
captured here on the thought record was, don't you telemarketer person have anything better to
do with your time? And the other big thought that I wrote down is this is my time that you are
invading. Yeah. So those were the two big ones that I wrote down. Almost has a how dare you sort
of a violation again of for someone to come in into my home or take my time, they should be
invited or be welcome. Right. You're not. I did not ask for this call. Right. There was though,
and I don't know how to weave this into the story, but it wasn't immediate. But as really in the
process of really tearing into this telemarketer person, I began to realize that that person is
just doing their job, right? Right. So why am I ripping into somebody who after all is just doing
a job probably doesn't get paid all that well anyway. So I did begin to realize, Hey, this is
kind of stupid, but I didn't apologize to the telemarketer. But I kind of backed off got off
the phone and I really actually felt a little bit embarrassed after the call. And there was a little
bit of twins that said, you know, maybe you should find out how to get back in touch with that
telemarketer and apologize. I didn't take that stuff. But you know, those were some of the
thoughts and the emotions that were also playing out after that initial outburst.
It sounds like you were almost a little surprised by the intensity that got evoked so quickly by
the calls are annoying. I think most people would say and not welcome, but it really it flipped
that switch for you. But in the moment, you started having empathy. You started having empathy for
the other person and started imagining what it would be like if your job was as a telemarketer.
You're in a minimum wage job, you're calling people that don't want to be called. And I
bet they have a lot of people yell at them all day long. What kind of stink to be a telemarketer?
For sure. So even in the moment with empathy, without even needing to sort of wrestle with
thoughts, the empathy diffused your anger. Okay, so if you were to rate the anger now or maybe
after the call, what did it get down to? The anger about the call is probably way down to the,
you know, the zero five percent that just seems it just seems an overreaction as I look back on it.
And you mentioned a new emotion came out and that was, I guess, embarrassment or remorse or
something. So that's, again, that's one of those kind of events, chains of events or event inside
of an event. So there were, I'm sure, thoughts that triggered that embarrassment. Yeah,
one of the thoughts that I had was that people are just doing their their job. And, you know,
I understand what it's like to do a job and not necessarily to like every minute of it.
That person probably doesn't like every minute of it either. And so I guess, you know, you use the
word empathy. That thought, for me, connects back if we're all just trying to get by, we're all just
trying to do it. You don't need somebody chewing you out just because you're doing what you're asked
to do. And that's a very sort of kind and compassionate way of looking at the world and
something definitely to strive for. And we can all aim to be kind and compassionate and do
the best that we can. And sometimes we're not. But then again, it's that opportunity to learn
and to grow and to turn it into something constructive. Yeah, I would hope so. And I must
say that I still feel a little bit of embarrassment. But one of the things that I wrote down about
sort of the the more objective thought I might have had was if next time I don't say if next
time a telemarketer calls to to front load kind of these thoughts that we're talking about and to
be prepared when that happens to say things to yourself in your own hand, it's just a telemarketer.
That doesn't mean I have to spend my night my evening talking to this person. I can end the
call. But there's no reason to inflict my anger on someone else. So what did we just see? Notice
that we've moved from the simpler ABCD exercise to a more detailed seven column thought record or
DTR dysfunctional thought record sometimes called a daily thought record. It takes more time to do
this particular exercise than an ABCD. But it does provide more information. The critical part,
as with the ABCD exercise, is in reconstructing or restructuring the cognitions. So I'll describe
the seven column DTR in greater detail, but I don't want us to lose the point of how we build
empathy. Notice that with Michael being out of the situation with the telemarketer and having
time to reflect was essential. He mentions feeling embarrassed and ashamed of losing his temper.
The DTR exercise itself in some of its prompts asks him to see the events through the eyes of
someone else, in other words, to develop empathy. After repeat exercises like this one, Michael
will become quicker to see the point of view of others and hopefully he will remember his lessons
learned. So now let's take a moment to unpack the seven column DTR a little bit. We'll explore
this more in the next lecture, but I think it's worth going over now as it can be quite challenging
to work with. In the seven column DTR, it includes prompts to think about evidence for and evidence
against a particular thought. It prompts essentially for a rational analysis of the situation.
It reminds us that thoughts aren't facts, thoughts are opinions, and we should always weigh and
consider and potentially change those opinions. Now for particular personality types, they love
this approach, especially those with legal backgrounds used to looking at evidence for or
evidence against. There's also, though, a set of prompts that you can use to help yourself
to soften up an emotionally charged thought and start to rewrite it. So some of those prompts
might be, if my best friend had this thought and I wanted to help him or her see things differently,
what might I say? Or you could ask yourself, am I using a habit of mind, all or none thinking?
Am I maximizing or minimizing? Am I doing mind reading right now?
Have there been times or situations when this thought doesn't or hasn't seemed true?
What's the other side of the coin? If I were to pretend to do a U-turn in my beliefs,
what might I say or think instead? When I felt or thought this way in the past,
what helped me? Is this thought balanced? Is it fair? What's the worst case scenario?
Can I live with that? Will I care about this five years from now? Is it really worth the
investment right now? Are there any positives? Maybe a silver lining that I'm not seeing.
In the seventh and final column of the DTR, the patient re-rates the intensity of their emotion
to assess whether or not the cognitive restructuring has lessened the intensity
of their emotion. If it hasn't lessened the intensity, then there's probably more work to do.
If you are interested in what a seven-column DTR might look like, I would encourage you again to
go to our friend Google, just type in seven-column dysfunctional thought record, and you will see
many, many very similar versions of this particular exercise.
Now in the last clip, we used the seven-column DTR with Michael to help him with his anger,
but it's a tool that we can use with nearly any scenario. And remember that the patient always
has a role in helping to select the tools that resonate with them. Sometimes we move from the
ABCD to the DTR. Some patients prefer just to stick with the ABCD. Some patients prefer to
start with the DTR. It's really up to you. But let's go back to anger. Does CBT work for anger?
I wanted to share just a couple of studies, one of the more recent from McIntosh and colleagues
in 2014, where they did a group anger management program in a sample of veterans who had post-traumatic
stress disorder. So again, it's not just about anger, but there's also something namely exposure
to trauma that's underneath. Now in the sample of 109 veterans, they looked at potential mechanisms
that helped them to get control of their anger. Now in all of their veterans, they found that
they were able to better regulate their anger at the end of group therapy, but there were two things
in particular, two skill sets that seem to be most helpful. The first was calming skills or what
we call somatic quieting skills. So again, you're turning down the flame, that sort of physiologic
arousal that often accompanies anger. The other was cognitive restructuring. That's back to the ABCD,
and that's back to the DTR. When they compared the relative power of those two, they found that
calming skills was slightly more powerful than cognitive restructuring, but both were actually
helpful. In an older study done by Beck and Fernandez in 1998, they did a meta-analysis of 50
studies of CBT for anger. They found that CBT patients did about 76% better than untreated
patients for the reduction of anger. In a study by Landenberger and Lipsy in 2005, they looked at
58 studies of CBT for violent offenders. So here we're not talking about everyday anger, we're
actually also talking about folks with a history of violence. They found that those individuals
also responded positively in being able to regulate their anger, and in fact recidivism
were bouncing back to jail once they got out, dropped by as much as 25%.
Now, the last piece I wanted to move to was to talk not just about the consequence of anger
on relationships or on social or professional functioning. I wanted to look at the consequences
of anger on the individual. There is this idea that a prototypical type A aggressive, angry,
hostile, usually business type guy would have a heart attack, or maybe he would have a stroke.
Is it true that anger, or specifically something called type A personality,
might predispose an individual to have a serious medical event like that?
Now, type A personality style wasn't discovered in a laboratory,
or by a scientist even. It was by a practicing cardiologist who had a rather posh practice
in the Pacific Heights neighborhood of San Francisco. He noticed that his furniture was
getting a little bit worn, so he called in a furniture upholsterer. The furniture upholsterer
took the measurements, but noticed and said to the doc, hey, Dr. Friedman, it looks like you must
see some really interesting patients, because they're always fidgeting with the arms of the chairs,
and they're always bouncing their legs up and down, rubbing the front of the chair.
What kind of patients do you see? The light bulb went off for Meyer Friedman,
and he realized that these mostly 40, 50-ish year-old men that he saw with their first heart
attack were very time-pressured, very aggressive, and very competitive. He called it a type A
behavior pattern, defined as a behavioral and emotional style marked by an aggressive,
unceasing struggle to achieve more and more and less time, often in competition with others.
Through a number of different studies over several decades, he found that really the key
element wasn't the time urgency or even the competitiveness, it was the hostility.
So if we look at hostility and cardiovascular disease, what does the evidence show us? And
there are actually well over 100 studies at this point, so I'll just give you a couple of highlights.
In one classic study by Ira Barron published in the Journal of the American Medical Association
in 2000, we see that hostility in a sample of 374 young 18- to 30-year-old students
predicted calcification of coronary arteries 10 years later. So what this particular study showed
us, it's not just guys in their 40s or their 50s that might be having this harm caused by hostility,
it actually starts much earlier in life and builds potentially over decades. In the next study by
Cheetah and Steptoe from 2009, they did a meta-analysis of 44 studies of hostility and
cardiovascular events. They found that the health hazard ratio was increased by about 25% if an
individual has high scores in hostility. So when I say high scores in hostility, what does that mean
exactly and what sorts of scales do we use? As you can imagine, there's a number of different ones,
but many of these studies have used something called the Cook-Medley Hostility Scale. It lists
the number of different beliefs and it is a true-false scale. Some sample items would be
true or false, no one cares much what happens to me, some of my family have habits that annoy me very
much, people often disappoint me, or it's safer to trust nobody. Now if we're honest, all of us
are going to get a few points on the Cook-Medley Hostility Scale, but we're really most interested
in the top 20 to 25% of folks on that particular scale in terms of being worried about their
cardiovascular health. Now it's well known that hostility and especially cynical hostility in men
is associated with having a first heart attack. We know the damage hostility causes begins early
and usually takes decades to really matter, but is there anything that we can do about it? If you
or your loved one might be in that top 20% of people who are hostile, is there hope? And the answer
is yes, personalities don't necessarily change, but we can learn to better manage our emotions.
One of the first studies published to show us that we can manage our emotions and improve our
cardiovascular health was published by Meyer Friedman, the individual who coined the term
type A personality. This was published in 1986 and was a four and a half year randomized controlled
trial where he took about a thousand guys who had just had their first heart attack
and put them in a type A intervention group. Some of them had supportive group therapy, some of
them had interventions that were specifically targeting that hostility. Fortunately for folks
who were hostile and for the ones who loved them, he had positive results. In the type A
intervention group, there was a recurrence of cardiac events only 13% of the time compared
to the usual care group, which was 28.2% of the time. So there's hope. But honestly, we don't
have a lot of hope just yet. There haven't been a lot of studies since the Meyer Friedman study
that show that we can decrease anger and there are going to be consequences in terms of improving
cardiovascular health. Now there are a lot of studies that are ongoing. There are meta analyses
that show that CBT can work to reduce anger, but they haven't connected all of the links in that
particular chain. CBT reduces anger and reducing anger improves cardiovascular health. So what
does this mean for Michael? Well, we're going to add behavioral interventions, social interventions
and somatic quieting. I think we can definitely reduce his anger. We hope to improve his relationship
with his wife and his son and his relationships with co-workers, but it's unclear if this will
improve his cardiovascular health. So in our next lecture, we're going to continue talking about the
seven column daily thought record and we're going to talk about some common challenges that come
up when treating anxiety, treating depression or treating anger, all grist for the mill. Thank you.
