Michael had his first big medical scare less than a year ago.
He was at work, he was incredibly stressed, and he was furious at a co-worker who had
yet again missed a deadline.
It started with a slow burn but quickly became a stabbing pain in his chest just behind his
sternum.
He started to panic when his arm began tingling.
This is it, he thought, my first heart attack.
He's rushed to the emergency room and undergoes a full workup, and much to his relief, he's
told that it's angina and not an actual heart attack.
He got lucky.
This time.
Welcome to lecture 14 on behavioral medicine, where we'll begin to apply CBT skills to the
management of chronic disease.
Although initially developed for the treatment of psychopathology, CBT principles and tools
have been used to understand chronic disease onset and to promote something called chronic
disease self-management.
This lecture translates CBT tools for use in medical settings.
Recently there's been a growing acceptance of behavioral medicine and specifically cognitive
behavioral techniques in medical settings, and I want you to recall the biopsychosocial
model.
Now in the biopsychosocial model, we had a Venn diagram of three intersecting circles.
We had biological factors, psychological factors, and social factors.
If we want to understand the causes as well as the contributing factors to those biological
diseases, we need to look at the psychological and the social.
Not a new idea, but an idea that seems to be gaining ground.
Now, CBT looks at mind, cognition and emotion, and of course it looks at behaviors that may
be directly or indirectly related to health.
And exactly how much do these matter?
Now it's important to remember that the practice of medicine or really the skills required
to practice medicine have changed dramatically over the past hundred years.
All we need to do is look at the primary causes of death for individuals in 1900 versus
say the year 2006.
Now about a hundred years ago, most of us were dying from acute infectious illnesses
like influenza or pneumonia.
So the skills of the physician were to treat those particular diseases or maybe even to
try to prevent transmission of those diseases.
Fast forward to the current day and folks aren't dying as much of those acute infectious diseases.
It's much more about chronic diseases that start slowly and build slowly.
Diseases like heart disease or cancer, stroke, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
We know that all of these diseases have a very strong behavioral component.
In order to practice medicine in the current day, it's not so much about infection prevention
as it is changing and understanding behavior.
If we were to look at the determinants of health, so what are the different contributors
that cause a person to stay well or to get sick?
We can look at an interesting paper published by McGinnis, Russo, and Nickman in Health
Affairs in 2002.
And here they break down the determinants of health by percentages.
They say that on average our genetic predisposition accounts for about 30% of our health.
Pretty big chunk.
Our behavioral patterns, though, account for approximately 40% of our health.
This would be things like diet, exercise, smoking, alcohol, and drug use.
Environmental exposures to toxins to pollution, that accounts for about 5% of our health,
small but still important.
And our social circumstances, so our communities, our education, our income, account for about
15% and health care accounts only for about 10%.
So if you look at the behavioral and the social determinants of health, you're slightly
over 50% of what's causing a person to get sick or causing a person to stay well.
If you're a patient or if you're a medical provider, it would behoove you then to think
about the biopsychosocial model and especially those social and behavioral determinants.
So if we're to look in more depth at those behavioral determinants of health, exactly
what kinds of behaviors are we talking about and how important are they?
Now by far, the number one cause of preventable morbidity and mortality is tobacco use.
Now this is primarily smoking tobacco, but really it's any kind of tobacco use.
And they estimate that about 19% of premature morbidity and mortality is attributable to
using tobacco.
A close number two comes in with obesity, and of course the behaviors there we're talking
about are diet, our nutrition, and caloric intake, but also physical activity and exercise.
Rounding out the list are alcohol, exposure to microbial agents, toxic agents, firearms,
sexual behaviors, motor vehicles, and then down at the bottom of that top 10 list are
the illicit use of drugs.
So if you think about it, we have a really important opportunity.
If we have 50 to 55% of premature morbidity and mortality attributable to social and behavioral
factors, we have a tremendous opportunity.
The challenge though is when life or circumstances get in the way.
We all know that we're supposed to eat healthy, we all know that we're supposed to exercise,
but do we have the resources, do we have the opportunity, and what are the competing demands
and what is our level of motivation?
Can we reach in with our cognitive behavioral tools and do something to re-engineer that
situation?
So what system can help us understand why we do the things we do even when we know they're
unhealthy, even when we know we are at risk of having a chronic disease?
Well of course we're going to take out our CBT toolkit.
We can use cognitive behavioral theory as an explanation, and we can use our cognitive
behavioral tools as an intervention.
So what are some of the common conditions for which CBT has been applied?
Now of course we've talked about the psychiatric categories of depression and anxiety and anger
and so forth, but here we could talk about health anxiety, we could talk about chronic
pain, we could talk about common symptoms like fatigue or insomnia.
We might talk about fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue, irritable bowel, we might even talk
about palliative care.
I think we can agree that with most common chronic diseases, there's always going to
be an emotional and or a behavioral and a social component.
So what's the impact of chronic and preventable diseases?
Well in 2005, about 133 million Americans suffered from at least one chronic disease,
and by 2020 they estimated that the number of people living with a chronic disease is
expected to reach 157 million.
50% of those people will have multiple chronic conditions, and each year seven out of every
10 deaths are the result of a chronic condition.
Clearly a very important area and much room for improvement.
Now the old school model is that prevention receives almost no attention in the medical
community.
So we eventually develop our symptoms, we go and see our doctor and we get a diagnosis
of cardiovascular disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or maybe even diabetes.
We get our prescription, usually some form of medication, maybe we get a little bit of
education and then we go on our way until our symptoms progress a little bit more and
then we come back and they add in more pharmacotherapy.
We know that this does work to some extent in managing those symptoms, but the movement
now is towards something we call patient centered care and patient empowerment.
And with that particular focus, I hope we're moving more upstream so it's not just about
managing symptoms, maybe it's about preventing them before they even occur.
Now an interesting new model proposed by Ed Wagner is called the chronic care model
and really it is a shift in health policy and health care system design in order to
facilitate the prevention and management of chronic diseases.
So we know that most of us, in fact probably all of us, are going to have a chronic disease
at some point in time.
The old school model is you have an individual primary care provider and he or she is your
primary or maybe even your only point of contact.
If you need a specialist, then you spend much of your time trying to arrange those appointments
and entering into all sorts of different health care systems.
In the chronic care model, we have a collaborative organized health care system of interprofessional
providers so physicians, nurses, psychologists, physical therapists, occupational therapists,
but we also have connections with an individual patient's community.
We have connections with the patient and the patient's family.
Now the part of the chronic care model I want to talk about the most is something called
self-management and self-management support.
The idea is, even if you see your primary care provider fairly often say once or twice
a month, that's still only 30, 40 minutes, maybe an hour over a particular month.
You have all of those other hours on your own or with your family or with your community.
So we want to teach you the skills when you're on your own, how do you self-manage your chronic
disease.
So does the chronic care model work?
And of course there's been a lot of different innovations and trials to see if chronic care
model can actually improve the quality of care.
And they found that over time, organizations have been able to improve their care coordination
and they've made an average of 48 changes in six of those core chronic care areas we've
mentioned.
They found that patients with diabetes had significant decreases to their risk of cardiovascular
disease when you use the chronic care model.
They found that congestive heart failure patients were more knowledgeable and more often to
recommend therapy and they had 35% fewer hospital days.
We know that asthma and diabetes patients were more likely to receive the appropriate
therapies.
So it looks like it's something that's promising.
We are broadening our team but hopefully we're improving the collaboration within that team
and we're improving power and empowerment really for patients.
But what is this thing that we're calling self-management?
So self-management is officially defined as the individual's ability to manage symptoms,
treatment, physical and social consequences and lifestyle change inherent in living with
a chronic condition.
So some of the essential skills for patients and patient families would be things such
as goal setting and action planning.
And I want to refer you back to our earlier lectures where we talked about SMART goals
and we talked about setting very concrete and specific action plans and looking at one
step at a time progress.
We want to use the skills of self-monitoring but here we might not be monitoring mood or
social context as we have in past examples.
We would be monitoring physical or medical symptoms.
We want to look at managing cognitions and emotions.
Remember that cognitions are related to emotions and cognitions are very much part of motivation.
If we're looking at motivation to change behavior or manage disease, we want to make sure that
you have cognitions that are increasing your motivation and not decreasing.
We might want to look at ways to manage your environment.
We know that the environment influences the behavioral choices that you make.
So if you can make changes to your environment so that it's more supportive of healthy behaviors,
then again you're moving more towards self-management.
And lastly, we want to help to build and utilize social supports.
We know that individuals can manage a chronic disease on their own but their outcomes are
better if they have at least one social support that they can turn to.
So I think of three key areas that we want to manage or to help patients to manage.
And first we want to help with the management of the symptoms of the illness or maybe the
side effects of the treatment that an individual needs to have.
Number two, we want to manage the stress and emotional impact that's caused by the illness.
And number three, we want to manage and adapt to the functional impairments that might be
caused by the illness.
Now I want you to note we're not saying that cognitive behavioral therapy or that self-management
is going to cure the disease but it helps to manage the symptoms, the emotional and
stressful consequences as well as some of the functional impairments.
So let's talk about what each of those mean.
So if we're talking about managing the illness, we might be talking about managing common
symptoms such as difficulty sleeping, having pain, having fatigue, nausea, changes in
appetite.
We might be looking at side effects of treatment or side effects of medication that you need
to take.
Common side effects include sedation or maybe agitation, dry mouth feeling that you're
in a fog or maybe having GI distress again as a consequence of your medication.
There are behavioral as well as cognitive strategies that might help an individual manage
those symptoms.
But part two is managing the emotional impact.
So we've had a lecture already on the management of stress and I think many of those same principles
and practices might apply.
We want to see if the emotional impact includes depression, sadness or grief.
It doesn't have to be clinical depression, it could be sub-syndromal but I think those
same strategies, behavioral strategies and cognitive strategies may help to lift mood
when an individual feels the burden of their illness.
We may want to look at anxiety.
Is the individual worried, fearful, are they avoiding things?
Have they become hyper-vigilant of different symptoms they might be having in their body?
Are there other somatic manifestations?
And here we'll want to use our cognitive strategies as well as our somatic quieting strategies.
And the last category was managing the functional impact.
So we might be talking about physical function.
Has your disease caused you to lose mobility or strength or endurance?
If so, there are behavioral strategies to begin rebuilding that endurance.
Has it affected your social and occupational functioning?
Your ability to maintain personal relationships?
Your ability to perform normal job duties?
Or are there maybe excessive or burdensome time and resource demands that are related
to your care or the need to go to medical appointments, physical therapies or maybe
adhere to referrals or even to your medications?
All of these can be addressed through self-management and through cognitive behavioral tools.
So let's move to a more concrete example of a chronic disease, our number one killer
and let's look at how or where CBT might matter.
So first we'll do a quick review of cardiovascular disease, pathophysiology, so we can see where
to apply those CBT interventions.
So if we're talking about the cardiovascular system, we're really just talking about plumbing
and a pump.
So our heart is a pump.
It beats it about 100,000 times per day, about 2.5 billion times in our life.
Our pipes is our circulatory system, of course, the arteries, veins and capillaries.
And if we were to connect all of those end to end to end, the length would be approximately
60,000 miles.
We know that our arteries are dynamic and responsive.
They can vasoconstrict, they can vasodilate, depending on demand.
The veins are really just tubes and the capillaries are where a lot of the action happens, where
our gases are exchanged, where oxygen and nutrients are delivered or where waste is picked up.
The average human has about five liters of blood, about half plasma, but then a mix of
different cells, red blood cells, white cells, immune cells, platelets, electrolytes and
mineral salts, all of which are important in keeping an individual's cardiovascular
system and body overall healthy.
Now there's a lot of different diseases of the cardiovascular system that we could talk
about, congestive heart failure, cardiomyopathy, aneurysm stroke, but let's focus on a heart
attack or myocardial infarction, since that's what was most relevant to Michael.
So how does a heart attack occur?
Well, essentially there's a couple of different ongoing slow processes which may cause a either
hardening of the arteries or narrowing of the arteries, respectively those are called arteriosclerosis
or atherosclerosis, and oftentimes we will see that character is characterized by the
deposition of lipids, of triglycerides or other materials that build up in the artery
and simply close the opening so that the same quantity or volume of blood is not able
to get through.
So some of the risk factors for a heart attack include, and you probably know many of these,
having hypertension or high blood pressure, what happens is that over time the high blood
pressure causes more wear and tear to the blood vessels, in fact it cause micro tears
and those micro tears serve as anchors to begin building up plaque that will eventually
go on to clog those particular vessels.
We know that high cholesterol, specifically LDL, the bad cholesterol contributes to cardiovascular
disease, as well as something called high C-reactive protein, a marker for inflammation.
Behaviorally, we know that some of the risk factors include being sedentary, overweight
or smoking.
Now, Michael isn't overweight but he smokes occasionally and he does have hypertension
and he does have high cholesterol.
Now the typical symptoms of a heart attack include sudden retro sternal chest pain, shortness
of breath, nausea, vomiting, palpitations, sweating and anxiety.
It's estimated that about half of all middle aged men and a third of women in the US will
develop coronary heart disease or cardiovascular disease at some point in their lives.
But having a heart attack is not a death sentence, of course survival depends on a number of
factors but on average an MI has about a 30% mortality rate with half of those dying
before they reach the hospital, another 10 to 15% die at some point in the subsequent
year.
That leaves more than half that need rehabilitation and our hope is that rehabilitation is not
just from pharmacotherapy but includes behavior and also includes psychological treatments
and work with cognition.
Now in general CBT could help with a number of mind-body factors related to disease.
Or a hostility, depression can help with acute or chronic stress, a sense of loneliness
or isolation or things like diet, exercise, smoking or medication adherence.
We've mentioned we want to self-monitor potentially our blood pressure, blood sugar, our sleep,
pain, calories, our fat intake or maybe how often we do or don't take our medications.
We want to use our skills for goal setting for behavioral analysis.
We want to build our motivations through using cognitive restructuring and maybe once we
find those particular obstacles preventing quality care we want to go about our problem
solving process of identifying the problem and testing out different solutions.
Let's move now to a clip of Michael where we look at how or when he's taking his anti-hypertensives.
So next up Michael I thought we could talk a little bit about physical health and the
relationship between specifically your heart and your anger and we had talked a bit before
about how anger and especially hostility is related to cardiovascular disease and we
know that that's something you have and it's something that you want to treat as much as
possible both with behavior, with therapy, but also with medications and you mentioned
that you're on a couple of medications and I know for most people, my patients but also
my family, it's hard to take the medications exactly as the doctor wants you to take them.
So tell me what medications you're…
Yeah I've got a couple, I've got a blood pressure pill and they've also got me on
a cholesterol.
Okay right, so you have high blood pressure, high cholesterol, we know those are risk factors
for cardiovascular disease so we want to get those as low as we can and you're on two
pills already.
So tell me how you're taking your blood pressure medicine and your cholesterol medicine.
I try to take it, I would say I take it most of the time, I miss a few I guess.
So is that once a day, twice a day?
It's twice a day.
Okay so you do twice a day and you take it most of the time, why don't we focus then
on just the past week or so.
How many times in the past week would you say you've missed your blood pressure pill?
Three or four.
Okay and for your cholesterol pill, how many times have you missed it in the past week?
I would say probably three, yeah three.
Okay so it sounds like in the past seven days you've missed the blood pressure pill three
or four times and you've missed your cholesterol pill three times or three days.
So about half the time would you say you're missing it?
I guess if I went back and thought about it each time and really yeah it's probably close
to half the time.
Well you know I will tell you that you're average.
So most folks that are on an anti-hypertensive blood pressure pill they have about a 50-50 chance
of taking it which is too bad because if you don't take it it doesn't work for you and
we know that blood pressure is one of those things that takes a while before it begins
to damage your blood vessels and your heart but eventually it does.
So we want to try to get your adherence up to medications but we don't want to jump to any
conclusions about why you're missing it about half the time.
So on the days you don't take it why don't you take it?
I guess generally I'm still forgetting a lot of the time.
It's not necessarily at the top of my agenda of things to do and maybe it's not as routine
as other things that I do.
So forgetting to take it sometimes I might be in the middle of something else I think
it's time to take it but then I say not now because I'll get to it later or another time
and then I don't get around to it.
Those are probably the most typical scenarios.
These are outright forgetting and are just kind of putting it off and then never getting around to do it.
I'll do it.
I'll get it the next time.
And then it doesn't happen.
So it sounds like it's mostly forgetting.
There are other reasons sometimes people have side effects when they take it.
I have not experienced any of the side effects that they talked about.
So that's good.
Another common reason are people feel uncomfortable taking pills.
It makes them feel sick or there's a stigma associated with it.
I really don't feel that because I think that I want to get well.
I want to make sure that my health is getting better.
So I don't mind the idea of medication being part of that.
Maybe somewhere in the background there's a little resistance to the idea that I've got to rely on something else
as opposed to on myself.
But I don't feel that as a powerful factor here.
Other common reasons and just to make sure we do diligence and gone down our list,
sometimes it's about cost or access to the medications.
Has that ever been a problem?
That has not been a problem.
And sometimes it's problems with the prescribing physician.
So you disagree or don't have a good relationship or it's part of those dynamics.
Probably not as good as our relationship.
But I don't feel that I would just say that because the doctor said do it, I'm not going to do it.
It could be a better relationship.
So it looks like the winner is memory forgetting.
That seems to be it.
Or if not outright forgetting, just putting it off and thinking somehow it'll take care of itself or I'll catch up.
So we need to think then about some sort of mnemonic memory aid that will help you to remember to take your meds.
And what have you tried so far?
Because I imagine you've tried a few things and maybe they haven't worked quite so well.
I really just have been relying on myself.
I haven't done anything to just kind of putting something out there that's going to remind me this needs to be done.
I guess I'm relying on the whole brain.
Maybe it's such a great idea.
Let's work in half the time.
Well, there's different things that people can try.
Some are high tech and some are low tech.
Behaviorally, we're more likely to adhere to something if it becomes routine.
And for many of us, putting on your seatbelt, you sit in the car and this is the first thing you do is you reach over and you take the seatbelt.
You don't have to remember to do it because it's become automatic.
You just do it.
But if you don't put on your seatbelt, you get that sort of little beepy noise that comes on.
And so there's this external reminder that says, hey, you forgot to do something.
So we want the equivalent of that with your medications.
So what are some ideas?
How can we make it automatic?
And if the automaticity fails, what's that alarm that we call?
Well, obviously I could just program this into my devices so that I'm getting a reminder.
You get a beep, you get a little message, you get whatever.
So that would be, I think, the easiest thing to do.
I could also obviously use the old fashioned stuff of just putting notes here and there, sticky notes, whatever.
Those are the things that come to mind.
OK, so we have the alarm part.
I think for the automatic part, you probably want to link taking medications to something you're going to do every morning anyway.
So you probably brush your teeth every morning.
Brush my teeth, have coffee.
So if you sit the pill bottle right next to your toothbrush, it's a visual reminder that you need to do something.
Some people pair it with breakfast or they sit it next to the coffee grinder or something.
So just, again, visually that it's there.
It sounds like you want to use maybe a smartphone or something so that there's an alarm that just goes off and you know what that alarm means.
Or so you have to make an agreement.
When the alarm goes off, you won't postpone getting the medication so you have to take the meds.
There are some fancier ways to do it.
There are apps that you can download that will even remind you exactly which medication, what dose,
and you have to answer yes or no after you've taken it.
And if you don't take it, it will actually notify your physician that you skipped a dose.
So maybe a little bit more motivation.
That might be what I need though.
That might be exactly what I need.
Sticky notes are a good idea.
The danger of a sticky note is you'll notice it the first few days.
Then after a while, it just blends into the background and you kind of becomes part of the landscape and you don't remember it anymore.
So what plan would you like to use from here on out?
I like the app.
I think that that's probably the thing that will keep me most responsible.
It'll give me the reminder and as you say, it'll also give me the little nudge, a motivation that if I'm not doing it,
I've got to sign off and if I don't, then somebody's going to be notified.
I think that that would be something that would get me into a routine.
Of course, medication adherence is just one category of interventions that we might consider.
And in fact, there's an entire menu of which we might use our CVT tools.
I would encourage you to again go to our friend Google, type in Minding the Body in Satterfield.
You will see a link for an Oxford University Press workbook called Minding the Body.
And in this particular book, you'll see that there are four modules.
One is on stress and coping specific to medical diseases.
One is on mood management.
The third is on social support and social supports include family and friends.
But what's interesting in this book is they also talk about how to mend or build relationships with medical providers.
And the last section is on quality of life.
And this includes quality of life as influenced by medical symptoms, by meaning, and also by spirituality.
I wanted to mention just one other book that I think does a nice job of highlighting how we can import CBT skills into a primary care visit.
This is a book by Dr. Lee David from the UK.
It's called 10 Minute Cognitive Behavioral Therapy.
10 minutes because that's the average or so amount of time that an individual gets with their cognitive or with their primary care provider.
It gives a careful description of process and the skills required and a little bit of the data on even though it's not a full cognitive behavioral therapy session,
why some of that structure and the approach can be helpful.
Now I think CBT is going to become even more important as we look at new models of care.
We know with the Affordable Care Act that it actually mandates that behavioral health be part of anyone's insurance.
Insurance companies can no longer say we're not going to treat your depression, your anxiety, or their substance use.
The problem is we don't have enough providers to meet that need.
So we're going to have to teach a wider array of individuals of how to do these CBT techniques.
Patient-centered medical home is a popular buzzword.
It's also about integration very much like the chronic care model.
And it specifically again includes behavioral health but we need short-term focused, structured, evidence-based interventions such as cognitive behavioral therapy.
The last examples I wanted to leave you with was from the fourth edition of a textbook called Behavioral Medicine.
In this particular textbook they really highlight chapters on integrated medicine, stress and disease, depression, patient self-management,
palliative care, and a number of other topics.
Now in summary we've opened up a new and I think logical area of application for CBT, the realm of medical illnesses.
For chronic illnesses in particular there's a strong and unavoidable role of behavior and much room for improvement.
CBT is a logical starting point to help improve the quality of care.
Now for our next lecture we'll stay in the area of behavioral medicine and tackle the always difficult topic of how to facilitate behavior change.
Thank you.
Thank you.
