There's a concept sweeping the smartphone app industry in Silicon Valley.
It's called adaptive difficulty, and the idea is to first quickly assess the skill and
knowledge level of your new user, then set your game or learning app at the appropriate
level of difficulty, usually just one short stretch for the user.
It feels a little challenging, but it gives rewards right away, and the customer feels
motivated to continue.
As the user gets better and better, the game gets harder and harder, always pushing the
user to improve and to grow stronger.
Now, CBT isn't a game, but it does involve knowledge and skill, and I've often thought
that CBT therapists use something like adaptive difficulty.
You start with the assessments to gather data on baseline knowledge and skills, but you
also use specific interviewing techniques like Socratic Questioning or Ask, Teach, Ask
as a way to set the initial bar for the level of difficulty.
Tell me what you know about depression and cognition.
Depending on the answer you get from the patient, you know what to teach and you know where
to start.
As the patient does their homework and they learn and they grow, you adjust the level
of difficulty upwards, and this lecture will adjust upwards from basic cognitive restructuring
to a more in-depth look at the seven-column DTR.
We'll also look at what happens when an exercise fails.
There is a way to almost always have a win-win scenario.
Remember, it's all grist for the mill, even when things go wrong.
So let's review what skills we've gone over so far, starting with the behavioral category.
We started with self-monitoring, and here we had an activity record.
We moved from the activity record to prospectively scheduling activities with an activity schedule.
We wanted to look at the relationship between activities in mood.
We talked about a variant where we could add in something called pleasure predicting, where
an individual, usually a depressed individual, makes a prediction in advance of how much
they will enjoy an event.
They do the event, and then they re-rate their level of pleasure, often finding that they're
initial predictions were too negative.
Another behavioral strategy we used is something called the behavioral experiment.
This is when Carol decided that she would walk down the street and say hello to strangers.
She had a particular prediction about what would happen, and it turned out to be wrong.
The last category of behavioral interventions we've discussed thus far fall into the realm
of somatic quieting, things like breathing, meditation, or progressive muscle relaxation.
So in our other bucket of skills, the cognitive bucket, we've done things like self-monitoring,
and here we're monitoring the cognitions.
We want to do detection, we want to do analysis, and we want to do restructuring of those cognitions.
We've done things like the ABCD exercise, and we talked a little in the last lecture
about the seven column DTR or dysfunctional thought record.
We're going to do another one, and if you want to follow along with your own DTR form,
again you can Google seven column dysfunctional thought record.
Let's move now to our second example of how a seven column DTR might work with a clip
from Carol.
So I brought my homework in, and I think that it would be good to talk about that first,
the thought record.
Sure, sure, absolutely.
So you have a thought record?
Yeah.
Did you do the ABCD or the seven column one?
I did the seven, the seven column one.
Perfect, perfect.
All right, so why don't we start with that then?
So what was your activating event?
Well, I went to the movies by myself, just because there was a movie out that I thought
was good, and I noticed that I was the only one there by myself.
Someone else who was there was in group, or they had a boyfriend or a girlfriend with
them, and it was kind of frustrating, and I don't know, I was a little embarrassed to
be there alone, and I thought about leaving the movie for a short period of time.
So if we look in this first column, the situation or trigger, you went to the movies alone and
looked around and saw that other people weren't alone, and the emotions I see here, you have
embarrassed, ashamed, lonely, and sad, and it looks like you've circled sad, so that
was the primary emotion and the one you wanted to focus on.
And the intensity ratings go from 0 to 100, and it looks like you've rated sad and lonely
both at a 70, so that was a pretty strong feeling.
Not as strong as possible, but it's pretty strong.
Tell me about these thoughts, so you have three different thoughts that you put down.
These are the automatic thoughts that popped to mind.
So what were they?
Sure.
Well, I think that the one that made me feel that sad and that lonely, which I circled
there too, was that I'm 30, and most of my friends are married, but here I am, 30 years
old still going to the movies by myself, so that was sad.
It just made me feel, I don't know, kind of down, but the other ones were, I feel like
everyone else I know, they're not as lonely as I am, so that makes me feel kind of even
more like a failure.
And then the last one I kind of already mentioned is that I should have stayed at home, or I
should have just left.
Okay, all right.
And I'm glad you captured multiple thoughts, and as we've talked before, every situation
usually brings up a lot of different thoughts, and the challenge is to be aware of them.
Looks like you're aware of them and you caught them, even though they were evoking negative
emotions and sort of prompting you to leave or to escape the situation, and you've gone
ahead and you circled the hot thought, or the one that you really wanted us to work
on today, so that's all perfectly done.
So the one you circled was I'm 30 and I still go to the movies alone, okay?
And those are one of those thoughts, you know, it's an automatic thought, so it pops to
mind, it's on the surface, and I always suspect that there's a lot of thoughts underneath
it, because different people could have that exact same thought, I'm 30 and I go to the
movies alone, and they might not feel sad, they might feel relieved, or they've given
themselves a treat, but for you there's more that's underneath, right, that contributes
to the feeling.
So when you have the thought I'm 30 and I go to the movies alone, what does that mean
to you?
What does it say about you?
Well, I don't really know.
I mean, I feel like for me, I just, it feels like I'm always going to go to the movies
alone, like I'm never going to have anyone to go to the movies with, and I didn't really
think a whole lot of it when I went to the movies, and then I go and I see everybody
there, and I realize, okay, this isn't how it's supposed to be.
And the fact that you're there alone means there's something wrong, something missing,
and the fact that you're 30 means this, well what does that mean, the fact that you're
30?
You should have been coupled by now, is that the idea?
Yeah, I guess so.
I feel like, you know, most people who are 30 or, you know, even 20s, you know, have
someone, you know, a friend or a boyfriend or a girlfriend that they can share those
experiences with, and I don't feel like I do.
If someone's 30 and they don't have someone, what does that say about them?
What would that mean?
That they're unlovable, I guess, and nobody really likes them, that nobody really wants
to be with them.
Right.
So now we're sort of getting down to the core stuff, and it sounds like there's some
doubts about lovability and some worries that maybe no one will want to be with you.
Yeah, it's pretty accurate.
Yeah, I wonder if it's a 70 for feeling sad and lonely, it is, it's really sad to think
that way.
Yeah.
Well, remember that thoughts aren't true or false or good or bad, they're helpful or
hurtful.
That one seems like it's more on the hurtful side, and the thing to do is to roll up our
sleeves and see if we can do something about that thought, see if it's fair, see if it's
even handed, and these next two columns ask you to find evidence or facts that support
or argue against the thought, and if we were to say the thought is, I'm unlovable and I'll
always be alone.
What would be evidence that supports that belief?
Well, I'm 30, that's fact.
Okay.
I'm at the movies alone with no one else, and...
Okay, so again, the thought we're looking for evidence for and against is that you're
always going to be alone or that you're unlovable.
So you're 30, you're right, that's fact.
You were at the movies alone that time.
Have there been times when you went to the movies with someone else, your sister or friend
or someone?
Sure.
Okay, and have there been events, holidays, dinners where you had other people's company?
Yeah.
Okay, and how about you've been on dates before?
A couple.
Okay, you've been on those before too.
So what would those serve as evidence for?
Do you think they might be in the proof that you're going to be alone or maybe evidence
against that?
Probably evidence against that.
Okay.
All right.
And if you had a friend, say a best friend, sister or someone that thought I'm always
going to be alone, I'm 30 and that proves it, what would you say to her?
Well, she was my friend and I would say, you're clearly not alone because we're friends.
Right.
Right.
Right.
And how about in the case for you, is there anyone in your life that you would consider
a friend or a social support?
Yeah, I guess, I mean, like I talked to my sister a little bit.
And you had mentioned some good friends from college too, like a roommate from college.
Yeah, yeah, who I still talk to.
And I mean, we don't talk often, but when we do.
Sure, sure.
And just to remind you a few sessions ago, we talked about habits of mind and how it's
very easy to slip into black or white and all or none.
So I'm either alone or I'm completely connected and have a huge army of friends.
And for most of us, we're somewhere in the middle.
So it sounds like you're somewhere in the middle, you would like to always have someone
to go to the movies with or you would like to have a significant other.
You're not there yet, but you're also not at zero, never having any social contacts
or any friends.
Does that feel believable and balanced?
Is that fair enough to say?
I think so, yeah.
Okay.
So we're going to try to rewrite that thought.
You're always going to be alone and you're not lovable.
We want to rewrite it in a way that maybe takes some of the sting out of that original
automatic thought, but it's still believable.
It's still fair.
So what would be a way to rewrite that thought?
What do you think?
Well, it's okay to be alone sometimes.
Okay.
All right.
I know that I mentioned, yeah, I'm 30 and so I should be doing all these things, but
I guess there are people who are older than 30 and they don't meet all of those expectations.
So there's still plenty of time for me to do all those things and to make new friends
and go on dates.
So I guess life isn't over.
I still have plenty of time and it's okay to be alone sometimes.
I shouldn't feel sad about that.
Sure.
Sure.
And in fact, some of those couples you saw at the movie, who knows, maybe next week one
or then we'll go on their own, maybe the week before they did, we saw a particular snapshot
and yes, you were at the movies alone that particular time, but maybe next week you can
invite a friend or your sister, but it doesn't mean that in the future that will always be
the case.
Okay, Carol, so now that we've rewritten the alternate thought and it feels less all
or none, a little more balanced and to me sounds a little more hopeful, why don't we
do the last step and have you re-rate the intensity of emotions and you had sadness
and loneliness were both out of 70.
So where would you be now if you were going to re-rate those?
I feel a little better.
So I guess if I had to re-rate the sadness, I think I could go down to about a 40.
Okay, great.
And then I guess for loneliness, loneliness maybe a 45.
Okay, all right, so you went from a 70 to a 40 for sadness and a 70 to about a 45.
So a decent drop, but it's still, and I think it feels realistic, it's not magic, you still
feel some sadness and some loneliness, there's some things you want to change.
That's why you're here, you're working on changing them, but I hope this is a good example
of how an exercise that you're going to get better and better at doing the more you practice
it can drop maybe by as much as half the intensity of a negative emotion you're feeling and
if you're not spending that energy feeling that negative emotion, hopefully it frees
you up to do other things that you want to do and definitely help you feel better.
Okay, so the next step from here I think it would be helpful to keep practicing with
the daily thought records, in particular honing in on that hot thought and sort of
drilling down a little bit deeper, looking for evidence for and against and I'll give
you another copy of, we had a little cheat sheet of questions to ask yourself and we
went through some of them together, what would you say to a best friend, what would you say
to someone else that's in a similar situation that needed a little bit of encouragement.
So we'll give you that, it's totally fair and fine to use it as you're filling this
out and bring it back next time and we'll go over it, work through it again.
Okay.
All right, thank you.
So by now we've seen several exercises with Carol and I hope that you're starting to
see variations on a theme for her.
She tends to have thoughts that devalue herself, devalue how likable, how lovable or how interesting
she might be.
She also tends to have thoughts that amplify or magnify potential dangers that are out
in the environment or possible negative reactions that other individuals might have to her.
What we want to do is to help her see those recurring thoughts, those recurring themes
and to really sort of build up her muscles in quickly building common helpful responses.
The advantage of seeing those variations on a theme is when she's out of the moment, when
things aren't so hot, she can write those detailed responses that are convincing and
meaningful for her.
When she's in the moment, she can then call them to mind much more quickly.
I have a patient that calls them his mantras because he knows that there are certain well
rehearsed negative thoughts that will pop to mind in social situations but now he's prepared
and his mantras will pop back almost as quickly.
We're going to talk about how to fill out each of those columns of the DTR and I specifically
want to focus on places where individuals tend to get stuck.
This is really a core skill and one of the more complex skills that you'll do in cognitive
therapy.
So first let's talk about how to identify an event and this is just the first column
on that seven column DTR.
Now there's all sorts of events that you could choose from and I usually recommend if you're
early in the process of learning how to do this, you pick one that has a mild to moderate
level of emotional intensity.
You don't want something so charged or so difficult that it's hard to finish the exercise.
If you're more advanced, go ahead and move from moderate to something that's more severe.
When you describe the event in that column, you want to keep it fairly neutral.
There's no interpretation, it's just the facts, it's just the context, it's just the circumstance.
In the next column you want to describe the emotion and you want to rate it in intensity
from zero to 100 with 100 being the most intense.
If necessary, if you're having trouble coming up with the right words to describe the emotion
you had, think back to the exercise we did with Michael where he created a sort of emotional
thesaurus that helped him whenever he needed to be able to put a word to a feeling that
he was having.
Now many folks struggle with the next column where you actually capture the automatic thoughts
portion but here are a few tips that might help you.
So you might ask yourself at this moment what was going through my mind?
What images or memories did this particular activating event evoke for me?
What meaning did I assign to it?
What does it say about me or my future?
If I were to put words to the feelings I had, how would I describe it?
And you might want to use a technique called the downward arrow to try to go a little bit
deeper.
That's how the downward arrow works.
If you remember some of the common automatic thoughts from Michael, they were about anger
and they were about some sort of injustice.
So Michael tells us, I can't let that guy get away with disrespecting me.
I would ask him, but what does it mean if you do let him get away with it?
He might respond, it means I'm weak and I'm asking to be abused again.
And what does it mean if you're weak?
Well, it means I'm a loser and that no one likes me.
You're drilling down, we're using that downward arrow to really get to the heart, to get at
that underlying belief.
And if you're able to work with that underlying belief, you'll probably be more effective
in changing your mood.
Now the next two columns are finding evidence for and against the automatic thought.
And as I mentioned before, sometimes this comes very easily to people and others might
struggle with it.
You might ask yourself, what are the facts and what are the opinions?
What are the assumptions or guesses that it might be making?
What has happened in the past in similar situations or with other people?
Are my automatic thoughts using habits of mind?
Is my language all or none?
Am I saying things like always and never?
Are there other habits of mind such as over personalization or magnification which I might
begin to shrink down a bit?
You should think of yourself as an investigative team of sorts, the Sherlock Holmes of automatic
thoughts.
Now if you're totally stuck, you can also run the thought record by a loved one or a
friend or you can do a behavioral experiment.
So if you have the belief, I'm socially invisible, even if I try no one wants to interact with
me, what you would do then is design a behavioral experiment where you go into a social situation
and you test out whether or not folks interact with you and whether or not you're truly
socially invisible.
Next column, how do you arrive at that new thought?
Again, this is one of the more challenging parts on the ABCD.
This is the D box or the dispute box.
You can use a strategy called yes, but which acknowledges some of the truth in what you
originally thought, but that there is another side.
Yes, I at times seem invisible in social situations, but I can change my behavior to reach out
more to others.
You want to go for balance or at least softening and qualifying those automatic thoughts.
You might try for perspective.
What's the worst case scenario?
Well this matter in five years.
Is there a silver lining?
Is there a bigger picture?
What we want to do is to help you find a more compassionate caring and forgiving way to
think about the situation and then rewrite it.
Now the final step is to rewrite the intensity of the emotion.
Did the intensity go down?
If not, go back and try to figure out why.
Did you pick the right automatic thought?
Do you need to dig a little bit deeper using something like the downward arrow?
Was the new thought believable?
Is this an unchangeable fact where you should probably work on acceptance and coping?
But remember it's all grist for the mill.
In fact, I think my patients learn most when they've tried to do a thought record on their
own.
They get stuck, they bring it back and we work on it together and figure out what adaptations
they can make for next time.
Now there's a new exercise I wanted to describe just briefly called the core beliefs worksheet.
Now if you remember the cognitive model talks about automatic thoughts on the surface but
we have these core beliefs underneath.
Oftentimes they're developed earlier in life and they may not be particularly rational
but they have a strong emotional charge attached to them and they're fairly resistant to change.
The way you would do a core beliefs worksheet, you can take a blank piece of paper.
You write that core belief up at the top.
So for Carol, it might be I'm an unlovable person.
She would then rate the percent strength that she currently has in that belief.
She would create two columns on that piece of paper, evidence for, evidence against,
probably sounding familiar now.
She would look for all of those prompts that you might use on a DTR but using them on the
core beliefs worksheet.
She might talk to significant others.
At the bottom of that core beliefs worksheet, she will write a new tentative belief at the
bottom in her percent agreement.
Now a one page exercise that takes her 15 or 20 minutes certainly isn't going to change
a core belief but if we think of that core belief as a boulder that's weighing heavily
on her, each time she does this she chips away a piece and chips away a piece.
And with enough practice over time, we hope that she can really make shifts in how she
feels about herself.
If you are interested in these or other CBT tools, I do encourage you to go online to
psychology.tools.
There is a veritable treasure trove of free handouts for CBT and other kinds of therapy
that are available for free downloads on that website.
Now what do we do though when things go wrong?
We really want individuals to practice their skills.
We want them to make adaptations over time.
It should be an iterative process but sometimes the homework just doesn't work out.
Sometimes it doesn't have the desired effect.
Let's go to a clip of a new patient, Scott, who does a meditation exercise that just doesn't
work.
But I see this, you know, as we talked before, this is all grist for the mill.
So something works, something doesn't work, there's a positive emotion, negative emotion.
We can always use that as an opportunity to learn more about what makes you tick and what
sorts of interventions we might be able to develop to help you especially with your anger.
So why don't we use this as an activating event for the ABCD and A is the activating
event.
It's the, I'm just going to put meditation practice.
And it sounds like one of the consequences you felt it was an awkward feeling.
Yes, definitely.
And what was it, was it weird or what was the word you used?
It just didn't make any sense, I don't know how you could word that.
So remember the consequences are for the emotions and behaviors and the thoughts go here.
So one thought is this doesn't make any sense.
Remember thoughts are thoughts, their opinions are not right or wrong or good or bad, that
they have consequences.
So they often contribute to the way you're feeling or the things you're doing.
So the consequences might be that there were times where I thought, well, this isn't going
to work and I'm just going to quit.
Okay, so you wanted to quit, but did you quit?
No.
Because I'm trying to help myself here.
Right.
So I'm going to put your behaviors, you didn't quit, you stuck with it.
All right, you didn't quit.
What were some of the other thoughts that you had?
Well, I mean, it just, the words, the words just didn't have, I mean, what is Zen?
I mean, I don't know what, so it's just maybe that part of the same doesn't make any sense.
I mean, just repeating things, three phrases over and over again.
I mean, maybe it wasn't, maybe just because it wasn't the way I would have worded it,
but usually I would think when I word it my way, they make more sense.
Sure.
But when you recite a script, it's kind of, I don't know, I just, I tried.
And I appreciate your honesty.
So I put, having you write your own mantra might make more sense for you.
Any other thoughts or consequences we should capture?
You did mention that you felt somewhat relaxed.
Yeah, well, after about the third or fourth try, yeah.
Put a bit, and that's after some practice, third or fourth try.
Yeah, so I mean, that's probably the reason why I didn't quit, because I thought, well,
maybe this is starting to work.
Let's see what happens.
This guy doesn't know what he's doing.
Okay.
Maybe this is starting to work.
All right.
So just as a reminder, when we look at this horizontal line, these are usually the things
we notice.
They're above ground, so to speak.
Your feelings, your behaviors, the triggering event, all of the stuff below the horizontal
line is below ground.
We got to dig a little bit to get to them.
And these are the beliefs or the automatic thoughts, things that popped to mind.
We got some positive, we have some negative, the consequences awkward, but relaxed after
you practiced a bit and you didn't quit.
Now this is a dispute box, and remember, these two are directly related.
So if you believe that some of these thoughts are unhelpful or unfair or unbalanced or you
want to think about it in a different way, then you rewrite those thoughts in the dispute
box.
So why don't we start with the very first one.
This doesn't make any sense and let's use some of those strategies that we had talked
about.
And just as a reminder, one of them was, so if your friend was trying out something new
and said, yeah, this doesn't make any sense, and you wanted to encourage him.
So what would you say to him?
Well, I mean, what I would say to him is like, it doesn't make any sense at first, but nothing
new does.
So you have to give it a chance.
Nothing new makes sense at first.
You have to give it a chance.
And it seems like you did that.
It didn't make sense, but you stuck with it anyway.
I trust the professionals.
When a professional says, do this, this is going to work, then you...
Okay.
All right.
So I'm going to put another thought you had was, or you just shared, was to trust the
professionals.
All right.
Suspend your disbelief.
Yeah.
I'm trying to get help.
And so if I trust the professional, if I practice with the professional, there's obviously
a reason why this is...
I'm not the first person that this has been done on.
Right.
Right.
And I think your experience really matches what a lot of other folks have shared as well.
We didn't...
Most of us didn't grow up learning about meditation or Buddhism or Zen or what have you.
I certainly did.
Some folks did.
So if you try something different, it feels a little maybe awkward in the beginning.
But you stuck with it.
You felt a little relaxed.
We have a choice point here.
So you could either go ahead and continue practicing this, or you can try a different
relaxation strategy.
Remember the goal was to turn down the flame a bit so that you had a little more reserve
when you're in stressful situations and you're not as close to erupting as has happened.
Yes.
The important part is to remember that nothing works all the time, and you often don't get
it right the first time.
That's the partnership, the collaborative problem solving and CBT that creates the flexibility
and the creativity to finally find something that works for that particular person given
his or her life circumstances.
Now in our next lecture, we're going to try something different.
We have the same toolbox, but we're going to see if we can use those tools to evoke
positive emotions.
Thank you.
