Nearly 70% of Americans have it.
About 40% of us are trying to change it.
We spend a collective total of nearly $500 billion per year on it.
It's been closely linked to heart disease, stroke, cancer, and early death.
What are we talking about?
We're talking about being overweight or obese.
We're obsessed with fatness and, to a lesser extent, fitness.
But this obsession has done little to stop what is being called an epidemic of obesity.
What is going on?
In this installment, we'll tackle this and other vexing questions regarding weight, weight
gain, weight loss, and, I think more importantly, fitness and wellness.
CBT, with its focus on motivation, cognition, and behavior, has quite a few tools to offer.
Let's see what they are and if they really work.
So first we'll want to calibrate our language, our terminology, and I want to talk just a
little bit about the epidemiology of weight.
Now the number we most commonly see is our weight in pounds.
In a medical setting, we'll often use something called the BMI or the body mass index.
Your body mass index is simply a proportion of your weight to your height, and specifically,
it's your weight in kilograms divided by your height in meters squared.
Since that's an awful lot of math to do in your head, the easiest way to figure your
BMI is to go online, type in BMI calculator, you can enter in your weight in pounds and
your height in feet and inches, and there you'll get a number.
An alternative to BMI is something called waist to hip ratio or the gut to butt ratio.
The goal is that for men, your waist to hip ratio would be less than 0.95, and for women,
it would be less than 0.80.
For individuals who have a BMI between 18.5 and 24.9, that's considered what's called
a normal body mass index or a normal weight.
For folks from 25 up to 29.9, that's considered overweight, and anyone 30 and above is considered
obese.
Now in terms of the epidemiology, we know that about 69% of men and women over the age
of 20 are considered overweight or obese, that's 25 and above, and 36% are considered
obese or a BMI of 30 or higher.
We know that the rates of overweight and obesity have been rising dramatically over the past
couple of decades for adolescents and for adults, and we believe that by the year 2030
that a full 58% of the world is predicted to be overweight.
So when we hear statistics like this, I hope that you've developed the habit to step back
and start thinking about a formulation, to start thinking about behavioral analysis,
and I would recommend that we could go back and use our model, the biopsychosocial model.
So we would want to look for biological hypotheses, we would want to look at psychological hypotheses
such as stress or other psych variables, and we would also want to look at social relationships
and the social environment.
So we've already talked a good bit about stress.
We know that it too is an epidemic, and we also know that there are many environmental
pressures to make bad food choices, but are we really behaving differently when it comes
to food, and how are we supposed to be eating?
So let's take a look at nutrition statistics.
Now most of us are familiar with the old food pyramid with the carbs on the bottom, then
the fruits and vegetables and the dairy meat oils and sweets up closer to the top of the
pyramid.
Now this pyramid was revised about every decade or so until just recently when they scrapped
the pyramid completely.
Today we have something called my plate, and it's a relatively simple graphic of a bird's
eye view of a plate with a little cup of dairy next to it.
The plate looks like it's been approximately cut into four quadrants.
We have a quadrant for fruit, for vegetables, for grains and for protein, a slightly larger
portion of vegetables, slightly smaller portions for the fruits and for the protein.
So how do we do in terms of following these simplified dietary recommendations?
Well, not so good.
We follow these recommendations only 2% of the time.
And to count as a yes, to count as following those recommendations you only have to be
compliant 70% of your meals.
If we look at the most commonly eaten vegetable, it's the potato, but usually in the form of
french fries or potato chips.
Second most commonly eaten vegetable is the tomato, in the form of ketchup or pizza or
pasta sauce.
Third is onions, and fourth is iceberg lettuce which is mostly water with little nutritional
value.
So we're not making very good food choices in terms of what we eat, but that only begs
the question of why.
It may partly be ignorance, but it can't be that simple.
Well, we're not eating so well, but what about physical activity?
What about exercise?
How are we doing there?
Well, we know that about 60% of US adults don't exercise regularly, but 73% of us believe
that we're in fair to excellent physical condition, and a full 25% of the population are fully
sedentary, and it's estimated that this costs the US health care system a full $76 billion
per year.
Now it's tempting to attribute our rising overweight and obesity rates to a failure
in willpower, some sort of decline in character, but think of it in another way.
If you gave a test to 100 people and 70 of them failed, would you assume they were all
lazy or unintelligent or lacked willpower, or would you begin to wonder about that test
and what made it so difficult?
So let's go back and look at some biological explanations, some social and environmental
explanations, and take a look again at the role that stress might play.
And let's remember that CBT is particularly well suited to address stress and behavior.
So we know that energy balance is the key to the regulation of body weight.
This is the classic calories taken in versus calories burned off, but we also know that
that it really isn't that simple, since our rate of energy expenditure or metabolism
may vary.
Now energy expenditure occurs in three different ways.
The first is our basal metabolic rate, and that's about 60% of the total.
Second is the thermic effect of food, about 10% of the total, and that's the energy it
takes to eat and digest your food.
And the third is activity thermogenesis, and that burns off about 30% of your calories,
and that's the physical activity and the exercise.
Now the high percentage of your basal metabolic rate is partly why losing weight is so hard.
The body slows our metabolic rate when we're dieting.
Our metabolic rate also slows as we age, in part due to the loss of lean muscle mass that
burns calories much more quickly.
So as we age, it gets harder and harder to keep the weight off.
And the more we diet, the more we run the risk of slowing down our metabolism.
But that's not all.
Our food environment and even our culture make it extremely difficult to make good
food choices.
So think from your own family experience or your own cultural experience.
When does food make an appearance?
Food is often times tied with celebrations, the wedding cake and the birthday cake, or
it's tied with holidays, the Thanksgiving feast or the Christmas or other holiday feast.
It's also tied symbolically to feeling cared for or to feeling loved.
For me, it was my grandmother's blackberry cobbler.
She would cook an entire cobbler for the family.
She would cook a second cobbler just for me, give me a serving spoon and I would eat myself
into a happy food coma.
Nothing better.
So when we're talking about changing food choices, we have to remember that it brings
with it all of that history, all of that meaning, and all of that symbolism.
Now of course it is about family and it's about culture, but it's also about other social
determinants, such as socioeconomic status and education.
We also have to remember that there are broader social influences.
For instance, McDonald's advertising budget is 10 times the NIH budget for healthy eating.
About 50 million people a day eat at McDonald's and a quarter of the nation's vegetable
consumptions are french fries.
In 1970 about 26% of our food dollars were spent eating out.
That has increased to around 41% in 2005.
Our portion sizes have also changed dramatically in the past 20 years.
NHLBI, the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, has a terrific online portion distortion
quiz.
They show us that two pieces of pizza used to be around 500 calories and now it's around
850 calories.
A bagel used to be around 140 calories, but now it's all the way up to 350 calories.
And an average cup of coffee used to be 45 calories, but now it's 330 calories, compliments
of the Grande Starbucks.
If we look at broader media influences, the average child watches around 10,000 TV ads.
95% of those ads are for sugary cereals, sodas, candies and fast food.
50,000 schools serve fast food as their, quote, nutritious school lunch, and physical education
or PE has been cut in no longer mandatory in many different schools.
The average kid has spent more hours watching TV than going to school by the time they graduate
from high school.
And what about the internet?
They watch that way more than TV.
So it's important that we remember when we're talking about psychological variables such
as stress and obesity, we're talking about stress on a physiologic level, but we're
also talking about stress on a behavioral level.
When we're stressed, it affects our food choices.
When we're stressed, it affects our motivation to exercise.
So what do we eat when we're stressed?
Well, 65% of us eat more candy or chocolate, 56% eat more ice cream, 53% eat more potatoes
or corn chips, 49% eat more cookies, and only 8% of us eat more vegetables.
So what are some of the implications?
Well, we might need to think about re-engineering food availability and changing our habits
of how we respond to stress.
We might want to limit our exposures to bad food.
We might want to think about other stress reduction strategies to manage our moods other
than reaching for the candy or for the cookies.
We probably want to schedule an increased amount of time to sleep when we're stressed,
even though we're busy and feel that we don't have the time.
And we actually need to exercise more, not less, when we're stressed.
So I often get the question of whether or not an individual should exercise or diet.
If their BMI is 26, 27, 28, they're technically in that overweight category, but maybe they
don't have many health consequences as of yet.
I tend to go by the NIH guidelines, which say, if you are overweight, in other words,
your BMI is between 25 and 30, if you're overweight and you have two or more cardiovascular risk
factors such as hypertension or high cholesterol, then you should try behavior, modification,
diet, exercise, better food choices.
If you are obese, your BMI is over 30, and you're unable to lose 10% of your weight,
then you could consider adding pharmacotherapy into your behavior modification program.
If your BMI is over 40, you're already doing behavior modification, you've already tried
pharmacotherapy, then you could also consider weight loss surgery, and of course that's
an evaluation you would want to do with your primary care physician.
So what does the data tell us in terms of the outcomes for behavior modification for
all of these different kinds of diets and exercise?
And here I don't want to parse it into specific kinds of diets, but I want to look at a large
meta-analysis that NIH did of 48 different randomized controlled trials.
In these 48 trials, they showed that there was an average weight loss of 8% over one
year, and at a three to five year follow-up, there was zero weight loss.
So essentially everyone increased their weight back up to where they had started, sort of
discouraging in a way, but remember those individuals were able to lose initially, and
at least they prevented weight gain, even though they gained that weight back.
So I think maybe some more realistic initial goals would be to first, be as fit as possible
at your current weight, and don't worry so much about the number.
The second goal would be to prevent further weight gain.
We know that as we get older, we tend to gain more weight, so if you can put the brakes
on that, that should certainly be considered a success.
If you're good at number one and number two, then number three would be, okay, now we can
think about decreasing BMI or decreasing your actual weight.
So what are some of the skills that we should think about in terms of dieting and exercise?
Well, both of them are important, but if your goal is to decrease that number to lose pounds,
dieting will probably get you there quicker than exercise will.
Ideally you would do a little bit of both, but what skills would be helpful especially
for dieting?
Well it takes us back to our usual list of self-monitoring, so you need to know your
baseline and where you're starting.
We might use stimulus controls, so removing temptation from your environment, cognitive
restructuring, so what thoughts do you have when you're deciding what to eat or what not
to eat, and we might use some of those motivational enhancement strategies that we talked about
with the trans-theoretical model and motivational interviewing?
There's a number of well-designed CBT programs for weight management and physical activity,
but most of them have been shown to have a fairly modest effect size.
One of the best articulated and demonstrated models comes from Judy Beck, and of course
her name sounds familiar because her father was Aaron or Tim Beck, the father of cognitive
behavioral therapy.
Now Judy Beck wrote a book called The Beck Diet Solution in 2008, a best seller that
very carefully plans out a 42-day action plan to help individuals realize their exercise
and weight loss goals.
In that book they start with self-monitoring and a behavioral analysis, what really makes
you eat, and why do you really want to lose the weight, how do you think like a thin person,
and here that really moves you into the realm of cognitive restructuring.
So what's an example of some of the habits that she talks about?
So what foods do you select when you go to the grocery store?
Many of us go on autopilot as we're zooming through our familiar grocery store and we
pick the same sorts of foods.
You want to shift those habits, taking time to plan and prepare meals and thinking about
what choices you're making, serving your food on smaller plates, eating more slowly and
without distraction, or pausing for 20 minutes after a serving before you decide you need
more.
And this is from a basic physiologic explanation of how and when we feel satiety, and it takes
us about 20 minutes before we feel satiated after we've eaten.
So what's the evidence for CBT and weight loss?
Remember that CBT started in psychiatry as a treatment for mental illness, and the strongest
evidence for CBT in weight or management of eating comes from studies of binge eating
and bulimia.
It's also a key ingredient for the treatment of anorexia, a disorder which is at the other
extreme end of the spectrum.
But what about for run-of-the-mill weight loss?
Well, we've had over about 100 studies, all testing slight variants to the model or to
different populations, and all have behavioral interventions as number one, and cognitive
interventions as number two.
So an example would be from Pementa in 2012.
This was an international study looking at a small sample of midlife women.
They used an eight-week randomized controlled trial of cognitive behavioral therapy.
They were able to show decreased weight, decreased body mass index, decreased waist circumference,
and improved eating habits.
But the effects were modest.
In fact, in most of these studies, we're back to that number that NIH has given us from their
meta-analysis, the weight loss of about 8% to 10%.
What about evidence for youth?
And I wanted to mention just one study by Denise Wilfley in 2011.
This was a comprehensive literature review focusing on children and adolescents where
they used behavior therapy supplemented with cognitive restructuring, and they found that
that combination was the strongest non-medical treatment for youth and for adolescents.
They used self-monitoring, they used stimulus control, both invaluable behavioral components.
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, in fact, recommends multimodal approaches to
weight management and specifically lists CBT as a core ingredient.
Now a number of large longitudinal studies have shown us that it's not just about fat,
it's also about fit.
An overweight but fit person is much better off than a thin person who is unfit.
In fact, even small improvements in fitness can have substantial benefits.
So some of the benefits of physical activity increases in cardiorespiratory fitness.
We know there's an overall reduction in mortality, better management, or even prevention of
cardiovascular disease, hypertension, diabetes, and the list goes on and on, and I think we
should make sure we add to that list a decrease in stress and an increase in psychological
well-being.
Well, how much physical activity do we need to have?
And honestly, it's a little frustrating if you follow the literature because it seems
like the amount continues to change.
But the point that I hope you'll take away from this is that greater health benefits
are associated with greater levels of activity.
But exercise does not need to be intense nor does it need to be prolonged to be beneficial.
If possible, you should aim for 60 to 90% of your maximum heart rate.
You can derive your maximum heart rate by taking the number 220, minusing your age,
and then you would want to be approximately 60 to 90% of that number.
We know that the greatest relative benefit may be gained by previously sedentary people
becoming even slightly active.
In fact, I wanted to share one interesting and very promising study done by Ching Peng
Nguyen in Taiwan.
This was published by The Lancet in 2011 and included a whopping 416,000 subjects that
they followed over a period of eight years.
In this study, they found that inactive people who increased their physical activity by just
15 minutes per day, reduced the risk of death by 14% and increased their life expectancy
by three years.
And I want to repeat that because I think it's rather extraordinary.
Inactive people who increased their physical activity by just 15 minutes per day, reduced
their risk of death by 14% and increased their life expectancy by three years.
Each additional 15 minutes of exercise lowered their risk by an additional 4%.
Just 15 minutes a day.
I hope that seems doable.
Next let's move to a clip of Michael.
Michael is trying to increase his physical activity levels and he's encountering some
challenges.
So Michael, let's continue talking about the health-related behaviors that are important
in managing your cardiovascular disease.
And on our list, I have medication adherence, smoking, diet, and physical activity.
So which of those should we pick up?
And let's talk about physical activity.
Physical activity.
So we know that physical activity and cardiovascular health are very much related to one another.
And we know that oftentimes we're told our level of exercise should be here, but in reality
we're down here somewhere.
But I don't want to assume.
So let me just ask first, what is your current level of physical activity?
Well, it's pretty low I think, that a lot of things get in the way.
But I would say I might be getting an hour a week.
An hour a week.
Yeah.
Okay.
Well, let's maybe take a step back and make sure we're defining physical activity the
same way.
And you might have noticed that folks now talk more about physical activity versus exercise.
And that's because exercise sounds like it's something that you do in a gym.
You know, it's something you have to have like a special outfit for and special shoes
or whatever.
And really physical activity is physical activity.
It all counts.
And it all contributes to cardiovascular health.
So walking to work or walking across the parking lot or taking the stairs instead of the elevator,
that's all physical activity.
And we think of that as summing across the course of the day or over the course of a
week.
So that all counts.
Okay.
So for you, when you said an hour a week, what kind of physical activity is it?
Well, I was thinking more about I walk and it's that setting, I wasn't really thinking
about it as, okay, do I walk how many steps I take during a day?
Do I go out and take X minutes to walk?
That's the sort of thing I was talking about.
Now, you know, I used to be a tennis player, never great, but I played tennis somewhat
regularly once upon a time.
I haven't done that in a long time.
So nothing structured like that, though it would be nice to do that.
So I guess what I'm saying, roughly an hour a week, I'm thinking more walks around the
neighborhood.
Okay.
All right.
And maybe it's good then to think of physical activity in these sort of two buckets and
one is incidental physical activity, you know, walking to work or from the car or up
the stairs.
And then there's the time that's specifically set aside or dedicated to physical activity.
And that can still be things you enjoy, like tennis or going for walks or whatever, but
it's really time that you've specifically earmarked for physical fitness, if you will.
And that's about an hour.
And ideally what we want to do is we want to increase both of those.
So how much physical activity should you be getting, do you think?
I would say, you know, probably 45 minutes, maybe even an hour a day.
Okay.
All right.
You know, it's been hard to pin down because the recommendations from the experts often
change, but now the recommendation is to exercise on more days than not and to try to get, depends
on the intensity of the exercise, but to try to get 45 minutes to an hour a day if possible.
Now that's a pretty high goal, I think, for a lot of us, but remember all physical activity
counts.
So maybe the sum total will get you closer there.
So what's your first goal?
You're doing about an hour a week now.
We want to increase that as much as we can.
What would be a goal you'd like to set for yourself?
For the whole week in terms of time or?
Yeah, sure.
I guess it would be good to be doing, yeah, I don't know, maybe reasonably 20 to 30 minutes,
five days a week.
Okay, 20 to 30 minutes, five days per week, and what activity would you be doing?
Is that walking or?
I'm thinking walking indefinitely since we're broadening and we're talking about physical
activity and whereas I've been thinking really more of that structured exercise time, if
I've brought it out, I can definitely take stairs at work.
I can definitely, there are places that I might take the car to that I could walk to.
So I could include those things.
So the question then becomes, how do I monitor that?
I mean, I've got to keep it all in my head, I don't know.
And I think you're doing a good job in thinking about specific goals.
And remember our acronym for goals is SMART, S-M-A-R-T, so S is you want it to be specific
and you specify 20 to 30 minutes of walking each, five days per week each week.
And that includes the incidental walking, but it can also include earmarked time where
you go for an extra walk.
So S for specific, M for measurable.
So that's sort of the point I think that you're getting at.
So you want to be able to measure the amount you're walking.
So you use 20 to 30 minutes so you could time it.
That might get a little bit tricky if it's walking up the stairs or across the parking
lot.
So what other way could you measure it?
Well, I guess you could measure.
I know there's a lot of talk out there and even some apps I've heard about where you
measure the number of steps you take.
Sure.
Sure.
So rather than time, I might be talking about X number of steps.
Right.
So and you're right.
In most smartphones, there's an accelerometer that counts your steps.
And there's also some inexpensive devices that you can buy and wear on your belt clip
or some of them are bracelets that you can wear that counts the steps.
So we'll just want to get a sense of, you may even try walking 20 or 30 minutes and
see how many steps that is so you can set your goal and figure out how many steps per
day you need to do for that.
So smart goals, specific, measurable, attainable.
So do you think it's realistic to do that given your schedule and where you are now?
It may be a little much for right now.
I mean, there's some reasons I don't go and get the exercise now and we can assume they're
going to continue to be issues and not having time other commitments that I have.
These are things that typically will get in the way.
So maybe I should think more about getting this kind of exercise two or three times a
week or maybe I should just adjust it once I've got an idea of how many steps are in
30 minutes.
I should say, well, it's more like two hours a week and how many steps would that be?
But I'm thinking out loud here.
Okay.
Okay.
And I want you to set the goal.
There's no sort of right amount.
It's thinking realistically, you know, what is going to be attainable for you.
You want it specific, measurable, attainable.
And the last two, you want it relevant and timely.
We know that physical activity is very much relevant to your cardiovascular health.
So we're not often a tangent.
We know it's relevant and timely is, you know, is this a good time for you to do it?
Sounds like you're busy now, but I know you have a high pressure job and you're pretty
much always busy.
It seems like there might be other things going on.
Do you think this is a good time to start something?
I think it is.
I think it is because if you're going to value something, if you're going to say your health
is important, your point is well taken, you know, you're always busy, so it may as well
be now.
Right.
And we also want it timely in a sense of there's going to be follow-up, there's going
to be accountability.
We have a defined time frame.
So when would you like to start this?
Well, maybe in so far as we can always check in with each other.
Moving after this session, maybe we set a goal and then next session or two sessions
from now, we come back and we monitor, we check up on what's going on.
I think that that would be really helpful for me in that accountability front.
Okay.
Good.
Good.
So I want to make sure that I've done a good job facilitating this discussion and sort
of helping you develop this treatment plan.
So can you repeat back what it is that you're going to do in terms of physical activity?
I am going to shoot for realistically three times a week, 30 minutes, so a total of 90
minutes a week.
Okay.
Okay.
And the kind of activity we're talking about is mostly walking, but we're thinking not
necessarily about just the walking as I said the next 30 minutes, I'm going to walk around
the neighborhood.
We're talking about walking that might be walking up steps at work, might be walking
across the parking lot or to the cafe instead of driving to it.
In order to monitor that, I'm going to look at what's available to me in terms of counting
the steps.
Right.
The other thing that I can do is to set this up is just check what is for me 30 minutes,
how many steps is that, and then can plug that back in to the 90 minutes, how many steps
am I trying to get this week, and then we'll come back and we'll see how I've done.
Okay.
That sounds perfect.
Okay.
So as we think about the complex field of weight management and fitness, I hope that
we can remember to pull forward our biopsychosocial model.
I hope we can pull forward the trans theoretical model and stages of change.
And I hope we can use some of those core behavior change principles that we've talked about
in the past few lectures.
We've covered the scope of weight issues, the epidemiology of weight, and how tough
it is to change.
In essence, the cards are really stacked against us.
But the best chance is probably slow and steady interventions through cognitive behavioral
therapy is recommended by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
I'd like to end by moving to our next FAQ or Frequently Ask question.
And the question is, weight management is obviously important for medical reasons.
But the issue of weight seems to cut more deeply than that.
Why do we care so much about our shapes if we are healthy?
Again, a very good question.
And I think you've touched on a really important issue here, and it gets to the issue of self-worth
in what messages our society has given us.
It's not just about your cholesterol, your hypertension, or your cardiorespiratory fitness.
It's about what you look at as an individual and what the marketers have told us is valuable
or not valuable.
It's very easy for a child to mistakenly equate the way they appear with whether or not they're
lovable, with whether or not they'll be rich, successful, or desirable.
And it's exactly those sorts of associations that we need to break.
And I've been encouraged by seeing more and more of a movement to move away from air brushing,
to move away from the super skinny supermodels, and to look at a realistic body image and
body weight.
Please join us next time where we'll continue talking about behavioral medicine in the context
of substance use disorders.
Thank you.
