I grew up in Tennessee and we always had a garden, something I very much loved and cherished.
In fact, the first real letter I ever wrote with my fat pencil and the carefully lined
paper was a note to Jung's seed company asking them if they could please send me a seed catalog.
They sent me an entire box of free seeds and my passion was ignited.
There's just something about getting to know the plot of land, the soil, the light, the
climate, the rainfall, selecting what you think is well suited than carefully and lovingly
nourishing something to new life.
There's the joy of watching it grow, bloom, or fruit, and the inevitable problem solving
when something goes wrong or your plant doesn't thrive.
Now, I live in the middle of a city, so my gardening has changed, but I've managed to
find a profession that I think is very much like gardening, carefully planting, nourishing,
and guiding a natural process driven from within.
It's psychotherapy, and particularly cognitive behavioral therapy, a therapy where the patient
cultivates, plants, and harvests their own garden.
Welcome to lecture two.
In this lecture, we will look at the basic principles of CBT, the history, the theory,
and what you need to know in order to understand what's in the toolbox.
You'll learn procedures for assessment and goal setting, you'll learn how to use a battery
of psychological tests to determine strengths, challenges, and opportunities for change,
and lastly, we'll use self-monitoring to collect and to use real-world data.
But first, we need to start with the history, and we'll start with the story of Aaron T.
Beck, the father of cognitive therapy.
Now the T stands for Tim, and that's what he insists that everyone call him.
So Tim's idea was to develop a new system that was particularly targeted for the needs
of an individual and not to apply the primary paradigm at the time in the 1960s, which was
psychoanalysis.
Now picture this.
Tim, a very smart, very promising psychiatrist, just fresh out of Yale medical school, finished
his residencies and goes to the University of Pennsylvania.
He starts working with a cohort of depressed patients doing psychoanalysis four or sometimes
five times a week per patient over several years.
He's doing classic psychoanalysis, including dream analysis, and guess what?
His patients aren't getting any better.
Now he's frustrated by the lack of progress, but he's also frustrated by the process of
therapy where there are no objective outcome measures.
There are no objective goals.
The treatment seems to be endless with no time point.
He's frustrated that the therapist is supposed to be omniscient and the patient should be
disempowered.
He's frustrated by the lack of transparency.
He's frustrated by the common ways of thinking he keeps seeing in his depressed patients
over and over again.
Why can't he use that?
It was his frustration with the outcomes, his frustration with the process that led
to what we call now the cognitive revolution.
So when exactly was the cognitive revolution?
And as I said before, the roots go back quite far.
In fact, the roots are in Socratic and Stoic traditions.
One of the core skills of the CBT therapist is something called Socratic questioning.
So rather than just telling the patient the answer, you ask a series of questions so that
the patient will find the answer him or herself.
Or the words of the Stoic philosopher Epictetus, people are disturbed not by events alone,
but by the views they take of them.
That's classic CBT.
When exactly was the cognitive revolution?
Now as I mentioned, Tim Beck is typically called the father of CBT, but we know there
were a number of other very influential individuals at the time that were also taking their own
part in the cognitive revolution.
There was Albert Ellis and his writings and important work on REBT, Rational Emotive Behavior
Therapy in the early, mid 1960s.
There was the organization AABT, the American Association of Behavior Therapy, founded
in 1966 by 10 behaviorists that were unhappy with psychoanalysis.
There was Michael Mahoney's book in 1974, Cognition and Behavior Modification, and then
Don Meekinbaum's book, which followed shortly thereafter in 1977.
But in 1979, that was the classic book that really opened the field of CBT, particularly
looking at depression, written by Tim Beck, Rush, Shaw, and Emory.
So what are some of the things that you should be asking yourself as you learn more about
this particular model?
You should be again asking yourself, how would CBT explain emotions, positive or negative
emotions?
How would CBT explain suffering?
How does CBT explain mental illness?
And yes, biology does matter.
And how would CBT be able to account for the individuality and the variation among individuals?
Does that theory hold true for everyone?
Remember we're looking at three key variables.
We're looking at cognition, behavior, and emotion.
And essentially, we work with all three of those on three different levels.
First we want to do detection and data gathering.
We want to see what's happening in that individual's life in terms of their cognition, behavior,
or emotions.
Secondly, we want to look at analysis and evaluation.
So we know what happened, but why did it happen and what was driving it?
What were the contextual factors?
Is this a one-time thing or is this an ongoing pattern?
And lastly, we want to go about challenging or even changing those cognition's behaviors
or emotions.
So detection, analysis, and challenge.
But this is just the starting point.
Now much of the richness lies beneath the surface.
So when an individual will come in and they'll tell us about the present, they'll tell us
about daily activities, but we want to begin drilling a little bit deeper, looking at those
core beliefs and potentially implicit biases.
So how might a CBT therapist respond to the charge that what they do is simply superficial?
Well, I think it's all a matter of perspective.
Now you can approach psychotherapy from a top-down perspective, or you can do it from
a bottom-up perspective.
Now classic psychotherapy, a psychodynamic psychotherapy or psychoanalysis, very much
starts at the bottom.
So you'll look at those unconscious desires, beliefs, and wishes, and you try to bubble
them up to the top, to the surface.
The CBT therapist starts up at the top, the everyday events that are happening, and begins
sinking down further until we get to the point where the individual has achieved his or her
goals.
Now the difference there is we've set the goals up front, and once an individual has
achieved their goals, they're no longer depressed, they're no longer anxious, they've been able
to establish a new social support network, there's really no reason to continue excavating.
Eventually what you'll want to do is to create what's called a case formulation, where we
put together all of this data from the top, the middle, and the bottom, if necessary.
So we have an idea, we have an explanation of why the individual's life happens to be
the way that it is.
We want to keep things transparent, so we're going to share that formulation, and we're
going to keep it open to revisions throughout the course of therapy.
All our key ideas on collaborative empiricism and on transparency, and it's going to be
important for us to set some concrete goals.
So what kinds of data we'll be looking at?
Well we'll be looking at our questionnaires, but we'll also be looking at social and medical
history.
We'll be looking at potential symptoms of psychopathology or other medical symptoms.
We'll be looking at potential functional impairments, so are they having trouble operating or functioning
as usual in a work setting or in a social setting?
We want to get a sense of the timeline, when did the problem start, and how have they progressed
over time.
And of course we want very concrete and specific examples from the individual.
Now some of the advantages of assessment is that we get a clear indication of a starting
point, of a baseline, of where we are right now at this point in time.
We can reassess that over time as a way to judge our progress.
It tends to be more objective, more reliable, and less biased.
And it's key in order and getting feedback to decide whether or not our treatment interventions
are working.
If they're not working, we should change them.
Now there are objections to measurements and to the structure that you find in a CBT approach,
and that not everything is quantifiable.
It may oversimplify an individual's difficulties, and maybe some of those survey instruments
lack of validity.
Perhaps it's less personal, perhaps it could hurt the therapeutic relationship.
I hope through our video clips you'll see that those concerns are probably ill-founded.
So what are some of the types of instruments that we use?
We may use surveys, we may use questionnaires, diaries.
We may use semi-structured interviews, which you'll see a demonstration of.
We may use phone apps these days, or websites to collect data.
And even more recently we're using wearable devices and sensors to collect information
on an individual's social contacts, as well as their physical activity levels.
Now some of the questionnaires commonly used will use things like the Beck Depression Inventory.
That name, Beck, of course, comes from Tim Beck.
The Beck Anxiety Inventory, the PHQ-9 for Depression, or something called the DASS-21.
That's the Depression and Stress Questionnaire, and of course it has 21 questions.
First we'll start with the broad sweep, where we give questionnaires to all patients and
we'll begin tailoring that packet, depending on what the individual's chief complaint is.
Let's turn now to a video example from Maria, where we're going over her initial assessment
packet.
Hi, Maria.
Welcome back.
Thank you.
And I see you've brought your questionnaires today.
I don't know if I filled it out the way you wanted it, but I tried.
I'm sure they're fine, and we'll definitely go over these for today.
But I did want to say that I'm sorry that you have to be here, but glad that you're
willing to do something to take care of yourself.
Thank you.
Well, what I'd like to do, and we'll do this in each of our subsequent visits, is as we
begin, we'll set an agenda, and it just helps us to make sure that we know what's on our
plate for today, and we'll get to the most important things.
So one thing we'll have on our agenda is to go over the questionnaires.
Is there anything else that you want to make sure that we talk about today?
I don't know.
I can't think of anything.
I just want to get better.
Okay, and I want you to get better too.
So I think one of the things we can do is to talk about goals, and we'll talk more specifically
about how to get you to that point where you are feeling more like yourself and feeling
better.
So we'll talk about questionnaires, and we'll do some goal setting.
And maybe we'll talk a little bit about how cognitive behavioral therapy works, and some
of the tools we might use to help you achieve those goals.
Okay.
Does that sound okay?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Can we go through some of the questionnaires here?
And I know there were several.
What was this like for you to fill these out?
Well, it took time.
It took me a long time to do it.
I didn't know what to say exactly, but I did the best I could.
I tried to answer the questions.
Okay.
Okay.
And just as a reminder, the reason we have these questionnaires is we want to get a sense
of the severity of different symptoms that you might be experiencing.
It gives us a baseline of where you're starting.
We'll have you fill these out periodically, probably at least a couple more times, because
we want to see if those scores are improving or not.
If they're improving, we're on the right track.
If they're not improving, then we need to try something different.
But it gives us that important feedback.
So the first one we have is a depression inventory, and it looks like you filled out all 21 items
here, and you've added it up here at the bottom.
And your score was a 27.
That puts you just up at the top of the moderate to severe depressive range.
So when you hear that, what does that mean to you?
It makes me sad.
I feel just tired all the time.
I feel like I just don't have the energy that I used to have.
Right.
And we had, as you were sharing with me last time, sleep has been a big issue, and we're
definitely going to want to talk about sleep.
Yeah.
It's hard to cope if you're exhausted.
That's right.
All the time.
That's right.
I just, if I could just get some sleep, I think I could do a little better.
Yes.
You see, there's other symptoms like appetite, weight, energy levels, one of them, ability
to concentrate, and it looks like nearly all of those have been affected.
Yeah.
I just don't have any appetite anymore, and I just don't feel like eating.
I try to eat, but it's hard.
All right.
So we have a starting point, and we have a pretty good idea that you do meet the criteria
for what we call clinical depression, or sometimes people call it major depression.
We consider it a chemical imbalance.
It's a medical disease often triggered by stress in a person's life.
It's kind of scary to think about that.
I mean, I'm like, I'm mentally ill or something.
Well, I know there is, unfortunately, a stigma that's attached to depression, but in reality,
one in four people will meet criteria for a mental illness at some point in their lives,
anxiety and depression being the two most common.
It's, for me, when I think about it, it's no different than people get diabetes, people
get heart disease.
It's often an accumulation of wear and tear that causes a person to have those sorts of
problems, and depression's really no different.
But you're here, and we have treatments that work for depression, and that will be part
of the treatment plan we develop is how to treat that depression and get these scores
down hopefully below a 10.
Everyone has a little bit of a depression from time to time that's part of life, but
scores this high tell us that there's something more serious that's happening and something
that we really need to take care of.
So the first one was your depression measure, and the second was about anxiety, and two parts
of anxiety, how anxiety affects your body.
So feeling keyed up or on edge, having an exaggerated startle response.
And the other part was about the thoughts that go, often go with anxiety, so the ruminations
and the worry.
And it looks like for anxiety you're at a low moderate level, both for the physical
and the cognitive part.
How does that sound when you hear that?
I guess, I mean I have things to worry about now.
There are things that make me anxious, certainly, I mean my husband, it's one thing, worrying
about money is another thing.
I mean we saved some money for retirement and everything, but we didn't expect to be spending
it like this, and medical bills are a lot, so I worry about some things.
And I do think about things a lot, especially at night when I wake up, my mind is going
around like a gerbil in an exercise wheel, thinking and thinking, and I'd never get
anywhere.
Okay, and what we'll do then is to make sure that treatment of anxiety is part of the plan
that we put together, it's part of the goals that we'll be talking about later today.
If we look just at symptom severity, it looks like depression is probably number one, anxiety
is probably number two.
And then this last one that you filled out, this was a somatic symptom checklist.
So it's about your physical health, and you've noted that you do have more chronic aches
and pains, and you're a little worried about your physical health.
No, I feel like I'm in pain all the time, but it's not like a headache or a bad knee
or something, it's just like I heard all over.
Maybe it's not even a physical pain, but it feels that way, it's worse than a physical
pain.
I don't know how to say it, it's like I have an ache in my heart, and it just goes all
over my body.
Hard to measure and hard to quantify.
Hard to explain.
Yeah, yeah, I'm wondering as we think about that ache, and I think you've described it
in a very poignant way, we want to address that ache, and we might be able to reach it
through treating depression, through treating anxiety, but we should keep our minds open,
and if we come up with other ideas about how to treat it, through changing behaviors,
through physical activity, through social contacts, those all might be treatments that
could help that pain.
So what did we see with Maria?
We started with mostly symptom focused questionnaires as our starting point, they gave us a baseline,
we used a guided interview to then elicit additional information that we will use in
making the formulation.
We use those questionnaires and assessments to initiate to open a conversation about what
her goals might be.
Other information that we might want to use is real world data that we would collect
through a process called self-monitoring.
So if we want to learn more about her cognitions, if we want to learn more about her emotions,
we will give her a self-monitoring form to begin writing those down as they occur in
real time throughout the week, she would then bring that back as additional data for our
next session.
Let's move now to look at an example of self-monitoring from our case of Michael, and Michael's
not looking at cognition, Michael wants help being more aware of his emotions and writing
them down.
That actually brings up another element when we think about emotions, there's the physical
sensation but you mention when you feel sad affects the way that you think.
So you're right, emotions affect our bodies, so the physical sensation.
They also affect the way that our minds work, they affect our behaviors, our social relationships
and we already talked about how cognition, sometimes it's a chicken in the egg with emotions,
sometimes it fuels emotion and sometimes the emotions affect our thoughts.
So all of those are elements and it's very rich and complicated and terrific and terrible
sort of all at the same time depending on the circumstances and the emotion.
What we want to do is to help you be aware of emotions when they happen, maybe at the
beginning of that causal chain of when you're first starting to feel sad or angry or anxious
or any of those emotions and we all feel even though we have our habits and the emotions
we gravitate to, we want you to be able to feel and to recognize the full range of emotions.
And I'll tell you specifically what I'm driving at, I think in our culture and for men in
particular, a lot of times we're told and we're raised to believe that anger is the
place you're supposed to go because it's strong and it's masculine and we use anger
all the time is a substitute for other kinds of emotions.
So we want to just sort of move that layer off and see if there are other emotions that
are happening underneath.
So why don't we just do sort of a quick game and what I'd like you to do is to just start
firing off emotion words, all right, so just like you're a thesaurus, an emotional thesaurus,
so what kinds of words for emotions and one would be anger.
What's another one?
Happiness.
So happy.
Frustration or frustrated.
Frustrated.
What else?
Joyful.
Let's put joy.
We sadness, sad.
Sad.
Depressed.
Depressed.
Anxious.
Anxious.
What else?
Stressed, maybe.
Okay.
Stress has got a lot of layers too, right?
Yeah, I guess.
What else?
Elated.
Furious.
Disturbed.
Sometimes it helps to think about relationships as triggers, so think about your son or your
wife and what kinds of feelings come up with them.
Love.
Yeah.
Caring.
Uh-huh.
Hopeful.
Disappointed.
All right, and how about you think about work?
Maybe your boss or co-workers or folks you supervise.
Puzzled.
Puzzled, all right.
Oops, puzzled, that's now.
I mean, I'm mentioned frustrated, I guess that's something I feel at last.
Frustrated here.
Okay.
Fulfilled.
Filled.
I guess content-satisfied.
Yeah, satisfied, contentment fulfilled.
Okay.
All right.
Well, we can pause there, and there are actually hundreds and hundreds, as you can imagine,
different emotion words in the English language.
But I wanted to see first what pops to mind for you, and if you could tell me which of
these you feel most often.
What's most familiar to you?
Well, we all know I am here, so angry, angry, angry.
What's most familiar to you?
Well, we all know I am here, so anger is pretty familiar.
Okay.
I would say frustration is pretty familiar, frustrated.
Frustrated.
Yeah.
When we talk about my son, if I can break it down to individuals, I guess I'm hopeful,
but I'm probably more often disappointed.
Okay.
You know, furious, I feel furious a lot.
I do feel stressed a lot, but I just say there are a lot of layers.
I don't know if we're free to use that one.
Sure.
We can do whatever we want.
That would probably be the top group that I feel.
Okay.
The top group.
Yeah.
Do you see any commonalities?
Well, yes, I do.
Yeah.
They're all kind of the same spice, right?
They're the same flavor pretty much.
Yeah.
All right.
And that's kind of what we would expect.
Now, another question.
So if we look at this particular family of emotions, if you were to rate the range of intensity
that you usually experience them, would you say you're all the way from zero, not at all,
up to 100, or do they tend to cluster in a particular level of intensity?
I would say most of these are, when they happen, they're at a particular level of intensity.
Okay.
Would you say that's above or below a 50?
Above.
All right.
So they're fairly intense, usually above a 50.
And do they come on like that, or does it take a while to sort of build up?
They tend to come on like that.
Okay.
So we have this family of emotions that are fairly common.
They tend to be intense.
They tend to come on quickly.
So what I would like you to do, I mean, there's all these other emotions, right, that are
happening, and I would assume that you have them.
And when I prompted you to think about your family, it wasn't anger or fury or things
that came up first.
It was love and caring and hopeful.
And those are also part of you.
And I know you really care about your family.
And that's part of why you're here.
I do.
Right?
That's part of why you're here.
And we want to find those emotions, those strengths.
We want to pull them out, and we want to raise them up.
We want to build them up.
We want to have them happen more commonly and more intensely.
Okay.
All right.
I would like that.
All right.
You're going to truncate your range of emotions.
You're going to have all of these, but we want you to start paying attention to all of
them and not allow this one family to dominate.
Okay.
So I wanted to propose your second homework assignment for now and next time, and that's
to do some emotion self-monitoring.
And what you do with self-monitoring is you're just collecting data on yourself.
And I don't have a special form for this because you can really make whatever works for you,
and I want you to have some ownership over it.
But essentially, you know, what I would do, my first thought that comes to mind, and you
can totally do something different, I would do just like a calendar.
So you have Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and so on.
Okay.
You might want to have time of day, depending on when you get up in the morning.
And just writing the primary emotion that you feel, whether it's sadness or happiness,
you don't have to do it every single hour.
That'll drive you crazy.
That will be frustrating, right?
They have to do that.
But, you know, and whenever you think about it, and then maybe at the end of the day,
so what's your average emotion that you had?
And we wanted intensity, too.
So maybe that's zero to 100.
Okay.
So maybe you're a little angry here.
Maybe you're more angry here.
But maybe there's some happiness in the middle.
We want you to start capturing that.
And if you want to capture other things like, what was the trigger?
What was the circumstance?
Were you at work?
Were you home?
That's fine, too.
As much as you want, because, again, we're gathering data.
We want to help you be more aware of your emotions.
And once you have that awareness, we want you to be aware of the context of what's happening
around you, outside, and also what's happening inside of you.
Okay.
All right.
Okay.
Let me ask you a little bit about that.
Sure.
Would it be better for me to take an assessment on an hourly, or you might do it every three
or four hours basis, but using the time as the hook, or whenever I feel like I'm feeling
something, I note it down at that moment, or is it a combination of the two?
For example, if I suddenly realize I'm feeling quite happy, and it's 11.15 in the morning,
do I note that, or is it the other way that I just note it periodically?
That's a great question, and I think both of those are important.
You know, if you only write down an emotion when it grabs your attention, you're probably
going to be paying only attention to the stronger emotions.
Okay.
So it's the others that we're going to miss.
So I would say if you feel an emotion and it grabs your attention, absolutely write
that one down.
But you probably want a couple other times during the day, maybe just when there's a natural
break in the morning, or in the afternoon, or I've had patients set an alarm on their
phone just so it goes off, and they know, oh, I need to write down my emotion and my
intensity.
I like that idea.
So we can get a little bit of both that way.
Okay.
All right.
So we're well on our way to better understanding and helping both Maria and Michael.
We have interviews, we have questionnaires, and now we have self-monitoring data.
Now, all of this data gathering and interpretation is, of course, in service of a few goals.
So we'll want to know what their diagnosis is if they have one.
We'll want to know about strings.
We'll want to know about deficiencies.
But we'll really want to specify some goals.
Let's move to our next video clip where we talk with Carol about creating something
called smart goals.
So we've talked a little bit about the questionnaire assessments.
That was our baseline.
And the second thing on our agenda was goals.
And you've told me about sleep and shyness and relationships.
And as we dig a little bit further into goals, I want to specify what it is we mean by goals
and how to set goals that are maybe set us up in a way that we're more likely to see
some success.
And the goals I'm talking about are called smart goals.
Have you heard about smart goals before?
It's just S-M-A-R-T.
No.
Okay.
And that's okay.
So it stands for you want the goals to be specific.
So a goal of feeling better is not specific enough.
It's hard to evaluate.
You can't tell if people made progress.
So we want to be fairly specific.
We want it to be measurable.
So things like the back anxiety inventory are a measure.
So you might have a specific goal of to get your anxiety below a 10 on the back anxiety inventory.
And our measurement then would be the back anxiety inventory.
The A stands for attainable.
So we want them to be realistic.
And it's okay to have big goals.
You know, you want that star on the horizon, something that you can shoot for.
But we want more realistic goals that are closer to us so that you can have an experience of succeeding
and doing those steps towards that star on the horizon.
So specific, measurable, attainable, we want it to be relevant.
So we know why you're here.
We know you're interested in relationships and anxiety.
So our goals should be in service of those sort of bigger picture reasons that have brought you here.
And timely.
So we want to know what's going on in your life.
Is it work conflict, relationship conflict?
We want them to be relevant to your life, but also timely.
So it's something that matters to you now at this point in your life.
And maybe not something that happened five or 10 years ago or some hypothetical event that will happen in five or 10 years.
So we want the goals to be specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and timely.
So if we just walk through an example and we'll do a quick one with sleep,
and you want it to sleep better, that's sort of the general goal,
you're sleeping about five hours a night.
If we wanted to set a specific goal around sleep, what do you think it would be?
Well, I guess you mentioned sleeping seven hours a night.
So I think that would be a specific goal.
All right. So we want seven hours per night.
All right. And measurable, how would we measure that?
Well, I guess I would measure it by what time I fall asleep and what time I wake up.
And we could do something like a sleep diary.
Okay.
And I can show you what those look like.
Attainable. Do you think it's realistic?
Yeah, I think it's realistic.
I'm just going to put a check mark for attainable.
It's definitely relevant to something that's going on now and it's something that's timely.
So this gives us just an idea with sleep.
It's a fairly concrete specific goal.
It's specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and timely.
So where does that leave us?
Now, obviously we have a lot more work to do with setting smart goals for Carol and actually for each of our cases.
But now we have qualitative and quantitative information.
We just need to fill in more of their story.
We still need to learn how all of this fits together in each of their lives.
We need to understand what lies underneath.
We need to understand what strengths they have, what resources they have, and what might actually get in the way.
We need to invest a fair amount of ongoing effort to build an initial case formulation,
share that formulation with each of the patients, and then revise it and continue to revise it over the time
as we get more and more information about how much progress they may be making.
In our next lecture, we'll be talking about how to connect those dots and how to create a case formulation.
Thank you.
