Julie, a patient of mine, is in her mid-50s and used to be very close to her slightly
older brother. When her father became terminally ill, she had to shoulder the burden and got
very little help from him. In fact, her brother didn't really show up until the very end.
Julie was mostly present when they were figuring out their dad's will and there was a lot
of money on the table. Julie was furious, disappointed, and very hurt. She ended up
going years without talking to her brother. She missed him, but she could still feel the
burning resentment and had this image of him looking at her smugly at the reading of the
will. He got most of the money. She wanted to let go and move on, but felt very, very
stuck. That's when we began working on forgiveness using a CBT approach.
Forgiveness and its associated health benefits begins with a cognitive decision and can be
promoted with both cognitive and behavioral strategies. This lecture summarizes the research
on forgiveness and illustrates exercises that help us let go and move forward towards
those goals. Remember that this can be forgiveness of another or it can be forgiveness of ourselves.
An example might be having a car accident, losing a job, losing your temper, and blaming
yourself for it. It may have affected another person or it might just be something that
affects you. You may feel guilty for getting sick. You may feel guilty for being a burden
on your family. For the most part, when we think of forgiveness, we think about forgiving
another person and it usually starts with a transgression. There's the emotional reaction,
maybe the initial shock, the guilt, the anger, the thoughts of betrayal, the disbelief, the
chagrin, the judgment, the what-ifs, the behavior that might include avoidance, rumination,
social interactions, and of course the physiologic effects. It might affect our sleep. It might
affect our appetite. We may become depressed, angry. It may even affect our level of cardiovascular
arousal and blood pressure. But how would this play out with our cases? Now, we know that
Michael often loses his temper and then he feels guilty or ashamed later. He might need
to work on self-forgiveness, but others in his life may need to work on forgiving him.
Now, Maria feels guilt for not being a perfect caregiver. She really needs to focus on forgiving
herself. Although each are quite different, we'll want to go through the same process
of formulating the situation using our cognitive ABCs. Let's turn to our first clip of Michael
who describes an event that happened with his wife.
So this is just an example of one event. Why don't we just do one more event and you had
mentioned the fight with your wife. So why don't we go ahead and jump to that one? So
what was the activating event for that? Well, that would have been the fact that, you know,
I'm not supposed to be smoking and I actually needed some nicotine. So I went out. I didn't
think that she was around. So I went out on the deck. It was dark. I figured I could get
away with having one cigarette. All right. So you were smoking on the deck at home and
your wife and she obviously was around and she came out and caught me smoking. All right.
So sounds like you guys have an agreement that you're not smoking or that is that is
our agreement and it ties into, you know, some of the health issues we've discussed.
But I was not I admit I was I was not supposed to be smoking and I did have a sense even
when I went out there that I was sneaking a smoke. Right. Right. Okay. So you knew that
for your health and for your own good, that's not something you want to do. But she came
out and was unhappy when she was unhappy to say the least. Okay. All right. And what were
the consequences of that event? I mean, what were the feelings or behaviors? Well, the
consequence again was anger on my part. And the reason for that is, although, you know,
intellectually, I can understand that it's not a good thing to be doing. You know, it's
just one cigarette. And I think the way that she responded to it by lecturing me, which
is really what happened, was on her part, insensitive. So I guess I was kind of reacting
to that. The fact that she can't see that sometimes, you know, it's just one cigarette.
I might need one. Okay, I'm just going to put she's insensitive. I need a cigarette.
Other emotions. Embarrassment, indignation, resignation. I guess there's a little bit
of embarrassment there, because it's like, you know, you're the kid, you got caught with
your hand in the cookie jar. And so there was there was embarrassment there. Okay. All
right. Anything else? Well, the I don't know how far you want me to go into the event.
But you know, one as as she kind of lowered the boom on me about the rules and the rules
that I was breaking. My response was to talk about the needs that I have. And one of those
needs at the moment was obviously the need to unwind with a cigarette, because it had
been a really, really difficult day. And that's when I talking about the sense of that she
was insensitive. She wasn't appreciating that. And so one of my ways of responding was and
I know this was completely inappropriate, but my way of responding was, you know, she's
been staying at home for years has not been working herself. And so I kind of threw that
back in her face that, you know, you really don't understand, you might it must be really
nice to have a day when you can stay at home all day a week when you can do that all day.
And yeah, I guess in that case, maybe I wouldn't need a cigarette either. Okay. So in remembering
consequences were going for emotions and behavior. So it sounds like the behaviors was a counter
attack or a good way of putting it. So a counter attack. And maybe that has something to do
with being embarrassed. And that's also a way of responding. Sure. Sure. And sometimes,
you know, with these kind of when people fall off the wagon, there's, there's disappointment,
you know, sort of disappointed in yourself, but sort of knowing that you had to do it.
There might be some defensiveness that's there to sometimes when people are telling you something
that you know, but you feel like you have to defend yourself about it. We forgot to put
the consequences up here. We know this was the, the, the coke on the car incident, right?
But then there was the washing the car off. Okay. There was also the, the key words that
you said and the gestures that you're making. And so that that all sort of fits in the picture.
All right. Any words or gestures with your wife? Well, I guess there's a sort of I didn't
call her any names. But there's the accusation that I'm throwing at her of being, I didn't
call her lazy, but I guess that's what I was trying to get at, or at least that she's
unappreciative. Yeah. Yeah. And I kind of, that's kind of language there. And I think
often in long standing relationships, you know, really how to, where people's buttons
are, and you can zing them pretty easily with very few words because you've sort of been
down that path. Exactly. Before. Yeah. All right. Well, this gives you an idea. So we
have just two events here, very different events, but it looks like the consequences
are kind of similar. I mean, this one has more fury. This has sort of an embarrassed
defensive aspect to it. But in each case, there were thoughts which fueled these emotions.
What I want to follow up on a little bit. So here she's insensitive. She's not supportive.
Is there any element of you were owed support and she didn't give it to you or you should
have been supported? Well, yeah, I guess that's part of reacting that way. When somebody calls
you out for something that, as you say, you both know, I feel that we have a lot of time
invested, many years invested in each other. And that she should have been sensitive enough
in that situation, maybe not to have gone right to the accusation, but perhaps to have
talked me through that. I see you're smoking or whatever, kind of the way that you and
I talk. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, and I'm, you know, sort of what, what I'm after with
that is again to understand how beliefs or cognitions are related to emotions. And oftentimes
the feelings behind anger are the perception that something that was rightfully yours was
taken away or violated or damaged. It sounds like you really want the support of your wife
in the positive regard. And when you don't get that, it makes you angry. I think that's
fair to say. Okay. So in the realm of transgressions, this one is fairly minor, at least on the
surface. It carries a bit more of an emotional charge because of their shared history and
what the event means or symbolizes to each of them. In this case, there may be an issue
of forgiveness and acceptance on both sides. Michael can forgive his wife for being angry
and trying to control his behavior. His wife, who will meet later in other lectures, could
forgive him for breaking a promise and doing something that he agrees is unhealthy.
In right in Fitzgibbon, it's in 2000. Tell us people upon rationally determining that
they have been unfairly treated, forgive when they willfully abandon resentment and related
responses to which they have a right and endeavor to respond to the wrongdoer based on the moral
principle of beneficence, which may include compassion, unconditional worth, generosity and
moral love. They tell us that forgiveness is not forgetting. Forgiveness is not surrender,
resignation or passivity. Forgiveness is not necessarily reconciliation. It's not excusing
or condoning. It's not letting time heal or somehow balancing the scales. Forgiveness is
an active ongoing process that may take years to evolve, but it typically starts with a
decision, a desire to forgive or at least to begin that process. The primary beneficiary
of forgiveness is the person who is doing the forgiving. But let's look at the research
and see what the research tells us, and I want to talk just briefly about something called
the Stanford Forgiveness Project in a paper published by Harris and his colleagues in
2006. Now, in this particular project, they recruited individuals who had recently been
wronged or transgressed. They took a wide range of different individuals with different
types of transgressions they had experienced. They designed six 90-minute groups and half
of the subjects got the intervention and half were controls out of a total sample of 259
individuals. So what did they teach in these forgiveness classes? Well, they started with
somatic quieting or stress reduction and relaxation. Then they moved into some of the anger management
exercises which we've also talked about. The individuals learned to depersonalize or to
take less offense, and that term personalization should pop to mind as one of those common habits
of mine that we often tackle when we're doing cognitive therapy. They taught the individuals
to also be aware of the personal health consequences of holding a grudge and to choose to redirect
their attention elsewhere. They helped them to build empathy skills to see the situation
from different perspectives and to develop something that they called grace or accepting
that other individuals aren't infallible and make mistakes and do things that may hurt others.
They then encouraged them to take small steps and do easy forgiveness first. So don't start with
the big transgression. Start with something a little bit easier until you build up your skills
with forgiveness and then tackle that big transgression. So what were some of the results?
Well, the intervention reduced negative thoughts and feelings about the target transgression
two to three times more effectively than the control condition, and it produced significantly
greater increases in positive thoughts and feelings towards the transgression. Significant treatment
effects were also found for forgiveness self-efficacy, forgiveness generalized to new situations,
perceived stress, and decreased trait anger. And an interesting adaptation to this study
published by Elamond in 2013, they did a randomized controlled trial where they looked at an
intervention group versus the weightless group, but here they were focused on older adults where
the average age was 70 years old. Here they took the Stanford forgiveness project curriculum
essentially, but they adapted it for issues that might be more salient for older adults.
What they found is that the intervention reduced the levels of perceived actual
transgression painfulness, transgression related emotions and cognitions, and also decreased
negative emotions. The next study I wanted to mention was an interesting way of breaking
things apart done by Ryan in 2005, again a randomized controlled trial looking at 192
individuals. They had an eight session forgiveness group, but here they had three different conditions.
So they had a secular forgiveness group, they had a religious forgiveness group,
and then they had a weight list control. They looked at forgiveness outcomes,
they looked at mental health, and they looked at outcomes right after the class ended six
and six weeks follow up. They found that participants increased significantly more than
comparisons on self-reported forgiveness of an ex-spouse and understanding of forgiveness.
Participants in the secular condition though showed a greater decrease in
depressive symptoms than comparison participants. Intrinsic religiousness
didn't seem to help, but it didn't seem to hurt. The last study I wanted to mention is something
called the restore curriculum, and this was framed as a self-forgiveness curriculum developed by
Toussaint in 2014. Again, a randomized controlled trial where they're looking at weight list
controls. They have 83 cancer patients and their caregivers. They found that the project restore
would encourage self-acceptance, self-improvement, and commitment, and they used prayer, meditation,
reflection, and expressive writing, and again they looked at pre and post outcomes. They found
that patients and their caregivers scored higher than controls on self-forgiveness,
self-acceptance, self-improvement, and they were lower on pessimism.
So what are some of the predictors of forgiveness? If we're looking for ways to promote it, we want
to know what might predict it. A study by FAIR was actually a meta-analysis of 175 different studies
where they looked at over 26,000 subjects and they found that there were some key features which
will probably sound a little bit familiar. One of the predictors of forgiveness was first having
the intent to forgive. As we said, forgiveness or the process of forgiveness starts with a
cognitive decision. Second was receiving an apology. Now that may seem somewhat simplistic,
but having another individual, particularly the transgressor, acknowledge that a wrong occurred
and acknowledge regret that the wrong occurred can actually go quite a long way in terms of
promoting healing and forgiveness. Next predictor was the capacity for empathy and the capacity to
manage or to control their own angry reaction. In a study by PRONK, they were also looking
at predictors of forgiveness, but PRONK was looking more at what he called executive functioning,
or we would call it cognitive functioning or cognitive skills, and he found that there were
three that were particularly important. The first had to do with inhibition. Remember oftentimes when
we are angry or if we have been harmed or hurt in some way, we will ruminate about that transgression.
The more we ruminate, the more it raises up our anger and the more entangled we get with
our own cognitions. So an individual that's able to inhibit or step outside of those ruminations
is more likely to be able to forgive. The second cognitive skill had to do with task
switching, and I think it's related somewhat to inhibitions, but they're able to switch
tracks completely if they find that somehow they've been triggered into memories about a
particular event. They're quickly able to move themselves on to something else. And the last
cognitive skill has to do with flexibility and an ability to step back to be able to rewrite
or to revise their story. So how can we move more towards forgiveness? Well remember that it first
starts with a decision to forgive. We need to stop ourselves from going down that rabbit hole,
from going into those ruminative spaces that really amplify our negative emotions and make
it difficult to let go. We need to think about task switching. We need to think about distractions.
We need to think about possibly that toolbox of positive emotion strategies that can pull us away
from the harm that was done by the transgression. We might want to use our skills that we learned
in our trauma lecture about rewriting the story or building empathy via new attributions or
explanations about why an event occurred. And most importantly is to remember that forgiveness is
for you and it's not necessarily for someone else. So let's return to our story about Julie.
This is the woman who was desperately wanting to forgive her brother for not helping out
with the death of her father, then showing up for his inheritance. Note that she had already
made the decision that she wanted to move on. It had been years. She missed her brother. She
couldn't excuse what had happened, but she had spent a lot of time worrying and ruminating about
what had happened. She wanted to forgive, but she felt stuck and just couldn't do it. So what did
we do? Well, first of course, we did a CBT formulation. We started collecting stories,
particularly triggers around the event, but also stories about her relationship with her brother.
We started looking at beliefs and consequences. We started using those cognitive ABCs. We then
wanted to look at core beliefs or rules of living that were tapped for her. What is her sense of
justice or injustice in the world? And when injustice occurs from her worldview, what is it
that needs to happen? We started working on empathy by first having her recall positive times with
her brother, then recalling times when he needed her and her support, then ask her to imagine how
or why people act as they do when someone's dying and why greed may come up and why it comes up so
often and how society or culture might play a role in telling us what we should do when we're
caregiving and whose responsibility it might be. From there, we moved to writing. She wrote several
letters to her brother with each one taking more time to try to understand and graciously explain
his behavior. We kept remembering the bigger picture. This was about her health. This was about
her relationships. This was about her moving on in pursuit of her values and her goals. The event
was long gone and we can't change the past and she actually felt grateful that she was able to share
those last few years with her father. In the end, she mailed her brother a letter. It briefly shared
her feelings, including how much she missed him. She didn't give in, but she did let him know that
she was going to let it go and she hoped that they could see where it went from there.
Now, when we think about Michael, it would be fair to wonder if we should be talking about
forgiveness or anger management. The two are certainly related given what we know about the
cognitive basis of anger, but the approach might be somewhat different. An interesting study done by
Goldman and Wade in 2012 randomized controlled trial of about 112 students. They had an anger
group versus a forgiveness group versus a control group. They had six 90-minute sessions that took
place over three weeks. So what happened? Well, in the forgiveness group, they had better outcomes
for decreasing hostility, for managing their psychological symptoms, and they had more empathy
for the offender when compared to the anger group or the waitlist control. Both the treatment
conditions, the forgiveness as well as the anger management, reported greater reductions in desires
for revenge than those in the waitlist condition. So it looks like a little bit different, but maybe
better outcomes at least in this one particular study for forgiveness. So let's go ahead and shift
gears a bit and remember that sometimes there isn't a person or anything else exterior to us to
blame. Something tragic happens. There's maybe a loss or a death or a random occurrence, and you're
just not able to move on. You very much feel stuck. Maybe it's self-forgiveness. Maybe it's
feeling like moving on is a betrayal of the person that you've lost. Maybe it's unresolved grief.
We know that letting go is something that Maria is really struggling with. Her husband is still
very much around, but his mind and really his identity and all of their history they've shared
together are rapidly disappearing. She's devastated and she needs help. Let's watch this next clip
of her sharing her perspective early in the course of treatment. In a marriage, as long as I've been
in a marriage, this is 45 years now, you go through a lot of a lot of different things and you say,
well, you know, things will be better later, you know, kids sleep through the night or
when they're all in school or get the mortgage paid off. But this is really different from that,
you know. This is, he can't get better, you know. What can I wish for at this point?
You know, wish that he was dead. I can't wish that. What's my life going to be like after that?
I just can't even imagine. It just seems hopeless.
And it is a really painful place that you're in right now and I can see why you would feel
helpless and hopeless about it. And my hope is that we can help you to connect to a source of
meaning to something that gives you life, that gives you hope to other friends, to other family,
things won't be the same with your husband again, as far as we know. I hope to help you
find reasons. You know, it helps me already to be able to say these things to you because I can't
say them to him and there's really nobody else that I can talk to like that. He was always my
best friend, you know. But it's nice to be able to just say how much it hurts.
So in that very brief but poignant clip, I hope you're able to see the situation that Maria's in
and the pain that she might be feeling. As a psychotherapist, one thing I worry about is
something called pathological grief. Now, there's no one right way to grieve or no one right intensity
or duration, but we do worry when an individual seems that they're having a number of mental
health difficulties after bereavement and they don't seem to be recovering. They don't seem to be
connecting to their usual activities or to their social contacts. Now, we know that Maria's not there
yet, but fortunately, there are treatments that have been validated for the treatment of pathological
grief. And I want to share just one study done by Papa Sewell and colleagues in 2013, where they
looked at pathological grief. In this particular study, they used a randomized control trial of
immediate treatment versus a waitlist control. And they looked at these individuals at 12,
24 and 36 weeks after their treatment. This particular treatment was something called
behavioral activation. If you think back to our basic behavior lectures, we did activity recording,
we did activity scheduling, and we're trying to activate Maria because she was more depressed.
In behavioral activation, it really just focuses on activating those behaviors. What did they find?
So compared with no treatment, behavioral activation was associated with large reductions
in prolonged, complicated or traumatic grief, decreases in PTSD and decreases in depressive
symptoms. 70% at post and 75% at follow-up responded to treatment, with 45% at post and 40% at follow-up
being classified as high end state functioning at 12 weeks. Looks like it worked.
Now, for behavioral activation, recall the activity monitoring forms, the activity schedules we did
with Maria. And in her case, it was really about reconnecting her with sources of positive reinforcement
and with her social contacts. But note that she's also grieving. She's losing a little bit of her
husband day by day as his mind slips away. The study by Papa put together a full behavioral
activation program, and we did more of a combined hybrid program with Maria. So if we were doing a
full behavioral activation program, what might that look like? Well, it's not as simple as it sounds.
People can't just snap out of it because if they could, they would. It's a highly tailored approach
to ongoing assessment and formulations about why a person does or does not engage in particular
behaviors. And much of it is based on the seminal work of Pete Lewinson and Oregon Health Sciences
University. So what are some of the goals and ideas in behavioral activation? Well, first we want to
look at those contingent if then beliefs, but we're really looking at what are the drivers or what are
the inhibitors of behaviors. And we're talking about small behaviors, medium behaviors, large
behaviors, behaviors by yourself or with others. The goal is to increase rewards and problem resolution
and to decrease avoidance and rumination. We want to recall and remember that behavior slowly
evolves or in some cases devolves over time. Often when an individual comes to treatment,
their life has devolved to a particular point where they become disconnected from the things
that used to really give them enjoyment or support or love. We've found that behavioral
activation in terms of the evidence shows that it may be equal to the hybrid model of CBT in
treatment for depression. And this is some of the seminal work by Neil Jacobson published as early as
the mid 1990s. So what are some of the components then of behavioral activation? So we have an
orientation to treatment and education just like in hybrid CBT. We want to develop our treatment
goals again, not very different. We want to individualize the activation plans and engagement
targets. So we're doing our functional analysis, sort of our formulation of situations and of
behaviors. We want to have the individual go out and try increasing their activation. They're going
to encounter obstacles. It's all grist for the mill. They'll come back and we'll do some trouble
shooting about why they had trouble increasing their behaviors or connecting with those new
people or activities. We want to review and we want to consolidate gains. Now the other important
part that I really like about behavioral activation and I often borrow these ideas is we not we not
only want to increase activities but we want to look for examples of maladaptive behaviors that
an individual has learned as a way of coping. And a lot of times people will use these maladaptive
behaviors because they have an immediate reward and it's not entirely obvious that they might have
a negative consequence later down the line. So an example of a maladaptive coping behavior would be
taking long naps in the middle of the day when you're not feeling very good. Now I don't mean
when you're feeling physically sick, when you're feeling depressed, there's a natural tendency
just to want to escape. A long nap can be reinforcing it helps you to escape but it prevents you from
going out to do things that might be more reinforcing or connecting with your social supports.
Another example of a maladaptive behavior would be drinking alcohol when you're stressed.
It is a depressant. It certainly turns down the stress response but we know that it doesn't help
you solve any of the things that might be causing you to have that stress response. The last example
I'll give has to do with the telephone. Telephones are ubiquitous but oftentimes an individual when
they're feeling anxious like Carol, depressed like Maria, they just won't answer their phone. Over time
what happens is you train those people who call you to stop calling you because you never answer
and then you feel more isolated. So in behavioral activation we increase those positive behaviors
and we decrease those negative or maladaptive behaviors. They use an acronym to remind us
about the steps that an individual would need to take. It's called ACTION where the A stands for
the assessment, C stands for choose a new behavior, T try the chosen behavior, I integrate it into
your new routine. We want to create new habits that are long lasting even after the therapy ends.
O we want to observe the results. What was the effect on mood, on energy, other symptoms that
might be of interest and N it's never give up even if it doesn't work the first, second or third time
it's all grist for the mill and we'll be able to change it later. So in summary we've seen that
short-term CBT usually in groups but can be in individual settings as well can be effective
in promoting forgiveness of others or in promoting forgiveness of the self. We know that behavioral
activation and presumably it's linked to depression can be helpful in pathological grief.
Let's end by addressing one of our frequently asked questions. How well do CBT and religion
mix? CBT is all about rationality and religions often about faith. The two seem kind of opposite.
Great question and it's true that CBT is a secular approach grounded in western
empiricism and rationality and faith is something that's very much different. But remember that
CBT approach is based on things like Socratic questioning. It's based on a scholarly look
at life and at things that need to be examined. It specifically focuses on how we oftentimes
jump to conclusions. We use habits of mind in ways that hurt ourselves or hurt others. If our
religion, if our religious beliefs or our faith are helpful to ourselves or helpful to others
you probably wouldn't turn that CBT lens on it in the first place. So in our next lecture
we'll continue along these lines and talk about CBT and finding perspective and finding meaning.
Thank you.
