Donovan was the apple of his mother's eye. Always so sweet, so smart, and just a little
bit shy. He did well in school and got into a good college. He studied hard, he got a
good job on the other side of the country. She worried about him, but knew he needed
to live his own life. Six months, twelve months go by, she hears from him less and
less, and when he does call, he seems distracted or sleepy or irritable. He loses his job and
he starts waiting tables, but insists it isn't his fault, it's only temporary. Two years
after he graduated college, she got the call that every mother dreads. It was the ER at
San Francisco General Hospital. Donovan had been found unconscious and barely breathing,
and a parent accidental overdose from IV heroin use. How could this possibly happen? Her father,
his grandfather, was maybe an alcoholic, but heroin? How was that even possible? She bought
the next ticket to San Francisco. Her life now turned upside down.
The misuse and abuse of alcohol and drugs continue to be a central challenge to our society
and healthcare system. Like other mental illnesses or diseases of the brain, substance use disorders
carry a great deal of stigma, blame, and misinformation. Let's review the basics of substance use disorders
and what second or third wave CBT therapies might be able to offer.
Let's first look at the prevalence of alcohol use and alcohol use disorders. We know that
approximately 52% of the population are regular drinkers, and a regular drinker is defined
as someone that has at least 12 drinks over a one year period. We know that 23% of the
population would be defined as what's called risky drinkers, and 7.2% of the population would
have a diagnosable alcohol use disorder. That's about 17 million adults. But drinking
oftentimes starts early. In fact, 24% of 8th graders consume alcohol, and 64% of 12th graders
consume alcohol. We know that 50% of college students binge drink, causing about 1,800
deaths per year, and around 700,000 physical or sexual assaults.
Alcohol use continues into older age. We know that 3% of older adults meet full criteria
for an alcohol use disorder or alcoholism. At-risk drinking was reported in 19% of individuals
aged 50 to 64, and in 13% of respondents aged 65 and higher. Binge drinking was at 23%
for individuals aged 50 to 64, and still at 15% for individuals over the age of 65.
Now we know the medical complications of alcohol use include possible hypertension, stroke,
cardiomyopathy, cirrhosis of the liver, pancreatitis, increase in mouth, throat, and liver cancer,
just to name a few. In fact, 25 to 40% of patients who occupy general hospital beds are
thought to have alcohol problems. But what about the epidemiology of drug use? We know
that about 9.2% or around 24 million Americans aged 12 or higher used an illicit drug in
the past year. The most commonly used was marijuana at 14% use at any time in the past year,
or 7.3% of use in the past month. We do know that marijuana can be addictive, contrary
to popular belief, and about 9% of individuals who regularly use marijuana go on to develop
a substance use disorder. A rising and more recent category of abuse is in the category
of prescription medication. And here we're talking about things like painkillers, oxycodone,
Vicodin, and Percocet, tranquilizers such as Valium, Xanax, and Ativan, or stimulants
such as Adderall or Ritalin. In fact, in 2009, 7 million Americans reported current,
within the past month, non-medical use of prescription drugs. And that's more than the
number of individuals using cocaine, heroin, hallucinogens, and inhalants combined. And
that number continues to rise, especially with painkillers. In fact, prescription drug overdose
was the leading cause of injury death in 2012. And among people aged 25 to 64 years old,
drug overdose caused more deaths than motor vehicle traffic accidents. Of course, there
are many psychosocial aspects or social consequences related to substance use disorders or just
the use of substances. Alcohol is involved in a half to two-thirds of all homicides and
at least one half of serious assaults. We know that 70% of incarcerated individuals
have a substance use disorder. It accounts for a third of all criminal justice costs
and about 50% of all cases of child abuse and neglect. But when we talk about substance
use, we want to remember that we're thinking about use along a continuum. And at one end
of the continuum, we have complete abstinence, not using at all. The next level over would
be low risk, so occasional use, moving into at risk, so the individual in terms of quantity
or the occasions in which they use might place themselves or others at risk for negative
consequences. Then at the far end of the spectrum, we have the substance use disorders, and those
might be mild, moderate, or severe. Let's take a quick quiz. I'm going to read four
different case descriptions, and I want you to decide which of these patients is an at
risk drinker. So case one is a 45-year-old woman who drinks one to two glasses of wine
each night. Is she an at risk drinker? Case two, a 70-year-old man who drinks one to two
beers each night. Is he an at risk drinker? Case three, a 25-year-old woman who drinks
four to five drinks once per week when she goes out with her friends. And the last one,
a 40-year-old man who drinks one to two glasses of wine each night. Which of those four is
an at risk drinker? Well, it's a little bit of a trick question, because in fact, three
of those individuals would technically be considered at risk drinkers. The 45-year-old
woman drinking one to two glasses per night is at risk. The 70-year-old man who drinks
one to two beers each night is at risk. The 25-year-old woman who drinks four to five
drinks once per week is also at risk. So let's go ahead and define what we mean by
at risk substance use. And remember by at risk, we're looking at drinking patterns or
quantities that might place an individual at risk for medical complications or maybe
social problems. For a male who is under the age of 65, you can drink on average two drinks
per day, but no more than 14 drinks per week. That number drops for women on average one
drink per day and no more than seven drinks per week. For anyone over 65, it's an average
of one drink per day, no more than seven drinks per week. In terms of binge drinking, for
men under 65, if they drink more than four, it's considered a binge drink. For women,
if they drink more than three drinks, it's considered a binge. For individuals over
65 years old, if they drink more than three drinks, it's actually considered a binge.
Now you may wonder where these particular numbers come from and they really come from
the medical literature, where we look at individuals who've had complications, medical or social,
from their use of alcohol or drugs, then we look at how much those individuals used and
at what point they cross the threshold that might place them at risk. Now this isn't saying
that they have an alcohol use disorder or any sort of drug use disorder, but they're
in that at risk category where we probably want to take a little bit of a closer look.
Now what about for illicit drugs? So for illicit drugs, any use is considered at risk and
for prescription drugs, any unadvised or any non-medical use of a prescription medication
also places an individual at risk. Now remember, at risk just means exactly what it says. You're
at risk and it should be a focus of further inquiry and investigation to see if it might
be a problem. It might not, but it might be a problem. Now as I mentioned out on the far
end of that spectrum, we have substance use disorders and in order to be diagnosed with
a substance use disorder, you have to meet a diagnostic criteria. There's a total list
of 11 and you need a minimum of two of these diagnostic criteria. If you have two to three
of these criteria, you're considered mild. Four to five, you're considered moderate.
If you have six or more, you're considered severe. So what are those 11 criteria? So
the first is a failure to fulfill work or social obligations as a consequence of substance
use. The second is that you use at times even when it might be hazardous. So this is the
classic do not operate dangerous machinery or drive a car while you're drinking or using
drugs. Individuals who do that would then get a point on this diagnostic criteria.
Number three would be, has your substance use caused social or interpersonal problems?
Next would be tolerance. So do you have to use more and more of the substance in order
to have the same effect? Next would be withdrawal. So if you abruptly stop using the substance,
do you have a physiologic reaction because your body needs to have that substance you've
developed an addiction? Are you unable to cut down despite repeated attempts and maybe
even a desire to cut down? Are you using more than you initially intended to use? Do you
neglect important activities or spend a lot of time getting the substance? Have there
been psychological or physical problems like medical problems that have come up as a consequence
of your substance use? And last, do you have a psychologic or physiologic craving to have
more of the substance? Now when you go to a primary care setting, they often use very
brief screening tests around alcohol and drug use. We know that alcohol and drug use are
relevant to a lot of different medical disorders and it probably should be on the map for any
primary care clinician. So if we're looking in the category of alcohol, there's one commonly
used single question screener put out by NIAAA, the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism. The second most commonly used screener is something called the audit and
let me describe each of those. So the NIA single question screener is as follows. Let's assume
you're a man and you are under the age of 65. How many times in the past year have you
had five or more drinks in a day? So how many times in the past year have you had five or
more drinks in a day? If the answer is anything other than zero, that individual is considered
quote at risk and you might go on to do a more in-depth screener. Incidentally, that
number changes to have you had four or more drinks in a day for women or for anyone over
the age of 65. Now I mentioned the audit and the audit stands for Alcohol Use Disorders
Identification Test. It is a ten-question survey which focuses on use but also focuses
on potential dependence symptoms or consequences of using alcohol. The cutoff score on the
audit, which is freely available online, is eight or above. If you're eight or above,
you're in that at-risk category. You may just need some simple advice or you may just need
to cut down and take it easy a bit. If your scores are in 16 to the 19 range, you might
need some brief counseling. If your scores are 20 or higher, you might need a referral
to a specialist. If we're looking in the category illicit drugs, there's also a single
question screener from NIDA which simply asks how many times in the past year have you used
an illicit substance or used a prescription medication for non-medical reasons or because
of the way it made you feel? Single question. And if your answer is anything other than zero,
you're at risk. The questionnaire that is often used is the DASC and that's the Drug
Abuse Screening Test. Let's move on to do a brief demonstration of alcohol screening
and we'll look at a clip from Carol. Can you tell me a little bit about the alcohol
use? You said that you have a glass of wine before bed to help you sleep. So how many days
do you usually drink alcohol? I mean, I don't really drink it a whole lot on the weekends
but on weeknights I'll have probably a glass or two. So we'll say five days a week. Okay,
so five days a week and you said a glass or two. So how often is it one and how often
is it two? That's a good question. I guess it's probably closer to two than one most
but I don't feel it to the brim or anything. Okay, and that was my next question. So glasses
or smaller glasses are big. So did you have a sense of how many ounces or how? I measure
actually. So five ounce glasses. That's five ounce glasses. Okay. And so more commonly
two than one and sounds like you're drinking somewhere then between maybe seven to ten
glasses per week. That's pretty accurate. Okay. And are you comfortable with that amount
or is that something that worries you a little bit? I'm not worried about it. I don't feel
like I need it necessarily and I don't get drunk or anything like that but it'd be nice
to not, I guess, feel like I, it'd be nice to feel like it doesn't help me fall asleep.
Like it doesn't have to be there. Right, right. It's sort of a crutch that you use to help
you fall asleep and it would be nice to drink for the enjoyment or with your meal or whatever
reason and not have to use it as a medication almost. I'm just going to maybe bookmark this
as something that we can talk about later too because for a woman your age what's considered
moderate drinking is no more than seven drinks per week so if you're sometimes up above seven
it doesn't mean that you have a problem with alcohol but it means you're drinking a little bit
over what would be considered moderate drinking for a woman your age and we'll want to keep
an eye on it and make sure that it doesn't become again a crutch like we said that then
becomes its own sort of problem. Okay. Okay. So what would we do with Carol? Honestly alcohol
is now on my list for her. I've flagged it not necessarily as her most important problem
but something that I want to pay attention to. I haven't yet seen other indicators that alcohol
is truly a problem but she is drinking in the risky category. She's drinking more than seven drinks
per week on average. I will encourage her to cut back to safe levels and I will regularly reassess her.
Next I'd like to talk about a increasingly popular public health approach to doing screening
and brief intervention for substance use disorders in primary care settings and it's something
that's called SBIRT or S-B-I-R-T where the S stands for screening. You quickly assess use
in severity of alcohol elicit drugs and prescription drug abuse. This is oftentimes done with a quick
questionnaire that's in the waiting room before your primary care appointment sometimes done
on a computer tab or at home on a patient health portal. The B.I. stands for brief intervention
and the brief intervention is a three to five minute motivational and awareness raising
intervention given to a risky or problematic substance user. So if you do your screening
and you score in the at risk category then a nurse or your primary care physician or a behavioral
health specialist would then spend about three to five minutes with you talking about ways to
reduce risk and providing some basic education about your level of use. The R.T. stands for
referrals to treatment and these are for individuals who aren't just risky users but you suspect
that they might have a full blown alcohol use disorder or substance use disorder in general.
The R.T. referrals to treatment means then you would work with that individual to prepare them
to accept a referral to specialty care then you would actually facilitate that referral
and help them to make that connection. But does SBIRT work? Well a recent meta-analysis
suggests an overall reduction of 56% in the number of drinks. Research has shown that brief
interventions can reduce alcohol use for at least 12 months in patients who are not alcohol dependent
and if you think about it that three to five minute intervention just reaching out to someone
before they have a full blown use disorder and saying hey you know what the amount you're
drinking is actually not safe and here's why I'm worried and here's some things that you can do
about it might reduce drinking as much as 56% over a period of 12 months. Now as I mentioned
brief interventions are really for people who are at risk users but what about people
with full blown substance use disorders? In 2012 an estimated 23.1 million Americans
needed treatment for a problem related to alcohol or drugs but only about 2.5 million people
or little more than 10% received treatment at a specialty facility. That means that there are
millions of people who simply aren't getting into treatment. So what are the most commonly used
forms of treatment for substance use disorders? Well the most commonly used is a 12 step program
things like alcoholics anonymous or narcotics anonymous that uses a peer-to-peer individual
and group counseling model. Now the data shows us that in 2013 there were about a million people
that were involved in some sort of 12 step program and there were about 60,000 meetings
occurring at some place around the United States. In terms of the efficacy of this particular
approach studies have been quite difficult because with alcoholics anonymous as the name implies
they like to keep things anonymous so it's been difficult for researchers to go in and to study.
But in the studies that have been done it looks like the effectiveness rate is actually a little
disappointing. It's about 5 to 10% effective but that's for people who stick with it. I think
the primary problem with 12 step is that 90% of the people that go to an AA meeting drop out
in the first 90 days. For the folks that stay it works but you have to get people to stay.
I wanted to share a different type of treatment one that we haven't talked about in our toolbox
as of yet. It's called CRA or the Community Reinforcement Approach. Now me being a diet in the world
Cognitive Behavioral Therapist I read their treatment manuals and I think this is CBT but there are
some important differences and they've added in I think some really interesting elements in terms
of thinking about community support and social relationships. CBT oftentimes very much on the
individual or maybe the couple, maybe the family, a lot less in thinking about a supportive community.
So there are a number of different components, four main components for the Community Reinforcement
Approach. The first they want to do a functional analysis of substance use. So they want to come up
with those explanations of what are the triggers or the antecedents of use and they want to explore
the positive and the negative consequences. So here we're talking about rewards and punishments
and there are rewards to using alcohol and drugs. It's part of the reason why people use them.
Let's look at both sides of the coin. The second element is something they call sobriety sampling.
Now here they think that movement towards abstinence begins with a client's agreement to sample a brief
period of abstinence. Now remember there's no failure here, it's all grist for the mill. So you'll talk to
an individual, you will get their agreement that they won't drink for 7 days or 10 days or 30 days,
whatever number you agree to. They go out and they try that experiment if you will, that sobriety
sampling and see what happens. Sometimes people can't do it, sometimes they can do it but either way
they learn important information that helps to feed their functional analysis and helps to shape
their subsequent treatment approach. Now the next part of CRA is the actual treatment plan itself
where you want to establish meaningful, objective, smart goals that are client selected and negotiated
with the clinician. You want to establish specified methods for obtaining those goals and here we might
be pulling out some of those tools from our CBT toolbox but they add additional tools such as the happiness
scales so they're not just looking at negative emotions but also positives and they use things such as
a goals of counseling form to help the individual track their progress towards their goals. They may
add in a component of behavior skills training where they teach three basic skills through instruction
and they also use a lot of role playing with the facilitator or with the therapist. So they will look at
problem solving skills, obstacles always arise, you may need to be nimble on your feet in terms of responding
to problems. They teach communication skills and particularly help people to have a more positive
interaction style even in the face of conflict. They also teach something that's quite important called
drink and drug refusal training. Remember that our social networks are very powerful in terms of influencing
our behavior. So one of the things that causes an individual to fall off the wagon, they've decided not to
drink or not to use drugs but guess what their best friend, their neighbor, their significant other comes and
offers it to them. So they need to develop their communication skills in terms of refusing drinks or
drugs but still salvaging that relationship. The next skills training comes in the job skills department.
Oftentimes individuals who may have been using substances for a long period of time, they've either
forgotten or they lack the basic steps and skills necessary for getting and for keeping the job.
Now some of the other components would include social and recreational counseling. Oftentimes folks will need
to establish new social contacts and new relationships or maybe new positive social or recreational
activities that don't involve alcohol or drugs. You want to think about relapse prevention. There's a number of
different strategies that are effective in helping a person stop using but the real test comes in, can they
stay clean for 30 days, 60 days, 90 days, 6 months, 5 years and so on. They teach clients to identify high risk situations
and they teach them to anticipate or to cope with potential relapses. Another important part that CRA adds is
relationship counseling. They know that substance use disorders place a great tremendous stress on the individual
and their significant others. It teaches them how to improve the interaction between client and his or her partner.
The next type of therapy that I wanted to talk about is similar to some of the things that we've talked about in the
past when we've talked about cognitive therapy in contrast to mindfulness based cognitive therapy for the treatment
of depression but here we're talking about substance abuse. Cognitive behavioral therapy is still a leading player
but we've added something now called mindfulness based relapse prevention or MBRP. This was initially developed
by Alan Marlott in Washington State and is currently being studied by Sarah Bowen. Then here I really want you to
think back to those third wave therapies with their focus on mindfulness and sometimes accepting the storms that come
in, the cravings that might come in in the terms of substance abuse and not necessarily wrestling with them but just
letting them diminish and to leave on their own. So in MBRP they use the acronym SOBER, S-O-B-E-R, where the S stands
for stop, the O stands for observe, the B stands for breathe, the E stands for expand awareness and the R stands
for respond mindfully. So if we think about substance use disorders an individual will oftentimes see a trigger. That trigger
may activate a physiologic or psychologic craving to reach out and smoke that cigarette to have that drink to use drugs.
What SOBER does is it teaches an individual to slow down. It gives them that couple second pause so that their frontal lobes,
that executive functioning can kick in and say, wait a minute, is this really what you want to do? Is this in service of your
values and your goals or can we have you step outside of the situation or maybe call somebody for help?
Now an example of a strategy often used as part of mindfulness-based relapse prevention is something called
surfing the urge and it's something that we use with Michael and just to remind you Michael used to be a
pachydase smoker so he was physiologically addicted to nicotine. When he stopped smoking he would have cravings for nicotine.
Now oftentimes when an individual has a physiologic craving they imagine that the intensity of that craving will just
continue to go up and up and up and up until they just can't stand it anymore. But we know that the way cravings work,
yes there is a physiologic increase to that craving but it hits a plateau, it stays at that plateau for a relatively
short period of time then that craving begins to decrease. So really all you need to do is to buckle your seat belt
while you're having that craving and this too shall pass. So surfing the urge first teaches the skills of mindfulness
and of awareness but it tells the individual you have this wave coming in rather than allow yourself to get hammered by
that wave take out your surfboard and surf that urge into the shore, step off and go about your way.
So how about evidence for mindfulness based relapse prevention and this is a study by Sarah Bowen that was published in
2014. She looked at 268 individuals with substance use disorders and she looked at three different kinds of treatment.
She looked at cognitive based or cognitive behavioral therapy that focused on relapse prevention. She looked on mindfulness
based relapse prevention and she looked at treatment as usual. For individuals in after care following initial treatment
for substance use disorders CBT relapse prevention and mindfulness based relapse prevention were superior to treatment
as usual. At 12 month follow up mindfulness based relapse prevention offered an added benefit over CBT and treatment
as usual in reducing drug use and heavy drinking. So it looks like maybe targeted mindfulness practices can support
long term outcomes by strengthening an ability, an individual's ability to monitor and skillfully cope with discomfort
that comes from those cravings. The next system that I wanted to introduce is something called TESS TES which stands
for the therapeutic education system and I wanted to illustrate this because it's delivered in a different modality.
In TESS we have 62 internet modules so it's quite extensive. Again as a CBT person I see them and I think this is lots of CBT
but it's based primarily on CRA the community reinforcement approach developed by Lisa Marsh and her colleagues at Dartmouth University
and recently evaluated in a paper by Campbell in 2014 where they looked at 507 individuals using alcohol and drugs
and working their way through these 62 internet modules. What they found was that TESS was superior to treatment as usual
on both adherence and abstinence so it looks like their treatment approach CRA delivered through an internet modality
was helpful and successful. Now one of the interesting features of TESS is that it uses a contingency management system
to get people to do the modules so essentially what happens is every time you use the module you get a sort of lottery ticket
that makes you eligible to win say $100 in prize money. Each time you take another module you get another ticket
and your odds continue to go up. There's a number of different variants on contingency management
where you use lotteries or rewards or payments as a reward for someone who say comes in and gives a urine sample
and you can prove that they haven't been using. But does contingency management work and should we pay people to not engage
in unhealthy behaviors? I want to share just a couple of studies on this topic. The first is by Fernando in 2013
and they did a systematic review of CBT versus contingency management for cocaine addiction. They found that contingency management
produces very rapid results in the beginning of treatment and CBT produced results towards the end and after treatment
had ended. About half of the studies that did a combination of the two showed better results but half of the studies
showed that a combination didn't really matter and they weren't very supportive of contingency management. In another study
done looking at smoking it was a Cochrane review by Cahill and Pereira in 2011. They looked at 19 different studies
total of about 4,500 different subjects. There was only one large study out of their 19 studies showed that payments
for abstinence were beneficial. The incentives did increase participation but the initial success faded after the rewards
and they went away. So it looks like incentives are just one extrinsic motivator and it looks like the results are mixed
for now. However a more common scenario is when a family or a friend is trying to get their loved one to cut down
or to quit using entirely. It's estimated that for every one substance abuser there are five family members affected.
So what should families do? Now the last modality I wanted to talk about is something called Kraft. Now this is
CRA as we've talked about before but they've added an FT which stands for family training. Now Kraft is a more
recent outgrowth of CRA that focuses on how to help the loved ones of those abusing alcohol or drugs. Now I found
a couple of books and websites about Kraft that I thought were good and quite helpful. One was by Jeff Foot called
Beyond Addiction. Another by Robert Myers called Get Your Loved One Sober. There's a website called The 20-Minute Guide
with 20 using the numbers 2-0. This website includes instructions, motivational messages about how to take care of yourself,
how to communicate with your loved one and how to get help if you need it. Now the goal of Kraft is to use positive
communication to reinforce positive behaviors while taking care of yourself and using other social supports. You want to
highlight positive interactions, positive conversations, times when your loved one is sober or not using, times when they've
been reliable. Some might say is this enabling? But remember that there's an important distinction. When you are
enabling you're increasing an individual's drug use behavior by removing negative consequences. You cover for them at
work. You pay for them to have their car fixed which they crashed when they were using. That might be enabling. A positive
reinforcement increases non-drinking behavior and thus far the research results are positive. Let's move on to ask one of our
frequently asked questions and this patient asks, other than surfing the urge to deal with cravings, what are some other
strategies to cut down? Well it really depends on the substance and it depends on the severity of use but the first thing
that I would do is self-monitoring or some sort of substance use diary where you not only want to record use but you want to
record the antecedents or the triggers as well as the consequences. You might then think about removing triggers. If an
individual is triggered because they drive by a bar on their way home from work, change the route that you drive so that you
are able to avoid that trigger. You might also make some temporary or even permanent changes in your social circle. Remember,
our friends and family have a big influence on the behavioral choices we make. If they're pushing you in unhealthy
directions, maybe it's time to have different social supports. Another helpful website to go to and this is particularly for folks
who might be in that at risk drinking category is called the drinkers checkup which you can find on Google. So where does
that leave us? Well for Donovan we really don't have very much information about his IV heroin use. We can hope that this was a
one-time accident and that he might learn from that accident. Of course if his use is much more developed than that there's
both pharmacotherapies as well as psychotherapies that might help. For Carol we'll probably want to watch and wait. For Michael
he's made a lot of progress already with his smoking and we'll want to help him build on those successes. In our next lecture
we'll tackle the topic of insomnia. Thank you.
