Up to this point, our CBT examples have been nearly all dyadic, one patient and one therapist
as a pair.
We step outside of the therapy office by having the patient do homework in the real world
that involves other people.
The patient then reports back the next session and we do problem solving and adjusting to
our treatment plan if necessary.
But if the issue resides within a couple or family, then everyone might literally need
to be in the room.
In today's lecture, we're going to return to Michael, but we're also going to meet
his wife, Stephanie, and follow them in their work together.
Now, couple CBT works on many of the same issues that any type of couples therapy most
likely will want to address.
We'll look at communication and we'll especially look at miscommunication and its role in conflict.
We'll look at empathy or emotional understanding and respect for each member of the couple
and understand why that sometimes waxes and wanes over time.
We'll look at intimacy or emotional closeness, at expressed affection either directly or
implicitly, and of course at some of the foundations in any relationship such as trust and acceptance
or if a transgression has occurred, we'll look at forgiveness.
Now if you're interested in what a full program of cognitive behavioral couples therapy might
look like, there's a couple of different sources I wanted to point you towards.
The first is a book called Enhanced Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Couples, A Contextual
Approach, written in 2002 by Ebstein and Balkam, and the other is a series of articles that
are freely available online about Integrative Behavioral Couples Therapy, or IBCT, by Christensen
and Neil Jacobson.
Now there are some important differences between individual CBT and couples CBT.
First and probably foremost is that the cognitions that you work on with couples are hot, meaning
it's not just doing an ABCD about an event that happens out there, sometimes the activating
event is the session itself so those cognitions are coming out right in the moment.
It makes them a little more difficult and challenging to work with but maybe more fruitful.
Couple CBT is also a little harder to predict.
It's easier to make a formulation for one person than for two people but remember in
a couple the whole is greater than the sum of the parts.
It's not just two people together, it's the chemistry between those two individuals so
the work becomes much more complex and the conceptualizations can be a lot more tricky.
And lastly we'll still work on smart goals but remember it's not just the goals of one
individual, it's the goals of two individuals.
Now we would hope that those goals overlap a fair amount within a couple but sometimes
those goals might be diametrically opposed.
Of course we're going to look at relationship dynamics and I think you would want to imagine
relationships as a potent trigger for automatic thoughts and emotions.
Just as we have habits of mind, we have habits of the heart.
We develop our own romantic or emotional or intimate style.
We know that some people when angry or upset they will shut down and withdraw and become
very quiet, some people might have the opposite style.
Others might have a tendency to feel rejected even when rejection wasn't the intent.
Others when angry may become passive aggressive, others might become quite competitive or even
aggressive.
But remember it's about the chemistry, it's about the interaction of those two different
kinds of habits of the heart that we'll see in action when we're doing couples CBT.
Let's move on then to look at our very first clip where you're going to meet Stephanie,
who will lay the ground rules and will set the stage for the work ahead.
Stephanie, welcome.
Thank you.
I'm so glad you're here.
As you know, Michael has had several sessions before and we've been working on issues around
anger and it was actually his idea that you come in today.
Yes, thank you.
It's my pleasure.
I'm a little nervous but I know this is Michael's deal but it affects me too so he's always
saying Jason said this, Jason said that and always really good but I'm glad I could be
here too.
Okay, and I'm glad you could come as well and Michael, how are you feeling right now?
I'm feeling good, I think that this will be a good opportunity for us to talk to each
other in an environment where obviously it's different and maybe we'll both learn something.
Okay, good.
Well, let's start just by laying some ground rules just so we know how to proceed from
here.
There's always conflict in every single relationship but I think what differentiates between successful
and unsuccessful conflict is if there's respect, if there's an opportunity to both speak and
to listen.
And I'm wondering what other rules you guys would like to suggest as we work through maybe
some of the conflicts you've had.
Well I think maybe one of the things that often happens is sort of judging up the past
and letting that, you're holding grudges and letting things like that.
Because you think I do that?
Well sometimes you bring up things that have happened years ago that I don't necessarily
think.
I don't really think I do that.
Well.
Okay, so why don't we push pause?
We push pause there and you have a good ground rule and that's to focus on the present.
And how about if someone says something you disagree with?
What's a good way to disagree that opens conversation instead of shutting it down?
Well, you could be the referee.
Okay, there's that.
But you know I'm only here about an hour a week, right?
So a lot of other hours so it's something you guys probably want to be able to negotiate
on your own.
We have sort of respect and we have both listening and speaking, focusing on the present.
How about focus on what the other person says, perhaps I suppose we could reserve judgment.
Okay, reserving judgment, maybe agreeing to disagree if you don't see things eye to eye.
And I think maybe just remembering that if you didn't care about each other you wouldn't
be here.
Right?
If you're married for what almost 20 years now, that's a lot of time together.
And you've been through a lot of life together, you have a son together, a teenager now.
But you've been through a lot and we're hoping that we can get you guys back to a place where
you remember what it is that brought you together in the first place.
So I was hoping that rather than jump in about conflict, I mean we can lay some ground rules
and if things get stirred up here, that's fine, but I'll remind you of those rules
and I'll actually write them down and give them to you and put them on the fridge, put
them wherever you need to put them at home.
So what are some of the things I'm immediately looking for?
Remember that we already have a formulation for Michael, but I want to see if it holds
true for when his wife is also around.
How does he communicate with her?
What are his nonverbals?
What is her style?
What is the level of tension that's between them and what is the level of their emotional
intimacy?
And of course race is the issue of how do you assess the couple and we've learned from
individual CBT that there's a number of different assessment methodologies, semi-structured
interviews, questionnaires and so on.
We would want to have a similar process for the couple.
So in a clinical setting though with two individuals, we usually want to look for something called
triangulation where you take multiple sources of data and you see where they overlap or
where they don't overlap.
So first I would give individual self-report packets, surveys really, to each individual
that they would fill out independently and they would not share with one another.
These would often include the perceptions of how things are going in the relationship
now versus how they wish or want them to be.
Secondly, I would probably interview each member of the couple separately.
Sometimes without the other person in the room, they feel that they have more freedom
to express their feelings or desires and the challenges that they may be facing as a couple.
And finally I would want to bring them together and interview them together so that again
we can see that chemistry and how they interact with one another.
Now regardless of whether or not those sources of data overlap or don't overlap, it's instructive
either way.
So what would an inventory look like?
So what sorts of assessment tools?
And I'll just give you a couple of examples of ones that you can find freely available
online.
The first is by Ellen Bershide.
It's the relationship closeness inventory that measures interdependence looking at frequencies
of intimacy, diversities of connection and the strength of connection.
Another commonly used instrument is used in religious or non-secular counseling.
It's called the prepare or enrich assessment tool.
It's often used as a way to prepare individuals who are considering joining and becoming married.
The next is the ECR or the Experiences in Close Relationship Survey.
It's a 36-item self-report attachment measure developed by Fraley Waller and Brennan.
It yields two subscales, one scale on avoidance.
It looks at discomfort with closeness and discomfort with depending on others, certainly
important for intimacy or lack thereof.
And the second scale is about anxiety.
So it looks at things like fear of rejection and fear of abandonment.
If you're interested in this instrument or others, I would again encourage you to look
online.
For the ECR, you can probably most easily find it at yourpersonality.net.
Let's move on then to look at our second clip.
And in this second clip, we're going to use a positive psychology exercise before we get
to negotiating conflict.
But maybe we could start with some of the positives and getting you back to some of the positives.
And Stephanie, if it's okay, I wanted to ask you, what are some of the things that initially
drew you to Michael?
So Michael, at his best, why did you pick him?
What was it?
Well, I mean, obviously he's very attractive and he's only gotten more attractive as we've
gotten older.
And he's really funny.
And I really appreciate that about him, more than anything, he's got a wonderful sense
of humor.
And he's always making me laugh.
I think I don't want to say that maybe he's lost some of his sense of humor, but you know,
you get older and things get stressed out and we'll stay with the positive.
So we've got sense of humor and he's a looker.
And he's obviously, he's very smart.
I mean, and that's something that I enjoy about him a lot.
I think we have a lot of common interests and, you know, I can express my opinions about
something and he always has an interesting response to it.
Okay.
All right.
And Michael, I'm going to ask you the same question.
So what was it about Stephanie that drew you to her and, you know, with Stephanie at
her best?
What did you really like or love about her?
Well, I think I'd echo a lot of the things that she said.
And I'd also, one thing that probably doesn't come out when you think of me, but certainly
when I think of Stephanie, I think caring from the very beginning.
That's one of the things that I first really noticed appreciated and eventually came to
love about Stephanie.
She's really caring.
She talked about humor and intelligence.
And I feel that early on in our relationship, there was just the sense that we communicated
very, very naturally because we were on the same wavelength.
We found the same things funny.
We thought about things the same way.
And when you have that sort of, I don't know, camaraderie, it's hard to beat.
And I felt like, you know, that was there almost, maybe you disagree, but from the beginning.
No, no, I agree.
I agree.
It makes things so much easier to get through together when you have that sort of understanding
already.
Right.
Right.
Another question, Stephanie, we'll go back to you.
What are some things that the two of you used to do together that you really enjoyed
that maybe you haven't done in a while?
Well, we used to spend a lot of time outdoors hiking.
We did a lot of canoeing and camping, especially when we were younger, before we had our son.
We haven't done that so much of that lately.
He's has some health issues that don't allow us to get out as much as we used to.
And he just quite readily doesn't like it.
So.
Okay.
So it's so camping and outdoors and.
Yeah.
And I mean, we used to, you know, we used to be a lot more social, I think, than we are
now.
And especially, I guess, when we were younger, we had a larger group of friends and, you
know, as you get older, you move and people move and you kind of lose track of them.
So, you know, we do enjoy our neighbors and things like that, but I think our close friends
are not as accessible maybe as they used to be.
So.
Okay.
So we're going to create a list of activities and you can probably see where this is going.
All right.
And how about for you, Michael, what are some of the positive memories or activities that
the two of you used to do in addition to what, what Stephanie?
Yeah, there was that sense of what Stephanie's talking about, getting busy, getting distracted.
There was that sense of freedom wasn't there that you really, I really miss.
I really miss.
I think when, when we were young, that freedom meant that we could do things like go to movies.
I really enjoyed you introducing me to movies that I'd never seen and me introducing you
to movies that may be a little weird, but, but you, you endured them, right?
I always enjoyed them.
But going, going to the movies, even if we didn't necessarily come out thinking the same
thing about them.
I've always enjoyed, and this is something I've definitely got away from cooking.
I enjoy cooking for just the two of us.
That was, that was always something that, that I, I, I would like to do on a weekend
just to say, you know, it's Saturday.
We could go out, but maybe we could just make it an event, uh, eating in.
So those are a couple of things in addition to the outdoorsy things we used to, to do
that I would, I would mention.
Okay.
And I have outdoors, socializing, movies, and cooking.
So those are four great, and I think realistic and doable ideas to a certain extent.
Um, you know, I'm thinking about these, um, not because we don't have work to do.
We do.
There's a lot of water under the bridge.
There's this anger issue.
I've heard about the recent incident around smoking on the deck and, I mean, so it, it
stirred up and it's clear there were a lot of, uh, probably years of resentments and
things that can get released with a, a poke or so, but I think, you know, what we don't
want to lose sight of is there's a foundation that's here.
There are strengths that are here.
And while we're, you know, mucking around in the stuff that we need to fix, I think
it's important that we remember that there's a lot of positive things that have happened
too.
And if we can keep adding to that list of positives, even in a very little way, it might
remind you who it is that you're arguing with.
And in the heat of the moment, hopefully take a little bit of that heat off.
So you can see that we've started with a simple behavioral intervention and a bit of attention
shifting in the positive emotion direction.
We wanted to create a bit of a cushion, if you will, before digging into their conflicts.
Now before moving into conflict, we might need to look at communication and what the
current state of affairs is in terms of their communication style or their communication
chemistry with one another.
We have the usual processes in order to evaluate communication.
It might be self-report, surveys.
It might be individual interviews.
It might be con joint interviews, reports from others, or even observations that we
do in session.
One of the most commonly used communication skills test is the interpersonal communication
skills test, where it has a number of different scales that help us to better understand our
strengths and our weaknesses in communicating with others.
These scales would include insightfulness, the ability to understand other people's
words and intentions, verbal expression, assertiveness, and your listening skills and your emotional
management skills.
Now this particular questionnaire has 25 items that are rated on a one to five scale.
I'll give you just a couple of ideas of what some of these items might be like.
For example, I managed to express my ideas clearly.
I find it easy to see things from someone else's point of view.
People don't get what I am saying.
I have difficulty putting my thoughts into words, or I tend to postpone or avoid discussing
touchy subjects.
Now miscommunication we know occurs commonly, and oftentimes there may be a gender issue
in the way that men and women prefer or are taught to communicate.
For example, we know that men spend approximately two-thirds of social conversations talking
about themselves.
Men are less likely to pick up on emotional cues, and they're less likely to take turns
or give openings to others.
Men and conversation tend to report, and women tend to engage and report talk.
These are just different styles, and it's not to harshly criticize men, but there are
pros and cons, and of course different sorts of conflict that might emerge from those styles.
The most common sources of conflict in couples, I think of them as the big four, are money,
sex, kids, and religion, but of course folks might have conflict about just about anything.
We want to look at some of the cognitive elements.
What are the memories, what are the other conflicts that are brought up, what are subjective
interpretations of events, or the beliefs about the relationship?
What we do in this next clip is we illustrate a very simple, structured approach to describing
conflict and going on to resolve it.
Let's watch the next clip.
The conflict that I thought we'd go to is one that we talked about a little bit before,
and it was around smoking.
Before we do that, I wanted to outline a process that we can try out.
We can test drive it, see how it works for you guys around this issue of smoking and
the conflict you had about smoking.
The method is called the DESC method, just D-E-S-C, and the D stands for describe, so
you're just describing the situation and setting the stage, and we know that if each of you
describe the situation, it'll sound a little different, maybe a lot different, but just
the first step is describe.
The second step is to emote, so describe the situation and then how you felt in that situation.
The S is for specify, so that's when you say specifically what you would like the other
person to do differently next time, doesn't mean they're going to do it or they agree
with you, but it's what you need from the other person so that they understand what
you need.
And the C is the consequences, or really why is this important to me, and if we don't
work it out, what's going to happen?
It's not a threat, but it's why does this matter?
So it's D-E-S-C, and just to make sure we're on the same page with that, so the D stands
for describe, and the E stands for emote, and the S, specify, and the C, consequences.
Perfect.
Alright, so Michael, you're up with the DESC method to talk about the incident where you
came home from work, you're stressed, you went out on the deck, and you smoked cigarette,
and Stephanie came out and saw you smoking.
So why don't you sort of describe, and what we can keep it brief, the incident, let us
know how you felt, the E, specify, and consequences, and then we'll give you a chance to respond.
Over the description, I had been caught doing something I wasn't supposed to.
If I could just pause there and have you talk to each other instead of to me, and I'm just
here to observe, and you can just talk directly to Stephanie.
Good.
Well, I was smoking, I recognized I shouldn't have been there, and I was sneaking a cigarette
out on the deck, and you arrived, and you immediately launched into what I thought was a tirade
about all the negative consequences of smoking, and the reasons I shouldn't be doing it.
And that led to my reacting, which led to your reacting.
So let's pause there if I can interrupt, and since this is our test drive of a particular
method, I might jump in a little more than I usually do, and I think in the D part, the
described part, we want you to pretend like you're a really, really boring attorney.
And you're not trying to sway or persuade a jury, you've essentially lost all color
in life in the description of the incident.
So trying to remove evaluations or emotion-laden words like tirade, that's kind of a powerful
word, tirade.
But just say, I went out, I was smoking, you came out of the house, you saw that I was
smoking, and we started to have an argument.
What's that?
That sounds like a good description.
That's the event on the table, right?
And so let's get to the E part, the emote part.
So she saw you smoking, you guys had an exchange, and how did you feel during and after that?
I felt angry because I felt you didn't understand why I needed to have a cigarette, just one
cigarette at that point.
I felt a little embarrassed that I had been found out.
I felt that you were attacking me, and I felt defensive because of that.
So let's pause again there, and thank you for sharing that.
So there's a few layers there, and Stephanie, you probably heard that there's the emotion,
anger, embarrassment, defensiveness, but then there's some thoughts that were underneath
and some interpretation underneath, some about him, some about your behavior.
So he felt angry and embarrassed and defensive, and felt that he was being attacked.
That was sort of his interpretation of your behavior is that it was an attack.
He was also thinking, man, I need this, and I deserve this, and it's been a really stressful
day.
And that was all part of his head space in the moment.
Now how about the S part, the specified part?
By specify, I would want to express what specifically I would like her to do.
So if we were to rewind, you're smoking on the deck, she comes out and she sees you,
what kind of response would you like from her?
I think I said the last time we were here that one of the things that I always appreciated
about you was the fact that you're caring.
So I would specify by saying the first response instead of putting me on the defensive by taking
the offensive might be, Michael, I see that you're having a cigarette, what's up.
Just having the response of caring and understanding would be great.
And if that doesn't happen, or if this sort of pattern continues, what's your worry?
Why is this important?
My worry is that in this particular case, you're not appreciating where I live.
And that's an indication that maybe we don't understand each other.
If we can't get to a space where we're demonstrating that we understand one another, I guess ultimately
one would be worried about the relationship itself.
Why would two people who don't understand each other continue drifting through the world
this way?
Okay, so let's pause there and Stephanie, I want to check in with you about how you're
feeling right now.
You've been very good about not speaking up and I can tell you're listening.
Yes.
Okay.
I'm going to start at the beginning to go through everything.
Okay.
Well, I guess to describe the situation, you were outside smoking and I was coming upstairs
from the laundry room and just saw you out there and yes, I came out to the deck and
was quite upset about you being out there smoking.
Emote.
I was upset.
I don't feel like I was angry as much as I was just sad and frustrated because you've
been working so hard not to smoke and I just felt like that was a big setback and I don't
want you to get lung cancer like your father and die.
That's the real basis for my being upset is that we watched your father die and here you
are sort of doing the same thing and it makes me very sad and because I care about you and
I love you and I don't want anything like that to happen to you.
If we can pause there, I wanted to ask is there some fear there, fear for his health
or his well-being?
Absolutely.
Yes.
Yes.
I mean, the death of Michael's father was awful.
It's no way for anybody to die and I don't know that I can do that again.
I don't want to and there's no reason why I should have to because there's the opportunity
to head that off.
So given that's the emotions that you had and that's sort of what you were feeling in
the space that you were in, he has put a request on the table and that is to say, hey Michael,
what's going on?
Is that a request you could comply with or?
Yes.
Yes.
I can.
Absolutely.
Because that is where my anger is coming from is because I care for you and I want you
to know that and I'm sorry that I reacted that way but it is coming from a place of
love and not from trying to be a bully or to make you feel embarrassed.
It's because I care for you.
So there's one more piece to this and I want to make sure we get to that.
So in the event as it happened, he was wanting a particular response.
He got a different response from you.
And what happened is a situation escalated.
So you heard something that you felt was attacking and unfair and unsupportive and describe
how you reacted to that.
Well I think the way that I reacted was basically to get back at you and the way that I got
back at you was to dredge up the conversation that we've had in the past and usually in
elevated tones and that is that I feel that I work very, very hard and I'm under a great
deal of stress and I threw that back at you as though you aren't.
I think when I'm calm, I realize how much you do take on day to day.
But the way that I threw it back at you was to say that you're just at home.
How can you understand all of that I'm going through?
I was clearly at that moment I felt you didn't.
Right.
And how did it feel to hear that?
Well, it's something that happens more often when we do get angry.
It kind of comes down to, you know, I'm not working.
I used to but I'm not right now and I take care of the house and our teenage son but
I don't know that Michael really appreciates all of that.
And so he often throws that back in my face as for any sort of argument.
So that sounds like a definite violation of our rules of conflict, right, where we focus
on the issue at hand and the issue at hand in that situation was Michael was smoking,
you saw him smoke, you said something he thought was unsupportive and then Michael, you pulled
in this other issue and it was like sort of pushing an old tape that you'd had that
argument a lot of times before and then you guys were sort of off, you know, to the races
with the latest argument.
So it sounds like maybe if I can do the specified part for Michael, the request would be when
you have an exchange that you're not happy with or hurts you or feels unsupported, we
want you to have an alternate response rather than pulling out or dredging up something
from a past argument.
What could you do instead or maybe Stephanie, we could hear from you.
What would you like him to say instead of dredging something up?
Well, I think if you could tell me why you're stressed out and why it's causing you to smoke
instead of just, you know, trying to pull me into an argument, that would be more beneficial
because then I would understand what you're going through and I might be able to give
suggestions about how you can decompress rather than coming out on the deck and smoking because
it's not helpful for you to get angry at me because I'm angry at you for smoking and
you're still carrying around the stress from your day.
So I mean, I guess your anger is a way of expressing your stress but that's not very
helpful.
Right.
And we've talked about how anger can be empowering but it also pushes other people away.
It's hard to be around someone that's angry and it's even harder to try to show support
for them.
So this was just a quick example of a fairly straightforward way to negotiate a conflict.
Now does it work?
Do we have evidence that shows us it works and of course there are a number of different
studies and I'll just point out two that I think are exemplary.
The first was from 1995, done by Dunn and Schwebel and the next in 2005, a meta-analysis
done by Wood in the American Journal of Family Therapy.
They found in both of those cases that the preponderance of evidence shows us that cognitive
behavioral conflict resolution skills in the context of couples therapy is indeed effective.
What they weren't able to show is which of those different sub-types of CBT for couples
is most effective, they seemed equally effective across the board.
Now in this lecture and in other lectures we've talked about the importance of both
quantity and quality of relationships.
We've talked about challenges of building intimacy and some of the basic or beginning
skills of conflict management.
In our next lecture we're going to move to talking about occupational context and address
work-related stress and functioning.
Thank you.
