Although CBT was developed for the treatment of psychopathology in negative mood states,
it has more recently been used as a way to encourage or induce positive emotion.
Let's look at a short clip of Maria trying a positive CBT exercise.
Maria, we've talked a lot about management of depression and anxiety and negative emotions,
but I want to see if we can do something a little bit different and talk about the other end of
the spectrum. So instead of life from zero to minus five, maybe life from zero to plus five,
would that be all right? Sounds good. So what I'd like to talk about first is about positive
emotions. And positive emotions love, enthusiasm, excitement, curiosity, contentment, all of those
sort of fit in that category. And as you're learning to better manage the negative side,
we would like to help you to cultivate the positive side as well. And there is a type of
psychology called positive psychology, which focuses exactly on that life from zero to plus
five. And there's a growing body of research where they're testing out different interventions to
see what is the most potent generator of positive emotion. And one of the things that seems to
have some of the strongest research support is called a gratitude journal. So have you heard
of that? Yeah, actually, I have. I have a girlfriend who, she and her husband have a boat
and they named it gratitude. I think she probably does a gratitude journal. Sure, sure. And you
know, it's been in the popular press and I think people sort of do this public declaration of things
that they're grateful for, but it doesn't have to be public. It can be private, it can be in a
journal. But it's really writing down things big and small that you've noticed that you appreciate
and that you are grateful for. So the way that assignment typically goes is people will pick
a time of the day, morning, noon or night doesn't really matter. But it's a dedicated time, can be
five or 10 minutes, where you will begin to write things that you're grateful for. And what happens,
just like with when you were recording activities or cognitions, if you know that time is coming
up, when you're going to be writing things down, you start looking for them in the day and you start
making these mental notes. Can they be really little things? They can be really little things. The
sun came up. You're grateful for that. It was a beautiful day. Your roses started blooming. I
mean, those are all things to be grateful for. So why don't we have you start it today? So if you
could go ahead and just open up your journal and I'll let you borrow my pen. Okay. And you can
start just with today's date. And what is something today that you've noticed that you're grateful
for? Actually, something happened that I am grateful for. And what was that? It was in the middle of
the night and I was lying awake as I often am in the middle of the night. And Jack was awake too. He
didn't say anything, but you know how you can kind of tell from a person's breathing whether
they're awake or not. So I said, Are you all right, Jack? Are you hurting? And he said, No, just
wakeful. And so I got up and I went I went into the kitchen and I got made some cocoa and I brought
it back to the bedroom. And it was snowing out. And and so I turned on the outside light and we
sat side by side in the bed with our mugs of cocoa and watched the snow come down. So pretty
against the trees. And Jack was telling a story about when the kids were little and he and they
built a snowman. I'll spare you the snowman story, but it always made him laugh. And so he was
chuckling and he got me to laughing. And I think just for one minute, I completely forgot that he
was dying. And I'm very grateful for that. And I think I'm also grateful for the 40 plus years that
we had together when we really were partners and really knew how to love each other. So I am
grateful for a lot of things. That's wonderful. And I would encourage you to actually record those
things to write them down. And in times when you are feeling down or low, their record is there. And
if your mental energy isn't there, you don't need it. You just have to open up the book and remind
yourself of the things that you're grateful for. Okay. Well, why don't you go ahead and write that
one down as the first entry for today. That's a wonderful first entry. And if you could then think
about a time that you could do this each and every day, do that for the next week. And when you
come back, we'll look at what you have in your gratitude journal. Okay. I think of it as another
tool in the toolbox and you may choose to keep doing it or you may just decide a week was enough
and you have a good enough record, but it's entirely up to you. In this lecture, we'll continue
looking at the other side of the emotional spectrum, positive emotions. But let's start with
gratitude and what we know about it. Now, recently, there's been a great deal of research on
gratitude, or what has been called an attitude of gratitude. Now, gratitude has been linked to
better health, sound or sleep, less anxiety and depression, higher long term satisfaction with
life and kinder behavior toward others, including romantic partners. Another study shows that
feeling grateful makes people less likely to turn aggressive when provoked. A good example of some
of the seminal work was done by Robert Eamons at the University of California in Davis. He started
with a program that he called gratitude light. And in this program, individuals were asked to
complete a journal, a gratitude journal where they list five things once per week and only allowed
one sentence per item. After two months, the results began to show in the intervention subjects.
Those subjects were more optimistic, they were happier, they worked out more, and they had
fewer physical complaints. Of course, we're not just talking about gratitude when we talk about
positive emotions. We're including happiness, joy, love and excitement. We know that all emotions,
including positive emotions, have a physiologic impact as well as social consequences. But what
are the functions of the positive emotional family? We know that anger helps us to face or to
correct injustice. We know that anxiety helps us to see and to recognize threats that might be in
our environment. But why do we need happiness, joy or love? Do they really help us to survive? And
if so, how? This was exactly the question that Barbara Fredrickson asked as she developed her
broaden and build model. What is the evolutionary purpose of positive emotions? She reminds us
that when we're in a negative emotional state, it gives us a sort of cognitive tunnel vision. It
narrows our cognitive repertoire. We're focused on a particular problem. When you're in a positive
mood state that repertoire is broaden, you're able to think more broadly and more creatively. We
also know that when an individual's in a negative mood state, they circle their social wagons,
they're more closed to outside social contacts or to building new relationships. The opposite is
true for positive emotions. When we're in a positive emotional state, we're more likely to
reach out to others to meet new people or to deepen existing relationships. So positive emotions,
she believed, are there to broaden our cognitive repertoire and to build important social
relationships that will sustain us in the negative times ahead. She went on to do an interesting
study in 2008 published in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology on loving
kindness meditation. There she took 139 adults, half of them meditated, half of them were in a
control condition. She found that meditation increased the daily experience of positive
emotions and produced increases in a wide range of personal resources, including mindfulness,
purpose in life, social support, and decreased illness symptoms. These increased resources
predicted increased life satisfaction and reduced depressive symptoms. In a similar study done
by Judy Moskowitz and published in 2012, she looked at whether or not this idea of positive
emotions sustaining us through difficult times would be true in different groups of subjects.
Her first group of study subjects were college students. The second group, caregivers of ill
children, obviously experiencing a lot of chronic stress. And the third group, individuals recently
diagnosed with HIV. She found that positive emotion was correlated with better self-regulation
performance and dependent of the effects of negative emotion. The effects were not as
strong longitudinally, however, she found that her studies in all three populations
did provide modest support for the broaden and build model. So we have a theory that
tells us why positive emotion might matter from a survival standpoint, and Judy Moskowitz
has given us some preliminary data on the adaptive power of positive emotion and coping
with stress as a sort of replenishment. But let's take a step back and look at the broader
field of positive psychology. Now positive psychology became popular around 10 to 15
years ago through the guidance of Marty Seligman. Marty is most known for his work with depression
and negative mood states, especially learned helplessness and pessimism. He decided that
instead of looking at life from minus five to zero, he wanted to look at life from zero
to plus five to look at things like happiness, like gratitude, creativity, enthusiasm, wisdom,
or insight. Much of the early work in positive psychology was sort of a epidemiology of positive
psychology and specifically looking at happiness. Many of these surveys found that approximately
only one third of Americans would describe themselves as happy. We learned that happiness
is not necessarily predicted by income, by age, or by gender. It is correlated with
extraversion and spirituality, and relationships and friendships are key. Interestingly, there
seems to be a bimodal distribution in happiness where we are happiest in our 20s and happiest
in our 60s on average. An interesting study survey done by Columbia University looked
at what might be the happiest spots on earth and specifically what would be the happiest
countries on earth. They then wanted to deduce if there was something about those cultures
that really supported those happy mood states. They found the top three were clustered close
to one another. Number one was Denmark. Number two was Finland. Number three was Norway and
the United States came in at number 11. They found that even though Qatar is the richest
country in the world, they're number 31 in happiness. US is sixth most wealthy, but again
number 11 on the list. Japan has the longest life expectancy, but they're number 44 on
the happiness list, and Hong Kong has the lowest murder rate of anywhere in the world,
but they're number 67 in happiness. So clearly it's not just about safety, life expectancy,
or income. It's something much more rich and meaningful than that. Now ultimately, I don't
think the promise of positive psychology lies in making us happy, but it may have quite
a bit to offer in terms of coping and even in terms of improving our physical health.
Now the classic study that opened up the relationship between longevity and positive mood states
was the nun study. Now this study was published approximately 15 years ago, and what this
particular study showed us is that nuns who kept a diary in their 20s, they had their
diaries analyzed for positive emotional words. The nuns who were most positive were most
likely to live into their 80s and 90s compared with their more negative or pessimistic counterparts.
The question then remains though, is there a way that we could generate positive emotions
if we believe it has positive physiologic effects and over the long term may even have
effects on our longevity? I wanted to mention a series of studies done again by Judy Moskowitz,
the Iris Project study and her CHI study, where she created a sort of toolbox of different
strategies to promote positive emotions. Some of those strategies included things such as
intentionally helping a person to notice or selectively attend to positive events,
something that she called capitalizing or savoring. Oftentimes when something negative
happens we ruminate about it over and over again. Could we cause a sort of rumination about positive
events called savoring? She also mentions gratitude and mindfulness which we've heard about,
positive reappraisals of situations, focusing on personal strengths,
setting and noticing when you've reached attainable goals and acts of kindness towards others.
An established study published by Judy in 2011 looking at health-related stress,
she wanted to see if it was possible for this toolbox to increase positive emotions even in
individuals who were very stressed. So she looked at people newly diagnosed with HIV. She found that
the toolbox was effective in terms of increasing positive affect and decreasing negative affect
or negative emotions in these individuals. I wanted to mention just one more study and this
was a pilot study done looking at caregivers by Dowling in 2014. Now Dowling used a randomized
controlled trial of 24 caregivers and half of them had five one-on-one positive affect
interventions. Now these caregivers were caring for a loved one that had frontotemporal dementia.
They looked at measures of emotions, caregiver mood, stress, distress, caregiver burden at baseline,
at the end of the five-week intervention and then at one month post follow-up.
They found that positive affect increased, negative affect decreased and stress improved
all around at post and also one month following the intervention.
Let's move now to look at a different sort of positive affect intervention, the clip of Carol.
So Carol, I believe you had some slightly different homework you were going to do this
past week. You want to tell me about it? Sure. So to I guess kind of help me wind down my day
before I went to bed, I was supposed to keep a journal and answer three questions. What moved me,
what surprised me, what inspired me. Okay. Not necessarily in that order. Sure, sure. So what
surprised moved and inspired and is that your journal? Yes. Okay, perfect. Were you able to
answer those three questions before bed? Yeah, most nights. Okay, all right. Well show me what
you got. So what did you write down? Okay. On Tuesday, surprised me was I actually dropped
something out of my purse when I was scrambling in it to find something, a pen, I guess. And
I dropped it and instead of just walking by, one of my coworkers picked it up and handed it back.
So someone called and did you a favor and that surprised you. Okay, all right. And what moved
you on Tuesday? We were really busy at work and one of my coworkers, I was clearly very stressed
out about it. And she offered to help me and take a little bit of my workload. So that was kind
of nice of her and kindness and generosity moved you. Yeah. Okay. And inspired. So what inspired
you on Tuesday? Well, I don't know, it was, it was just, I don't know, it's something kind of little,
but it was a stressful day. And so I went home and I, you know, looked at a picture of my dad,
who was also an accountant. And the reason why I became an accountant. And I just remembered that
he worked day after day after day, and he never complained about it. And I'm sure that he had
really stressful days too. And so that just kind of inspired me to keep going. That's
an inspiration for you. And that picture reminded you, it sounds like. Yeah. Great. Now, what was
the effect of answering these questions? Did it have any effect on your mood at all?
It did. Actually, I guess it kind of put the day into perspective. And so
it was, you know, if the day was really stressful, I kind of forced me to look at some of the positive
things that happened that day. So it was kind of de-stressing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And it's,
you know, as we talked about last time, it's a way to intentionally shift your focus cognitively
onto something that was positive. Because most of us, and I think this is just the way we're wired
through evolution, we are trained to notice the bad things or the threatening things, the things
that might get us in trouble or cause danger. We're trained to remember those. And that's sort
of what we carry around with us. And especially if you're anxious or depressed, those things are
sort of like in bold relief. And it takes a little bit of effort to push those to the side and to
realize that every day has a mix of positive and negative. We just sometimes have to search a little
more to find the positive. Now, this was an exercise. It only takes a few minutes, but it is
a special exercise. And what we eventually want you to do is to develop the facility
of being able to notice and to appreciate in a way to savor those positives during the day
and throughout the day. So I thought maybe just off the cuff here, I know we're only halfway through
the day today. But if you were to answer those three questions right now, what surprised you,
what moved you, and what has inspired you so far today, it can be small. But what, since you got
up this morning, so what has surprised you? Well, when I got up, I guess, I don't know, this is
really a tough one. Yeah. Yeah. But go ahead. I got ready a lot faster than normal. So that surprised
me. I didn't do anything particularly special. I just so you were in the groove and you were
efficient and you got it together quick today. All right. And what what moved you today?
Well, when I like, right before I went to work, and I was kind of eating my breakfast and watching
TV, and one of my cats came up and they just like snuggled right into me. And I don't know, I just,
it was, again, I feel like that's kind of silly. But I just thought it was really sweet and,
you know, kind of moved me a little bit. And when you were walking here, did anything inspire
you or anyone inspire you? Yeah, I guess. I saw, I walked past like this couple who were older and
clearly like been together for like 50 or 60 years. And it's just, you know, I don't know, it's just
inspiring that people can can do that, that they that they can just be together for that one.
Right. Right. That's great. And I would encourage you again, it doesn't have to be formal. But
whenever you can pause and you can think or when something like that's happening of going,
I'm being moved. I'm being inspired. I'm being surprised. And that's something to appreciate.
So as you were watching the clip, I hope you were thinking about the Judy Moskowitz positive
emotion toolbox. What tools were being used? Well, we had asked Carol through having her answer those
three questions to shift her attention to things that were positive that had happened during the
day. But we were also having her do some subtle reframing or reappraising of those events that
had happened. And by having her to recall them and to write them down, we were encouraging some
savoring or some rumination, if you will, about those positive events that had occurred.
Now, is it wise to be preoccupied with positive emotion and with happiness? And I think the
answer is no. We have positive emotions and we have negative emotions for a reason. We need a
balance between the two. And each of them might tell us something important about ourselves,
about our world, or about our relationships. Now, for our last clip, I'd like to demonstrate
a different sort of positive psychology exercise. This is one that shifts the attention, but it
isn't about simply generating positive emotions. It's an exercise called my best self or signature
strengths. So I have a new positive psychology exercise for you. I thought we could try out.
I know that we have tried the gratitude journal before. And this is along those lines. It's
shifting our focus, again, away from things that are broken or negative to things that are more
positive. And I think within each of us, we have stories of failure and loss, but we have stories
of success and achievement. And oftentimes, when we are depressed or stressed, we think about the
negative. So we want an exercise to help you to think about the positive. But in this particular
exercise, it's not just your perspective. Your perspective matters. We're going to be collecting
data from other people about you. So you're going to be looking at yourself through the eyes of
another person. Okay, how does that? I don't know. Okay, okay. Well, I appreciate you're being willing
just to try it out and see what happens. You know, we have done what we call behavioral experiments.
So if you have a thought or a worry or an anxiety, that's okay. But the important part is to go and
still test it out and see if it holds true. Or maybe things are a little bit different than you
thought they might be. So this is called an at my best exercise. It's sometimes called a signature
strengths exercise. Again, the idea is to see yourself and your strengths at least through
three lenses, one from yourself and then two other people. So the prompts that you have,
and usually it's written in about a page or a page and a half or so, the prompts are as follows.
So I am at my best when blank. And there's no one particular right answer. The next one is when I'm
at my best, I am you fill it in. And then when I'm at my best, I do. So the first one's really
asking for sort of character personality, what you send. And then the next one's asking about
behavior, the things you do. Then it asks you to share an example that illustrates you at your best.
And it could be current or it could be somewhere in the distant past, but it's just an example.
So, you know, we won't take time to fully flesh this out, but I thought maybe we could get you
started. Why don't we go back up to the top and just tell me again what it is that pops to mind.
We're looking at you when you're at your best, when your strengths are really being showcased.
So you are at your best when? Well, I guess one of the best times of my life is when I was teaching.
I loved teaching and I loved being in the classroom and I was good at it.
Okay. So you're at your best when you're you're you're teaching when I was teaching.
Yeah. All right. And when I'm when I'm at my best, I am enthusiastic,
curious, excited. Yeah. And when I'm at my best, I do.
I do. Oh, we could change the verb I
It's about behaviors. Okay. What do I do?
I help people. I learn things. I try to look into things. I'm trying to figure things out.
I guess those are things that I do. Okay. My best. Sure. Sure. So how about now an example
of you at your best? And I know this is off the top of your head and you can totally change your
mind later. But when we think about those strengths, those signature strengths that you just mentioned,
what's a story that illustrates you at your best? Well, there was this one kid that I had in class.
I taught high school English. And I had this one kid who just didn't get it and didn't get it.
And I kept trying and trying and work with him after school and so forth. And
didn't care all that much. And I tried to find books that would interest him, you know,
that would get him going. And he got into some detective fiction that he sort of liked and
everything. He got maybe a C in the class at the end of the year. And I thought, well, that's,
that's that, you know, then he came back about 10 years later and he'd gone to college and he was
successful at what he was doing. And he was, he came back and he said, I owe this all to you,
Maria. And I just felt, I mean, I know that wasn't true, but I just felt so good about it. It just
made it all worthwhile. Knowing you had a part at least that I was a little teeny, teeny part of
that. That was wonderful. Yeah, how rewarding and what a wonderful memory to recall and to save her.
Okay, well, I'm going to give you this form. And like I said, you can totally change later.
If you want. But we're going to, I'm going to ask you to fill this out. And you know, a page is
totally fine. And then what we want is to have two other people do this exercise. And we want
them to answer these same questions. But it would be Maria is at her best when Maria when Maria is
at her best, she is when she is at her best, she does. So same sorts of questions. And then we
want them to share an example of you at your best. Okay, and they'll probably have some questions.
And they might feel like, Oh, no, I want to make sure I do it right. There's no right or wrong way.
It's about them sharing their perspective about you. And I want you to collect those and to bring
all three ends. We have yours and then from two other people. And let's go ahead and designate
who those two people would be. Okay, so who would you like to have do this exercise? Judith. So
you're from Judith. Okay. And maybe my daughter, your daughter. Okay. Yeah. All right. So give them
a call or email or whatever and ask them about this exercise. Tell them you have deadline
in your homework. And you want to bring it back for next time. And of course, you'll read them
before you bring them back and just note what people say and the emotions that you have when
you read it. Okay. Thank you. So what did Maria get back from her daughter and her friend? Well,
she was surprised by how both saw her as a very strong person as a role model and as a loving,
kind and selfless person. She was a bit embarrassed, but really couldn't dismiss the direct positive
feedback regarding her strengths. She's going to reread those write ups whenever she needs to be
reminded of that positive feedback. So thus far, we've seen some exercises to address and hopefully
grow the positive. Next up, we'll talk about CBT and trauma.
