Lose weight, stop smoking, eat your veggies, watch the carbs, don't drink too much, watch
out for high-fructose corn syrup.
You almost can't escape some kind of exhortation about changing your behavior these days.
In fact, it's become a multi-billion-dollar industry, and frankly, much of it is not evidence-based.
However, there is a science to behavior change.
There's no magic bullet, but there is a science.
What can we do?
In today's lecture, we're going to explore the notion of long-term behavior changes or
changes that stick.
We'll first look at some of the statistics on change rates, then we'll take a brief
detour to discuss some of the leading models of change.
In those models, we'll identify some core concepts and we'll look at what they really
mean.
We're going to look at concepts like self-control, self-discipline, motivation, and willpower.
We'll discuss how each of these could be affected by the CBT skills we've already been learning.
Now, before we go there, I want to share just a plea or maybe a reminder for understanding
and for compassion.
We all, at times, engage in behaviors that are unhealthy for us, and none of us sets
out with the goal of being overweight or having an addiction or being totally sedentary.
But life happens.
Fortunately, there's something we can do about it.
So what are our chances?
First let's look at weight loss.
And for anyone who has tried to lose weight before, through diet, through exercise, through
any means, you're probably familiar with the frustrating yoyo pattern.
The weight goes up and the weight goes down.
And in fact, if you look at the preponderance of evidence, it shows us that nothing works
super well.
In fact, the average weight loss is about 7 to 10 pounds, and most people over a three
to five year period gain all that weight back, a little discouraging.
There's only one exception to that, and that is weight loss surgery.
And there's all sorts of variations of bariatric surgeries, some which are quite extreme, some
which involve bands, and there's a new one which actually inserts a balloon and inflates
the balloon in your stomach so that you have less room for food and food absorption.
But regardless of the strategy you use, the aim is to lower weight and hopefully to improve
fitness and nutrition.
How about for smoking or substance use disorders?
Now on average, it takes about four to five attempts for an individual to quit smoking.
If they just go cold turkey, they only have about a 7% chance of being successful.
If they use nicotine replacement therapy, like nicotine patches or nicotine gums, they
have about a 30% chance of being successful.
How about for alcohol?
We know that having a brief intervention from a medical provider can reduce your risky
drinking by about 50 to 60%.
We know that for treatment for alcohol dependence, there's detoxification, there's 12 step,
there's all sorts of different levels, but unfortunately only 25% of the people who need
treatment for alcoholism make it to treatment, and only about a third of those that make it
into treatment get better.
Once you're smoking at waxes and wanes over time, how can we promote stronger and more
lasting changes?
Another example comes from medication adherence, and in our last lecture we heard about some
of the struggles that Michael was having in remembering to take his antihypertensives.
Well in general, approximately 50% of medication doses are missed.
Let me repeat that, approximately 50% of medication doses are missed.
It depends on all sorts of variables, the kind of medication, the cost, the availability,
whether or not your disease has obvious symptoms or not, but hypertensive medications are a
good example and about 50% are missed.
However, even if there are severe consequences, like you've had a heart transplant and you
need to take immunosuppressants, many patients forget.
Or if you have glaucoma and if you don't put one drop in your eye per day, you will
go blind, again many patients still forget.
What's happening?
So if we think about it from a CBT perspective, we're going to roll up our sleeves, we're
going to partner and we're going to collaborate.
And the first thing we're going to do is to gather data so that we can set a baseline of
where an individual's beginning behaviors are, and so we can start making a formulation
or coming up with an explanation of why we do the things we do.
Of course you'll want to do a behavioral analysis, just like we did with Michael in
the last clip, when we were trying to dig a little bit deeper and understand what was
underneath the reasons for him not taking his heart medication or his cholesterol medication.
So first we want to select the behavior, then we want to design a data collection instrument.
So if we were going to self-monitor, say for someone with diabetes, we might track their
blood sugars, we might track their diet, their exercise.
For someone who's overweight, it might be calories, fat, carbs, it could be physical
activity or all of the above.
Or for someone who has chronic back pain, we might ask them to keep a pain diary where
they record the intensity, the frequency, or the triggers of their back pain and what
makes it better or what makes it worse.
Essentially, you are involved in gathering data on yourself, in between visits, and in
bringing that data back to your medical provider so that the two of you together can try to
make sense of it and come up with some interventions.
Of course, when you're looking at your baseline data, you need to set your target.
You need to decide where should you be and why.
What is your goal and specifically your smart goal?
You want to think about proximal goals, so what do I want to do next week, next month,
but you also want to think about distal goals that start on the horizon.
And remember, it's important to follow the rules of smart goals where they are specific,
they're measurable, they're attainable, they're relevant, and timely.
When you begin the behavioral analysis or trying to come up with that explanation of
why you do the things that you do, it's important to think of recent examples of when you fell
short of your goal.
What happened?
What were the circumstances?
What were the cognitions?
What were the emotions and what were the behaviors?
What were the rewards and what were the punishers?
You want to imagine back, you want to describe, and you want to come up with some hypotheses.
You want to start your analysis.
So what happened?
What were the obstacles?
Were there any facilitators?
What was the benefit from not acting?
Was there any secondary gain?
What are your most important goals and values and can you change?
So whether or not you can change and what it is that causes a person to be a successful
changer was the subject of an interesting study by the National Institutes of Health
where they looked at the successful changers.
And here they looked at that small sub-sample of individuals that were able to make dramatic
changes mostly in the realm of weight management and keep that weight off for at least multiple
years throughout the duration of the study.
They wanted to see what are the attributes or the circumstances or the ingredients that
those individuals have that others might be able to learn.
So what were the key ingredients?
They were having realistic expectations.
So those smart goals but also thinking about proximal or short-term goals that are realistic
and achievable.
They have motivation and they have will.
They have core skills and preferably they've conditioned habits.
So for someone who's trying to manage weight, it's not a short-term project that you do
for a few months then you go back to the way you ate before, you're essentially changing
for the duration of your life, how you eat and how you exercise.
The other key ingredient was these individuals had achievable action plans.
You always want to set the bar just a little bit above where you are now in order to challenge
yourself but not so high that it would be discouraging when you fall short of your goal.
The other ingredient these individuals had was support from significant others and support
from their environment.
Now I mentioned that they had motivation but motivation can be sort of a slippery construct
and if you're not motivated how do you go about getting motivated?
Now motivation is simply defined as the activation of goal-oriented behavior.
It can come from inside or be intrinsic or it can be extrinsic coming from outside.
Some of the determiners of motivation include placing a high value on the behavior, having
self-efficacy or self-confidence that you're able to do the behavior and then of course
having a supportive social context or environment.
So how can we begin to understand motivation?
And I think first we have to acknowledge that life is complicated, that change is difficult
and that in fact ambivalence about change is the common condition.
Ambivalence is the norm.
So how do we go about resolving our ambivalence?
Well fortunately there's a model that rests squarely in ambivalence called the trans-theoretical
model developed by James Prochaska and Carlo DiClemente.
It sees ambivalence not as an obstacle but as an opportunity.
Now in the trans-theoretical model or sometimes called the stages of change model, behavior
change is a dynamic process that progresses through five stages.
Change progression is caused by utilization of ten change processes plus changes in self-efficacy
and decisional balance seeing the pros and cons of an activity where hopefully the pros
outweigh the cons.
The current stage that you happen to be in should predict your future behavior, adherence
and your intervention outcomes and from a clinical standpoint your primary care provider
should see how ready you are to change and then match his or her style and interventions
to how ready you are.
So what are those five stages of change?
Well for an individual who's not at all ready to change and not really thinking about it
they call that stage pre-contemplation.
For an individual who's squarely in ambivalence they can see the pros and the cons but they're
really not sure if they want to change, it's possible they might get ready in the next
six months but they're not ready.
Stage two then would be contemplation.
Stage three is for the individual who's decided, okay I need to do this.
This is in my best interest but I'm not quite sure if I have the resources, I'm not quite
sure if I have enough confidence but I would like to rally the troops, get my resources
and maybe make this change in the next month.
That stage is called preparation.
The stage that follows is action so you have stopped smoking, you've started your diet,
you're actively in that process.
The stage after that is maintenance usually after about six months of the action stage
although there's some variability.
And then the last stage which I think is an interesting feature of this model is called
lapse and all of these stages are arranged on a wheel because it recognizes that most
of us can't just decide we're going to change, we do it once, we succeed and we're finished.
In fact it usually takes multiple iterations.
We move from pre-contemplation to contemplation, preparation, action, maintenance, we lapse,
we fall off the wagon but hopefully we learn something from that mistake so the next time
we go around that wheel we have a better chance at succeeding.
So how can you get yourself or someone to move into the preparation or action stage?
Well there's a set of motivational techniques that has grown from the trans theoretical
model called motivational interviewing.
It was originally intended for healthcare providers but has recently spread into the
lay public.
So what are the specific motivational interviewing techniques and I'll just mention three of
them briefly.
One is being able to listen to and respond to something called change talk.
The second is something called decisional balance looking at the pros and cons.
And the third is the readiness ruler.
Let's talk about each of those.
So first is change talk.
So what is change talk?
Well change talk is any statement that suggests the person has thought about a problem, their
need, their commitment or their ability to change.
And the goal when you're listening to another person talk about their behavior is to pick
out that statement and reflect it back to them.
So in essence you're steering the conversation towards that one little nugget that you heard
in terms of change.
Here's an example.
So I was recently talking with a patient that said, yeah I know I should be better about
taking my blood pressure pills but they make me go to the bathroom all the time.
It's just it's so inconvenient.
So the change talk I heard was I know I should be better.
So clearly they've reflected on that behavior and part of them at least would like to change
it.
So I said tell me more about why you know you should be better.
We've steered the conversation to talking about change and hopefully it will generate
more change talk, more processing and more thought about the behavior change.
Let's use a second example.
And in the second example we'll go back to Michael our 50 year old smoker who's working
on his anger issues but he's also trying to quit smoking.
Now he's down from a pack a day to three to four cigarettes every two weeks but he's
having a hard time letting go of those last few.
He says I know I should stop but I just can't seem to let it go.
I need those cigarettes to help me cope with stress.
Now if you're listening to change talk and using motivational interviewing you would
hone in on I know I should stop and you would reflect back.
Tell me more about why you know you should stop.
So we've picked out that golden nugget and we've steered our conversation right dead
center to having him talk about change.
Now the other motivational interviewing technique we mentioned was decisional balance and here
you essentially take out a piece of paper and you create a two by two grid where on
one side you list the pros and cons and across the top you might list changing and not changing.
So essentially you have four cells, you want to talk about the pros of changing, the pros
of not changing, you want to talk about the cons of changing and the cons of not changing.
And an interesting behavior change study they've shown time and time again across different
behaviors we don't change until we see the pros of changing as outweighing the cons.
The last strategy is something called the readiness ruler and here it just helps us to reflect
and hone in on what might cause us to become more ready to change.
So a question would be something like on a scale of zero to ten how ready are you to
stop smoking?
A patient might say well maybe I'm a three I would say so it sounds like you aren't
too interested right now but I'm curious why did you say three and not a zero?
I'm asking the patient to say what have they already noticed similar to change talk about
their smoking, about their health, about their behavior that brought them up to the three?
You can probably guess my next question would be what would it take to get you to a four
or to get you to a five?
I don't want to insert my own beliefs or value system I want to know what's important
to you in terms of your goals and your values that would get you to a four or get you to
a five?
So what support do we have for motivational interviewing?
Well in different meta-analyses that have been done for example Berks in 2003 in the
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology they found that across controlled clinical
trials motivational interviewing yielded moderate effects for problems involving alcohol, drugs,
diet and exercise when compared to other interview techniques.
In order to facilitate change we probably want to improve or increase self-efficacy
or self-confidence now it's essentially defined as the belief that one is capable of performing
in a certain manner to ascertain particular goals.
So if an individual has low self-efficacy or low self-confidence even though their importance
might be high and they're ready to change they probably won't do it because they're
afraid they might fail.
So our goals then are to build self-confidence and self-efficacy by reminding an individual
of past successes or maybe setting very small initial proximal goals so that they can have
the experience of success and they can feel more confident to take the next step and the
next step.
We also want to think about social context so we want a supportive environment, we want
supportive significant others and family and friends that help to facilitate change.
We know that our health related behaviors are highly influenced by people around us.
If all of your friends drink heavily the chances are that you're probably going to drink heavily
too.
If you are a smoker, odds are many of your friends and family are probably smokers too.
So if you make the decision to change ideally other key people in your social circle can
make that same decision and if not you might then need to think about contacts with individuals
who can support the changes that you want to make.
So of course there are other changes other than social support you might want to think
about your social environment and your home environment and removing temptations or triggers
when possible.
It's a classic behavioral strategy called stimulus control so if you're wanting to decrease
fat or salt intake you make sure that most of the food in your house has low fat or low
salt content so the temptation simply isn't there.
So thus far we see that you need motivation and it can come from inside or outside.
You also need confidence or self efficacy particularly if you'll play a big role in
making or maintaining the change yourself.
You'll also need to think about your social environment and how to possibly engineer things
around you to promote success.
But how can CBT move us forward now?
Now the strategies we use all depend on the action plan that's developed which in turn
depends on motivation goals and resources.
So the important question then is how do you develop an action plan?
Now action plans work if you first thought about what resources you will need and you
first put those resources in place.
You need a very detailed plan with the step by step process that you're going to follow
to facilitate change.
You need a concrete and specific start date.
You need to share your action plan with your social circle.
There needs to be regular reassessments to evaluate your progress towards your eventual
goal.
Importantly, we have to anticipate the obstacles.
We have to expect setbacks and lapses.
It's all part of the process and you'll need regular consultations and adaptations to the
plan if you're not able to meet those goals right away.
So what are some of the CBT skills to use?
Well it's our regular toolbox but I think underlying all of that it's important that
we have the right attitude.
That attitude it's all grist for the mill.
Expect that things are going to go wrong but then it gives you an opportunity to learn
from that mistake.
We want to have the attitude of seeing this as a challenge, as a puzzle.
We want to develop a hypothesis about why we do the things we do and then test out ideas
about how to change it.
So let's move now to our next clip where Michael is talking about his smoking behavior.
So Michael we've talked a bit about medication adherence as one behavior that's important
to managing your cardiovascular disease.
But there are a couple of other behaviors too that should probably be on our radar.
We've talked about some of them before but I wanted to check in with you sort of what
health related behaviors are you most concerned about when it comes to treating your cardiovascular
disease?
Well you know outside of the meds I guess it's the three big ones, the diet, the exercise
and for me the smoking.
Okay so diet, exercise and smoking.
Which of those would you like to start talking about first?
Why don't we start with smoking because we've had conversations about that in the past.
So I'm very aware of when I'm smoking and I've got it down to really three or four cigarettes
every couple of weeks.
So I think I've made progress but getting beyond those three or four down below those
three or four to one, two, zero, I really haven't made a lot of progress in a while
in getting some finding that I still find that cigarette relaxing every now and then.
So let me first say you've made a lot of progress.
So you were a pack a day smoker for years and years and years and now you're down to
three or four cigarettes every couple of weeks.
So that's going from 20 a day to three or four every couple of weeks.
So that's absolutely progress.
But you're right, there's no reason to stop there.
Even three or four cigarettes are enough to raise your risk for having a heart attack.
Yeah and I guess I'm also concerned that the three or four, if I'm giving myself that
leeway maybe it comes five, six, maybe it becomes a pack so there's that concern.
So why don't we focus on the three or four and is that three or four that are spread
out over two weeks or does that usually come sort of in one day or after one trigger?
It will vary sometimes it will happen as a sort of something triggers me and I'll do
two or three all at once but I think it's more common it's kind of spread out and I'll
say I just need a cigarette now and I'm going to give myself that break so I'll take the
cigarette and that'll happen a couple three times.
And just like with thought records there tends to be an activating mentor trigger and there's
some thoughts about the behavior which can make the behavior more or less likely.
So let's think about the last cigarette you smoked just so that we can use a concrete
example.
Okay.
When was the last cigarette?
The last cigarette that I smoked was I was actually out of town on business and I was
at a meeting, it was a conference.
So I was coming out of a meeting and this meeting I just it brought up a lot of things
that made me feel a little overwhelmed and a little stressed like maybe these were things
that these guys were talking about that I wasn't up on and that triggered me to say
okay just give yourself a break here with the cigarette to kind of chill out and de-stress.
So the trigger was this work conference and there were emotions of feeling stressed and
overwhelmed and maybe out of your depth and the cigarette was a way to cope with stress
but it sounds like it was also kind of a treat or reward or something.
It was a little bit of a treat as well.
A self soothing kind of thing because some of the times the thought process is that you've
been so good that you almost owe yourself this little bit of candy as it were.
So that was the thought process and where did you go out then and I guess you had to
buy a cigarette or someone else or somebody else.
Now I actually went out and bought a pack but I only smoked the one and I still got
that pack so this is the pack I've been working on for the last few weeks but I did go out
and I bought a pack and I smoked a cigarette.
So let's talk about some strategies to help you get down to zero with still acknowledging
you've made a lot of progress but there's a few those last few steps that you want to
get to.
So given the infrequency of your smoking you're not physiologically addicted anymore so you're
not going to have withdrawal nicotine withdrawals if you don't constantly keep smoking.
So to me that says you don't need the nicotine patches or the gums or the other things that
I know you've tried in the past.
You don't need pharmacotherapy.
This is about sort of behavior and this is about emotion so that's probably where we
should go.
Now the first thing that comes to mind is something we've talked a little bit about
it's called stimulus control and it's hard to fall off the wagon if there's no supply.
So you have a pack of cigarettes at home which means the temptation is there and if you get
stressed or you want to treat yourself then there's easy access to something.
So what could you do about that?
That would be throwing them out.
That would be one way of dealing with that stimulus.
And what might prevent you from doing that?
Safety net you know having that safety net there again I think it's a matter of generally
I feel hey I don't need a cigarette to deal with this but there are times when I feel
like maybe I don't need it but I almost I've earned the right to it.
And you know that's actually a thought that comes up often with addictions and I'm glad
you've brought it up.
There is this fear of what if something really catastrophic happens and I need that safety
net.
I need that one backup you know whatever the substance is you know that backup drink or
cigarette or whatever it is I need to tuck one away somewhere in the back of my dresser
drawer just in case.
So that's a real worry.
That's a real worry.
It makes a kind of fat sound seedy but it's a natural impulse if you have relied on something
for decades in your case just to let go of it it generates some anxiety because now you're
feels like you're free-floating almost.
Yeah that's it.
So what do you feel comfortable doing throwing away the pack but keeping a backup or would
you like to not have a backup?
If I'm going to get to zero which is really my goal here I think I prefer to get to the
point where I don't want that safety net around.
It's more important to me to have zero tolerance than to have the safety net.
Does that make sense?
That absolutely makes sense and I think that's sort of the most direct path to being successful
is to say okay just complete stimulus control no buying cigarettes.
Now the next part is the function that that cigarette serves and we want to find something
else that can fill that same role.
So it's partly stress relief it's partly reward.
So what have you done other times because you're only smoking three or four cigarettes
a week I would guess stress comes up more often than that.
So what do you do in lieu of smoking cigarettes?
I have actually done some light exercise when it's possible to do so just getting out even
at work sometimes if I've got an opportunity for a break maybe you are feeling a little
stressful maybe even feeling that need to go out and have a cigarette instead ten minutes
go outside brief walk something like that I've done that.
Other things that I've done that have worked are really thinking about some of the things
that we've talked about in here and just taking an opportunity to write down what's going
on here what my desire or need is and breaking it down and actually separating it from myself
so so that's something that doesn't really have so much of of an obvious reward element
to it except I guess I begin to think of it as well the reward is you're getting to where
you want to be so if it helps you not to smoke then go through that process those are a couple
of things that I've done in lieu of actually having a cigarette.
It's interesting to think about sort of rewards and punishments for lack of a better term
sort of the pros and cons and the pros of smoking the cigarette is you get the reward
right away you get the taste you get the sensation you get the physiologic experience of the
nicotine the punishment I guess the downside later well let me ask you is there a downside
later after you've smoked that cigarette yeah you don't you don't feel so great really
don't you don't it's it's all about the in the moment relief that's sometimes that's
the most important thing and you have a cigarette but then you do feel not so great afterwards
so in that moment when you're tempted to having the thought of it's not worth it it's not
worth it what's beyond it what's on the other side of it I guess I also should say that
probably more than not so much obviously when I'm at work I'm feeling that but if I'm at
home and I'm thinking I've got that urge sometimes I do replacements that aren't the
great things treat yourself to you know whatever a scoop of ice cream or whatever it is sometimes
I do that I should admit okay okay you and I think that's common and you know all things
in moderation we know ice cream even though not the healthiest in the world in moderation
probably not not a big deal yeah all right well so we have some ideas then about how you'll
work on getting those cigarettes down and I think what we should do so there's some accountability
and reporting back is maybe not next session but in two sessions we'll check in again about
your smoking and see if you've been able to get that amount down from three or four maybe
to zero okay let's do that all right all right the last piece I would like to talk about
is the inevitability that maybe things won't work out quite the way you wanted you're traversing
your travel across that wheel of change and maybe you get to the laps stage you fall off the wagon
and oftentimes what happens that we have cognitions and those cognitions come in the form of harsh
self-criticism that harsh self-criticism discourages us depresses us frustrates us and takes away
our self-confidence we can break out those cognitive behavioral therapy skills and we can
challenge those harsh self-critical statements having a lapse is a normal and expected part of
the process and we should see it as an opportunity to learn something and do something a little bit
different next time so what do you need to change what are the key ingredients well we want to have
realistic expectations we want to make sure that we maximize your motivation or will to change we
want to make sure that you have those core CBT behavior change skills in place and preferably
you're working towards having conditioned habits that are sustainable over the rest of your life
and we want to make sure that you have achievable yet flexible action plans along with support and
environmental help let's end by looking at one of our frequently asked questions this patient asks
I've tried everything in the world to stop smoking and I just can't seem to do it my doctor tells me
I must have some self-destructive streak or an unconscious death wish is there anything to that
could it be some sort of core belief well unfortunately I've heard this before I've
heard it in other contexts when children aren't doing well in school and they blame the child when
people become sick and they blame the patient to me this sounds a little bit like blaming the patient
no I don't think it's because you have a death wish I think it's because nicotine is highly
addictive and it's very difficult to stop smoking you need support you need resources maybe nicotine
replacement therapy but together with enough iterations around that wheel enough support
and maybe some pharmacotherapy you can successfully quit smoking so I hope you'll join us then for
our next lecture while we continue along the lines of talking about behavior change but in the context
of managing weight thank you
