Catch some shut-eye, get your Z's, counting sheep and sawing logs, those little slices
of death being reborn, dipped again in God, sleep that knits up the raviled sleeve of
care. Writers and thinkers since the time of Gilgamesh have been waxing poetic about
the power and beauty of sleep and that special pain of insomnia. It touches us in a very
primal and powerful place. Now insomnia is defined as difficulty with the initiation,
maintenance, duration, or quality of sleep that results in the impairment of daytime
functioning despite adequate opportunity and circumstances for sleep. Most research studies
adopt an arbitrary definition of a delay of more than 30 minutes in sleep onset or a sleep efficiency
of less than 85%. And your sleep efficiency is simply the ratio of time of sleep to time spent
in bed times 100. Now fewer than half of Americans say they get a good night's sleep on most nights.
About 10% of the US population have what is called chronic insomnia, with chronic being
defined as lasting more than one month. You see higher rates of insomnia in people with chronic
pain, psychiatric disorders, alcohol or drug addictions, and the prevalence of insomnia rises
with age. We know that there is a large societal and economic impact. In fact, Business 2.0
estimates the American sleeponomics to be worth about $20 billion a year, and that includes
everything from the thousand plus sleep labs to ongoing overnight tests for things like sleep apnea
to over-the-counter medications, herbal supplements, how-to books, and all sorts of gadgets and gizmos
meant to help us get a good night's rest. But why do we sleep and exactly what is the function?
Well, we don't actually know for sure, but we do know some of the medical consequences
if an individual is sleep deprived. For anyone who's missed a night of sleep,
you're very much familiar with the compulsion for sleep the next day and the impairment in
functioning, the impairment in mood. But let's look first at what normal sleep is. We'll look at
quantity, frequency, and we'll look at different stages of sleep or what's called sleep architecture.
Now, on average, we need to have about seven to eight hours of sleep per night.
Sleep is organized into five sleep stages that are systematically spread across time.
They're named stages one, two, three, and four. These are the non-rim sleep stages,
and the fifth stage is rim sleep or rapid eye movement sleep, where we do our dreaming.
Each stage has a characteristic pattern on an EEG or an electroencephalogram that measures
brain activity. If you want to measure your stages of sleep across a particular night of sleep,
you would use a sleep hypnogram that uses EEG measurements over time.
Now, a full cycle of sleep includes all five stages and is typically 90 to 100 minutes total,
and you have a total of four to six cycles over the course of any given night of sleep.
In general, the healthy young adult non-rim sleep accounts for about 75 to 90 percent of sleep,
and rim sleeps account for about 10 to 25 percent. And again, total sleep time
in a healthy adult is about seven to eight hours. Now, we know that the proportion of time we spend
in slow wave sleep changes as we age. Men 20 to 29 years spend about 21 percent of their total
sleep in slow wave sleep. Those aged 40 to 49, it drops down to about 8 percent, and those aged
60 to 69 only spend about 2 percent of their sleep time in slow wave sleep. Why? Well, again,
we're not really sure, but it's fairly well accepted that we see these changes in sleep
architecture as we grow older. So what is it that makes us sleep? And I'll just touch on a
couple of different explanations, and here we're going back to use our biopsychosocial model,
where there's two biological systems, circadian rhythms, and something called the sleep homeostatic
drive. There are psychological factors such as expectations, scripts, behaviors, especially
things that you do right around bedtime, stress or mental fatigue or depression might also be
factors. And then, of course, there are social, cultural, or environmental factors such as the
sleep environment that might make it easier or more difficult for you to fall asleep.
So let's just talk briefly about circadian rhythms. And circadian rhythms essentially refer to our
body's biological clocks. So we have a number of automatic processes like body temperature or even
normal cortisol secretion that have daily diurnal rhythms. So something goes up, something goes down,
it's essentially meant to give you the right level of energy or alertness at the right period of time.
We've all had the experience of waking up before our alarm clock or knowing that it's around 3 PM
or so in the afternoon because you feel that dip in energy and you start to get a little bit sleepy.
It's all about circadian rhythms. There's also the sleep homeostatic drive. And we think of the
sleep homeostatic drive as the yin to the yang of the circadian rhythm system. So our circadian
rhythms help promote wakefulness during the day while our sleep homeostatic drive creates a drive
for sleep that accumulates throughout the day and maximizes before bedtime. If you are sleep deprived,
however, you might feel this profound and powerful drive to fall asleep at any time during the day.
Now, if we want to think about both psychological as well as social or environmental factors,
we can pull them all together and talk about something called sleep hygiene. And sleep hygiene
is essentially a system or really a list of conditions that we believe are helpful or hurtful
in terms of helping an individual get a good night's sleep. So a list of sleep hygiene, and again,
it includes both behavioral as well as psychological, environmental, it's things such as keeping a
regular bedtime and a regular wake up time even on the weekends, keeping your bedroom quiet, comfortable
and dark, having a period of relaxation time before bed of 10 to 30 minutes. And for many
individuals, this might be reading a book, getting regular exercise, but not exercising within an
hour or two before bedtime, not taking naps during the day. Or if you do find that you need to nap,
not napping after 2pm and trying to do what they call power naps are just 20 to 30 minutes. So it
doesn't disrupt your ability to go to sleep at night. Other recommendations include if you do
wake up in the middle of the night, which is quite common and nothing necessarily to worry about.
Don't lie in bed feeling worried or frustrated for more than 20 or 30 minutes. Get up and do
something that is relaxing. Don't use alcohol, caffeine or nicotine again, particularly with
any sort of proximity to your bedtime. And to make sure to turn off TVs, cell phones and computers.
And many of us love to look at our iPads or iPhones, those glowing screens right before
bed. And there's recent research to show us that that actually wakes us up and activates us.
But what about energy or fatigue? We're all familiar with the experience of being tired or
fatigued. And fatigue can be caused by a number of factors and it's usually the body's way of
slowing us down so that the body can recover, often by helping us go to sleep. But we often
complain that we don't have enough energy, hence the market for energy drinks and a vast success
of Starbucks. But how can we assess what level of energy is normal? Why is it that some people
are still fatigued even after a good night's sleep? Or how can some people be exhausted
even if they haven't exerted themselves? We know that sleep and fatigue are closely related
to one another, but they're not entirely the same. Now, fatigue is one of the most commonly
presented symptoms in a primary care practice. And there's really a very simple and unsophisticated
way to assess it. It's usually with one item where the clinician will ask on a scale of 1 to 10,
with 10 being most severe, what is your average level of fatigue? Any patient that says they have
a 4 or higher warrants a further workup. So what are the things they might work up or look for?
They would look for stress. They would look for depression or other mental health issues.
They might look for nutrition or whether it's a side effect of medications over the counter or
prescription that you might be on. They might look at your quality of sleep. They might want to do a
hypnogram or a sleep study. Maybe it's chronic pain, anemia, thyroid function, or a number of
other medical conditions that might help to explain your fatigue. Now, for Maria, she has both
insomnia and fatigue. Both are key symptoms of depression, and insomnia most likely worsens her
fatigue. Now, treating her depression without any special attention to sleep or fatigue may be
sufficient, but there are targeted interventions that we might try. First, though, we need to start
with assessment. So what we would do with Maria, or really any patient, is do something called a
sleep diary, which is essentially self-monitoring for sleep. We want an individual to write down
the time entering and leaving bed. We might want to look at sleep onset latency. So how long does
it take to fall asleep? Number and duration of awakenings during the night. Final awakening,
napping, subjective sleep ratings of the quality of sleep, whether or not you're sleepy and able
to function the next day. Of course, we want to look at those hygiene factors as well. There are
a number of new technological tools, such as a Fitbit or other technologies, which you can strap
to your risk. You wear it while you sleep, and they're able through an algorithm to deduce how well
you slept that night. Certainly much easier than a sleep diary, but doesn't quite give you as much
information. If you were interested in measuring fatigue, there's a number of questionnaires,
mostly from the cancer literature or from the chronic fatigue literature. All measuring intensity,
consequences or impact of the fatigue, timing related symptoms, and self-care. Let's move
then to our first clip of Maria, where we are assessing her quality of sleep. Maria, why don't we
switch gears now and talk a little bit about sleep and specifically about insomnia. And as we
mentioned before, that's one of our goals. And it's very important for energy and mood and for
well-being. And I think before we begin exploring different interventions, we just need more data.
So we need more information on how you sleep. So would it be okay if I ask you some questions
about how you're sleeping or not sleeping? Of course. Okay. So if we just think about, say,
the past week, so keep it fairly recent, on average, about how many hours of sleep per night
do you get? And that's sort of summed up over the course of a night. I don't know. Maybe four
or five. Okay. So four to five hours per night, that's average. And what time do you usually go to
bed for the first time? Well, I try to go to bed when my husband goes to bed and that's around
10 o'clock. But I don't usually fall asleep then. Okay. So 10 p.m. and sounds like some
trouble falling asleep. Yeah. Well, I'm usually, you know, my brain is just going and going at the
end of the day like that. Very. So a lot of thoughts. Yeah. A lot of thoughts. And about how long
does it usually take you to fall asleep? I don't know. I try not to look at the clock, but sometimes
I do and it's after midnight. Okay. So we can take two hours or so. We can take that long. Yeah.
Sometimes it's faster than that. Okay. So it can be up to two hours. And once you fall asleep,
do you stay asleep or do you wake up in the middle of the night? Sometimes I wake up in the middle
of the night and just sort of lie awake and think about things again, you know. What wakes you up?
I don't know. Just anything. I just wake up, I guess. I just wake myself up. Okay. So it's not
noise in the house or going to the bathroom or... Oh, sometimes my husband gets up. Sometimes he's
getting dressed in the middle of the night and I have to get him back to bed. Okay. But he thinks
he's going to work. But it isn't always that. Sometimes I just wake up and lie there just
worrying and thinking about things. Okay. All right. And what time do you get up in the morning
or get out of bed in the morning? I usually get up by 6.30 or so. All right. So ideally if you're
in bed from 10 to 6.30, that would be eight and a half hours. That would be eight. That'd be wonderful.
You're getting four to five though. So there's a lot of time trying to fall asleep, getting up in
the middle of the night. Yeah. Do you ever wake up, say before 6.30, like four or five in the morning
and you just can't? Yeah. And then I figure, well, you know, I'm going to get up in an hour anyway,
so I just stay awake. Right. Okay. All right. So, you know, the reason I asked some of these
questions, we want to get a sense, again, a baseline of where you're starting. But we also
wanted to see if there's a consistent pattern to your insomnia. Some people just have trouble
falling asleep. Some people just have the issue of waking up too early in the morning. I think it's
a mixed bag. Yeah. It's kind of a mixed bag for me. Okay. All right. My next set of questions
are about common things that affect the quality of our sleep. And you probably know many of these
already. The first question is about stimulants like caffeine. Are you a coffee or tea drinker?
I try not to drink coffee or tea after, after noon more or less. Yeah. All right. Sometimes I have a
little chocolate at night. Okay. Okay. I don't know if that affects it or not, but I know that's
supposed to have a little caffeine. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So, it sounds like you're fairly careful
with the caffeine. I try to be. How about alcohol? Sometimes people will have a nightcap or a glass
of wine at the end of the day to relax. Yeah. Sometimes I have a glass of wine. Okay. How often
would you say? A couple times a week. A couple times a week. Yeah. All right. And I ask, you know,
alcohol is a depressant. It relaxes us and it often helps people fall asleep. The problem is it
affects sleep quality and you'll often wake up in the middle of the night or wake up too early.
It sounds like it's not sort of a regular thing that you, you do. I think it's other things. I've
always had a glass of wine occasionally and it hasn't bothered me before. Sure. Okay. Now,
tell me about your sleep environment and I'm interested in things like temperature, sound,
comfort. Comfort? Yeah. Well, I sleep with Jack still. He's like a space heater. I'm kind of cold
myself, but he's so warm. I didn't even have to be touching him. You know, I could be just like
six inches away and warm his toast. Okay. I see so warm. He does snore some, but, you know,
I just think when he's snoring, it's still alive at least. I know that he's alive if he's snoring.
So, so it doesn't really bother me that much. He's always snoring. Okay. So sleep environment
sounds like that's again, not the cause. That's okay. It just seems like it's just the worries,
you know, just thinking about things so much. And how often does he interrupt your sleep by
getting up or thrashing about or? No more than one time in a night usually. Okay. Sometimes he'll
get up and go to the bathroom on his own. Sometimes he can still do that. So, and that doesn't bother
me. All right. Now, what about daytime napping? That's often, you know, people try to catch up on
their sleep, but sleep during the day and then it's harder to sleep at night. Yeah. If he falls
asleep in the afternoon, I'll try to try to get in a little sleep. I don't always feel like sleeping
at that time of day, but I do try sometimes. Grab it while you can. Grab it while you can. That's
right. And is that usually 20 minutes, 30 minutes, two hours? It's not two hours, but it might be
30 minutes. Yeah. Okay. Okay. And how about physical activity? We know in general, exercise,
physical activity improves sleep unless it's done right before bedtime and then you're sort of
activated and it's hard to go to sleep. I really, I probably don't exercise enough. I don't do
anything really in the evenings. I'm tired at that point. So, I don't exercise then. I wish I
exercised more. I used to exercise more. Maybe I'd sleep better if I did. Okay. All right. Well,
what I'll do is before you leave today, I'll give you a handout on recommendations for something
they call sleep hygiene. And it sounds like you're doing most of them already and it's
attention to stimulants and alcohol and sleep environment and physical activity and daytime
naps and so on. Well, I have to give up chocolate. You won't have to give up chocolate.
So, we'll give you that. It sounds like you pretty much maximized many of those already,
but I think it's good still to have the information. The other thing we'll need
is to have you collect data, do self-monitoring on your sleep. And I wanted to propose that we do
this in sort of a new higher tech kind of way by using a device that tracks your sleep. Have you
seen these? Yeah, I think my son has one of those. He's a big fitness buff. He runs marathons and
things. All right. Well, essentially what it does is it electronically, it records physical
activity, things like steps throughout the day, but we're going to use it for sleep and it is able
to, based on your body movements, it's able to deduce the quality of sleep that you have.
We've, in the past, have used paper sleep diaries and I'll still give you a form that you can,
where you can record extra things, but it was difficult for people because you don't want to
interfere with their sleep by having them fill out a sleep diary or maybe the next morning they
may not know exactly how much they slept or the quality. This gives you a little more of an
objective measure of how many hours were you sleeping? What was the quality of sleep? What we
won't have and what you can fill out on a sleep diary that I'll give to you is if there were any
external factors that influenced your sleep, your husband got up at 2 a.m. and
started getting dressed for work. So we'll want to know sort of when those things occur and what
they are and if there's anything we can do about it. So what you would do is just put this on before
bedtime. It will collect data for you and I'll show you how you can either, on your own, you can
sync it to your computer, iPad, some of these even connect to your phone. Either your son
could show you or I could show you right afterwards. Okay, thank you. So I want to make sure I did a
good job in explaining how you're going to track your sleep and there's sort of two parts, one's
the bracelet and one's the sleep record. So how will you use those? So I'll figure out how to use the
Fitbit and my son can probably tell me how to use that. I'll talk to him and then I'm going to fill
out anything that happens in the night that affects how I sleep on that form that you give me.
Anything else you think we should be recording on that form? Because remember we want to keep it
collaborative. Well, maybe when I have a good night's sleep if I get one I'll write that down.
Yeah, perfect. You know and I think we want to identify obstacles to sleep but we also want to
identify facilitators. So the positives. So let me give you both of these and we'll see how you did
next week. Thank you. As I mentioned there are CBT interventions that have been especially designed
for insomnia. In fact there's a subtype of CBT called CBTI where the I stands for insomnia
and in this particular subset of CBT you focus on changing sleep habits, altering schedules and
sleep environment, challenging misconceptions about sleep, cognition such as if I don't get a good
night's sleep tomorrow will be terrible or cognition such as if I wake up in the middle of the night
that means something must be wrong. Of course it starts with an assessment, it starts with a formulation
and includes psychoeducation on sleep and sleep hygiene. Other interventions we might use for
Maria are things such as stimulus control therapy. An example there is that she would be told only
to go to bed when she feels sleepy. She would have the same time to get up every morning but only
going to bed when she's sleepy and only using the bed for sleep and sex not for work. You don't want
your bed to be associated with the stress of work and to get up out of bed if she's not able to fall
asleep within 30 minutes. This is similar to a type of therapy called sleep restriction therapy
where essentially if folks are spending a lot of time tossing and turning in bed you shrink the
amount of hours that they spend in bed until you can increase their level of sleep efficiency
up to about 90 percent. Now of course we might use some progressive muscle relaxation, some imagery
or other somatic quieting as a relaxation strategy to help ease her into sleep. The other thing we
might try is to do some cognitive restructuring if we find that right before bedtime she's having
cognitions that make her anxious or activated or make it more difficult to sleep. Let's move to
look at our second clip of Maria. Well I filled out this form that you gave me about sleep
and thoughts that I had about it and I don't know if I did it all right but I took a crack
at it. Okay good. So when I'm getting ready for bed the feelings that I'm having I'm sort of anxious
and worried. Okay. I don't know why maybe just at night you feel more afraid you know and it gets
dark and everything seems a little worse than it does during the day. Sure. And so when I lie down
to go to sleep even though I two hours before I was so exhausted I could hardly keep my eyes open
when I lie down then there I am wide awake again and thinking about things and thinking about
things. And so okay so it looks like you did a thought record about thoughts you have before
bed is that is that right okay and we have the you chose the seven column version instead of the
ABCD which is terrific so that's that's good. Do you want to just walk me through these different
columns starting with the trigger? Yeah well the trigger was the getting ready for bed I wanted
to see how I felt about it and why I was having so much trouble so just getting ready for bed.
And then the feelings that I was having was that I was anxious and stressed and kind of wired I guess
just kind of you know like I wanted to go to bed and go to sleep but I didn't want to go to sleep
I was afraid to let go or something. And wired is not a feeling you want before bed. That's
exactly when it happens because if I were wired in the morning I'd be fine but I'm wired at night
instead. And so you wrote anxious so you have wired and you have sadness and tell me about
these intensities that you rated those emotions. Well the the anxiety and being worried you know
that was that was pretty pretty intense you know maybe six out of ten something like that and
a sad well I was just looking at Jack in bed and you know that's that's so constant I
I don't know maybe a 40 out of 100 okay okay four out of ten okay all right so we have anxiety at
about a six out of ten sadness about a four out of ten or so okay all right and here you've captured
some of the thoughts that you were having so right well the only thing I'm thinking is
I can't get to sleep and if I can't get to sleep I'll feel horrible in the morning and if I feel
horrible in the morning I won't be able to do what I need to do and I and then of course that
makes me more worried and anxious and so it's just kind of a spiral right yeah right you see this
almost chain reaction I don't sleep and then I feel bad and then I can't do things I need to do
and then exactly yeah how am I gonna get enough sleep how can I possibly what was at the end of
that chain so you don't sleep you'll feel miserable in the morning you'll be really tired you won't be
able to take care of Jack and then what what's the catastrophe I guess at the end or the disaster
that would I thought that was it you know not being able to take care of Jack something will
happen to him and I won't be able to cope or he'll he'll be unhappy and I'll be useless okay so he'll
suffer in some way if you're not if you don't sleep it's a lot of pressure it's a lot of pressure
to fit on yourself though okay yeah all right and these next two columns were
designed to help you weigh the evidence for and against so let's talk about the evidence that
supports this idea that if you don't sleep then he's going to suffer the next day because you
won't be able to take care of him okay well if I don't sleep sometimes I don't sleep and then
the next day I do feel terrible and and then I'm just not very good at all the things that
happen and I'm more irritable and I wish it weren't happening and I just you know I'm just not that
good with him nothing terrible happens he hasn't died but you know it's not a good feeling okay
so you're not you're not on your A game for sure that's for sure but it's not the worst case scenario
no nobody died okay and one of those habits of mine that we've we've talked about is the
all or none thinking black or white thinking and I think especially when you're feeling anxious
and vulnerable and maybe going to bed it's everything seems black or white and it's going to
be worst case that already seems worse at night yeah well tell me any other evidence you have
for or against that thought of if you don't sleep he's going to suffer tomorrow well sometimes
when I don't sleep he's more irritable the next day or you know things happen to him like
might happen to him in the night and I wouldn't notice it because I was when I did get to sleep
I'd be so so dead to the world myself but that doesn't happen that often usually I do wake up
when he wakes up sure and I know you have a home health worker and you've been thinking of
increasing our she comes in the morning at least a couple times we have a different one now too
you have a different one now good good how she she's yeah it's actually working out pretty well
she's young but she's she's nice and jack seems to like her oh good he was even flirting with her
okay okay explains to me here's a man who can't control his bowel or his bladder and he
doesn't know what he's had for breakfast and he can feel remembers how to flirt how do you
scientists explain that I don't have an explanation human nature right human nature
so how about on the nights before she's going to come are you able to just hand things off to her
so you can sleep in late yes there are some things that I can okay can hand off to her when she
comes yes she can get him breakfast and get him dressed and that you know if I can sleep usually
I'm awake anyway by that time but at least I don't feel this pressured okay all right now there's a
couple of strategies before we get to the the alternative thought or the dispute box really
we can talk about evidence for and against but we can also talk about statements or thoughts that
are more helpful that might be about a behavior a way to cope that might help you so you're in bed
and you're feeling anxious and you're feeling a bit keyed up and you can continue to ruminate and
think about those sorts of things and wrestle with your thoughts or is there an alternative of
something else you could do while you're there in bed well sometimes I tried to think about
something that's pleasing to me like when I was a teenager we lived in a little house it was a
white brick house with a green roof and it had beautiful flowers all over the front of it roses
and all different colors and I just remember those roses and the way they smelled and sometimes
if I can think about that I can stop the the cycle of going on and on so it sounds like you're using
some guided imagery yes thanks to you right right and that that that helps to take your mind away
and to a more pleasant place and sometimes I just try to tell myself you know it doesn't help to
worry about it the next morning it's usually not as bad as I imagined it was at night and I'm just
spinning my wheels for nothing so that's an important thought to remember and to write down
oftentimes things seem worse at night and in the morning they seem much better yeah things often
don't turn out as bad as I think they might so those are important thoughts to capture yeah and I
think on the behavioral side the guided imagery is a great idea I know you've also practiced the
progressive muscle relaxation and you've done some deep breathing as well you've tried a little
bit of meditation so there's a whole menu of things yeah I've tried playing the tape with
your voice and that helps me sleep okay sometimes oh good I'm able to fall asleep with that oh good
and you know it's if you fall asleep in the middle of the exercise you know excellent it won't be hurt
not at all not at all at all so I think for tonight or tomorrow or whenever these anxious
thoughts come up again if you have a couple of those pre written sort of pre analyzed alternate
cognitions things always seem much worse at night things will be better in the morning worst case
scenario is very unlikely I get help from the new home health worker if I really need to I can ask
for more help and you can then kick into guided imagery or or some sort of relaxation to help
again turn down that anxiety yeah all right is that something you could yes yes it is thank you
so do that and come back next time and let me do that but do these treatments work well I wanted
to share two large meta analyses that show that CBT in comparison to a placebo control yielded
improvement in sleep latency in total sleep time and about 50 to 60 of people now that does leave a
pretty good chunk of the population that it didn't work for now we might try sleep hygiene we might
try other interventions but there are also sleep medications or sleeping pills and they fall into
a couple of different categories sedatives or hypnotics benzodiazepines or their cousins the
benzodiazepine agonists things like ambient sonata lunesta or sometimes small doses of antidepressants
that are sedating are also used there might be over-the-counter drugs such as diphenhydramine
brand name is benadryl things that they put in Tylenol PM melatonin and so on it's estimated
that about 50 million prescriptions are written every year and it cost about four billion dollars
all these different sleep aids but do they work well the answer is they sort of work we can certainly
put a person to sleep but I would encourage you to remember how complex sleep is we proceed through
those five different stages for about a hundred minutes then we cycle back around and we do it
all over again imagine the complexity that a pill or a drug would have to have in order to change
the way it works five different times and then cycle back around and do it all over again we just
can't have the same quality of sleep with pharmacotherapy in fact if you look at a randomized
controlled trial that was published by Jacobs in the Journal of the American Medical Association
Internal Medicine in 2004 they did a randomized controlled trial of CBT versus meds versus a
combination versus a placebo so they had four different conditions they found that cognitive
behavioral therapy actually outperformed medications and there was no advantage to using a combination
of CBT plus medications in a systematic review by Mitchell in 2012 they found that CBT I for
insomnia was superior to medications overall so in summary we see that that same toolbox those
same CBT skills those same protocols doing an assessment doing self-monitoring doing a behavioral
analysis those strategies can be helpful for insomnia those strategies could even be helpful
for energy and fatigue we continue in our theme of behavioral medicine in our next lecture when
we talk about chronic pain thank you
