During Maria's intake, she said she hurt all over, a sort of full body ache that couldn't
be touched with pills.
She also mentioned her sometimes debilitating osteoarthritis, especially in her hip and
her knees, and her regular back problems made worse by having to care for her husband.
She's afraid of pain pills mostly because she wants to be alert and clear, and she fears
addiction.
She wanted to know if CBT could help.
Whether minor or severe, chronic pain is regularly experienced by 15-20% of Americans
each year.
Both cognitive and behavioral factors influence the experience of pain and the intensity of
suffering.
We'll talk about the pain process, transduction, transmission, modulation, and perception.
We'll learn how psychological factors can alter the experience of pain.
But first we'll define pain in all of its facets and how we measure it.
Then we're going to look at those mind-body factors with chronic pain, including something
called gait theory, and of course looking at depression, anxiety, positive emotions,
and stress, and we'll take out that CBT toolbox and see how well it works for pain.
The International Association for the Study of Pain defines pain as an unpleasant sensory
and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage.
So what's the largest cause of acute pain?
It's surgery.
Approximately 46 million procedures are performed each year, and most patients report moderate
to severe pain post-surgically even in the face of current treatments and techniques.
But why do we have pain?
In general, acute pain is thought to be an important and adaptive signal.
It tells us of imminent tissue damage.
It only takes one touch of that hot stove to learn not to touch that hot stove.
And we know that there are diseases such as Hansen's disease or what's commonly called
leprosy where an individual is unable to feel pain and as a consequence they suffer quite
a bit of ongoing tissue damage.
But there are also times when pain misinforms us, like in the case of fibromyalgia, a chronic
pain disorder, or is so intense that it overwhelms us.
Fortunately for some, pain can be entirely suppressed so we could think clearly and escape
danger.
But how does pain work?
The process of being able to feel pain is something called nociception, and there are
four basic steps.
The first step is called transduction, and this is where nociceptors or pain receptors
transduce noxious stimuli into nociceptive impulses.
We have all sorts of nociceptors throughout our body, some are sensitive to crush or pressure,
some are sensitive to temperature, and some are sensitive to chemicals.
We then have transmission where the electrical impulses from the nociceptors are sent via
afferent nerves to the spinal cord and then along sensory tracks to the appropriate part
of the brain.
Transduction leads to transmission.
The third step is called modulation, and this is the process of dampening down or of amplifying
the pain signal related to the neural transmission.
This is hugely important for mind-body medicine because there seem to be factors which can
either increase the intensity, amplification, or dampen it down.
The fourth and final step is called perception, or the subjective experience of pain that
results from transduction, transmission, and modulation, plus psychological and social
factors at play within the individual.
But what about chronic pain?
Now chronic pain has usually been defined arbitrarily as pain that persists for three
to six months or longer or beyond the period of expected healing.
Ongoing or progressive tissue damage may be present in some types of chronic pain, including
progressive neuropathic pain and some rheumatologic conditions.
In other cases, chronic pain may be present when tissue damage is stable or even undetectable.
Unlike acute pain, chronic pain is now thought to be a disease of the central nervous system
that involves some sort of maladaptive reprogramming of the brain and or the spinal cord.
The brain can generate terrible pain in a wound that is long healed or even chronic
pain in a limb that has been amputated and no longer exists.
On average, 15 to 20% of Americans experience chronic pain each year, approximately 46 million
people.
Headache is the most common, followed by back pain, arthritis pain, and other musculoskeletal
pain.
But let's talk a little bit about the psychology of chronic pain, and it's important to remember
that we need to distinguish acute pain from chronic pain.
We think of chronic pain as a syndrome, really as an entirely different disorder, in a way
it takes on a life of its own.
We mentioned the reprogramming of the brain, but that's not all that's happened.
It also has potentially devastating consequences on mood, depression, anger, anxiety, effects
on social relationships, finances, and self-image.
You can think of chronic pain as a chronically stressful condition that essentially keeps
the stress response turned on all the time, and by now you're familiar with some of the
medical consequences of chronic stress.
So how do we measure pain?
Well in the medical setting, pain has now been called the fifth vital sign, and it's
regularly assessed or should be at every medical visit.
So first they want to assess the sensation or the no-susception of pain, and they simply
ask on a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 being the most intense, what's your average pain?
They may ask you what's the highest pain you've experienced in the past week, what's
the lowest, what makes it better, what makes it worse?
For younger individuals, they may show them a series of happy-to-sad faces and have the
child point to which of those best matches the intensity of the pain that they've felt.
You might also do some functional impairment measures, and here we're looking for impairment
and activities of daily living, and things you used to be able to do at home, social
activities you used to be able to engage in, or activities at work.
We want to know if there's social or occupational impairment as a consequence of your pain.
Now this one is especially important because if pain medications are prescribed, we don't
want them to just make an individual numb or turn down that sensation of no-susception.
We want pain medications, or really any treatment for pain, to decrease functional impairment
and improve functioning in general.
You might also be asked to rate on a scale of 1 to 10 what is your level of emotional
suffering, and it's important to distinguish between the physical sensation of pain and
the emotional suffering that might be tied to pain.
They're often correlated with one another, but they might be quite different.
In the end, it's important to remember there is no objective measure of pain, there's
no lab test, it's all based on self-report.
So I mentioned that the central nervous system was involved in pain, but what exactly happens
there and what does it do?
Now in our CNS, our central nervous system, we know that that's the seed of cognition,
emotion, and expectation.
So you can already start drawing some connections between the experience of pain and the central
nervous system through those pathways.
We also know that the central nervous system is important in directing the transduction
from psychological experience of pain into the biological and vice versa.
We know that the no-susceptors transmit their signals to the spinal cord, which then transmit
to the central nervous system or to the brain, and there we see things such as perception
and modulation that might occur.
We know that modulation of pain happens all the time, and we've all heard stories about
say soldiers on the battlefield that don't realize they've been injured and feel no pain
until they're in a safer context and then they begin to feel that pain.
In response to the growing awareness of mind-body phenomena in the realm of pain, the gait control
theory of pain was first described in the early 1960s by Ronald Melzak and Patrick Wall.
In this theory, pain signals encounter what they called nerve gates in the spinal cord
that open or close, depending upon a number of factors, possibly including instructions
coming down from the central nervous system.
When the gates are open, so to speak, pain messages can get through, and pain can be
quite intense.
When the gates close, pain messages are prevented from reaching the brain and may not even be
experienced at all.
It essentially gives us a mechanism for modulation that takes place on the level of the spinal
cord.
So, what's the evidence for gait control?
Now, a number of observational studies on the variability of pain experience have suggested
that gait control might actually be true.
Something must be happening to modulate the experience of pain which has been well documented.
For example, we know that pain transmission seems to have a limited bandwidth.
You have, for example, A fibers that send fast and sharp pains, and you have C fibers
that send slow and dull pain.
If you stub your toe or hit your hand, the A fibers, the fast, sharp sensation fibers,
are activated.
What you will immediately do is you will grab your hand or your toe and you'll rub it, you'll
squeeze it to stimulate the other fibers, the C fibers, that will then displace the A
fiber signal.
So, it's a very mechanical, simple example of how you can switch or displace a pain signal,
thus change your experience of the pain.
So what would open or close the gait in the spinal cord?
Well, we know that positive or negative emotions can influence the experience of pain.
For example, if you put individuals in a burn test condition, you essentially will induce
either positive or negative emotions in the individual, and you usually have them hold
something that looks kind of like a soldering iron.
They will turn it on, it starts to get hot, and they wait to see how long the individual
can hold on to that hot rod before they feel that it's starting to burn them.
Now, whether this is good or bad is up to you, but when you're in a positive mood state,
you will hold on to that rod a little bit longer, and your pain sensation has actually
been diminished.
The opposite is true if you're depressed, which we know tends to intensify the sensation
of pain, and stress, depending on the circumstance, can either intensify or diminish.
It's either opening or closing those gates.
A study by Irene Tracy at Oxford showed that thinking about pain has the power to sometimes
increase the sensation of pain.
Subjects were asked to think about their chronic pain, and they showed an increased activation
in their pain perception circuits.
Distraction on the other hand can be a good pain reliever.
In another study, Dr. Tracy's subjects were asked to do a complex counting task while
they were being, again, burned with that heat wand.
Their perception of pain was much less while distracted, and corresponding brain imaging
showed a lower activation in their pain centers.
Other studies have found that listening to tones or even to music as a form of distraction
can decrease pain sensations.
But why might distraction work?
It could be interfering with cognitions that would otherwise amplify the experience of
pain.
Distraction might be causing some sort of reduction in tension, or maybe at some form
of somatic quieting.
Let's look, though, at a quick example of a new patient, Sarah, who's learning how
to do guided imagery as a way to relax and escape her pain.
Note that when you see this clip, she's already gone through a series of breathing exercises
through progressive muscle relaxation, and now we're right at the point where she's
going to start some guided imagery.
You can keep your eyes closed, and now I want you to imagine you are in your paradise.
For some people it's a beach, for some people it's the woods, it might be the city who
knows it's up to you, but I want you to imagine you're there.
I want you to imagine the temperature.
Is it bright?
Is it dim?
Is it warm?
Is it cool?
This is your world, and you control it.
You are absolutely safe.
You are absolutely in charge.
I want you to imagine any sounds that you hear.
Is there music?
Are there birds?
Are there any smells that are there?
Do you smell flowers, or maybe chocolate chip cookies?
Where is paradise for you?
Give yourself this treat.
This is your space.
You created it, and you can go back there any time you want.
It only takes a moment.
You can paint the picture any time you want.
So I want you to take one last look around, but know that you'll be back, and maybe next
time you're going to stay a little longer.
This is yours.
You can go back, because you deserve it.
Say goodbye.
Wiggy, your finger is a little bit, and when you're ready, go ahead and open your eyes.
Wow.
Tell me about your feeling right now.
Relaxed.
Okay.
Very relaxed.
Feels good.
I bet it's a while since you felt relaxed.
No tension.
Yeah.
Do you want to share what your paradise was, or do you want to keep that secret?
I'll share it.
It's a log cabin up on a mountain.
I can see 100 miles with a porch across the front, sunny October, my favorite time of
the year, with all the foliage and fire in the fireplace, and I can smell ginger snaps.
I love your imagination.
Perfect.
Sounds like paradise to me now.
Me too.
Me too.
And remember, you can go back there any time you want.
So I think what we'll do from here is, how about we give you a homework assignment to
go back there at least once every week, where you can do some, I mean, the more often the
better, but I know there's a lot that's on your plate.
So whenever you're feeling tense, that should be your clue of maybe you can go to the bedroom
or somewhere quiet and close the door and take a few minutes to do some breathing, maybe
do some progressive muscle relaxation, do some imagery if that's what you want, and
then hopefully get back to this place where you are right now.
All right, good.
Thank you.
You're welcome.
Now, relaxation and guided imagery are just one set of tools to address chronic pain.
They may work through somatic quieting, but they may also work through their effect in
decreasing stress.
So let's talk a bit about stress and pain.
Now, in conditions of extreme stress like trauma, our experience of pain may be entirely
shut down, but even more minor acute stressors are known to produce something called stress-induced
analgesia.
Our fight or flight system and our HPA axis stress response not only lead to the release
of epinephrine and cortisol, the stress hormones we've talked about before.
They also promote the release of beta-endorphins, our endogenous opiates, or our internal painkillers.
How do we know this?
Well, from early animal research where animals were subjected to various stressors, then
blood-endorphin levels were measured.
In human studies, researchers use things like foot shocks, exercise stress, a social
stress test, and other methods to elicit a stress response, measure endorphins, and
in some cases, block endorphins using a drug called naloxone.
It's generally thought to be evolutionary and it's thought to be adaptive.
As we've learned, though, our stress response systems and the chemical messengers they release
were really intended for short-term situations and not the more common stressors we encountered
today which are often of a chronic nature.
Chronic stress does not produce analgesia.
In fact, it sometimes produces hyperalgesia or increased sensitivity to pain.
We don't fully understand how this happens and there are most likely a number of different
mechanisms, most of which include some sort of structural rewiring of the central nervous
system triggered by the higher levels of glucocorticoids or those stress hormones which we've mentioned
before.
Now if stress seems to be playing a major role, then it's time to move to our strategies
for stress management.
This might include various somatic quieting, working with primary or secondary appraisals,
the cognitions about the stressor or your coping resources.
We might encourage a person to have better use of those coping resources or social supports
or adding in new activities that help to mitigate the effects of stress.
So how do we treat pain?
Well, most people immediately think of pharmacotherapy and these are the drugs in the opioid family
usually like morphine or hydrocodone or oxycodone and these drugs work because of their similarity
to our body's own pain relievers, the endogenous opioids that we've talked about before.
But let's expand our idea of treatment and let's look at several non-pharmacologic treatments.
Now recall the need for a new attitude towards the management of chronic disease when we
talked about the chronic care model.
We wanted to encourage more patient empowerment and patient self-management and if we think
of chronic pain as a chronic disease it would certainly fit into that category that might
benefit from the chronic care model.
Remember one of the core skills was in self-monitoring but in this case we would be creating a self-monitoring
form like a pain diary.
We would need to create that diary to collect data and then to create a treatment package.
So what would be in a treatment package?
What sorts of things would we want to piece together?
Well we might have pharmacotherapy as one tool in our toolkit to combat chronic pain
but we might also want to think about practical, structural or even mechanical interventions.
So that would be things like physical therapy, occupational therapy, changes in your environment,
having pull bars in your home, using walkers, using braces or wraps, using ites, using heat,
using massage, all of those things packaged together can have a fairly substantial impact
depending on the individual's pain and the source of pain.
But part of that treatment package should also include the psychological and in that
package we would want to include some of the cognitive strategies that we know about.
Well first we want to look at an individual's expectations.
Expectations for their level of functioning, expectations for their pain but also expectations
for their pain control strategies.
When a patient tells me that their goal is to feel numb all of the time, I get very worried
because first of all it's an unrealistic goal and secondly I wonder if maybe they're looking
for that numbness as a way to avoid something that might be more psychologically painful.
We would also want to look at an individual's attitude, have they become helpless or hopeless
or even depressed as a consequence of the pain that they've been experiencing maybe over
a long period of time.
We might want to look at and change some or challenge some maladaptive cognitions.
Recall those habits of mine that we've talked about before is an individual catastrophizing.
Are they using all or none thinking?
Are they using maximizing or minimizing?
Or another habit of mine that we haven't talked about months is called emotional reasoning
where an individual deduces again on an implicit level that if I feel something with a really
strong emotional charge that must mean it's true.
Basically it just means you have a strong emotional charge and it's going to be a little
bit harder to step outside of that emotion and to rationally look at a particular situation.
Then of course we want to use some of those cognitive strategies for stress management
where we might look at accuracy of appraisals.
So let's take a moment then to look at what a cognitive exercise might look like if we
are looking at the habits of mine of an individual who has chronic pain.
Let's say that we're doing an ABCD where we look at the activating event, the beliefs,
the consequences again which are both emotions and behavior as well as the disputation or
this is where you restructure or rework those thoughts.
Let's say that the activating event is having a stabbing back pain.
It doesn't have to be an external event, it's just whatever triggers this cascade of
cognitions and emotions and reactions.
So let's say the individual has an activating event of stabbing back pain.
It triggers the cognitions or beliefs of I can't take this.
This is horrible.
My life has been ruined by this pain.
Consequences they have driven by those beliefs and cognitions, they feel depressed, they
feel hopeless, they stay at home and they decide to take more of their pain pills.
If they decide that those consequences are not what they were after, they're not helpful
instead they're hurtful, then you want to go to the D box, the dispute box.
And to create that dispute box, remember to think about those habits of mine.
Is this individual relying on some of those habits of mine?
Are these thoughts balanced?
Can you look at the other side of the coin?
If you had a friend or a loved one that was saying these things, what might you say in
return to help them think about a more balanced approach?
What would be some more helpful but still accurate and believable cognitions?
So the disputations might include things like, yes this physical pain is intense but it's
familiar and I have a plan to manage it.
I can take my meds, I can stretch, I can use ice, I can use distraction, I can pray or
I can meditate.
Another dispute might be, I had pain yesterday and I had pain the day before that and the
day before that and you know what?
I survived.
This stinks but it's beyond my control.
I can manage this.
Or another example is even though I hurt, I always feel better if I make it out somewhere,
if I accomplish something or if I see someone, isolation hurts too.
I can choose not to be isolated.
If we're still thinking about that pain package, that pain management package, we have our
structural, functional, mechanical tools, we have our pharmacotherapy, we have our
cognitive therapy.
Now we want to add in some additional behavioral strategies.
We've mentioned things like physical therapy and massage which of course can be helpful.
We might want to think about something called graded or sometimes called graduated physical
activity and essentially this is exercise starting at a very mild, modest level and slowly
working the way up into a person has build more flexibility, strength and endurance.
This is something you might start with a physical therapist but then you would continue it on
your own.
Another common behavioral activity would be somatic quieting.
Remember we think of chronic pain as a chronic stress response.
That means that the individual's HPA axis, their sympathetic nervous system are working
on overdrive so it's going to take an equal amount of counter action in order to turn
down the volume on those overactive stress response systems.
Now a critical behavioral element is activity scheduling and if you recall activity scheduling
from our depression lectures, we've talked about the activity record where an individual
writes down their activities but then they can prospectively plan activities that they
know are going to have a lifting effect on their mood.
For individuals who are in pain, they may not be depressed but often times what happens
is they find themselves pulling away from sources of enjoyment or support or social
relationships.
Remember that lower activity levels mean less reward, less reinforcement and eventually
those might even lead to depression.
So we want an individual to start scheduling those positive activities but what happens
and what often comes up when an individual is in pain and I've seen this many, many
times with patients, we'll talk about the relationship between activities and mood.
We'll talk about the importance of scheduling activities but the response I often get is
yes, but I hurt, yes I would love to do that but I have pain, yes I could schedule that
but I won't enjoy it because the whole time I'm going to be thinking about my pain.
If you remember with depression we had a similar objection saying, yeah I could do that but
I won't enjoy it so we did something called pleasure predicting.
If we can get the patient to suspend their disbelief temporarily, to go ahead and prospectively
schedule one thing, I will ask them on a scale of 1 to 10, how much do you predict you're
going to enjoy yourself?
They make their prediction, they write it down, then the next week they go and actually
do that activity.
Once they've finished, they re-rate the level of pleasure that they actually experienced
and almost always, not every time but almost always they find that they enjoyed it more
than they had predicted.
Chronic pain like depression often causes people to make very pessimistic predictions
and it's a matter of giving them that extra boost they need to go out and test out those
assumptions.
So if you're interested in a sketch of a more comprehensive and long-lasting CBT plan
to manage pain, I would encourage you to look at the best-selling book written by Margaret
Codhill called Managing Your Pain Before It Manages You, now in its third edition.
You can imagine some of the elements that are included, they start with assessment and
formulation.
They move into behavioral analysis and problem solving.
They create a pain package plan and something called a panic plan, meaning when everything
you've tried just doesn't work and that pain shoots up, what do you do?
When do you call your doctor?
When do you call your social supports?
When is it okay to ramp up the pain meds?
And it's always helpful to think about those things in advance so you know that you have
a plan in place.
The program also goes on to look at the roles of mood stress and social support.
If we were to think about assessment and formulation from a CBT perspective, we of course would
want to do a semi-structured interview first, that's always our gold standard.
We would want to do self-monitoring and here we would use a pain diary, there's a number
of examples available online, including if you type in Minding the Body, Satterfield,
you'll go to an Oxford University Press website that talks about a workbook, you can click
on the link for companion site and then download the forms for free.
In a typical pain diary, it has days of the week across the top, you fill in data at least
three times per day, rating your physical sensation, you also rate your suffering, you
want to record circumstances, triggers in context, and you want to record what you tried and
whether or not it was helpful or hurtful.
Now this pain diary gives you a baseline, but it also gives you an idea of whether there
are current strengths or strategies to keep or maybe even to ramp up.
It also helps us to see particularly vulnerable times so activities can be arranged around
those times and it gives you a more objective assessment of how interventions worked or
didn't work.
Once you have your data, you want to move to formulation and you can start identifying
potentially helpful interventions.
If cognitions are amplifying suffering, then you'll want to do some thought records.
If there's very little physical activity or social activities, then you might want
to do graduated exercise or physical therapy and some activity scheduling.
If it's depression, then you might want to add in social contacts and positive activities.
What does the data show us?
If we look at a Cochrane review by Williams, Eccleston and Mordley in 2012, they looked
at CBT versus treatment as usual or weightless controls and they found that CBT had statistically
significant but small effects on pain and disability, moderate effects on mood and catastrophizing
and by 6 to 12 months, the main effect was on mood.
So again, it's not reaching in and fixing the pain but it's altering and changing an
individual's mood and potentially changing some of those habits of mine.
A Cochrane review of behavioral treatments including CBT for chronic low back pain included
30 randomized controlled trials and concluded that behavioral treatments were more effective
than usual care for pain post-treatment but no different and immediate to long-term effects
on pain or functional status.
A review of behavioral treatments for headaches by Eindreizek in 2007 described CBT-based
interventions, relaxation, biofeedback, cognitive therapy and it was able to reduce headache
activity by as much as 30 to 60% on average across those different studies.
These effects surpassed those of various control conditions and were typically sustained over
time including years after treatment.
Now other meta-analyses have supported the efficacy of psychological treatments including
CBT and reducing arthritis pain, fibromyalgia and most of the studies in these reviews compared
interventions with various CBT techniques to usual care or weightless controls.
So I'd like to move to our next frequently asked question and this is again one that
often comes up and since in a primary care setting and since I often work with medical
patients I hear this one a lot from both patients and providers.
They say if you recommend cognitive interventions for pain aren't you in a sense saying that
the pain is all in your head?
That seems rather unhelpful and unsupportive.
In my response usually has a couple of elements.
First of all go for empathy first that's usually the safe route and you want to acknowledge
that that individual is suffering and they may have had negative encounters with the
medical establishment that doubted that they were experiencing pain.
I find those doubts about pain to be unhelpful if a person says they're suffering they're
suffering.
If they say they have pain they have pain but at the same time it's important to remember
that mind and body are very much related and just because we're going to look at the stress
the cognitions and the behaviors associated with pain doesn't mean that we're saying
that your pain is not real we're saying that it's all connected and if we're going to come
at this from a medical perspective as we should we should also try all avenues and
come at this from a cognitive and behavioral perspective as well.
So I hope that you'll stick around for the next lecture we're going to broaden our purview
and we're going to look at not just the individual and their health but we're going to look at
the health of relationships.
Thank you.
