The average American spends nearly 100,000 hours at work during their lifetime.
US workers currently put in around 1,800 hours per year, much more than our European counterparts.
Unlike other countries, the US does not require any paid vacation time off, although most of us get at least two weeks of vacation plus a few holidays.
But nearly 60% of US workers use less than half their vacation time each year.
Some say we're a nation of workaholics. We're ambitious, overachieving, perfectionistic.
Either that or just struggling to make ends meet in an increasingly polarized society of haves and have-nots.
Professional burnout is at an all-time high, but no end is in sight.
How did we get here?
Of course, there are a lot of layers rooted in our national ethos.
Pick yourself up by your bootstraps, the early bird gets the worm, living the American dream.
It's an ethos that has both religious or puritanical work ethic and economic elements,
or entrepreneurial spirit and a free market, capitalistic competition.
It's also tied to technological advances like the Industrial Revolution.
We could work in factories year-round and use artificial lighting to extend the workday.
Of course, the modern-day equivalent would be email in a ubiquitous smartphone.
Even when you're not physically at work, you're still kind of at work.
In fact, for many, they're potentially at work 24 hours a day, seven days a week,
making it increasingly difficult to quantify what a work week really is.
But as we prepare to define, measure, and maybe even improve occupational functioning,
it's important to see that many of the core ingredients,
concentration, motivation, emotional management, communication, or even assertiveness,
are relevant at both work and home and have obviously close ties to cognitive behavioral therapy.
But what does our workforce look like?
Well, over the past several decades, we've seen a big shift from manufacturing to white-collar service jobs
with particularly large growth in healthcare and technology.
And while we've seen a lot of national economic growth,
salary growth has been relatively flat, at least for middle- and lower-class jobs,
necessitating longer hours and sometimes having a second job.
Some of the consequences include 30% of U.S. workers who are often or always under stress at work.
Work stress has increased nearly 300% since 1995.
40% of missed work is due to stress-related causes,
and 80% of job accidents are stress-related.
Problems at work are more strongly associated with health complaints than are any other life stressors,
more so than even financial problems or family problems.
And yet we keep plugging along.
In fact, some or many find a way to be successful.
What skills or abilities led to that success?
That question has fueled a good chunk of the self-help industry for years with a number of different books,
and I want to illustrate just a couple of them.
But when I mention these books, even though they may ring a bell,
I want us to look at these books through a CBT lens.
We're going to look at these well-known words of wisdom,
but we're going to do a CBT analysis of some of their recommendations.
We'll see what's old, we'll see what's similar, we'll see what might be new.
The first book I wanted to mention was Stephen Covey's book,
The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, published in 1989.
Now the first three of those seven habits are related to a category he calls independence.
Habit number one is to be proactive.
To realize that your decisions are the primary determining factor for effectiveness in your life.
You are to take responsibility for your choices and the consequences.
Sounds good, but also sounds like patient empowerment.
You have to see yourself as an active agent of change.
We know that many individuals who are anxious or depressed may not be able to be proactive
because they don't see themselves as powerful.
We want to do a behavioral analysis, where is their power?
Can they be proactive?
Can they make decisions?
But we'll also want to look at cognitions that may interfere with their ability to be proactive.
Habit two, begin with the end in mind.
Here you're supposed to engage in self-discovery
and clarify your deeply important character values and life goals.
You should envision the ideal characteristics for each of your various roles and relationships in life.
Now I hope this very loudly rang a bell for you in terms of wave three cognitive behavioral therapies
and specifically the values, clarification, exercise we did as part of act
or acceptance and commitment to therapy.
Very similar.
Habit number three, put first things first
and here really they're talking about managers must manage his or her own person.
In other words, take care of things at home or inside before you start reaching out
and trying to manage other individuals.
Now this may have some similarities to couples CBT conflict resolution and communication
but it's probably something that is a little outside of CBT and more in the business world.
The next three habits have to do with a category of interdependence
and habit number four is something called think when when.
And here they talk about genuine feelings for mutually beneficial solutions or agreements in relationships.
You should value and respect people by understanding that a when for all is ultimately a better long-term resolution.
Now for this one what I associate to is not automatic thoughts so much from a CBT perspective
but really those conditional assumptions.
Remember we have these rules for life that each of us have learned over time.
So if your rule is a when for all means better long-term outcomes or resolution for everyone
then you're probably already in line with this habit number four.
Habit number five seek first to understand than to be understood
using empathic listening to genuinely be influenced by a person which compels them to reciprocate the listening.
Here it sounds like a lot of the couples therapy skills that we had mentioned before.
Habit six is synergize to combine the strengths of people through positive teamwork
so as to achieve goals that no one person could have done on their own.
Again probably more in the business world than in CBT
but interesting if you think about the chemistry of teams or coworkers
maybe in similar ways that you could think about and conceptualize the chemistry of a couple.
And the last habit falling under the category of continuous improvements
is something that was called sharpen the saw.
You need to balance and renew your resources energy and health
to create a sustainable long-term effective lifestyle.
Now it primarily emphasizes things like exercise for physical renewal
prayer, meditation, yoga, good reading for mental renewal
and it also mentions service to society or to communities
as a way to encourage spiritual renewal.
And here I think we're squarely within the realm of cognitive behavioral therapy
stress management, somatic quieting, behavioral activation connecting to our social supports.
The next example I wanted to show is much older written in 1936.
This was Dale Carnegie's classic how to win friends and influence people
has now sold over 15 million copies.
He gives us six ways to quote make people like you.
Now as a CBT person whenever I hear that word make
I automatically associate to the cognitive model that tells us
it's not an activating event that makes you act a particular way
or makes you like or dislike another person.
It's really that middle step your interpretation.
So I think what Dale Carnegie is telling us here
are here are some strategies to influence an individual's subjective interpretation
so that the consequences they will eventually like you.
So what were those six ways?
Becoming genuinely interested in other people.
And here I think of a recommendation by William Carlos Williams a physician
that tells the medical student to always find the poem in every patient.
How else can we help influence people to make them like us?
Number two is smile.
Number three is to remember a person's name and to remember to that person
their name is the sweetest and most important sound in any language.
Be a good listener.
Encourage others to talk about themselves.
Talk in terms of the other person's interest
and to make the other person feel important and to do it sincerely.
And here he's really pulling for the reciprocity element in interpersonal exchanges.
If you look at individual CBT it kind of focuses on the individual
and their own internal reactions.
But here it moves more into the realm of maybe couples therapy
or at least thinking about how to nurture our social supports.
So we have a lot of self-help books, some CBT influence,
some maybe not so much, but really what we're interested in
are what are the predictors of success?
Is it raw intelligence?
Is it professional knowledge?
Education income?
Is it having connections?
Ambition drive?
Is it just sort of rolling up your sleeves and working really hard?
Well, I think before we can answer that question
we have to decide what success means.
So is success money?
Is it advancement, prestige, status, growth or satisfaction?
It's a fairly personal issue with no correct answer.
And there are some interesting findings from the business literature
that shows us that objective measures of success
like how much money you make and if you get promoted
are oftentimes different from subjective measures of success
such as personal satisfaction with your career.
So let's take a sort of middle of the road perspective
and let's assume that success isn't about making millions of dollars
and you don't have to be a CEO of a company
but it does include occasional advancement, recognition,
reasonable compensation, constructive relationships
with peers and bosses and other supervisees
and it includes a reasonable level of satisfaction and contentment.
That of course will wax and wane over time.
But what do you need to get there?
Well, a 2006 study by Accenture of 251 executives in six countries
concluded that while intelligence is important for career success
it's a matter of how you are smart.
Interpersonal competence, self-awareness, social awareness,
all elements of a broader construct of emotional intelligence
are better predictors of who will succeed and who won't.
So if you're interested in digging a little bit deeper,
am I emotionally intelligent?
In what ways am I smart?
There's a number of different exercises.
We've demonstrated a few of them already.
One was called your best self, your worst self or signature strengths.
You might also use the CBT Triangle
and look at a number of different activating events that have occurred
at the workplace, maybe outside of the workplace
and see where your weaknesses are and where your strengths might be.
There's also something called a 360 evaluation
or a multi-source evaluation.
Our university actually requires all department chairs and division chiefs to do this.
A questionnaire is sent out to everyone that you work with
on all sorts of different levels.
They all give anonymous and very detailed feedback
about your strengths, about your weaknesses,
and of course, you evaluate yourself.
You then sit down with an executive coach,
kind of a CBT therapist of sorts,
that goes over all this data with you
and helps you to develop an individualized plan
to improve your skills.
But let's go back to this idea of how you are smart
or how you are intelligent.
I specifically wanted to talk about a construct called social intelligence.
Now, social intelligence and I think emotional intelligence definitely overlap,
but social intelligence is more specifically defined
as the capacity to effectively negotiate complex social relationships and environments.
Now, although this might seem like a new construct,
Edward Thorndike was the first to coin the term in the 1920s
and in Howard Gardner's theory of multiple intelligences that came out in 1983,
he also used the term social intelligence,
so it's not really that new.
I think it's come back into public awareness
after the surgeon's interest in emotional intelligence
and social intelligence just followed.
Now, as I mentioned, this will include skills in social perception,
psychology, social dynamics, and behavioral skills
and communication, strategies, actions, and conflict resolution,
many of which we've talked about before.
But can you cultivate social intelligence?
Well, initial studies of children have been successful
in teaching what they called socio-emotional skills,
things like listening, asserting yourself, cooperating, or apologizing,
and these can be taught, of course, indirectly, say, on the playground,
or they can be integrated into curricula.
But what about the workplace?
What about for adults who may have decades of social habits
that may or may not be so socially intelligent?
Well, there's been a number of different studies
and honestly the findings are somewhat mixed,
looking at social intelligence as a global construct.
We tend to overlap and get a bit confused with personality
and extroversion and introversion and other factors.
It's more encouraging when you look at specific sub-skills
like teaching communication, conflict resolution, or time management.
Let's go on to look at a clip and here we'll see Michael.
He's talking about an individual event that's occurred,
but it's occurred in the workplace
and it may have ramifications for his health and wellness at his work.
What was the first event?
Well, the first event was actually, it's at work,
and it involved a co-worker.
And there was a meeting coming up
and this co-worker was actually supposed to be taking the lead in the meeting.
So I sent a reminder, an email reminder to this guy
and I reminded him, you're responsible for taking the lead here,
so make sure you're prepared and just let's be on time
because we don't want to look bad there.
It wasn't a hugely important meeting,
but I think it was important to have the right presentation.
So he had that advanced notice.
Be on time, be prepared.
We arrived late for starters
and he wasn't prepared.
So what happened then is I kind of got very, very angry at him,
but not wanting to show that in the meeting.
I suppose the way it was coming across is I became pretty distracted
and I was having a very difficult time even focusing on what was going on.
Just to make sure I understand the activating event was
you had done some advanced work to prepare or make sure your co-worker was prepared.
He showed up late, not prepared.
You felt angry but tried to keep your poker face on
so that other people couldn't see how angry you were, but you felt it.
The interesting thing about that was, I guess my poker face isn't so great
because then during the meeting people actually began to say,
are you okay, Michael?
Is anything up?
Which actually didn't help things.
It made me, if anything, more angry.
Remember one of the things we want to do is to rate the intensity of the emotion
that is evoked by the thoughts you have.
So on a scale of 0 to 100, 0 you're not angry at all.
100 is as angry as you could possibly imagine.
Where were you on that scale?
I would say around 70%.
Around 70.
What were the thoughts that were related to that anger?
Well, some of the thoughts that I've written down,
the automatic thoughts that I was having was,
you are so immature.
How could you do this to me?
You had the reminder, you knew what you had to do,
and you show up here late and unprepared.
So one of the things that I wrote down was that's really immature
and kind of how dare you.
Outrage.
And another automatic thought that I found myself having is,
it's not my job to do everybody else's job.
My job is my job, and your job is your job.
So that was one of the thoughts that I was having,
and I also was feeling kind of connected with that.
Do I have to carry everybody?
So those were the thoughts.
So those are some of my powerful thoughts.
Do I have to carry everyone?
That's my job, but in a sense, here you are,
and here this is happening.
And I think that that goes back to that emotion
that I was having of anger and frustration.
So anger, frustration, any other emotions?
I also wrote down, maybe this is a good word, maybe not,
but I wrote down indignant.
I don't know if that's that kind of indignation.
You really should be doing something,
and you're not doing it.
Now, remember what we want to do is to take those thoughts,
and thoughts aren't necessarily true or false.
They're helpful or hurtful.
So in terms of the outcome or the effect that those thoughts had on you,
your feelings, your emotions, your behavior, your relationships,
would you say those were helpful,
or those are something that you might want to nudge in a different direction?
I would say I'd want to nudge those in a different direction.
And the way to do that is to look for evidence that supports the thought
and evidence that argues against the thought.
So which one of those thoughts you want to pick,
because there was a whole string of different thoughts?
Well, I think let's...
How dare you part of this that I was feeling,
and what I wrote about that was that evidence supporting that thought was,
well, in fact, you were late,
and in fact, you didn't prepare.
So that's evidence supporting this sense of indignation.
And I've told them in advance I did my job.
So I think that that's all...
For me, that's all evidence that the reaction wasn't entirely unreasonable.
The reaction of being angry was not entirely unreasonable.
Now, let's back up a little bit,
because I think I kind of thought, like, how dare you there's beliefs that are nested underneath.
So that sense of outrage or indignation is
that someone has violated what you see as a norm of something they should have done.
Any sort of normal, hard-working, good, decent person should have done this,
and that was violated, so you feel that how dare you moment.
So what are the thoughts underneath the how dare you, and maybe I just said them,
but what sorts of thoughts or expectations did you have for your coworker?
I have the expectations that that coworker is going to do in those circumstances,
what I would do, and that is if I am going to be late,
or I have a reason to be late, I'm going to notify you in advance of this.
I wasn't notified in advance.
If I am asked to be prepared for a meeting, then I am going to prepare for the meeting.
If for some reason I can't prepare for the meeting,
I should have that conversation in advance,
and this coworker did none of these things for me.
So there is an expectation of professionalism, I guess?
So is it fair to say that when you saw his behavior, experienced his behavior,
you thought he was being unprofessional, irresponsible?
Exactly.
So let's look for evidence for his lack of professionalism, his irresponsibility.
So what evidence? He showed up late.
He showed up late.
He wasn't prepared.
He showed up unprepared.
Okay, what else?
He didn't really seem all that apologetic immediately.
Now, later on, he did apologize.
Okay.
But at the outset, did not apologize, did not come into the meeting and say,
I'm sorry, I'm late, here's why.
Okay.
So I think that that would have been professional,
and that was evidence of unprofessionalism.
And have there been meetings in the past when he showed up?
I would not say that this particular person has a history of always being late,
but yes, he's been late in the past on occasion.
And I guess when I looked at someone coming in, anyone,
whether it's this or anybody else coming in late,
I would have expected some admission that this was not professional.
So we have, again, if we're looking evidence for and against,
there have been at least a handful of episodes where he's been late.
If we're looking at evidence against the idea that he's unprofessional,
it sounds like that there are times when he has been on time and he was prepared.
Perfectly fair to say that he's actually generally a good worker who rarely,
he may be late sometimes, but rarely would he not deliver when he's asked to prepare.
I certainly expected him to come to the meeting prepared,
because that's generally what he does.
So that would be evidence against, I suppose, the idea that he's unprofessional in the big sense.
Okay, so generally prepared wasn't this time.
So it sounds like there's a belief against sort of nested down a little bit deeper
about one time is too much, even if it's an exception that it's too much.
Yeah, and maybe that's going a little bit too far perhaps.
Well, let me ask, and I know you're a very sort of diligent, conscientious guy.
Have you been late to meetings before, or missed an email or something like that?
It's happened, and I have missed an email before.
And I think that that's actually one of the things that I jotted down as evidence
that doesn't support this hot thought is that nobody is perfect
and you, in fact, have missed meetings or been late for meetings yourself.
So you're moving us now into the next column where you're rewriting the thoughts.
And it's true something negative happened, and we don't know his reason.
There could have been extenuating circumstances, maybe not.
But, York, can you say your thought again?
Well, the idea that I had for kind of rethinking this process was that I've been late to meetings before.
We can't necessarily expect perfection, and I guess if I step back from it,
I have to say that there are times when I haven't been prepared, when I haven't been on time,
when I maybe have missed an email or just let it go right past me.
So we can hope for perfection, but expect that most of the time we're not going to be perfect.
Our cells are our coworkers.
So as you sort of think about it in a more balanced way,
and we maybe think about extenuating circumstances or your own experience of sometimes being late,
if you were to re-rate how angry you are, you were at a 70 before.
So where would your anger be now?
I would say about a 30.
About a 30.
So from a 70 to a 30.
From a 70 to a 30.
I think that probably the lingering sense of anger is that I did take the step myself to put the reminder out there
and said very specifically, be on time and be prepared.
But in the context of the fact that this wasn't the most important meeting in the world,
not the end of the world and all the other things we've discussed,
I feel backing away from it much less angry, annoyed, irritated.
Right.
And what do you think you might do differently next time?
Because I guess there'll be more meetings and more people who are late occasionally.
I think it's a matter of stepping back.
One of the things that we really didn't get into was that feeling as I was getting flustered
and people were asking about me and saying, okay, are you okay?
And that was actually making me more angry.
I think that that's probably the easiest part of the scenario for me to think how I'd do it differently in the future.
Because really, as I was rewriting my thought, my initial thought was,
well, now the focus is all on me and it's this guy who's getting off the hook.
That's really, I think, what I should have been thinking is they're just expressing concern.
They're just expressing concern.
So that part of the process I think is easier for me to step back and say,
I'm just asking how you are. Don't take that.
As a further reason to get angry, see that as an opportunity to respond to somebody
and understand that they're actually concerned about you.
And it's nice to see how your comfort and skill with the thought record has been growing.
So you've just talked about an event nested within an event and you've done a DTR about a DTR,
which I don't know if you did that on purpose or not, but you did.
So the event was about the worker.
But then the secondary event was you were sitting in a meeting and people were asking you if you're okay.
And that triggered a different set of thoughts of, oh my gosh, why is the focus on me now and not on this guy?
He's the one who screwed up, not me.
But now you're having rewriting thoughts about that secondary event.
They're just concerned about me.
And I hope it's not, but it's maybe a little bit of a cop out because it's focusing on something
that I feel I can more easily deal with.
But maybe that's part of the step.
I do think if I imagine this happening again, I send an email to someone and I say,
be on time and be prepared and they come on and they're neither of those things.
I'm not sure that I would not be very angry.
But I think that all of these other things that we've talked about can help me at least step back from that moment,
an initial response, that sort of instinctive gut response that gets angry to say, it's just a meeting.
Sure.
We've all been late.
Nobody's perfect.
Perfect.
So I know you have two more thought records we want to make sure we get to.
But as we've talked about before, there's often themes that come up, core beliefs,
or parts about your personality, your personal history, and we see them.
So they sort of make these guest appearances and different events that come along.
And the theme of perfectionism is one that's sort of been woven throughout a number of events.
And the theme of personal responsibility and when is it your responsibility to police other people
or to be the advocate for justice or not?
And if you're in a supervisory role, sure.
If you're not in a supervisory role, maybe you said, and one of your thoughts was it's not your job to do other people's jobs.
So it's one of those things we want to sort of keep our eye on and see if we can shift that over time.
OK.
In this example, we're really looking at the personal style of one employee, Michael,
and a conflict that he has with one other person.
But it's important to remember that these sorts of events, if common, can contribute to an overall work culture,
in part depending on the frequency but also on the person doing it.
So is that person a leader, a supervisor, how influential are they in the workplace?
And just as people have core beliefs or conditional assumptions in the CBT sense,
businesses have mission statements.
They may articulate values.
But even more important than what is written down is what is actually done.
What are their business practices?
What are employees treated and how are problems resolved?
Just as we collect stories for a person to create a case formulation,
a business consultant will collect stories about a business to create a formulation of that organization's culture.
This would include the health of the organization, but also contributing or detracting factors.
One of the biggest warning signs is occupational stress and professional burnout among the employees.
Now, occupational stress is defined simply as the experience of stress that is caused by work.
Remember that stress can include biological factors as well as emotional, behavioral, and cognitive.
And remember that a stressor, and in this case an occupational stressor, can be anything real,
or it can be imagined and these imagined events might also set off a whole chain of stressful events.
Recall that it's not just about the external situation, but also about our primary and our secondary appraisals.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health tells us that human health and social work employees
are at greatest risk for occupational stress and burnout.
We know that accountants and bookkeepers have extraordinarily high rates.
Individuals who work the night shift, weekend work, or overtime also have very high rates.
So if you wanted a top ten list of the jobs that are most stressful, up at the top of the list, the enlisted soldier,
followed by a firefighter, airline pilots, air traffic controllers, and police officers.
Next up might be a surprise. Number six is event coordinators, seven inner city school teachers,
followed by taxi drivers, customer service representatives,
and then rounding out the list are emergency medical technicians or paramedics.
So what factors, though, across these very different kinds of jobs are related to occupational stress?
Well, it's really about the level of work demands.
It's about whether or not there's hostility in the climate of the workplace,
if there are constant changes and expectations,
if the individual, the employee, has a perceived lack of control,
with high job demand and high job strain coupled with low reward.
What are some of the protective factors?
Well, if an individual has high perceived control, if their level of reward is increased to match their level of demand
or how hard they're working, if there's a certain amount of social status attached to their job,
and if they're able to derive a personal sense of meaning or purpose,
and I'll ask you to recall the lecture where we talked about how to construct meaning.
So how do you go about measuring stress in the workplace?
Again, we could use the same sort of processes through interviews or online measures.
We could also use objective data such as staff turnover, satisfaction surveys of the employees,
financial indicators, or even HR complaints.
So what are some of the ways to combat stress?
Well, we can make simple environmental changes, so it's a more comfortable workplace
in terms of light, temperature, noise, and space or privacy.
We might want to decrease ambiguity by being very clear about job descriptions
and making things very predictable.
We want to move towards the direction of shared decision-making
so things don't feel quite so dogmatic or autocratic.
We want to do things to facilitate social relationships and, of course, have rewards for good work.
Now, remember that we might also use some of our CBT exercises.
We could use cognitive skills to induce positive emotions.
We could look at positive appraisals.
We could also help folks to recalibrate their perspective and, again, to search for meaning.
So what are some of the ways to combat burnout when the stress has gotten so chronic or severe
that folks just feel that they can't necessarily recover?
Well, probably the best intervention is to take a nice long vacation away from work,
have a possible change in your job description,
maybe a re-engagement with sources of meaning either at work or outside of work,
and working on some of our stress management skills to achieve a better work-life balance.
Now, I wanted to end by moving to one of our frequently asked questions,
and this question was, what if you've done all you can and you just have a toxic job or a toxic boss?
How can CBT help then?
Now, remember, if you think back to our treatment of depression, there were four stages.
There was education, behavioral strategies, cognitive strategies,
and the last was social and potentially occupational changes.
So some of those strategies are being able to step back and take a very critical look
at whether or not you need to find the courage to end a relationship or to end a job
and to move on somewhere else.
And if it doesn't make sense to end or to change,
then using those skills for stress management to help you cope more effectively.
Along those lines in our next lecture,
we're going to talk about ways to promote flexibility and ultimately resilience.
