Astronomy, stars, galaxies, and the universe, lecture four, billions of stars.
In the last lecture, we looked at our own star, the sun.
In this one, we're going to start looking at all the other ones, at the different kinds.
Before going on to look at the real properties of stars, their intrinsic properties,
there are a number of things we have to look at that involve distances and motions.
How do you get the distance to something that is so far away?
It wasn't easy. Astronomers struggled for centuries to try to figure out how far away the stars are.
And the problem is that they're so far away that the distance measurement turns out to be quite difficult.
It really wasn't cracked until around the middle of the 19th century.
The basic idea is parallax. It's simple range finding.
Or if you like simple three-dimensional vision.
If you hold your finger out in front of your face and you look at it with one eye,
the finger looks like it's in a different direction than if you look at it with the other eye.
That is, if you flip your eyes back and forth, the finger appears to jump back and forth across the distant background.
The closer the finger is to your face, the more it appears to jump back through a larger and larger angle.
This is the whole foundation stone of three-dimensional vision of how you know something is at a given distance
when you're using both eyes simultaneously.
Astronomers use a version of this three-dimensional vision.
So all there is to it is to look at the star from one direction,
and then to blink your other eye and look at the star from the other direction,
measure the angle through which the star appears to shift, and you can get its distance in light years.
Problem is, of course, that we can't look at it with eyes separated that far apart, not at the same time.
But nature has given us a wonderful way of doing this automatically because we are on an Earth that is orbiting the Sun.
If you look at a star, here's the Sun.
You look at a star when the Earth is over here, you're looking at it in this direction,
and now six months later, the Earth will have moved over here two astronomical units away,
and now you're looking at a star in the other direction.
So it's rather like having gigantic eyes, one on each side of the Earth's orbit, and seeing in three dimensions.
You can't see terribly far away this way, any more than a person can see three-dimensionally, let's say 50 or 100 feet away.
You tend to lose it.
But for the nearby stars, within roughly 500 or so light years, this works beautifully,
especially with the sophistication we can apply to the method today using space satellites.
We now have the ability to measure the distances of hundreds of thousands of relatively nearby stars out to distances of about 500 light years.
The smaller this angle, through which the star appears to jump back and forth, the farther away it is.
That encompasses an enormous number of different kinds of stars whose properties we are then able to learn.
So the distance problem is essentially solved.
Now, the next problem we face is motions.
Stars are arranged in constellation patterns, as viewed from the Earth.
You see the Big Dipper, you see the Southern Cross.
These are ancient figures that go back thousands of years, used for sacred purposes, used for storytelling purposes,
who we look at a pattern of stars, and in our culture call that Orion.
We look at another pattern of stars called that Ursa Major, the Great Bear, a small part of which is the Big Dipper.
These are all temporary.
It's not hard to believe.
You are looking at the constellation patterns the same way that the ancient Greeks did,
the same way the ancient Sumerians did.
All cultures within the time span of human writing have seen the patterns about the same.
But that's because the stars are so terribly far away.
They are actually moving through space at speeds of 20 to 30 to 40 kilometers per second or more relative to the Sun.
Very high speeds.
However, they're so far away that they don't appear to move to us all that fast.
You're driving on an interstate highway.
The fence posts are whipping past because they're close.
The cow off on the distant horizon appears barely to move because it's so far away.
The apparent motion of stars technically is called their proper motion.
And we can actually measure that if we carefully observe positions over a long period of time,
and we can actually watch the stars shift their positions relative to each other.
Now, you wouldn't notice this with the naked eye unless you were able to live for thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of years.
But the Big Dipper is temporary.
It will fall apart.
The ancestors millions of years from now will be looking at different constellation patterns.
We can also see the stars appear to move back and forth along the line of sight by means of what's known as the Doppler shift.
They have a light wave moving along like so.
Make it a water wave.
Let's make it even simpler.
You drive a power boat through the water into the waves.
The waves slap against the boat at a higher frequency,
which gives you the sense of they're having a shorter wavelength where you try to measure them with a yardstick.
If you drive the power boat along with the waves, the waves appear to have a longer wavelength.
All wave motion does this.
You can hear the effect and sound so easily by standing on the street and listening to the sound of the cars going by
or listening to a siren or even listening to an airplane flying overhead.
As the body approaches you, the pitch will be higher because the sound waves are hitting you at a faster speed.
As it goes away from you, the sound waves hit you at a lower frequency, not at a speed, but at a lower frequency.
And consequently, you hear the pitch drop.
The same is going to be true with light waves.
Remember the little cutouts, the little absorption lines that we have in the spectrum of the sun.
They appear in the spectrum of all stars, too.
Different patterns, depending upon how hot the star is, what kind of chemical composition the star has.
But they're there and they can all be identified.
So by observing minute shifts in the positions of these little absorption lines in the spectrum,
we can determine the speed of a star in the back and forth direction.
Now, you've got the motion of a star across the sky in angle.
From how far away the star is, you can calculate its speed across the sky in kilometers per second.
From the Doppler shift, you can calculate its speed along the line of sight.
Between those two, you actually can measure how fast and in what direction the star is moving relative to the sun.
And get the idea of how the sun is moving within the local swarm.
The stars are terribly far away.
The nearest one is Alpha Centauri at a distance of four light years.
The rest that we can measure through parallax spread out to around 500 light years.
Even a thousand beyond that would begin to lose our ability to measure direct parallaxes from the trigonometry of the shifts back and forth.
We can go farther away than that with the motions.
That is, we can get motions of stars at least in the back and forth direction.
We can get motions of stars as far away as we want as long as we can get the spectrum.
By watching over periods of many, many years, of decades, we can learn the shifts of stars that are thousands of light years away.
We put all the information together and we begin to get a picture of the dynamics, the motions of our galaxy.
We live in an assembly of stars.
It's kind of flat.
Think of a big dinner plate, except that it's got a bulge in the middle, very thin.
It's about 100,000 light years across.
We're about 25,000 light years out from the center.
We are orbiting the galaxy from an analysis of the variety of motions,
not just of the nearby stars, but even of nearby galaxies, especially the back and forth movements.
We can tell that we are going around the center of the galaxy at a speed of a bit over 200 kilometers per second on a roughly circular orbit.
It takes us about 250 million years to go all the way around.
The Sun is 5 billion years old.
We've gone around 20 times since we were born.
All the stars, in fact, in our local neighborhood, nearly all of them,
have more or less circular orbits around the center of the galaxy as well.
That is, the inner part of the galaxy, all of the matter interior to our orbit,
acts as if it were a second body, so that it is the interior of the galaxy and our Sun
that act like a two-body problem, if you like, that is, two bodies that controls the Sun in orbit about the center of the galaxy.
It's all the stuff interior to the solar orbit.
Now, each star feels a slightly different gravitational tug.
Each star is in a slightly different orbit.
And as a result, we see the stars tend to drift past us a little bit because none of the orbits are identical.
From the variation that we see, from the motions that we see relative to the Sun,
we can then get the orbits of all of the other stars around the center of the galaxy,
all from these minute shifts in parallax as the Earth goes around the Sun to get the distance,
and from observing over periods of decades to see the small shifts as the constellation patterns slowly change.
And we can build up a whole picture to the dynamics of the galaxy.
The galaxy, again, is the thin disk, but there's an enormous cloud around it like this, large spherical, what we call halo.
Stars up here, which are in the distinct minority, 98% or so are in the disk,
dropping down through the disk like this in long, skinny orbits.
And they zip by as fast.
Some of these stars having speeds of hundreds of kilometers per second.
So we see a few visitors from the other part of the galaxy here,
as well as the ones that are in a nice, more or less circular orbit.
So we've solved the distance problem.
We have pretty much solved the motion problem.
Now we've got a brightness problem.
We have to be able to measure the luminosities of the stars.
About 135 BC, Hipparchus, famous ancient Greek astronomer,
divided the stars up into what he called magnitude groups, six of them.
First magnitude, the brightest we could see, sixth magnitude, the faintest the human eye could discern.
As it turns out, when you quantify this with the appropriate mathematics,
division of five magnitudes, sixth magnitude, first magnitude, is a factor of 100 in brightness.
That means it takes 106th magnitude stars to equal one first magnitude star.
We continue down this scale with telescopes, 10th, 11th, 20th magnitude,
each set of five giving us a factor of 100 in brightness.
By the time you get down to 30th magnitude, the faintest stars that the Hubble telescope can see,
we are a trillion times fainter than the stars that can be seen with the naked eye.
Now, the apparent brightness of a star depends upon how much energy is pumping out
and how far away it actually is.
If we know its distance, we can use the magnitude as measured on the Earth
to calculate the actual luminosity of the star.
Technically, we do this with what is called absolute magnitudes.
In our minds, we bring these stars into kind of a funny number
called at 32.6 light years, defined by a distance unit that is used professionally.
And try to calculate what the brightness of the star would be at that distance, the absolute magnitude.
From that and from a calculation based upon the temperature of the kinds of radiation
we can't directly see, infrared and ultraviolet, we can then derive the total luminosity of the star.
And what we find is quite astonishing.
The most luminous stars in the galaxy are over a million times more luminous than the Sun.
The faintest stars in the galaxy are less than a millionth the brightness of the Sun.
We don't even know where the lower limit is.
The maximum is a few million times.
The range is over a trillion from the brightest stars in the galaxy to the faintest stars
that can be seen with modern-day telescopes.
And somehow, we have to explain this pattern.
Why does nature make some stars that are so huge?
Why does nature make some stars that are so feeble?
Remarkably, the Sun is pretty much in the middle.
It's a middling star, a median star.
You go from about a factor of a million brighter down to the Sun,
a factor of a million or so fainter than the Sun.
And here we are right now.
This is one of the reasons that the Sun makes such a wonderful example of stars
because everything else is spread around it.
Look at temperature now and the different kinds of stars.
The temperatures range from not much more than that of a cell-cleaning oven,
thousand degrees Kelvin and under, in the most extreme cases up to close to a million,
but degrees Kelvin, of course, but the stars that you see with the naked eye
range from, it ranges in quite so great.
It's about 3,000 degrees up to maybe 20 or 30 or 40,000 degrees Kelvin.
We characterize the kind of star in part by the temperature
but more by the kind of spectrum that it has.
That is, when we pass the light through a prism or find some way of spreading it out
so we can look at these fine absorptions, the kinds that we see in the Sun,
we see that different kinds of stars have spectral patterns, different absorptions,
quite different from what we find in the Sun.
This caused a terrible puzzle to the astronomers of the 19th century.
When you're trying to solve a problem in nature scientifically,
one of the very first things you do is to classify your data.
Whether you understand it or not at that point is not relevant.
It's the classification that ultimately leads to some kind of understanding.
Around 1890, a variety of classification systems culminated in one that was developed at Harvard,
in which they classified stars by Roman letters,
by the strengths, by the darkness of the hydrogen absorptions in stars.
They didn't even know then that hydrogen was the most common element found in stars.
So Class A stars had the strongest hydrogen, Class B the next, C the next, and so on and so on.
Well, it turned out that in the primitive technology at the time,
some of the letters didn't even exist.
There were no C stars, they were just bad observations.
And then it consolidated a few more, and then astronomers found that you get better continuity
with color and with other absorptions if you put B on top of A and then O on top of B.
And we wind up with what is called the classic spectral sequence O, B, A, F, G, K, and M.
We can do a cheer. Give me an O, give me a B.
It helps to learn it. I've done that in class. It's really kind of fun.
What we are observing here are different absorptions in the different kinds of stars.
And it looks at first as if the stars are made out of all different things.
The Class A stars have powerful, powerful hydrogen absorptions.
The Class B stars have helium absorptions and the Class O ionized helium absorptions.
Looks like they're made out of different things.
You drop down through F and G, the sun is a G star, the hydrogen lines weaken,
but then you get a lot of metal absorptions, ionized and neutral metals,
and you go down to Class M down at the bottom and you find molecules.
The remarkable thing is that this sequence, the standard classic spectral sequence in astronomy,
correlates with color. O and B stars are blue, A stars are white,
G stars are kind of an off-white, a yellow-white, K stars are orange, red stars are Class M.
And we see immediately that we have a temperature sequence.
And when we solve the chemical composition problem in stars,
factoring in the efficiencies of absorption,
we find that all of these stars in the classic sequence are all made out of the same stuff,
90% hydrogen, 10% helium, assaulting of everything else.
It all has to do with temperature.
At low temperatures, you cannot produce these helium absorptions.
That's why you don't see them in the sun,
whereas you're only going to get molecules at very low temperatures where the molecules can exist
because the atoms are always smashing into each other and at high temperatures,
they hit each other at such high speed that the molecules break down.
At low temperatures, they can exist.
Oddly, the most common chemical element found in these cool Class M stars is titanium oxide.
It just happens that that molecule has its absorptions in the optical part of the spectrum.
So by the titanium oxide, you know you've got the M star,
and then you can do fine gradations, you can decimalize it.
The sun is two-tenths of the way from G to K, so we call it a G2 star.
We have now nailed down the sun.
We have stars now that range from 3,000 degrees at Class M up through the G stars like the sun
at 6,000 up through the A stars at 10,000 all the way to the very hot O stars all the way up
at close to 50,000 degrees.
We've now categorized the stars by temperature without actually having to measure the temperature.
You can simply look at the spectrum of the star and someone versed in the art of spectral analysis
will tell you right away what kind of star you have.
The first thing anybody interested in stars wants to know about any particular star
is what is its spectral class.
Now we have two measures.
We have this absolute magnitude, which tells us the brightness,
the intrinsic true luminosity of the star, how much energy it's producing in watts.
And then we have the spectral class, which is dependent entirely upon temperature.
So really we've got luminosity and temperature as expressed by absolute magnitude and spectral class.
You give any scientist two variables.
The first thing he or she wants to do is let's plot one against the other
and see if there's a relationship between the two.
And there really ought to be, when you go back to the lectures on the sun,
recall that the amount of energy coming out of a unit area, square meters, square centimeter,
of surface depends upon the fourth power of the temperature.
You double the temperature, you've got two times two times two times two, 16 times more energy coming out.
So all things being equal, it would seem that the hot star should be more luminous than the cool star,
so we can plot a graph.
It was first done in combination by an astronomer named Henry Norris Russell
and a Danish astronomer named Einar Herzsprung in the early part of the 20th century.
And the graph of luminosity versus temperature became known as the Herzsprung-Russel diagram,
or the HR diagram.
It's the most powerful tool we have in studying stars.
It's usually expressed as absolute magnitude versus spectral class,
but luminosity versus temperature will do just as well, and some people do it that way.
Sure enough, the stars line up from low temperature, low luminosity on the graph,
to high temperature and high luminosity on the graph,
along a beautiful S-shaped curve that became known as the main sequence of stars.
The sun is among them.
Since the sun is fusing hydrogen into helium in its deep core,
it makes sense that this is what all of these so-called main sequence stars are doing.
They're fusing hydrogen to helium, just like the sun.
What was remarkable, though, was that both astronomers, using somewhat different methods,
found that there were other kinds of stars.
Russell in particular found that there was a branch of this diagram that he produced
in which the luminosity of the star increased as the temperature went down.
Now, that makes no sense in terms of the picture of the amount of energy per unit area
coming out according to temperature to the fourth power.
Here you have very bright stars that may be thousands of times more luminous than the sun.
At temperatures, only half the temperature of the sun.
There's only one way you can explain that.
You have to have a big surface area.
That is, this radiation law tells you how much energy per unit area,
if you've got a lot of unit areas, square centimeters, square meters on the star,
you can produce a lot of energy in spite of the low temperature.
When Russell first saw this, back around 1913, 1915,
he divided the stars into two broad groups,
what we now call the main sequence stars and these much bigger stars
that were luminous in spite of low temperature,
and at that time he simply distinguished between the two by calling the big ones giants
the ones dwarfs, leaving nothing in the middle for some kind of normal star.
The normal stars are in fact the dwarfs.
The word dwarf in astronomy and phrase main sequence are identical to each other.
They're synonyms and it doesn't mean that the star is small.
Hot dwarfs, class O, class B dwarfs can in fact be very luminous and very large.
It simply discriminates the branch in which luminosity increases
with increasing temperature and luminosity increasing with decreasing temperature.
So something is odd about these giant stars.
Why are they so big?
Then Hertzsprung found a sampling of stars much more luminous than the giants
at the same temperatures.
Well, term giants was used up.
Must be super giants.
The giants can reach the proportions of the size of the orbit of the Earth.
Remember the orbit of the Earth, the astronomical unit is about a hundred times the diameter of the Sun.
Here you're talking about a star about the size of the orbit of the Earth,
sometimes the size of the orbit of Mars.
The super giants can be vastly larger than that.
They're exceedingly luminous, up to hundreds of thousands,
if not a million times more luminous than Sun, at low temperatures.
So they must span distances from the Sun to the giant planets.
Some have dimensions the size of the orbit of Jupiter.
Some super giants approach the size of the orbit of Saturn.
Huge, distended things.
It's a bright star in the northern winter, northern hemisphere sky called Sirius.
Bright a star in the sky.
It's bright primarily because it's close.
It's hot.
It's a luminous star, but it's bright mostly because it's close to us.
If you watch its proper motion, it doesn't move in a straight line.
It wobbles.
Well, it can't wobble by itself.
It's got to have something making it wobble.
And it was surmised in the 19th century that there must be some kind of other star in orbit about Sirius.
Stars can be doubled.
We'll have pretty much a whole lecture on this subject.
Bright Sirius must be orbited by something that's faint,
so we have two stars that are doing this to each other,
but you only see one of them.
And the one moves across the sky this way.
Without a part of the 1800s in testing a new telescope,
the little faint one was seen.
Another faint one was seen in orbit about the bright star Prision in the northern hemisphere winter sky.
A couple others were picked up as well.
Sirius B, as it's called, the faint companion to brilliant Sirius,
is 10 magnitudes fainter than Sirius A.
Now, each set of five magnitudes is a factor of 100.
You take 10 magnitudes, you have a factor of 10,000.
Sirius B is 10,000 times fainter than Sirius A.
Okay, so you have a faint star, lots of stars like that.
However, Sirius B is as hot as Sirius A.
They're both white stars.
Sirius A, the bright one, is about 10,000 degrees,
and we know now, in fact, that Sirius B is even hotter.
But back then it was thought to be about the same.
The details are not terribly relevant.
They're both white stars, implying temperatures around 10,000.
They're both producing the same amount of energy per unit area.
The only way Sirius B can be faint is for it to be terribly, terribly small.
You calculate that it's about the size of the orbit of the Earth, and it's white.
Well, it's a terribly small star if the word dwarf hadn't already been used.
That's what it would be, but the word dwarf was already used for the main sequence stars.
So instead of calling it dwarf, we have to discriminate it from the ordinary dwarfs.
It was called a white dwarf instead.
And all of these tiny stars became known as white dwarfs, irrespective of the color,
because later some of them were found to be blue, some of them were found to be red,
so we have blue, white dwarfs, and red, white dwarfs.
This marvelous subject isn't it?
The arcana of the vocabulary, but it makes this whole HR diagram,
this whole Hertzsprung-Russell diagram almost human.
It becomes alive with almost, in a sense, living stars that we know are born
as people are born, in a sense, live out their lifetimes as main sequence people.
Age, and as we'll see in later lectures, become giants, some becoming super giants,
some becoming white dwarfs, some becoming exploters,
and the kinds of stars that we can only address in later lectures further down the line.
The white dwarfs sort of parallel the main sequence at very low luminosities.
We know now they are the end products of stars very much like the sun.
The sun is going to become one of their number sometime in the very distant future.
Now, the main sequence stars are mostly 90% hydrogen, 10% helium, a smattering of everything else.
It's a good round composition to use.
The main sequence stars have pretty much the same chemical composition of the sun,
but there are others in which the chemical compositions can vary considerably.
Among the giants is a smattering of what are called carbon stars.
Now, in the sun, there's more oxygen than carbon.
You go to some of the giants, the ratio gets reversed.
Did nature do that to start with?
This is actual evidence that we have, direct evidence,
that nature is making heavy elements from hydrogen to helium and to carbon
and laughting that carbon upward by convection from the inside to the top of the star,
causing the star actually to change its chemical composition.
Through the details of the chemical compositions of these aging stars,
the giants and the super giants, even the white dwarfs,
we can learn something about how stars generate their energy, how they live and how they die.
A whole subject that we're going to put together in the form of a study called Stellar Evolution,
where we will deal with the aging processes of stars like the sun
and the aging processes of very massive stars that explode
and showing how all of this leads back into the creation of the sun and the earth itself.
In the next lecture, we're going to look at patterns of stars.
We're going to look at sets of stars, at double stars, multiple stars, clusters of stars,
because one of the things that we've yet to factor into this is the masses of the stars,
not just on the main sequence, but the masses of stars that become giants,
the masses of stars that become super giants, the masses of stars that are the white dwarfs,
and come up with numbers that will absolutely astonish.
After listening to lecture four, a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
Do we see stars from other galaxies in our sky?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
I think one thing that has to be made very clear is that all the stars you see in the nighttime sky
are part of our galaxy.
More, they're just the local part of our galaxy.
We don't really see very far within our own galaxy with the naked eye.
If you want to look farther away, that is represented by the Milky Way,
which is the combined light of the disc of our galaxy.
Other galaxies are so far away that they look just like faint fuzzy blobs
against the pattern of the stars, all of which are local.
And like many sciences, is plagued with a problem called observational selection.
Nature shows you what it wants to show you.
If I were a beginning biologist, let's say, a very naive beginning biologist,
I would look around me and say clearly there are more elephants in the world than there are microbes,
because I see lots of elephants and I have never seen a microbe.
On the other hand, anyone who studies the subject in depth knows there's an awful lot more microbes in the world
than there are elephants. Nature made elephants big, they're easy to see.
The same is true with the stars.
The stars that make the constellation patterns, the nighttime stars,
are the stars on the upper part, the more luminous part of the main sequence.
They're basically class F, A, and B stars.
And the giants, the class K giants, the class M, the cool class M giants,
and a few of the super giants.
The vast majority of stars in the galaxy are low luminosity, low temperature class M dwarfs.
Over 70% of the stars in the main sequence.
Maybe many more, because we've discovered stars that are down even cooler than class M.
We've even had to put in classes L and then classes T to account for the very low luminosity stars.
So over 70% are on this bottom end of the main sequence.
Not a one of them is visible with the naked eye. Not one.
They're all too faint. They're the microbes of astronomy. They're everywhere.
We can't see a one of them.
The sky is populated with many, many class B and even class O stars.
They are so rare, but they are so luminous they can be seen for tremendous distances
and it fools us into thinking that they're far more than they actually are.
This is actually called a good thing. You don't want to have too many class O stars.
These are the ones that blow up and you don't want to be too close to them when they go.
