Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe, Lecture 13, The Expanding Universe.
In the last lecture, in fact, the last two lectures, we looked at individual galaxies, first our own, and then at all of the other ones, and their various shapes and forms and kinds.
Now we're more approaching the Universe as a unit, looking at the whole thing in which the galaxies, as interesting as they are in themselves, become probes for examining the large-scale structure of things.
Here is where we begin to examine one of the most basic parts of the Universe, its general expansion, why it should be expanding, how it is expanding, the rate at which it's expanding, how the expansion can be used to get distances of other galaxies and look at how the galaxies are structured in their clusters and clusters of clusters throughout the Universe.
And then by reversing the expansion rate, looking at the age of the Universe, something that we will look at again in the last lecture when we put together the expansion that we're looking at here with the theory of how all of this happened and what may happen to it in the future.
We have surrounding us billions of galaxies. Even at the turn of the 20th century, we knew we had vast numbers of the things. And if they're all out here in space, gravity should draw them all together and bring them together into some kind of a lump.
Therefore, galaxies should probably not exist in the first place. Gravity would render it impossible to counter that early astronomers, early 20th century mathematical astronomers, suggested that the Universe ought to be expanding to prevent the contraction.
It was a theoretical idea that Hubble fitted his observations into because he was the first one to really determine the distances of galaxies from the Earth, how far away they are.
He didn't have a very good notion of it. There were rather large errors but that's irrelevant. The picture began to emerge at that point.
Hubble had the distances. Slifer, whose data began to show that there were, in fact, other galaxies, when he found that the spectra in almost every galaxy he looked at was red-shifted.
That is, the spectrum lines were shifted to the red part of the spectrum implying a Doppler shift, so they thought then, of galaxies away from us.
And it's kind of like the construction of the HR diagram. You have two variables that look really interesting to plot against each other.
So let's take a look at the distances of galaxies from the Earth and plot them against the velocities, or rather the velocities against the distances. It really doesn't matter.
Hubble did that and he found that the farther away you get from the Earth, the faster the galaxies are moving away from us.
There are a couple that are moving toward us, right down at the bottom corner of the diagram, M31 and a couple others, in our local group.
So we know that that's really kind of gravitationally driven. Once you get outside this local group, however, the farther away you get, the faster the galaxies are moving away from us.
Hubble had discovered observationally the expanding universe, and it fits in with the basic theoretical idea that the universe should be expanding, otherwise it would collapse.
We have gone far beyond that rudimentary beginning of Hubble. As our distances get better and better and better, we're able to look farther and farther and farther and get better and better velocities as well.
We can now construct a huge diagram like this, in which Hubble's little diagram fits down in the lower corner. And sure enough, as far as we can see, we have a straight line between velocity and distance.
If you double the distance, you double the velocity, and it can get very large.
One of the things we want to know about this expansion of the universe is its rate. This is one of the key reasons that they launched the Hubble Space Telescope to get the expansion rate of the universe.
The astronomer has been fighting over this number for decades. What is the actual expansion rate of the universe? Hubble had a very large number, well above 100 kilometers per second per million light years.
That's sort of the standard that we use. What is the rate at which the speed increases for every, let's say, million light years you go out? And he had it over 100.
Well, for much of the latter part of the 20th century, there were two strong camps in town. One wanted somewhere around 30 kilometers per second per million light years.
And the other one wanted about half of that, 15. And it went from coast to coast.
The east coasters wanted the high number, the west coasters wanted the low number, and the midwesterners seemed to be happy to take an average.
We wanted the number because that factors into the age of the universe, as we'll see later. So it's not just something we want to know academically.
There are real, real reasons for wanting to know this, but let's defer that to a little bit later.
The Hubble Space Telescope finally zeroed in on the great midwestern average of about 21 or 22 or so. We can round it to 20 if you like.
Kilometers per second per million light years. If you go a million light years away, things are expanding away at 20 kilometers per second.
A million light years isn't very much. In fact, over a million light years you don't even notice the expansion of the universe.
If you go to, let's say, 10 million light years and you're dealing with a couple of hundred kilometers per second.
If you go out to a billion light years, that's a thousand million, you multiply 20 by a thousand, you get 20,000 kilometers per second.
As you go farther and farther away, you actually begin to approach the speed of light.
Now, there are a couple of things that we really have to factor in. What is the meaning of this expansion and what effect does it have on us?
There's a, rumors will abound that this has to do with the expansion of the solar system or the expansion of the galaxy, and that is simply not true.
The expansion of the universe takes place on large scales that dominate even clusters of galaxies.
A cluster of galaxies is a cluster because it is gravitationally bound together.
That is, each galaxy has a complicated orbit of sorts around the center of mass of the system.
The cluster is not expanding. It's being held together by gravity.
So you have motions of the galaxies within the cluster that are superimposed upon the broad-scale expansion.
It's really, although we tend to be sloppy about it and say every galaxy is moving away from every other galaxy.
A phrase you hear commonly, that's really not true. You should say every cluster of galaxies, if they're far enough apart, is moving away from every other cluster of galaxies.
That's really a much better phraseology. It just takes longer to say, that's all.
So we can say the galaxies are separated, but realize that the clusters are bound together.
The Virgo cluster is bound together. Our little local group is bound together.
We see no effect of the expansion on our own galaxy. This can't happen because gravity keeps it all together.
Gravity is over with all of this mass. Quite a powerful force.
The other thing is, what does this expansion actually mean?
If you take a handful of sand and throw it into the air, the faster moving particles will be farthest away after a certain period of time.
And it looks like you somehow have an expanding universe of sand because you're throwing the sand into the cosmos.
That isn't what's happening. It truly is not what's happening.
The expansion of the universe involves the expansion of space-time.
Space-time is Einstein's four-dimensional construction.
Three dimensions of space, x, y, z, to which is coupled time. All of it bound together.
Space or space-time is actually doing the expansion. Space is getting bigger.
The galaxies are caught in space. They're trapped in it, in a sense.
They can move through it with their gravitational motions, but that's minor.
If you expand the space, however, then the galaxies get farther apart.
Think of a piece of graph paper, a rubber graph paper, with grid lines on it.
You take the edges all the way around and pull it apart.
The grid lines separate from each other, but the galaxies have coordinates on that grid.
So, really, they are staying at the same place in a kind of coordinate space.
It's just that you expand the coordinate space and everything gets bigger,
and the galaxies just happily go along for the ride.
Well, in our universe, it looks like we're at the center.
Well, sure it looks like we're at the center.
Everybody looks as if they're at the center.
If I've got a galaxy here and here, this one is moving faster than this one.
From the point of view of this one, we're moving away in this direction.
This one's moving away in this direction.
No matter where you stood, they'd all appear to be at the center of the expansion.
It doesn't matter which one you're on.
It's an illusion that you're at the center.
If you're in a crowd, imagine the crowd of people, New Year's Eve, on Times Square.
The ball comes down, everybody gets bored, New Year's Eve, everybody goes home.
They scatter off in all different directions.
Everybody moving away from the center of town.
Everybody's getting farther away from everybody else.
Everybody looks like he or she is at the center of the expansion,
except the people at the edge.
What happens here?
But there is no edge.
Why should there be an edge?
And there is no center.
That is the fundamental nature of the universe.
There's no edge, and there's no center.
Everybody's at the center, yet there is no center.
We don't come to the edge.
We just look as if we're in the middle, and that's all.
Well, within this expansion space-time, you have the clusters of galaxies,
and the galaxies are moving around each other, of course, back and forth in orbit.
So we can actually see that.
We can see some galaxies coming at us relative to the expansion.
Some galaxies going away from us relative to their expansion.
This just produces a spread in velocity at any given distance for any given galaxy.
The number we come up with now is about 20-21 kilometers per second per million light years.
Once we have that as a uniform expansion, and as far away as we can see within reason,
with a little warning down toward the end of this lecture, that's not quite true.
But for the most part, the expansion is uniform and linear.
We can turn it around and get the distances of galaxies from their red shifts.
So we begin a massive redshift project.
And there have been several that have gone on in which we try to get the red shifts
that is the apparent Doppler shift of a galaxy, of millions of galaxies,
so as to get their distances.
You just reverse it.
If you know what the velocity is, then you know the distance,
and you can map the universe this way.
And what we find are spectacular shells, filaments, walls of galaxies
that contain the clusters that surround tremendous voids.
It's a textured affair, this universe.
They are not uniformly distributed.
Oh, in the big picture, yes, if you smooth everything out,
but in the picture of only, say, within a billion light years or so,
we've got the cell-like structure.
The origin of which will gradually become clear
as we approach the next and final lecture.
There's another point that has to be made,
and another very common misconception is that this is a Doppler shift,
that the red shift is a Doppler shift.
It isn't.
And it's not a trivial difference either.
You commonly hear that it is.
Many textbooks, many popular books, have it as a Doppler shift
because it's relatively easy for the mind to understand a Doppler shift.
Doppler shifts are caused by are either moving into the wave,
which seems to shorten the wave,
or are moving away from the wave along the direction which the wave is moving,
which seems to lengthen the wave,
so that you can get the velocity of something from the shift.
But that really isn't what's happening.
The red shift of a galaxy is caused by the expansion of space.
Space expands.
It's getting bigger.
The universe is getting larger.
The photon is caught in the same fabric of space that the galaxies are.
It's caught there.
It's trapped in the coordinate grid,
and this means that the length of the photon increases
along with the expansion of the universe,
and by the time it reaches us, it's longer, and it is redshifted.
This is not a Doppler shift, and the rules are not the same.
The formulae, the mathematical formulae,
are similar as long as you're dealing with low velocities,
the rules change completely.
You can't use the Doppler formulae.
You have to use formulae that are based upon the theory of relativity,
and the whole thing becomes quite a bit more complex.
This, again, will surface in the final lecture,
where we begin to look at the very first things we can see in space.
So a number of misconceptions to knock down.
One is that we're in the middle of all of this, which we're not.
One that the galaxy is somehow expanding,
which it isn't, neither are we, neither is our cluster,
neither are any of the other clusters,
and the other is that it's a Doppler shift, which it isn't.
So a number of things are changing here
as we look at the universe in its large scale.
Using the redshifts with the proper formulae,
and even in the near space, we can get away with the Doppler shift.
It's good enough, but keep in mind that it isn't.
We can begin to establish the nature of the structure around us.
Superimposed upon this, again, are real Doppler shifts.
So there are two things going on at the same time,
the stretching of space-time, stretching of space,
and the trapping of the photons within space,
which make them longer and longer and longer the farther away we look,
which replicates the actual expansion of the universe.
And then superimposed upon that are real gravitational Doppler shifts,
and we have to somehow separate one from the other.
And in part, that is the art of dealing with the grand picture of the universe,
cosmology, the study of the cosmos in general as a unit.
And we have to be able to separate these redshifts out.
It's been historically the problem of getting the expansion rate,
which is called the Hubble constant after Hubble,
of 20, 21, 22 kilometers per second per million light years.
Is that in near space, when we're looking only a few million light years away,
let's say the Doppler shifts are comparable, the real ones,
are comparable to the expansion rate of the universe.
There we can get nice distances, but there we can't get...
The velocities are a little shaky,
but you get the velocities at great distances,
and the Doppler shifts don't matter anymore,
it's hard to get the distances.
So we turn to the ultimate in standard candles,
the Type 1A supernovae,
the brightest supernovae that there are,
which can reach vastly brighter proportions
than even the most luminous of the O-stars.
We calibrate these, as we talked about in the last lecture,
with Cepheid variables.
You see a Type 1A supernova pop off in a galaxy
whose distance you already know.
By other means, you can then know the absolute magnitude
of the absolute luminosity of the Type 1A exploder.
And then when you see it at a great distance,
you can chase these things out to well over a billion light-years.
You see them at great distances,
you can then determine the distance of that most distant galaxy.
And when we do this, a truly remarkable thing seems to happen.
We expected the universe to slow down.
Gravity pervades the universe.
It never goes to zero to one over our squared law, remember.
Everything affects everything else in the universe gravitationally.
If the universe is expanding,
we've got this gravity that is dragging it back.
So the universe ought to be slowing down as time proceeds,
and the Hubble constant should be steadily decreasing.
That's what was long thought.
It should be decelerating in a way.
So we look out to confirm our ideas using the Type 1A supernovae.
And what do we find?
But that the universe is not decelerating.
To the best of our knowledge, just the opposite is happening.
It's accelerating.
A stunning surprise.
And it wasn't just one small group of scientists with a marginal observation.
There were two broad teams who made this discovery of pretty much the same time.
And they both showed the same results.
A remarkable discovery.
Science works, of course, by replicating results.
If you just have a result once, that's not good enough.
Somebody else has to confirm it.
Everybody's got to be able to confirm it, and this is what is happening.
The universe is actually accelerating.
How do you get it to accelerate?
Go back to the early days of the formulation of the expansion of the universe.
Einstein suggested early on that to keep the galaxies from collapsing in on themselves,
there must be some force that kept that from happening, an outward expansive force.
It was termed the cosmological force.
We would recognize it now as a fifth force of nature of some sort.
And immediately after, very shortly after Einstein using his formulations of relativity,
postulated the cosmological force, expands the force to counter gravity to keep it all from collapsing in the middle.
Someone else suggested, well, if it's just expanding, that won't happen.
And Einstein sort of metaphorically went, oh, I should have known that.
And he claimed it was the biggest mistake he ever made in his life.
He was embarrassed about a good fraction of his life.
The cosmological force did not exist.
Well, like so many things, he may be right, because now we've got to deal with not the universe slowing down,
but the universe accelerating as time goes on.
The expansion is getting faster and faster.
The cosmological force lives in some form or other.
Wouldn't he have loved to have known that?
We don't know what's going on.
The force that is making it do that is sometimes called...
There's an energy in the universe that is causing this expansion, and we don't know what it is.
It's a strange world we live in, far stranger than we can know, because we live at low speeds, low velocities,
and Newton's laws of motion and Kepler's laws all work very, very well.
The indication that there was something wrong came toward the end of the 19th century.
Mercury has a relatively elliptical orbit, and the point of perihelion goes around the Sun.
That is, the whole orbit rotates, and you can calculate the rate of rotation of the orbit
based upon the gravitational influences of the other planets.
It rotates faster by 43 seconds of arc per century.
It sounds trivial, but the earliest astronomers could not replicate that motion.
Just couldn't do it.
It was left for Einstein to do it, because Newton's laws are slightly wrong.
They work very nicely at low velocities, but not at high velocities.
What's the matter of doing it at high velocities? What's wrong?
The problems with the speed of light, effectively.
Light is the fastest thing in the universe.
It is at upper limit, 186,000 miles per second.
Only light can go at light because it has no mass.
If you move a body and begin to approach the speed of light, relative to the viewer,
the mass will increase, and it will increase to infinity at the speed of light,
and consequently, you can't accelerate it any faster because its mass is infinite.
You can't even get to infinity, rather obviously.
You can only approach it asymptotically.
That is, you can get as close to the speed of light as you want by pumping more and more energy in the system,
but you can't get there.
This is why super light speeds are impossible.
The universe, interestingly enough, can expand faster than light, but that's the expansion of space.
That has nothing to do with things moving through space.
That's what the speed limit has to do with.
Well, it's more strange even than that.
If I were to take a ball and play pitch and catch with someone,
they threw the ball back at me, and it's at a particular velocity,
and they catch it at the same speed with which I throw it,
but if I were to run at the catcher,
I would add the speed of my body to the speed of the ball,
and the catcher would catch it faster.
This is part of the art of baseball pitching.
You throw your whole body into it, and that increases the ball speed.
Cricket players do exactly the same thing, cricket pitchers.
If you do it with light, it doesn't work that way.
You don't add the speeds.
If I shine a beam of light at you,
and you have some quick magic device that can measure the speed of light as it passes past you,
it will go past you at 186,000 miles per second.
We're dealing with a vacuum here, not light slows down in medium.
We're not talking about that.
If I were to run at you at half the speed of light,
intuition would say that the light beam should pass you at one and a half times the speed of light,
and it doesn't.
It passes you at the speed of light.
You can't change that speed of light.
It's a bizarre notion, not intuitive at all,
but that's the way it works in experiment.
It really does work that way.
Einstein had a thought experiment.
What would happen if I could run alongside a light beam?
He said,
as I run alongside the light beam and I try to catch up with it,
like trying to catch up with a freight train,
as I run alongside the light beam, I can't catch it.
It keeps passing me at the same speed.
Imagine you want to go to the next city down on a freight train.
You run alongside it.
You're running at the same speed as a train.
You hop on.
It doesn't work with light.
No matter how fast you run, it keeps going past you at the speed of light.
It's bizarre.
How do you explain that?
The only explanation that there is is that time must slow down for the observer
to keep that light beam moving past you at the same speed.
Now, it's not a slowing of your clock.
That is, it's not a mechanical thing.
It's a slowing of time itself.
If you could run alongside the light beam, time would have to stop.
You would freeze time.
You get the similar distortions in space as well as time.
You have a problem in relativity of simultaneous events.
It depends upon where you are.
If two lightning bolts strike at the same place,
I could say they hit simultaneously,
but anybody in the audience would say,
no, one hit before the other.
You have to account for all of this and these distortions in time and space,
and that's what relativity does,
and that led into relativity as a theory of gravity,
because then you think of gravity as a distortion of space-time caused by a mass,
and you roll down the distortion to the planet or to the star.
That is, you can't envision this because nobody can envision four dimensions in his or her mind,
but this distortion of space-time surrounding us is what makes things roll to the center.
It's what makes gravity, and when you use those rules,
the motion of the perihelion of Mercury,
its closest point to the Sun, falls right in the line.
You have to use these rules in order to send spacecraft at high velocities
across the planetary system.
This means that in a gravitational field, time will run slower in a high field
than it will in a low field.
It will run slower near the floor than they do up here
because they're in a higher gravitational field down here,
and if you switch the clocks, it doesn't matter, the high one's still in one store.
The experiment's been done, and it all agrees with what Einstein said.
There have been no experiments, in fact, that have negated the rules of general relativity.
It's a study of mechanics, of how things work, how things move, how time flows.
When, in the simplest idea, when you have this constancy of the speed of light,
you have to allow for it.
It's an experimental fact.
It's not just something somebody made up.
Einstein had another wonderful analogy.
You go into interstellar space somewhere, in your mind,
and lo and behold, here's an elevator in interstellar space.
Odd thing to find, perhaps, but there's the elevator.
And having nothing else to do away from all the gravitational fields of the stars,
you walk into the elevator, and the door closes behind you.
The hand of God comes down and pulls on the cable of the elevator,
and pulls it up at 9.8 meters per second, per second acceleration.
This is not an ordinary elevator where you accelerate up,
and then you go at a constant velocity.
This is a constant acceleration upward, quite different.
Nobody builds elevators like that.
You feel like you're back home in a gravitational field.
That's just what it feels like.
And Einstein's principle of equivalence states,
and nobody's found any negation of this,
that there's no experiment you can do inside that elevator
that can tell you you're in an elevator
and not in the gravitational field of the earth.
Nobody knows why this is so. It's just so.
Now, it's dark in there, so you have a little hole drilled in the elevator.
A beam of light shines in the elevator, right through it.
You see this thing pass through the elevator.
You're accelerating upward, but because you're accelerating upward,
the beam of light appears to bend.
That is, when it exits, you're going faster than when it enters.
How do you define a straight line?
Euclid said the shortest distance between two points.
In physics, it's the route taken by a light wave, by a light beam.
It will go the shortest distance between two points in the shortest time.
This means in the accelerating upward elevator,
the light beam has a curved path.
That shouldn't happen.
Now, go back to the earth's gravitational field.
Since there's no experiment that will tell you you're in an elevator
rather than on the earth,
if you shine a light beam in the earth's gravitational field,
it has to bend, just like it does in the elevator.
That is, a gravitational field causes a bending of the light beam,
but the light beam is moving in a straight line, by definition.
So, it must be space-time that is distorted,
and the light beam is going in a straight line.
Consequently, a mass produces a distortion of space-time.
That's what gravity is all about,
and the rules are different, slightly different,
than they are from the work of Isaac Newton.
And as long as the mass is small,
and velocities are small, the two are effectively the same,
but when you get to very high masses,
and when you get to very high velocities,
the rules change and they must be taken into account.
And if you try to run even something like
the global positioning system with satellites around the earth
that tell you where you are by Newton's laws,
you'll find yourself in the wrong place.
You've got to use the Einsteinian rules.
It becomes a practical matter.
Nobody ever expected relativity to become practical.
It does. You have to use it.
In fact, our whole-time system,
the principal time system that is used worldwide
to make clocks tick,
has actually been removed from the gravitational field of the earth
to allow for the fact that time runs slower
at the surface of the earth.
And if you use clocks at the surface of the earth,
you'll get the wrong trajectory on a spacecraft or for a planet.
It works. We have to use it.
When we look at the rotations of our galaxy,
we discover dark matter
that only maybe 1% of the mass of the universe
is in some form of actually rounding it all off.
Luminous matter, stars, interstellar medium,
that sort of thing.
We find the same thing with other galaxies
that they are involved with this dark matter.
And we find the same thing with clusters of galaxies.
The galaxies within a cluster are Doppler shifting,
moving too fast for the mass that we actually see.
So this dark matter must be mixed up in large clusters as well.
So not only do we have to deal with dark matter now,
we have to deal with dark energy.
We don't know what the dark matter is.
We don't know what the dark energy is either.
And here we are making grand schemes of how the universe works
without knowing what its contents are.
But we do know the effect of its contents.
And as a result, we are still able to use that small amount
of information that we have
from the things that we can actually see.
And remember, gravity and the expansion of the universe
are still good probes of something out there
even if we don't know the nature of that something.
So we continue on to try to find what is causing this expansion,
where it came from.
There have been a variety of theories over the years.
One finally became the only one
that really replicates all of the data we have.
There are more data to deal with.
We'll address all of this and the expansion of the universe
and the origin of our universe
as best we can tell in the last and final lecture.
This ends lecture 13.
