Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe, Lecture 3, The Making of Sunlight
In the last lecture we looked at the external properties of the sun. What you see from here?
Just at this narrow, thin layer of the so-called photosphere, the bright part of the sun,
and then the outer extended layers that are heated magnetically, that cause the solar wind,
cause auroras, northern and southern lights on Earth, produce a variety of effects in the planetary system.
But that is a tiny fraction of the whole sun, the miniscule fraction of the whole sun.
What we're going to do in this lecture is to look inside, take a journey from the top,
down into these incredibly opaque gases, right down into the solar core.
We'll look at the solar structure, and then we'll look into the middle of it,
into the heart of it, to see what keeps the sun alive, to look at the fusion reactions, as we call them,
the conversion of one element into the other, that is ultimately responsible for our own existence.
And at the proof that these processes really do take place because we have, over the last few decades,
developed the ability to look not just at the solar surface, but to look right down into the core itself,
to in a broad sense watch these processes actually take place.
The first clue to what is going on inside comes from what's going on on the outside.
If you look at the, what we call a white light image of the sun that is taken without filtration,
without any fancy equipment, just take a picture of it, or even look at it with proper equipment.
Remember, never try to look at these phenomena on the sun with anything except professionally available equipment
that is certified to be safe.
You see two things, aside from the sunspots, and we're not even going to be talking about that terribly much now.
You see two features that are always there.
One is the granulation.
The sun has this granular pattern.
It's very, very obvious in close-up photographs of a million and a half bright spots that cover the whole solar surface.
Each one lasting five or ten minutes and dissipating.
They're convection cells.
You heat a gas, it rises.
You cool a gas, it falls.
A fluid.
You can see it in a coffee cup.
And then you watch a bubble of hot gas come to the surface.
It radiates its energy and cools and then chills and falls down below.
So the outer layers of the sun we know are in a state of this convection.
In addition, if you look at the center of the sun, it is brighter than it is at the edges.
The edge of the sun is called the limb.
Now, it's just the apparent disc of a sphere, of course.
But the edge of it is darker than it is at the center.
This is called limb darkening, and it's a very obvious feature of the sun.
It's caused by your looking through a semi-opaque gas.
Even though the solar gases are opaque enough so that the limb looks very sharp from the earth.
Think of the sun as a sphere here.
When you look at the center, your vision penetrates to a certain depth,
so many kilometers in before it gets too opaque to see any further.
When you look at the edge, your vision penetrates less far in along the radius.
That shows, first of all, that the sun is a sphere,
which we know because sunspots are elongated at the edge, you get foreshortening.
It would have to be a sphere.
I've never doubted that the gases are not entirely opaque near the surface.
They're semi-transparent and that there's a temperature gradient.
That is, the temperature changes from the top of the layer down to the inside.
And by the degree of limb darkening, we can actually measure the temperature gradient
because if you remember from the last lecture,
the amount of energy that comes out of a unit area of a surface of an ideal radiator
depends on temperature to the fourth.
So if you drop the temperature a little bit on the average by going in looking at an angle,
you're going to get less radiation and the edge of the sun looks darker.
It also looks a little redder because it's cooler.
If you drop the temperature, you get proportionally more red light coming out.
That's not so obvious, but the limb darkening is very obvious
and that clearly shows that you have a temperature gradient going in
and you can actually make a measurement of what it is, at least in those thin layers.
Now theory, which is as good a probe in its own way of nature as observation,
at some point you sort of run out of your ability to observe,
but you can use theory to construct what the interior of the sun ought to be like
with some very simple laws.
If you have a layer of solar gases here, for example, gravity wants to pull that layer downward.
Gas pressure, however, which must increase toward the center.
If you compress this ball of gas by gravity,
the temperature at the center and pressure and temperature near the center is going to go up.
The difference in pressure between the lower layer and the upper layer
has to balance the weight of the layer pushing downward
and you adjust it so that everything is still in uniform
and you can then calculate a model of the sun right down to the inside.
Once we know that the internal temperature is near 16 million degrees Kelvin,
centigrade degrees above absolute zero,
and that the density is 160 times that of water and it's still a gas.
You can calculate that too.
So we can get a very good idea as we go inside as to how the sun is actually constructed.
And we find that the gases are unstable against convection
to about a third of the way in, about a third of that sun is roiling around in a very complex pattern.
Big cells, little cells, little cells inside big cells. It's pretty complex.
Once you get about a third of the way in, the gases settle down and they become quiet.
So we have this convective envelope, third of the radius of the sun,
and inside that is a radiative envelope which just transmits energy by radiation
from one atom to the next to the next.
That it doesn't come streaming out, it goes from one atom, gets absorbed by another one.
This one radiates, gets absorbed by another one and the energy works its way out.
And then you get into this deep core, which is where the action takes place,
roughly three quarters or so of the way in, where we find what causes sunlight.
So we're back to looking at the outside of the sun at the external layers
and at the luminosity of the sun with the sun pumping out radiation at the rate of 400 trillion trillion watts.
What makes sunlight? This is a subject that goes back a long way.
There's a very long history to it. You can get energy out of a wood fire.
You can burn something. One of the most volatile things we know of is gasoline.
You couldn't run the sun for very long if we're made out of pure gasoline.
It wouldn't last long. Not at that kind of radiative power.
The theory of how the sun converts itself or how it makes energy
is kind of dependent upon how long it's actually been shining.
In the 19th century, we did not know the age of the earth
because we hadn't yet discovered radioactive elements,
which is the only real way of determining the age of a rock.
In other words, of a planet.
The two theoreticians in the 19th century thought they had the right idea.
Lord Kelvin in England and Helmholtz in Germany thought that,
well, if you just squeeze the gas down, you'll heat it up.
This is the basic idea of a diesel engine, after all.
You take an air-fuel mixture, you compress it with a piston
to the combustion point of the diesel fuel.
It blows up, drives the piston back, and you just keep doing it over and over and over again.
That is, you compress the gas, you warm it.
Well, gravity acts as the piston in a way,
or as the flywheel is running the piston,
gravity squeezes the ball down and that heats up the center.
And if you have a hot gas inside a cool environment,
namely outer space, it's going to radiate that energy away.
So you can produce sunlight by gravitational contraction.
Now, you can't get something for nothing.
People try to do this all the time, it doesn't work.
You've got to pay for it at some point.
That is, this energy has got to come from something.
So as you radiate the energy away, that would chill the gas in the middle,
which would lower the pressure, which allows you to squeeze down the ball a little bit farther,
which keeps the pressure and temperature up.
So as a result, what you're doing is trading gravitational energy for light.
You're converting gravitational energy into radiation.
But you do it at the expense of the size of the sun.
It's called Kelvin-Helmholtz contraction.
This is what causes Jupiter, Saturn, Neptune to radiate some of their own energy into space.
It really does take place.
It has to take place, as we'll see, to get the temperature of the sun high enough in the first place
for what really happens in the core, which we're going to address in a little while.
So the sun could live for, oh, I think the squeezing rate is about 10 meters per year.
That's all in a body that's one and a half million kilometers across.
But you can't run the sun for more than a few million years this way.
It catches up with you.
But if you think the Earth is only a few million years or a few thousand years old,
you have no problem.
Kelvin-Helmholtz contraction will produce the kind of sun we see today,
and nothing else need to be done.
However, around the turn of the 20th century, we discovered radioactive elements,
and we began to learn how to date things.
And even then, there were suspicions because how did the oceans get so salty?
How did the layers, the sediment layers, and the Earth get laid down?
This takes a long time.
The Earth really has to be older than what Kelvin-Helmholtz contraction can accommodate.
It was really the discovery of radioactivity that did it in, however,
where we are converting heavy elements into light elements.
So it's really necessary, in fact, I'd like to, it's fun to do,
to take a little digression here and look at the construction of chemical elements.
Because everybody's familiar with them, hydrogen, helium, lithium, beryllium, tin, boron, uranium, all of these.
The fundamental elements that make the molecules water-consisting of hydrogen and oxygen,
what we breathe consisting of two oxygen atoms in a molecule.
Look at the fundamental things.
We're just going to go down one layer in subatomic particles.
There are subatomic particles. We don't want to deal with that now.
Look at one layer.
Protons, electrons, neutrons, they carry what's called the electromagnetic force.
They carry gravity, too. They have their own gravity.
That's what causes the gravitational attraction of the Earth to the human and everything else.
Protons and electrons carry the electromagnetic force, which is vastly stronger than gravity on an atom-to-atom basis.
You just don't notice it because it's neutralized.
You have as many protons with positive charges as you do electrons with negative charges,
and the two neutralize each other.
Consequently, you don't get an electrical shock every time you touch something.
If you unbalance it and produce an electric current, then you understand the strength of the electromagnetic force.
One of the four forces of nature, gravity, electromagnetism.
We now have two forces that act over a distance.
Atoms are held together by nuclei with protons around which go electrons.
It's not really an orbit, and the cartoon view in school is terribly wrong,
much as the cartoon view of the planetary system is wrong,
because the proton is only one-one-hundred thousandth the size of the electron orbit.
So it's mostly empty space, except that it's filled with the electromagnetic force,
which is what gives solidity to things.
Now, the simplest element is simply hydrogen.
One proton, one neutralizing electron.
In fact, you can remove the electron, and you still have hydrogen.
The hydrogen is the proton.
That's called a hydrogen ion, because you're now electrifying it.
An ion is a charged atom.
You go to helium, you've got two protons.
That's what makes it helium.
And in normal neutralized helium, you would have two electrons.
You don't have to have two electrons to keep it helium.
You can take one away, have single ionization, take two away, have double ionization.
You get the pattern here.
However, like charges repel, opposite charges attract.
That's why the electron is held to the proton.
It's not an orbit.
It's not really an orbit.
We loosely call it that, but the electron behaves as something of a wave,
just like a photon does, like a particle of light,
and it's sort of everywhere around the proton at the same time.
It's not a miniature solar system, but it's a way of drawing it on a blackboard.
Two protons want to repel each other.
However, invoke the third force of nature, a third force of nature,
which is called the strong force, or the nuclear force.
It's what keeps nuclei together.
Electromagnetism and gravity are inverse square laws.
They drop off as one over the distance squared.
They never go to zero, but the strong force is a short-range force.
It acts only over the size of the nucleus itself.
So you can take two protons and bring them together,
and they would try to repel each other,
but if they get within roughly their own radii of each other,
then they'll stick via the strong force and be held together.
That's what locks nuclei together.
There's a tremendous amount of energy involved,
which when released produces a tremendous amount of radiative energy.
This is what ultimately happens in the sun.
Now, the two protons by themselves still don't have enough strong force
to overcome that repulsion, but if you add a neutron to it,
the third particle, a neutron is a neutral particle
with about the same mass as the proton.
The electron is a very low mass, 1,800th the mass of either the proton or the neutron.
The neutron carries no electric force, no electric magnetic force,
but it does carry the strong force.
So if you stick a neutron to these two protons,
you provide enough force and the nucleus is then happily together.
Most helium has two protons and two neutrons for four nuclear particles.
It's therefore called Helium-4.
Very simple.
You can take one neutron away and you'll have Helium-3, three particles.
That's enough.
A small amount of fraction of Helium in the universe is Helium-3 rather than Helium-4.
You can stick an extra proton onto Hydrogen and get what's called Deuterium, Hydrogen-2.
About one Hydrogen atom out of 100,000 is Helium, is Hydrogen-2.
Now you just build up the so-called periodic table,
which is a listing of chemical elements by chemical reaction.
Lithium, Brillium, Boron, number 345, excuse me.
Carbon with six protons.
Nitrogen with seven.
Neon with ten.
Iron with 26.
Uranium with 92 and so on.
And each element usually has a range of stable isotopes.
Get too many neutrons, too few neutrons, the isotopes fall apart.
Isotopes are the neutron variants of the chemical elements.
That is, Hydrogen has two stable isotopes.
Hydrogen-1, the proton, Hydrogen-2, the proton, the neutron.
Hydrogen-3 with two neutrons is unstable.
It's radioactive, falls apart.
Radioactive elements with too many or too few neutrons are quite dangerous,
or at least can be, because they will radiate both particles and electromagnetic radiation.
In the early days of radioactive studies, we found three kinds of radiation.
Called them Alpha, Beta and Gamma, because nobody knew what they were.
Alpha rays turned out to be Helium nuclei that are spat out by decaying heavy elements.
Beta rays turned out to be electrons, which are spat out as well.
Gamma rays turned out to be real high-energy electromagnetic radiation.
You don't want to be around radioactive elements for this reason.
The radiation can be quite damaging to living tissue.
Once you get above element 83, all chemical elements are radioactive.
That includes Uranium.
Uranium is not an uncommon element.
It's rare, but there's a lot of it in the earth.
The decay of Uranium actually produces most of the heat inside the earth,
the drives, continental drift, and all the things of the earth.
It also produces all the Helium we have on earth.
The decay of Uranium produces these Alpha rays, called Alpha particles,
which are just Helium nuclei.
Now, most of the Uranium is Uranium-238, 238 nuclear particles,
92 protons, all the rest neutrons to help hold it together as long as we can anyway.
From lab experiments, you find that U-238 falls apart into lead 206
at a rate of half of it disappearing every four and a half billion years.
It's called a half-life.
Once you know that half-life, you can compare the lead 206 to U-238
and get the age of the rock.
That's the basis of all of this, and it's how we know the age of the solar system
and the age of the sun.
You just look for the oldest things you can find, four and a half billion years.
Well, now we've got a body that has been putting out energy,
we think, for four and a half billion years at the rate of 200 trillion, trillion watts.
Well, maybe it didn't put it out that great that long ago,
but now we have a fossil record.
We can date things, and we can tell from the fossil record
that the sun has been shining at about the same rate as it has for billions of years.
Kelvin-Helmholtz contraction doesn't work.
I mean, it works to dry the temperature of the sun upward, sure,
but it can't last long enough to give us a sun that keeps the Earth alive with life
for all this period of time and by extrapolation for the entire four and a half billion year lifetime
of the solar system.
So we have to have something else.
Well, the idea comes from the comparison of helium and hydrogen
and from the work that was done by Albert Einstein in the development of the theory of relativity.
I don't think there's anybody who has never heard of the formula E equals MC squared,
which is a direct result of the reformulation of the laws of mechanics in a way,
of Newton's laws by Einstein, where in light is not only has an upper limit,
light is the upper limit to speeds in the universe,
but the speed of light is constant no matter what you do with it.
That is, you can't run alongside a light ray if you try, it produces distortions in space and time.
From all of this come out this formula where energy and mass are really two sides of the same coin,
that you can take energy, you can take mass, rather, in grams,
multiply it by the square of the speed of light, which is C,
which is a huge number and you square it, multiply it by itself, it's an even bigger number,
multiply that by a little bit of mass, you get a whopping amount of energy.
In the early part of the century, it was realized that helium,
which we now know is almost very close to four times as massive as hydrogen,
isn't quite as massive as four hydrogens, it's missing by a fraction of one percent.
Maybe we could take four protons and somehow make one helium atom out of it,
almost four times as heavy as four hydrogen atoms,
lose a little bit of mass and with E equals mc squared produce a whopping amount of energy.
And maybe we could run the sun with that.
The problem in the early part of the 20th century when this was first formulated
was that we didn't know what the sun was made out of.
Sure it had hydrogen in it, these little gaps in the spectrum,
the hydrogen absorption lines were there but they were not all that strong.
The solar spectrum is dominated by absorptions of calcium, sodium.
Well it turns out that the atomic physicists in the 20s
discovered that it's an efficiency problem, hydrogen just is not a very efficient absorber.
The work was taken, the concepts here were taken by both Eddington and Cecilia Gaposhkin
to calculate that once you looked at the efficiencies, the sun was in fact 90% hydrogen.
In fact all normal stars unless they've done something internally to themselves are 90% hydrogen.
It's common, this pervades the whole universe, 90% hydrogen, 10% helium.
Now you've got enough hydrogen.
All we have to do is figure out how you do it, how you take the four hydrogen atoms
and you make one helium atom out of them, not easy.
This required discovery of many things in the atomic physics world.
Discovery of the neutron among other things until we were able finally to discover the strong force
until we could finally put it all together.
When we realize that this fusion developed, the idea is developed by Hans Bethe
that these fusion reactions were a natural part of nature and drive not just the sun but all the stars.
Thermal nuclear fusion because it requires high temperature.
You can't just put two protons in proximity to each other and have them stick.
What you have to do is have a high temperature.
If you drive your temperature up high enough, the atoms are moving very fast.
Now in any gas you're going to have slow atoms, they're going to collide again with each other.
That'll produce some very high velocity atoms.
It's that high velocity tail you're interested in.
If there's enough speed, you can take the two protons and in spite of the fact that they want to drive themselves apart,
you can overcome that outward force and get them close enough to get them to stick.
This requires all manner of other sophisticated atomic processes that depend on the fact
that protons like electrons are also waves and they can sort of jump around and overcome barriers and the like.
You took that too.
But if you get them close enough, they can get close enough so that the strong force can take over and they can stick.
Now you've got two protons right next to each other.
Instantaneously, one of the protons will dump its positive charge, spit it out, and become a neutron.
And suddenly you have a proton and a neutron together.
You've created deuterium out of ramming two protons together.
The electric charge goes away as a particle.
It goes away as a positive electron.
Anti-matter, it really exists.
Matter with properties reversed.
Negative protons, positive electrons.
Well, why not?
It actually happens.
But the positive electron called a positron doesn't get very far in the gas and it encounters a real electron and they disappear.
They annihilate each other and produce a pair of gamma rays.
They produce electromagnetic radiation by the annihilation.
You can't go over to your store and buy a bottle of anti-matter.
The contact of the anti-matter with the bottle would blow it up and produce gamma rays.
The universe is largely what we think of as normal matter.
Negative electrons, positive protons, but the reverse can exist and does take place.
It, in fact, drives the sun.
Out of this ejection of the positron also comes a little particle called a neutrino.
It's Italian for a little neutral one.
It was discovered theoretically before it was actually seen.
Just keep it in mind and we'll talk about it at a later time.
Now, we've got a deuterium nucleus, heavy hydrogen, proton and neutron.
Another proton hits it, gets absorbed.
We've got helium, helium-3, two protons and a neutron that gets rid of another gamma ray, additional heat.
So the sun consists of a mixture now of hydrogen, deuterium, light helium, helium-3.
Two helium-3 nuclei can encounter each other, get together, produce a helium-4 and throw out two hydrogen atoms.
The result when you add it all up is that you've got four hydrogen atoms.
You make one helium atom out of it with a slight loss of mass.
Then you're getting rid of the positron.
You've got a slight loss of mass that gets converted into electromagnetic energy,
which gradually works its way out through the sun.
This is called the proton-proton chain and it drives all stars like the sun.
It drives all stars up until you get a few times the mass of the sun, then another reaction takes over.
That produces over 90% of the solar energy, that and a few other side chains.
There are other reactions, minor reactions that take place as well.
And then there is another reaction called the carbon cycle in which you take carbon, which begins to absorb protons
and it converts into various isotopes of nitrogen and oxygen.
And the result is you're using carbon as a sort of a nuclear catalyst to take four atoms of hydrogen
and make one atom of helium out of them.
That produces a little bit of energy in the sun as well.
And it actually dominates many other phases of stellar life and massive stars.
We'll come back to that at a later time.
It's mostly the proton-proton chain.
It takes that energy a long time to work its way out because a gamma ray is only going to get that far.
And it will be absorbed by an ion of some sort and then re-emitted and re-absorbed and re-emitted.
The classic example is getting somebody drunk on the streets of New York and sending them to Los Angeles,
bouncing off of trees and telephone poles as he goes.
He might wind up in Canada, might wind up in Mexico,
but eventually if you have a little wind blowing from the east, you'll wind up in California.
Taking a long, long way to get there.
Well, the wind is the temperature gradient.
And gradually that energy works its way out, but every time on the average that it is re-emitted,
it's re-emitted at a lower temperature, which means you get lower energy photons.
So the result is it starts off with gamma rays in the middle,
and then you get more and more and more of lower and lower and lower energy photons.
By the time they reach the convective layer and finally the top of the sun,
because this absorption and re-emission is taking place in the convective layer as well,
by the time you get to the photosphere, one gamma ray formed in the center of the sun
has been converted into thousands of photons, light particles, waves,
at the solar photosphere in the optical part of the spectrum.
You can't take the gamma rays. If the gamma rays flew directly out,
it would fry the earth immediately. We couldn't survive.
So the outer layers of the sun act as a compressing medium to give you the temperatures that you need at the core.
So Kelvin-Helmholtz contraction is vital to start with.
That's how you drive the temperature up in the first place.
Once you get that high temperature, you stabilize the core.
It can't shrink anymore. It doesn't need gravity now to produce the luminosity.
So the core now sits there happily. Gravity can't fight against it, of course,
but it can't really do anything. You don't have to convert gravity into heat.
It's the fusion reactions that do it.
It takes... everybody does this calculation different.
I've seen anywhere from half a million to a couple of million years
for that radiation made at the center to work its way out to the surface.
The sunlight you see today on a nice sunny day out on the streets or out in the country,
that sunlight was created in the sun roughly a million years ago in the fusion reactions.
In other words, you could turn out the core. You wouldn't know it for a million years.
Not that that's going to happen in a million years is, again, a blip.
Remember, a billion is a thousand million and the sun's been alive for five billion years.
There's enough hydrogen in that core to last for 10 billion years,
even at this tremendous conversion rate to produce the solar luminosity that you see.
It's not a hard calculation. You can calculate how much is above the limit.
It requires, and there's no hard and fixed number, let's say five million Kelvin
to produce the fusion reactions, a 10 million that's really cooking.
It's about the inner 40% of the mass of the sun that's undergoing these reactions.
It's a controlled hydrogen bomb, highly controlled.
Why doesn't the sun just explode like a hydrogen bomb?
That first reaction is really, really slow.
A typical proton will survive in the sun for five billion years
before it hits another proton to create the deuterium.
That slows the whole thing down so much that it fully stabilizes the reactions.
The second reaction takes only a few seconds.
It's that first one that keeps everything stable.
And this is how the sun and stars survive.
We're halfway through. Radioactive records shows that we're five billion years old.
We had 10 billion years worth of fuel.
About half the hydrogen's been converted to helium.
It's a very stable system. You convert the hydrogen into helium.
You take four particles, you make one particle out of them.
Now, the pressure of a gas depends upon the number of particles, not upon their kind.
So in that sense, what you should be doing then is reducing the number of particles,
which would reduce the pressure.
But that allows gravity to squeeze down a little bit and raise the temperature.
So as the fuel supply goes down, the temperature goes up slightly,
and that offsets the lowering of the fuel supply and makes the sun wonderfully stable
over its enormous hydrogen-fusing lifetime.
I'm going to use the term hydrogen burning from now on.
It's a jargon phrase that is so pervasive in astronomy and astrophysics
that we really ought to make use of.
Besides, thermonuclear fusion is a tongue twister.
So we've got hydrogen burning.
We'll see helium burning later and even carbon burning and other phases that can take place in stars.
Now, remember the neutrino. We haven't forgotten the little neutral one.
It goes flying away, produced in the first fusion reaction.
Now we invoke a fourth force of nature called the weak force.
It's called that for a reason. It's not very strong.
It's stronger than gravity, but it's still weak.
This involves radioactive decay and the like, the weak force.
The neutrino is a weak force particle.
That means it doesn't interact with anything.
It goes flying right out of the sun immediately, right away.
It takes it just a fraction of a minute to go out.
Nothing impedes it.
It would take roughly a light year of lead to stop a neutrino.
You just don't stop them.
The neutrinos come to the earth. They pass right through the earth like it was glass.
It's very rare to have an interaction between a neutrino and matter.
That's why it's been so difficult over the years to study them.
There are millions of neutrinos passing through you right now, every second.
It's kind of an odd feeling, isn't it?
But there's no interaction.
And it doesn't matter whether it's day or night, if the sun is on the other side of the world,
there's just as many because those neutrinos come flying right through the earth.
How do we even know they exist?
They have been picked up in the laboratory.
They were predicted by theory to balance energy relationships before they were finally found.
Because every once in a while, a neutrino will hit an atom, bang on, and cause a nuclear reaction.
So in the 1960s, a scientist named Ray Davis built a neutrino telescope.
Let's look into the middle of the sun.
Now, unlike any telescope you've seen before, this was a vat of chlorine cleaning fluid,
100,000 gallons of the stuff buried way down in an old mine in South Dakota.
You bury it down and get away from a natural radiation background
that can fool you into thinking you're getting reactions.
And the neutrinos hit the chlorine atoms and they turn them into a radioactive byproduct that you can count.
And there are maybe a few of these reactions per week.
And you can actually count the number of neutrinos hitting the tank.
And by the theoretical calculation of how often a neutrino should produce this reaction into radioactive argon,
you can count the number of neutrinos coming from the sun.
And what did Davis find?
He found one-third of the number that was predicted.
This is called the solar neutrino problem.
And it lasted for decades.
It got to the point of, well, it's just the solar neutrino problem.
You know, maybe it'll go away if we get familiar enough with it.
Many other neutrino telescopes were built, each one of them finding only a half to a third.
Is there something wrong with the sun, our model of the sun?
Is it not as high a temperature in the core?
Yet all the calculations showed there was nothing wrong with the model of the sun.
Physical theory, however, suggested that neutrinos should have no mass
and should fly at the speed of light, just like light particles, just like photons.
There are, when you get into the depths of particle physics, various families of matter.
And we're most familiar with the electron, the proton, and the like,
but there are hierarchies of this that are much rarer than protons and electrons.
And there are neutrinos that are involved with these other families as well.
And if neutrinos have mass, then they could conceivably flip from one kind to an unobservable kind.
So on their way from the sun to here, the neutrinos that are generated
change to an unobservable kind.
This sounds like kind of an odd, made-up recipe for explaining it.
Until the latest neutrino telescopes, which are built out of heavy water,
deuterium oxide, which can find all the different kinds of neutrinos,
suddenly found, indeed, that's what's happening.
When you count all the different kinds,
the number of neutrinos coming out of the sun are exactly what you expect.
This has caused something of a revolution in particle physics.
And look at what's happening here. Science does work this way.
You examine this over here.
In one science, you find something that's going to help another science over here.
The moral to wish is that you cannot selectively pick which science you want to develop.
They all must be brought up at the same time.
Because studies in one area, study of the sun for the nothing more than the knowledge
of what runs the sun is changing the face of how atoms work.
And of course, that ultimately winds up having an impact on technology.
It can't help it. Fusion, after all, fusion reactions were discovered in the sun and stars.
Eventually, we hope that fusion reactions on Earth, fusion engines,
can produce the energy we need to run our Earth and our planet.
Much more safely than with the things that we have today.
The neutrino will appear again because many other stellar processes can produce them.
It'll pop up.
It allows us to look into the sun.
The latest neutrino telescopes are directional, and guess what?
Indeed, the neutrinos are coming right out of the core.
We can not only observe the photosphere with our light,
but we can penetrate all the way through.
And in more recent times, we've been able to watch the oscillations of the sun.
The sun rings like a bell with many, many different frequencies,
very complicated way, sound waves in a sense.
And just like earthquake waves, you can use these to examine the innards of the sun.
We can, with these, also see the end of the radiative layer.
We can see the convective layer.
We can measure chemical compositions inside rotations.
We have developed the ability to take the sun apart,
not just with theory, but with observations as well.
The sun is a paradigm of all other stars.
Once we understand the sun, we begin to understand the other stars.
Once we look at the other stars, we begin to understand our own sun better,
which we have to do to main lane life on Earth,
and to understand the interactions between the life giver and our own lives on this planet.
So in the next lecture, we'll begin to look at all the other stars of the galaxy.
We'll look at their natures, we'll look eventually,
and lectures down the line at how they live and how they die.
And finally, at the end, come right back to our own sun once more.
