Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies and the Universe, Lecture 8, Stellar Fate.
In the last lecture we ended with the birth of stars, low mass stars, even from brown dwarfs,
all the way up through the main sequence to the highest stellar masses, nearly 100 times that of the Sun.
In this lecture we're going to look at the other end of the scale, at the other end of the evolutionary scale,
at the deaths of stars, because they will all die at some point or other, from the high mass stars all the way down to the low mass stars.
We'll look first at the big, great domains of the main sequence, and the proof that we have that stars really do die from the top down,
that is from the high masses down to the low masses, and then in great detail look at the death of a star like the Sun.
At the middle part of the main sequence, the stars that die as white dwarfs.
Reserving for the next lecture, the catastrophic deaths of the high mass stars, those that produce the majority of the chemical elements in the Universe.
Look at the HR diagrams of clusters. This will give us a clue as to why we think that high mass stars die first.
And then this idea, of course, is supported entirely by theory. HR diagrams, Hertzsprung-Russell diagrams of clusters,
in which we are plotting the spectral class, really the temperature, against the luminosity of the star as expressed through this absolute magnitude.
It might seem contradictory, but high mass stars die first.
If you have a wood fire, the more wood you pile on it, the longer it's going to last.
It's just the opposite with stars. Almost every time you think you can intuitively understand what a star is going to do, it seems to do just the opposite.
The high mass stars die first because they use their fuel at such an enormous rate.
Stellar evolution is what we're talking about here. Sort of a poor use of the word evolution.
It's not like biological evolution of in which species change from one to the other to the other.
Here we're dealing with simply one star that is aging. It should be called the stellar aging process,
but the word stellar evolution, the phrase has worked its way into the vocabulary and we all know what we mean by it.
The aging process of stars has to do with a kind of a battle between gravity, which is trying to squeeze the star down, and the strong force.
See, it's the release of the strong force. It's this power of the strong force that keeps the star alive in the middle,
that is related to the thermonuclear fusion, the hydrogen burning in the middle, that is preventing gravity from squeezing the star down.
Gravity wants to make the star as small as possible, literally squeeze it down to a point if it can do it,
and it's prevented from doing so by the thermonuclear fusion and as we'll see by other processes that take place near the end of the star's life.
The luminosity of a star climbs dramatically with mass, where you go up to 100 times the mass of the sun
and the star is producing a million times more radiation.
As a result, the rate of nuclear burning in the core, the luminosity of the star, the amount of energy coming out of it,
is so great that the star's life is diminished. That is, we're using the fuel at a tremendous rate.
The rate of nuclear burning depends critically upon the temperature of the core,
and the temperature of the core depends upon the amount of gravity, the weight, the mass that is squeezing down on the center.
The result is that high mass stars will burn themselves out almost in an astronomical instant,
whereas the low mass stars last seemingly forever because they use their fuel at such an enormously low, low, low rate.
The sun has a hydrogen burning lifetime of 10 billion years.
You go up to only a couple of solar masses, and you cut that down to a billion years or so,
and you go all the way up to, let's say, the top of the main sequence, 100 solar masses, and the lifetime is only a million years.
They're literally here today, gone tomorrow. So it's just the opposite of what you might think.
We can see this effect reflected in the HR diagrams of clusters.
If you look at a cluster like the double cluster in Perseus, one that was mentioned in a previous lecture,
visible barely to the naked eye in between Perseus and Cassiopeia,
we see a almost intact main sequence, right from the bottom all the way up into the O-stars.
Sprinkled in that are a few red supergiants, which gives us a clue that the red supergiants are coming from the high mass stars.
Given that the high mass stars burn out first and you've got high mass stars in the double cluster, it must be a very young cluster.
See, we can begin to tell the ages of these clusters from the kinds of stars they have in them with really quite a simple application of theory.
Then you look at the Pleiades. There's no O-stars. You do, however, have some class B-stars a little bit down the main sequence.
So the Pleiades has to be older than the double cluster. And you look at the Hyades and there's no O-stars.
There's no B-stars. You're working your way down the main sequence.
Again, the Hyades is about a billion years old. We can tell the ages of these clusters.
The oldest open clusters in the disk are about the galactic disk, maybe 10 billion years old, 8 billion years old, something like that.
And then we sort of run out of steam. We can't find any older, so the disk of the galaxy must be somewhere around 8 billion years old, maybe 10 billion years old.
We look at the globular clusters. They're the oldest things we know.
So here we've got the main sequence burned all the way down roughly to class G or so, down to around 8 tenths of the solar mass.
And we can't find anything older. The globular clusters must tell us the age of the galaxy somewhere around 12 billion years.
Give or take, a billion error is around that or so.
Consistent, as we'll see, with the age of the universe from its expansion.
A remarkable result, given that we're looking at the age of the universe from two very different points of view and we come up with pretty much the same answer.
But we'll reserve that part out for the last lecture.
The main sequence is therefore divided into domains.
Three really great domains.
The galaxy is not old enough ever to have burned off stars below 0.8 solar masses.
No star under 0.8, 8 tenths of mass of the sun, has ever had time to evolve in the whole history of the galaxy they last so long.
Down at the bottom of the main sequence, these stars must last for trillions of years.
As the galaxy ages slowly, slowly, slowly, these globular clusters will work their way down.
So there's not much point in talking about what's going to happen to stars of less than 8 tenths of the solar mass.
We can predict this theoretically, but what's the point?
There are no data against which to test the theory.
There are no stars that have ever died below 0.8 solar masses.
Everyone that's ever been born is still there in the galaxy.
The other cut point is somewhere between 8 and 10 solar masses.
Let's call it 10. We're not quite certain of where the cut point is.
From around 10 solar masses down to 0.8, stars die off as white dwarfs.
As we'll see, they become giants first.
Lose their mass, become white dwarfs.
Above 10 solar masses, which is the realm of the O stars, they blow up.
Good theory for this. We understand what's happening and it fits so well with the observations.
This lecture is going to be involved with the middle part of the main sequence.
From around 8 tenths of the solar mass on up to around 10 solar masses.
I think it's more interesting to really personalize this.
Let's look at the evolution and the aging process of the sun.
Here and there, we'll compare that with stars perhaps of somewhat higher mass to see what happens.
Single stars, double star evolution takes place on a somewhat different scale, so to speak.
We can bring that into it a little bit as well.
We do have double stars that have evolved.
Look, for example, at Sirius, Sirius A and B.
Actually, this gives us a really interesting perspective on stellar evolution.
Remember Sirius, we have this bright star, the brightest star in the sky.
Talked in right next to it is this tiny white dwarf.
Now, to have become a white dwarf, the end product of this intermediate main sequence,
Sirius B must once have been more massive than Sirius A.
It's not.
Sirius B is less massive than Sirius A.
By a fair amount, about half, so it must have lost an enormous amount of matter.
This is the fate of stars.
They lose immense amounts of matter as they evolve.
The sun will probably lose half of itself back into interstellar space,
and we begin to see the recycling process where stars are born,
they live out their lives in hydrogen burning,
in a few other stages that take place on a very quick time scale,
and then they lose much of themselves back to space,
providing fodder for new generations of stars.
In many cases, enriched in chemical elements that the stars create within them.
Well, let's go back and take a look at the sun.
Take a look at the fate of the sun.
What is actually going to happen?
The main sequence is a zone of great stability,
but it's not perfectly stable.
Stars change very slightly on the main sequence.
This main sequence is plotted on the graph of the HR diagram.
It's not a line, it's a band.
The left-hand edge of the band is called the zero-age main sequence.
That's where stars land.
Stars are the same composition as the sun.
Slight variations in chemical composition can cause slight changes
in positioning the stars on the main sequence.
So just look at the standard composition, stars like the sun.
As the age stars will brighten some and eventually cool a little bit
to create the main sequence as a band,
and from the exact luminosity and temperature of a star of a known mass
we can determine its state of evolution.
Just by plotting it on the HR diagram,
we can tell how old an individual star actually is.
The sun has moved about halfway across this band of the main sequence.
In the core of the sun, we are taking four hydrogen atoms
and converting them into one helium atom.
That means we're reducing the amount of fuel in the center of the sun.
If you go back to the analogy of the wood fire,
as the fuel supply diminishes, the fire gradually dies out,
and it gets dimmer and dimmer.
Not in a star.
Perversity, perversity, stellar perversity.
As the fuel supply diminishes, reducing the number of particles
for hydrogens in one helium,
allow gravity to squeeze the core of the star down,
and you can convert a little gravitational energy into heat,
and as the fuel supply goes down, the temperature goes up,
just the opposite of what you would expect.
It's because you have this additional energy supply, namely gravity.
This process can't last forever, obviously,
but it can over a short period of time.
The rate of nuclear burning is incredibly sensitive to the temperature.
So as the fuel supply goes down, the temperature goes up,
and the rate of nuclear burning goes up as well,
and one pretty much offsets the other,
which is what gives great stability to the main sequence.
It's why we are here.
Without a stable main sequence, we could never have developed life on this planet.
Actually, there's a slight overcompensation.
As the temperature goes up,
the rate of nuclear burning goes up enough that the star actually will get slightly brighter
during its main sequence lifetime.
The sun is increasing its luminosity,
nothing that you would ever notice over a human lifetime,
over multiple human lifetimes.
The sun is absolutely stable over periods of thousands,
even millions of years,
but if you look over a scale of billions of years,
then you can't, quote, see.
We can't see it in an individual star,
but we can see that the sun should gradually increase its luminosity.
See, the whole point, the way we study stellar evolution
is to look at all the different kinds of stars.
Think of them as pearls, if you like,
and theory is the string.
What we need to do is to develop a theory of stellar evolution
using standard physical laws,
and then just let them work and see what would happen to a star
and try to string together all of the observations like pearls
to make the necklace of stellar evolution.
And it works.
We can understand all the stages of stellar evolution through the use of theory,
and since we can explain the different kinds of stars this way,
we say we truly understand them,
and we therefore know what the fate of the sun is going to be.
And five billion years ago when the sun was born,
the theory predicts that it was somewhere around 30 or so percent less luminous than it is today.
It's called the faint sun paradox,
because if the sun was less luminous than it is today,
we wonder how life could possibly have been born on this planet.
It should have been too cold.
Maybe the ocean should have frozen.
We don't quite understand this yet.
The ancient life record suggests that the sun was pumping out energy pretty much
as it is today. What's wrong?
Well, it may be that there was an additional energy source.
Remember that solar activity can have an effect on the earth.
Remember the Maunder Minimum,
when the sunspot activity and the magnetic activity died down for a while,
the earth chilled.
When it was born, the sun should have been rotating faster than it is today.
The sun has this magnetic field.
It also has a wind,
and the wind was probably more powerful in the early days.
The wind drags the magnetic field of the sun outward,
yet the magnetic field has to be anchored in the sun,
so you have a break.
The magnetic field grabs onto the sun like firm ropes,
and that slows down the sun,
so that in the early days the sun may have been whipping around much faster,
which produced more activity,
which could have compensated for the lower luminosity of the sun.
And as the sun ages, it rotates slower and slower,
and gradually the activity dies away.
We can actually see this effect in main-sequence stars.
The older stars have a much lower level of magnetic activity than the younger stars.
Remember the T-Tari stars have just wild activity because of their rotation
and their rapid rotation.
So one may compensate the other.
No one thinks that this kind of compensation can go on forever.
At the end of its main-sequence lifetime,
the sun is expected to be about twice as bright as it is today,
and that will be too much for us.
We say we've got five billion years left,
but life on Earth probably has less than that
because gradually the sun is getting brighter on the main-sequence,
and we figure maybe one or two billion years from now,
the oceans will start to evaporate away.
It's not really a depressing thought because a billion is a long, long time.
We have had the written record on Earth for only a couple of thousand years here,
so we don't have to worry about billions.
It's kind of an intellectual exercise,
so we want to know what this life-giver of ours is going to do.
And in doing so, of course, we can look around at the other stars
and see what has happened to them.
We can see ourselves in the other stars.
So what's going to happen to the sun?
Eventually that hydrogen is going to be all gone.
The sun will remain a stable main-sequence star until that hydrogen is disappeared,
practically down to the 1% level.
You have this wonderful compensation,
but eventually you have a helium core.
The fire will go out.
At that point, there's nothing that can keep that helium core from contracting.
Gravity is going to squeeze it down,
and it's going to get smaller and smaller and smaller,
and it will begin to approach the size of the Earth.
Now it's a good fraction the size of the sun.
It's going to squeeze down, and as it squeezes down, the temperature goes up.
How odd.
The fire goes out and the temperature goes up.
Wood fires don't do that. Stars do.
Again, it's temporary because you're using gravity as an outside energy source.
So the temperature goes up and that fires up hydrogen fusion,
hydrogen burning in a shell around the dead core.
The result is that the sun will actually get brighter when the core fire goes out.
It'll get a lot brighter.
It will eventually get a thousand times brighter than it is today.
That will wipe out anything that we have on the Earth at that point.
It will also expand.
As it expands, yes, becoming more luminous, but the expansion will be so great
that the surface temperature will go down,
and the sun will become a red giant star,
like so many that we see in the sky, Aldebaran Arcturus.
It will, as we say, climb the giant branch of the HR diagram.
It'll probably expand to somewhere around the size of the orbit of Mercury,
wiping out the little planet eventually.
So if you haven't seen Mercury yet, go out and find it because its lifetime is limited,
only a few billion years left to it.
Now this can't go on forever either because the helium gets hotter and hotter
when the helium core in the center hits around 100 million Kelvin.
Remember, it's about 16 million Kelvin in the middle of the sun now.
When it hits around 100 million Kelvin, then a wonderful thing happens.
The helium begins to burn into carbon.
It does so in kind of an odd way.
You can bang two helium nuclei together, very hard, and you can get the isotope beryllium-8.
However, beryllium-8 is wildly unstable
and immediately falls apart again into two helium nuclei.
So at that instant that you fuse two helium atoms, before they fall apart,
they have to get hit by a third helium atom.
Suddenly you're combining really three helium atoms at the same time, which makes carbon.
That is, you have 12 nuclear particles instead of 4.
4 plus 4 plus 4, 12, you get carbon.
You skip over lithium, beryllium, and boron.
That's what makes these things so rare in the universe.
There's very little of these chemical elements.
They get concentrated in the Earth's crust.
You can, of course, find deposits where you can dig the boron out of the Earth,
but on a global scale over the universe, they're almost as rare as uranium.
There's very little of this stuff because it gets skipped in the chorus of stars.
It's called helium burning, and the process is called the three-alpha process
because in the old-fashioned parlance, helium nuclei were called alpha particles,
but it gets spit out by the decay of uranium.
So they got that name before anybody knew what they were.
The triple-alpha process, three-alpha process, helium burning,
and then a slam with yet another helium nucleus can produce oxygen.
So you are burning the helium into carbon and oxygen in the core.
That stabilizes the core.
You can have a little helium burning main sequence here among these stars.
You stabilize the core, it can't shrink anymore,
and then the star settles down, it contracts a little bit,
becomes a somewhat smaller red giant at that point.
Here is where we really find the Aldebarans, the Arcturuses,
the red giants that sparkle around the sky.
These are really, for the most part, helium burners surrounded by a shell of burning hydrogen.
You can go on outside almost any clear night and pick out the red stars,
not Betelgeuse, not Antares.
Those are red supergiants. We'll address them in the next lecture.
But aside from those, look around for the reddish stars.
You can pick out, oh, that's a helium burner up there.
You can pick them out with a naked eye.
Well, it can't last forever.
You can get energy from fusion up to iron.
That is, you can keep fusing up to iron and get energy out of it.
You can fission, that is, break atoms apart from uranium on down to iron and get energy out of it.
Iron is sort of at the bottom.
As we say, iron has a very tightly bound nucleus, iron and nickel,
and you can't do much with them.
You can't get energy out of it.
You can take iron and make other elements out of it,
but you have to put energy into the system.
So in principle, the carbon could burn all the way up to iron,
but here's where we get stuck.
Eventually, the helium burning is going to run out.
Most of the energy from hydrogen to iron takes place in hydrogen to helium fusion.
And only about 10% of it goes from helium to carbon,
which means that this stability of the helium burning lasts only about 10% of the main sequence lifetime.
Very, very crude round numbers.
So in about a billion years or so, the helium burning runs out.
The core doesn't have any more choice.
Now it's carbon and oxygen and it contracts again.
Same thing happens all over again that happened the first time.
The carbon and oxygen core contracts.
That fires up helium fusion in a shell around the dead carbon core.
And then you get the hydrogen fusion in a larger shell around the inner shell
and you're beginning to nest the interior of the star.
This additional fusion and the gravitational contraction of the core
drives core temperature back up again a little bit and the star expands once more.
It expanded the first time with a dead helium core.
Now it's expanding for the second time with a dead carbon core.
And now it really gets big.
It's a temporary state of affairs, but the star now just gets enormous.
The theory suggests that the Sun will expand not just past Mercury,
but will expand in the second red giant stage.
It will expand past the orbit of Venus.
Take out Venus.
It may expand all the way to the orbit of the Earth.
It looks like it's going to do that.
Imagine this.
The Sun is now a hundredth of an astronomical unit across.
In, say, seven or so billion years, it's going to be two astronomical units across.
And it will reach out to touch the orbit of the Earth.
Now a couple of strange things happen at this point.
The star becomes somewhat unstable.
And this will be true for stars of two or three or four solar masses
all the way up close to ten solar masses.
First of all, these two fusion shells in here pop on and off in sequence.
The helium burning when it goes on is almost explosive.
Quite a lot of violence going on in the interior of the star.
Convection currents, especially in the higher mass stars,
can take some of the chemical elements, the helium, even the carbon,
and raise it to the surface of the star,
and the star can change its chemical composition,
producing carbon stars where carbon exceeds oxygen.
The star might become very unstable,
especially when it is reaching the maximum luminosity.
The Sun should be able to reach around 5,000 times its present luminosity,
and the star will start to pulsate and it will become a variable star.
You could find stars like this with the naked eye.
There's a famous star in the constellation Cetus called Myra.
Myra the wonderful.
Same root word as miracle.
No one in the early days knew what was going on.
The star varies by ten magnitudes.
It can be as bright as first.
Well, normally about third.
And then it will drop to tenth or so, way below naked eye vision,
giving you average seven magnitudes or so range.
And it will be a prominent part of its constellation for a period of time.
Then it disappears completely on a time scale of just under a year.
It takes a long time for the star to oscillate like this.
At the same time, the star now will drive a powerful wind.
These oscillations help drive the wind.
The outer parts of the star cool off.
The star becomes quite red.
And the cooling causes the outbound gas in this flowing wind
to precipitate into dust.
And the star begins to hide itself.
We find many stars like this too,
where there is one of these Myra type variables
in the middle of a tremendous shroud of expanding dust.
The star is preparing to lose anywhere from half of itself,
in the case of the Sun,
in the case of the higher mass stars,
up to maybe 80% of themselves back into space
in a dirty flow coming out from the star.
Dust.
This is the origin, the beginning stages of the dust
in the interstellar medium.
This is...
Now, the dust, once it gets out there, will evolve.
It will absorb metal atoms, absorb ices and so on.
But this is the origin of the grains.
The carbon stars will produce the carbon grains
that we find in interstellar space.
Stars that are not enriched in carbon,
that will be the majority of them,
will produce the silicate grains
because they're rich in oxygen.
So we can find the origin of the dust grains
of interstellar space,
out of which new stars will be born.
These are the natural refrigerators
that will ultimately create new stars.
So it's the deaths of stars that lead to the births of stars.
What we are doing is beginning to expose
the ancient nuclear burning core.
Gradually, the shell burning is going to shut down.
And if we had enough compression,
the core could continue to fuse into heavier elements,
but we're removing the overburden
and we can't drive the temperature up
so the star gets stuck at carbon and oxygen
and can't go any farther.
We remove the outer shell.
What appears as the star,
which will ultimately simply die as the core,
will appear hotter and hotter and hotter
and we're getting down close to the inside here now
with the loss of matter away from the core
and eventually that core will hit
the magic number of about 25,000 Kelvin at the surface
and at that point it will begin to light up
the shroud that is expanding away
and you get a beautiful shell or ring of gas
surrounding a hot blue star in the middle.
The ring of gas, the expanding ancient envelope
of what once once a normal kind of solar-like star,
two, three, four solar masses,
the Sun may well do the same thing,
will probably do the same thing.
Back in the later part of the 1700s,
William Herschel, who discovered the planet Uranus
and discovered so many things,
found a little puffy disc of gas
that he eventually found surrounded a little star in the middle.
This little disc he called a planetary nebula
because it reminded him of the discs of planets.
The word planetary here has nothing to do with planets.
It's just a synonym for disc-like
to the confusion of people who first encounter these planetary nebulae.
They're all over the sky.
The most famous of them is the ring nebula in Lyra, near Vega.
Even a small telescope will pick out a puffy little smoke ring,
and a big one shows a star dead center.
And through the Doppler shift,
we know that the gas is expanding around these stars in the middle.
We are revealing the nuclear-burning core.
Once the outer shroud has expanded away,
all that's left is the nuclear-burning core,
basically a ball of carbon and oxygen
with a little skin, perhaps, of hydrogen around it, a white dwarf.
Go back to Sirius.
It's a double star.
Remember?
And remember we can get the masses of double stars from Kepler's third law.
We get the sum of the masses.
By looking at the center of mass,
we can get the ratio of masses.
We get the individual masses.
Sirius A has a little over two solar masses attached to it.
You get the mass of Sirius B, the little white dwarf,
which is about the size of the Earth.
It has over a solar mass stuck into it.
Now, the average density of the Sun is 1 gram per cubic centimeter,
roughly 1.4.
Now, it's similar to water.
Now, this is average smeared out.
Remember, it's atmospheric density at the surface,
very, very low, even below that.
Down at the core, it's a dozen times that of iron or lead,
very, very heavy, very dense.
But we're looking at the average.
Now, take the Sun, just use round numbers.
Take the Sun and squeeze it down by a factor of 100
to the size of the Earth.
That squeezes the volume down by a factor of a million,
which means you raise the density by a factor of a million.
And this means the white dwarf has a density
of a million grams per cubic centimeter.
Well, put that in better terms.
That is a metric ton in a sugar cube.
So I think I once calculated 7, 1957 Cadillacs stuffed
in a golf ball.
We'll put it in better terms, perhaps.
Enormous densities.
At that point, the electrons begin to interfere with one another
because electrons are not really hard little balls.
They're waves, too.
And the wave nature of the electron causes the electrons
to interfere with one another, interact with each other.
And they provide, as a result, an outward pressure
that stops the contraction.
They're called degenerate at this point.
We speak of these white dwarfs as degenerate stars.
Degenerate electrons is the phrase that's used.
And once you achieve this degeneracy,
you can't squeeze the white dwarf down anymore.
All it can do from this point on is to radiate away its energy.
It starts off as a hot white dwarf incredibly dense
and then simply cools off through this white dwarf sequence
which lies down below the real main sequence,
going from blue white dwarfs all the way down to red white dwarfs.
The cooling is extremely slow.
Eventually you'll have, I suppose, black dwarfs.
They simply radiate all their energy away and none left
and you can't see them anymore.
But the cooling process is so slow that that's never happened.
The coolest white dwarfs are still greater than 3,000 degrees Kelvin.
Every white dwarf ever created in the galaxy via stellar evolution
is still there and visible for us to see.
Everyone.
And they flock all around us. They're faint stars.
You don't see any with the naked eye, but they're all over the place.
Now, how can you take matter and get it down to that kind of density?
This seems unreal.
There's nothing like this on Earth.
You cannot create this on Earth.
Go back to the atom.
To understand the very large, we have to understand the very small.
The atom, remember, is not this big nucleus with the electron going around it like this.
It's a tiny grain.
The nucleus is only one one hundred thousandth the size of the atom itself.
All the rest is empty space.
If you look at the volume, only one part in a thousand trillion is actually matter.
This gives us tremendous squeezing room.
Matter is basically vacuous.
There's really nothing here in terms of matter.
It's the forces that give everything their solidity.
So you can squeeze down by a factor of a million and still have lots of squeezing room.
In fact, white dwarfs on that level are still vacuous.
They just die off as these little balls of carbon and oxygen.
And they have taken all their outer envelopes and shoveled them back into outer space.
Dust grains going back into outer space.
Carbon created in the giant stars in addition to enormous numbers of other nuclear reactions that are taking place deep within the star
before the mass loss has stripped the star down to its core.
Neutron capture, for example, can build many of the elements of the periodic table.
Many of these carbon stars, for example, just a simple example, are rich in the element zirconium.
Many of the giant stars are rich in a rare element, an odd element called technetium.
All of technetiums, number 43, 43 protons, all of it is radioactive.
There are no stable isotopes.
There is no technetium on Earth.
Any was created disappears very quickly, yet there it is in stars.
Neutron capture produces it, shovels it to the surface, and there we see it.
The zirconium, too much of the stuff, it's being created in the star.
Almost all the zirconium in the galaxy, in the Earth, has been created in giant stars.
Many other elements are similar.
So we are beginning to approach the concept of element creation in stars,
and then convection takes these chemical elements, raises them to the surface,
and the winds blow them away to enrich interstellar space in heavy elements,
and in the dust out of which new stars are born.
It's been a long process now from the main sequence.
All of this takes place now from stars of about 0.8 solar masses on up to around 10 solar masses.
Give or take, maybe eight, nobody's quite sure.
And these stars wind up as carbon and oxygen white dwarfs,
having taken all of their outer envelopes and blown them back into space,
many of it enriched in chemical elements.
Reach that magic number 10, something odd can happen.
We can't remove enough overburden, and we can continue the nuclear burning process,
which leads ultimately to a spectacular, disastrous end for the star,
which we will look at in the next lecture.
After listening to lecture eight, a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
How long will the stellar recycling process last?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
The recycling process in which stars provide additional matter to the interstellar medium,
and in which we'll see that high mass stars produce not only matter and heavy elements,
but powerful shock waves that can disturb the interstellar medium,
and perhaps trigger star formation, has been going on since the time of the birth of the galaxy.
Eventually it's got to die out because although we are recycling
and adding matter from stars back into the galaxy,
some of it still gets locked up.
You're taking nearly half the mass of the sun and locking it up as a white dwarf eventually.
So gradually the gases of interstellar space will be locked up in stars,
and you reach the point where it's too thin to produce stars anymore.
So the recycling has got to die off at some point,
but it's got to be billions and billions of years into the future as well.
This is going to keep going for a long time.
This ends lecture 8.
