Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe, Lecture 6, Between the Stars
In the last two lectures we looked at individual stars, at their properties, the kinds of stars we have,
and then at their organization and stellar hierarchies, the doubles, multiples, clusters.
We're familiar now with all the different kinds of stars.
And when you look out in a nighttime sky, it looks for the moment that that's all there is out there.
You'd really be fooled, because as far apart as the stars are, the space in between is not empty.
It's filled with a thin, incredibly complex mixture of gas and dust.
So in this lecture we're going to look, not at stars, but at the interstellar medium,
at this dusty, lumpy gas in the spaces between.
We'll look at bright clouds that are illuminated by stars.
We'll look at dark clouds that are not illuminated by stars, and that look like black gaps in the middle of the Milky Way.
We'll look at the general distribution of things, at their radiation all the way from the radial part of the spectrum to the x-ray part of the spectrum.
And at the end, we'll look at the chemistry of some of these dark clouds, at what are called molecular clouds,
where the chemistry gets amazingly complex in this dark, lumpy mixture, and then set the stage for the regions in which stars are born.
We know our constellations. We go on out into a northern hemisphere winter evening and take a look at the constellation Orion,
one of the grandest of the sky.
Bright red supergiant Betelgeuse marks the upper right shoulder of Orion.
The blue supergiant Rigel marks his left foot.
The constellation is filled with O and B stars. The constellation is actually part of what is called an association.
It's not a cluster, but it's a grouping of stars that were born, if not together, in some kind of close proximity in time and space.
They really are associated, hence the term.
And that is what gives this wonderful constellation its wonderful sparkle, because it's not just a random grouping of stars.
The same can be said about much of the constellation Scorpius, much of Centaurus, many of the others.
Focus now not on Orion itself, but on the belt of Orion, consisting of three class O and B stars.
And then down from the belt, you find a set of three more called Orion's sword.
Focus in on the middle of that star, the central star on it.
And even with binoculars, you can see that it's fuzzy.
Really good eyes can actually see it with a naked eye.
Even a small telescope shows whirls of gas, and a bigger one will show you dark clouds in which you have unaluminated dust.
The Orion Nebula, probably the prime local example, about 500 light years away, of an illuminated interstellar gas cloud.
It's called a diffuse nebula.
The term nebula means cloud out of Latin.
Diffuse, because it's just that.
It's diffuse.
It swirls all over the place.
You can get lost in it in a large telescope, looking at the extraordinary detail of curves of gas.
What we now know is shock waves, edges of bright stuff against dark stuff.
What's called the thumbprint sitting right down upon it, which is unaluminated dust.
In the space between the stars, we find a mixture of gas and dust.
And it's important to understand that these two are always found together.
Roughly 1% of the mass of the interstellar stuff is dust.
In some cases, it's the dust that is producing the cloud.
In some cases, it's the gas that's producing it.
In some cases, both, but they're always found together.
So if I talk about a gas cloud, remember, it's both gas and dust.
I talk about a dust cloud.
Oh yes, the gas is always there too.
They're never, never separated from each other.
The Orion Nebula is illuminated by a quartet of stars.
The trapezium that we talked about in the last lecture.
It's actually at the pinnacle of a massive open cluster of a huge number of stars,
most of which are completely invisible to the amateur telescope.
The trapezium, remember, is unstable.
And by its very existence, has to be fairly young.
We think it's only about a million years old, very, very short in the time scale of astronomy.
One star in particular, let's have the whole name of it.
The trapezium is known as, the stars in the middle are two of them called Theta Orionis.
It's actually two. They're not real double star.
The brighter one is called Theta 1 Orionis.
Sometimes you can put numbers with these Greek letters.
And the brightest of the trapezium, which is Theta 1 Orionis, is Theta 1 Orionis C.
You see how complicated this can get.
It's kind of fun to know something of the hierarchy.
Theta 1 Orionis C, the brightest one of the trapezium, is hot, around 40,000 degrees in that general neighborhood.
And at 40,000, the star is pumping out a lot of ultraviolet radiation.
Well, here we've got a hydrogen atom in the Orion nebula.
Say a neutral hydrogen atom, minding its own business.
Little proton, electron orbiting around it.
That electron is attached to the proton by a specific amount of energy.
The shorter the waves of photons, the greater the energy they carry.
There's a special limit down in the middle of the ultraviolet part of the spectrum
where the energies of the photons coming out of the star are the equivalent of the energy that binds the electron to the proton.
It's called the Lyman limit after the physicist who put together some of the structure of the hydrogen atom and its absorption lines.
All photons short were to that limit, and there are a very great number of them at 40,000 degrees Kelvin.
All the photons short were to that limit are capable of being picked up by that electron
and kicking the electron free of the proton, ripping it apart.
That will happen to almost all the hydrogen atoms within that gas.
So we don't have much in the way of neutral hydrogen atoms.
Most of them are ionized.
There's an interesting form of matter called a plasma.
It's kind of a fourth state of matter from the solid, liquid gas that we speak of,
but an ionized gas, a fully ionized gas, or nearly so, is called a plasma.
And in fact, most of the matter in the universe seems to be in that state.
The neutral state being a loop, not uncommon, but certainly less common.
The Orion nebula is a plasma.
It's an ionized gas, and it's being ionized by the light from that star.
Mostly that one single hot blue star, bright class O star.
Now, the electrons and the protons in the gas are not going to be independent of each other,
and electron might pass close to a proton.
And if it passes close enough, it will get captured by the proton,
and in doing so, it will radiate emissions at the same points in the spectrum
at which it absorbs in a star.
So what we get are bright emissions at specific wavelengths of color.
This causes the Orion nebula to glow brightly in the red part of the spectrum,
as do most diffuse nebulae.
You take a picture of the Milky Way where you find the bulk of this interstellar gas,
and you find these red clouds everywhere,
and they take on other colors as well,
depending upon the particular excitation mechanisms that are lighting them up.
We can do a chemical analysis of the emissions from these nebulae.
They're everywhere within the plane of the galaxy.
And from that, we find that the nebulae have the same chemical compositions as the stars.
No surprise, since as we'll learn later, the stars are coming out of the same clouds of gas
that are producing the nebulae.
The Orion nebulae is the result of the birth of the trapezium about a million years ago,
and the bright stars turn around and light up what were the placental clouds
that produced the star in the first place.
In fact, actually, the Orion nebula is a blister on the front edge of a dark cloud that you can't even see.
The star is here, and it's illuminating the front edge of a black cloud that itself is largely unilluminated.
You have the Orion nebula.
You look into the star clouds of Sagittarius in the summer sky,
and you look at the Lagoon nebula, and you look at the Trifid nebula.
Some of the most beautiful things in the sky, they're artworks.
All books on astronomy have pictures of these because of their sheer beauty
and the sheer colors that you find within them.
The southern hemisphere, the Great Corina Nebulae,
many of these are visible to the naked eye.
The lagoon is rather easily seen with the naked eye.
In fact, binoculars pop out at you immediately.
Even small telescopes show them beautifully.
They are at the pinnacle of the interstellar medium, at least in terms of visibility,
in terms of our ability to be amazed by them.
But working in and around them are dark clouds.
You can take a small telescope and scan down the Milky Way,
and you'll find absences of stars that we have long known
have to be some kind of medium in the space between us and the background
that's blocking the light.
If they were real gaps in the space between stars,
the motions of stars would quickly fill them in.
So you simply can't have natural openings like this within the thick star clouds.
It must be some kind of hiding mechanism.
These are the dust clouds of interstellar space.
Herschel was one of the first to examine them,
and he knew that they were always found in relation to the bright clouds.
In fact, he has mentioned in his journal that when he saw the dark clouds in his telescope,
he was sure that the bright clouds were soon to come along.
Often you find the bright clouds in and around the area of the dark clouds.
Sometimes you find the dark stuff in and around the area of the bright stuff.
These are dust clouds.
Now remember, gas and dust are always found together.
It is the dust that is blocking the background.
The dust particles are very small.
Sometimes we can see stars through the dust clouds,
and from the way that the dust absorbs the light,
the dust selectively absorbs the blue component of starlight before it absorbs the red.
So stars seen through dust clouds are reddened, more red than they would be
than if seen without the dust cloud, and they're of course also dimmed as well.
From the way in which stars are reddened, we can begin to determine the kind of dust grains
we have, and they're fine as smoke.
You couldn't see them with the naked eye, thousands of a millimeter across.
They're terribly small.
We can even make a chemical analysis of them from the way in which they absorb starlight,
and they seem to be a mixture of complex silicate grains
into which are incorporated metal atoms, ises, complex carbon grains.
So largely you can define them as silicates or carbon-based
with all kinds of other stuff mixed in with them,
and they pervade interstellar space.
You can see them with the naked eye.
Find the Milky Way on a dark night.
In the summertime in the Northern Hemisphere, you look overhead in August evenings
and there's Cygnus the swan, topped by denim, the tail of the swan,
denim of the northern part of the northern cross, the asterism and Cygnus,
and from there on down toward the southern horizon, the Milky Way divides into two parts,
the bright half on the left, the fainter half on the right,
until the fainter half disappears into the constellation Scorpius,
and the bright part plunges down below the horizon.
This dividing line is called the Great Rift.
If you look carefully, you can see that it is made up of numerous clouds
that combine together to form the rift,
and if you look into the southern hemisphere of the sky,
the part not readily visible from northern latitudes,
these dark clouds are incredibly intense
near the southern cross is a dark, dark cloud called, for good reason, the coalsack.
The Incas of Peru called it U2, a little bird.
They actually made constellations from the dark clouds of the Milky Way.
After all, we did name the Great Rift, one of the more prominent ones that we can see from up here.
If you get a star embedded in the dust cloud, remember always gas and dust,
but let's say the star is not bright enough to ionize the surrounding hydrogen,
then the dust grains can scatter the starlight.
Walk out on any nice, beautiful day, and you see that the sky is blue.
Why is the sky blue?
Because the molecules in the Earth's atmosphere selectively scatter a kind of reflection,
preferentially scatter blue light from the sun rather than red light.
So a blue photon or a blue light wave can't get through the Earth's atmosphere very well
without bouncing off a molecule, so the blue light is coming to you from all over the sky,
whereas the red light tends to get through.
This is why the sky is blue in the setting sun,
which has to go through a thick layer of atmosphere tends to be red.
The same thing happens in interstellar space.
These little grains selectively scatter blue light,
the same reason that stars look red when they're seen through one of these clouds.
So if you get a star embedded in a dust cloud, but it's not hot enough,
it'll light up the dust cloud as blue.
Look sometime at the dust cloud surrounding the Pleiades star cluster.
It's embedded in these beautiful blue haze.
The Pleiades, the cluster, is now passing through a dust cloud.
It's not a birth cloud.
It just happens to be passing through one that was in the way.
It'll be out the other side in a few hundred thousand or a million years or so,
and maybe we'll encounter another.
Maybe the sun passes through one every once in a while,
but it shows you the lumpy nature of these gas and dust clouds.
These reflection nebulae, always blue, the bright diffuse nebulae,
always a little bit red, sometimes greenish,
depending upon the excitation mechanism that lights them up.
The interstellar medium is far more extensive than just these individual clouds.
It pervades everything.
In the 1950s, we began to pick up radio radiation from interstellar space.
Everywhere in the plane of our galaxy, you'll find hydrogen.
Some of it is in the atomic form, this ordinary H.
Some of it is in the molecular form, hydrogen 2.
This is not the deuterium that we call hydrogen 2.
This is hydrogen sub 2 down here at the bottom,
where it means a hydrogen molecule, two hydrogen atoms put together.
The nomenclature can be confusing orally.
It's not when it's written out.
So it comes in both forms.
A curious thing can happen with hydrogen.
Here's the hydrogen electron orbiting the proton.
Electrons and protons do more than orbit each other.
They spin.
Well, it's not like the rotation of the Earth.
It's a property that's sort of akin to spinning.
If they were planets, they'd be spinning and rotating.
It's a peculiar property that needs to be used to define
the way electrons and protons behave relative to each other.
But let's just call it rotation.
It's simpler that way.
If they're spinning together, they collectively have a higher energy
than if they're spinning in the opposite direction like this.
The lowest energy has them spinning oppositely.
They interact with each other because as they spin, they produce magnetic fields.
They move any kind of electric charge.
It produces a magnetic field.
So they lock together.
Now, collisions among atoms in interstellar space can raise the spinning electron
into the higher state where it's spinning in the same direction as its proton.
And then, given 100,000 or so years short in astronomical terms,
it'll go and start spinning in the opposite direction.
And when it flips and changes the direction of its spin,
it spits out a radio photon, kind of oxymoron.
As the photons span, we just use the optical term, little particles of light with waves.
We might as well use the term throughout the whole electromagnetic spectrum.
So we use it in the radio as much as we do in the X-ray.
We have X-ray photons and radio photons as well.
It throws out a radio photon with a wavelength of 21 centimeters.
This was predicted in the 1950s when in a couple of years they found it.
It shows us where the hydrogen is, a thin, skinny hydrogen layer throughout the entire galactic plane.
Very lumpy.
So we find hydrogen clouds, temperatures 100 degrees or so above absolute zero,
whereas the diffuse nebulae are heated to maybe 10,000 degrees above absolute zero by their hot stars.
So we're getting to see quite a range in here now.
When we first began to launch X-ray telescopes,
we began to find X-ray radiation from interstellar space.
There are volumes of space that have been heated to as high as a few hundred thousand degrees,
not by hot stars now, but from the shocks produced by exploding stars,
which expand outward and can compress and shred much of the interstellar medium.
Hot stars do the same thing.
The sun blows a wind from its surface.
The solar wind produces the northern lights eventually.
All stars blow winds to some degree.
The more massive the star, the more luminous the star, the larger the star,
the greater the flux of its wind from its surface.
O-stars produce prodigious winds that blow off their surfaces.
These too can help shred the interstellar medium.
The result is, I guess you could just call it a mess that has hardly ever been figured out.
We talk about clouds as if they were fluffy clouds in the sky,
but if you really take a look at a daytime sky with all manner of different kinds of clouds,
you can see how difficult it might be mathematically to characterize them.
The same is true with the gas and dust clouds of interstellar space.
They are terribly complex and very difficult to reckon with mathematically.
So as a result, we continue to call them clouds, even though some may be arcs or shreds or filaments,
or you name it, almost any structure at all.
The 21 centimeter radiation allows us to map out these clouds,
and they pervade this galactic disk of ours.
In fact, they line up along spiral arm features within the disk of the galaxy.
We can see these spiral arm features in other galaxies.
In fact, before we knew they were other galaxies, we called them spiral nebulae
because we didn't know what they were.
Now they are distant galaxies with spiral arms,
and we can see the same spiral arms in our own galaxy as a result of this 21 centimeter radiation,
and we'll show in a later lecture how we can use that to the 21 centimeter radiation,
actually to plot out the spiral arms, map them out,
and learn something about the structure of our entire galaxy,
all from the interstellar medium.
The very darkest of the clouds are very cold,
where you have starlight heating the clouds, the temperatures go up.
The Orion Nebula is up around 10,000 degrees, somewhere in that general neighborhood,
and even the thin interstellar medium where you don't have hammering by shock waves from exploding stars,
the temperatures are in the hundreds or so of degrees Kelvin.
One point that has to be made here, I think, very, very carefully,
is that the density of this material is extremely low.
The density of the gas in the Orion Nebula is not much more at its best
than about 10,000 particles per cubic centimeter.
That may sound like a lot, but it is billions of times less, trillions of times less
than the density of the atoms in the room.
The physicists who produce vacuums, who work in vacuum technology,
can't make vacuums on Earth as thin as the gases of interstellar space.
You wonder, how on Earth can we see them?
Volume, mass, there's a lot of space out there.
Remember that there's light years in the spaces between stars.
So even if the gas is thinly spread, there's an awful lot of it there,
and the accumulation of it as you look through the thickness of it
is what allows you to see all this stuff.
The average density of interstellar space, if you smear it all out,
is one lonely atom in a sugar cube per cubic centimeter.
It's that thin. It's the accumulation that does it.
Where the gas gets thick, up to 10,000 or so atoms per cubic centimeter,
with the dust getting thick as well, the dust keeps out the heating starlight.
And when you keep out the source of heat, the temperature has to go down.
And the temperature then plummets to, at its coolest,
only a few degrees above absolute zero.
When I first began studying astronomy long time ago,
I was told, you don't need to learn chemistry and astronomy.
There is no chemistry. Oh, sure, we have a few molecules here and there.
Starlight comes through the gases of interstellar space.
The gases of interstellar space superimpose some of their absorptions onto the starlight.
And it was known 50 years ago that we had very simple stuff like the CN molecule,
the CH molecule, and it was thought to be so little nobody cares.
And there are some molecules in stars, titanium oxide and the M stars,
but in a variety of other simple things that hardly qualifies as chemistry.
So the scalar don't bother studying chemistry in school.
Well, were we fooled?
The problem is that molecules are broken up at high temperatures.
So things like the Orion nebula can't contain molecules.
Even the thinner gases of interstellar space don't contain too much
because getting hit by a high energy photon tends to tear them apart.
But where you keep the photons out, the hydrogen collects into pools of molecular hydrogen, the H2.
And then begins a slow cold chemistry that is fascinating in how it shows the synergy of the galaxy as a whole.
We began to find, in the early 1960s, through radio waves, hosts of molecules.
The temperature is so low that these molecules cannot emit radiation at high energies.
It's not possible.
We didn't know that they were there with optical telescopes because optical radiation,
the kind you see with the eye, is rather energetic.
But at low temperatures, everything is emitting at low energy radio.
Once we got the radio telescopes, a radio telescope does not differ much from an optical telescope
except that it's observing radio waves.
The purpose of an optical telescope is to have a collecting area, a mirror or a lens that shovels the light to a focus.
From which you can take a picture or examine the brightness or whatever.
The bigger the telescope, the brighter the image, the fainter the things you can see.
A radio telescope does the same thing with radio waves.
Naturally produced static from low energy processes.
Sometimes from high energy processes as well.
You have a big collecting area.
It looks like a satellite dish.
You bounce the radiation off into a focus at which there's an antenna.
Amplify it.
You've got yourself a radio telescope.
You can make radio pictures by scanning back and forth.
You can do anything in the radio you can do in the optical part of the spectrum.
Radio telescopes and radio spectrographs, the devices that can spread the radio waves into their component waves
to begin to look at the same absorption or emission features you get in the optical,
began to pick up radio waves from molecules.
OH, hydroxyl.
Now, anybody who has studied chemistry will say, that's not a molecule.
That's a radical.
A radical is an incomplete molecule that will immediately combine with something else
and form water or some other substance.
The density is so low, for all you chemists out there, that free radicals exist.
They're stable for long periods of time.
So we speak of the OH molecule.
Water, H2O.
Ammonia, NH3.
Formaldehyde, formic acid.
The list went on and on and on.
There are over a hundred molecules now known in these dark dust clouds of interstellar space.
Some things that you can't even produce on Earth, not just these radicals,
but long chain molecules where you'll have a carbon atom here
and then HHHHHHHCHC, or NO, N, or whatever.
Odd, fragile things that you can't produce on Earth at all.
Various combinations, the same molecule in different forms and different structures.
Terribly complex.
Acetic acid has been found.
There's even an indication of the simplest amino acid, glycine.
Although not confirmed, it may well be there.
And astronomers and radio astronomers are looking for more complex things.
We seem to have things like rings of carbon atoms stacked together
to produce very complex molecules.
We don't know where this ends.
If you take a chemistry class, it's often heat-driven.
Put the stuff in a bunsen burner, heat it up.
Sometimes it's a natural reaction like when I burn a hole in my parents' rug one day.
But you don't expect it at 10 degrees Kelvin.
How do you get such a process to take place?
A star blows up over here.
It explodes.
Riding the shock waves off the exploding star are high-speed atoms
that can approach the speed of light.
They're called cosmic rays and they're hitting the Earth all the time.
These are the showers of atomic particles from cosmic rays.
Hydrogen atoms mostly kick to the speed of light hitting the Earth's upper atmosphere.
We're in a natural atomic accelerator.
We live with this as part of our background radiation field.
It's no problem at all.
Cosmic ray goes plowing right through one of these dark clouds.
Can't stop it.
Leaves the trail of ions behind it.
Suddenly, where you've got ions, you begin to get an ion-driven chemistry.
Dust grains.
A hydrogen atom hits a dust grain, sticks.
That provides a bench for another hydrogen atom to hit the dust grain, stick.
Other atoms to stick.
Between the cosmic rays and the chemistry that takes place on the dust grain,
you start to build up a very complex set of molecules.
It's slow.
It's cold.
But hey, we have time.
We have hundreds of thousands of years.
Nobody's going anywhere.
Time scales in the galaxy are long.
And the cloud has an integrated nature for a very long period of time.
So we build up this complex chemistry in what are called molecular clouds.
The small ones, molecular clouds.
The big ones, no surprise, giant molecular clouds.
The GMCs.
They are the largest single structures known in the galaxy.
Some of them may have 100,000 solar masses worth of molecular hydrogen and other stuff mixed up within them.
These are the dark dust clouds that make the band of the great rift that goes through the galaxy.
That make the coal sack, which consists of three or four of these individual molecular clouds.
In back of the Orion nebula, where you find the trapezium, about 1,500 light years away.
I think I said 450 before.
1,500 light years away is a dark molecular cloud.
In fact, it pervades all of Orion.
It's called the Orion molecular cloud, north and south.
And the Orion nebula is smack in the middle of it.
It's where stars come from.
We can penetrate into it, and we see again this complex chemistry in the back.
We find these molecular clouds everywhere, all through space.
It's from these that stars are born.
As we'll see in the next lecture, these clouds can have cloudlets within them that can collapse to form stars.
And we're set for the creation of diffuse nebulae.
We're set for the creation of stars that can then scatter throughout the galaxy.
The molecular clouds are the birthplaces of the stars.
And the stars age, produce winds, blow up.
They produce shock waves that produce more compression of the interstellar medium,
more shredding of the interstellar medium,
more cosmic rays that can aid in the chemistry,
and one process feeds back into the other, which feeds back into the other,
a theme that we will progressively develop throughout the rest of this course.
So we began with the Orion nebula.
We began with the beautiful, colorful, jewel-like, diffuse nebulae of interstellar space,
which led to the black clouds and the pervasive stuff that is found everywhere throughout the galactic plane.
Back into the molecular clouds, and then, as we'll see in the next lecture,
back into star formation that produces yet more diffuse nebulae.
The whole thing going around and around and around for nearly all time.
