Astronomy, stars, galaxies and the universe, lecture 10, neutron stars and black holes.
In the last two lectures we've looked at the processes of stellar evolution.
First at the evolution and the aging process of the intermediate mass stars, stars like
the sun and on up to around 10 times the mass of the sun.
And then in the last lecture at the evolution of the high mass stars, in this lecture we're
going to look more at the byproducts.
We've looked at the white dwarfs already to some good degree.
They can be brought in again a little bit.
But here we want to concentrate in this lecture on the byproducts of the real high mass stars,
the most bizarre stars known, the neutron stars and at the ultimate, I suppose, in stellar
evolution, the black hole.
There are four end products that we know of that stars can take.
The intermediate mass stars turn into the white dwarfs.
The sun will undoubtedly become a white dwarf.
See it cannot produce a supernova because it can't go past that carbon-oxygen phase to
develop an iron core.
It's simply not massive enough.
And at the rate of supernova we see, of course, this precludes the explosions of the enormous
number of lower mass stars that are out there, stars like the sun.
It's only that little tip of the main sequence that can blow up.
So we're perfectly safe in that regard.
The little tip of O-stars on the HR diagram, however, can produce two byproducts.
They can produce neutron stars.
They can produce black holes, which in a sense disappear, at least visibly, from the universe.
Or in the case of the type 1A supernovae, they can produce nothing at all.
They just completely disappear, that is, they annihilate themselves.
There are four end products, white dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes, and nothing, annihilation.
In 1967, or thereabouts, an astronomer in England decided it would be interesting to
examine the corona of the sun by looking at radio waves from very distant radio sources
that pass through the corona.
You can see the twinkling of stars in the nighttime sky.
Curiously enough, distant radio stars, not ordinary stars, but often nuclei of distant
galaxies, twinkle, too, their radiation in the radio spectrum has got to pass through
the interstellar gases.
And that causes slight variations.
You can pass radio waves through the solar corona, and you can see the same kind of thing.
So he built a vast radio telescope in England to monitor very rapid changes in radio signals.
This was one of the first experiments that this type ever mounted.
And a graduate student named Jocelyn Bell was assigned to monitor the experiment.
And she came into the lab room, where they were recording over the course of the night,
to look at the data.
And this was really before we were taking data by computers automatically.
It was just a rotating drum with a pen on it.
And there was a funny-looking signal, which she at first thought was, oh, some kind of
automobile ignition, maybe an airplane flying overhead.
This happens not uncommonly with radio observations.
But the signal didn't go away.
It kept blip, blip, blip, like this with a period of 1.3 seconds, rather odd.
And then it went away for a while, and then it came back later, days later, coming back
exactly on time with this 1.3 seconds.
It was very accurate.
It was clock-like in its regularity.
The astronomers thought that, my goodness, we've discovered an interstellar communications
beacon.
Maybe we've really discovered life somewhere out there, intelligent life in interstellar
space on another planet.
But then they found another one of these odd critters, and then they found another one.
And while they had these radio pulses with very accurate periodicity, so they called
them pulsars.
Actually, they called them little green men for a little while because they didn't know
what they were.
But it was pretty obvious after a while that it was a natural phenomenon of some sort,
which sort of set the astronomical world on its head, a new type of object.
What could cause such regular periodicity?
We already knew of pulsating stars, like the giant stars like Myra that pulsate like this
and vary.
And there are many, many different kinds of pulsating stars.
The star Delta Cephii, for example, which we will encounter in a later lecture, is the
prototype of what is called the Cepheid variables.
They pulsate like a beating heart with periods of anywhere from days to a couple of weeks,
and they vary by a magnitude or so.
Lots of different kinds.
Even a set of white dwarfs that pulsate, that chatter away with periods of minutes,
with very subtly.
But these things had periods of seconds, and nobody could think of anything that could
actually pulsate like this.
White dwarfs couldn't possibly pulsate with that short a period of time.
The only thing known that could pulsate or rather that could have that kind of regularity
must involve rotation.
But then you'd have to have a star that was rotating with a period of a second or so,
and a white dwarf couldn't do that, it would fly apart.
So you had to have a very, very small star.
Well a couple that with a speculation made by quite an amazing astronomer at the old
Mount Wilson Observatory named Fritz Zwicky.
He was a Swiss.
He worked in the West Coast Observatories, Mount Wilson, Mount Palomar, and was among
the first people to look at exploding stars.
And he found an odd sort of star.
He working with other people at Mount Wilson found an odd star in the middle of this crab
nebula, the remnant of the supernova 1054.
He speculated that an odd star with no spectrum lines could have been the collapsed remnant
of a high mass star.
And he suggested that it was possibly a neutron star.
Nobody could prove such a thing.
But the idea of the possibility of neutron stars has existed for decades before the pulsar
was discovered and then it was all put together.
That rapid pulsation, which isn't a pulsation at all, the pulses were coming from rotation,
it must be coming from a neutron star.
But the neutron stars, we looked for them optically, we didn't see them at that point
and they weren't in the early days related back in the late 60s to supernova remnants,
the expanding clouds, until we started looking into the heart of the crab nebula at the purported
neutron star in the middle of it.
It just seemed to shine with a steady light until astronomers began to look at it at high
speed, that is to see if it was flickering at very high speed with special cameras.
And sure enough, that star dead center in the crab nebula, which to the eye looks like
any other star, when you spread this light into a spectrum, it doesn't have the ordinary
spectrum of a star, there's something wrong with it, is turning on and off 30 times per
second.
Too fast for the human eye to see, it's rather like watching the successive frames of emotion
picture.
They come on the screen so fast that the eye retains the vision of the previous screen
that seems to give continuity to the movie.
The same thing was happening with this star in the middle of the crab nebula, ah, it must
be the neutron star, it's spinning 30 times per second and it must be fairly young because
we know the age of the crab nebula, it's only about a thousand years old.
It is the remnant of what was seen by the Chinese astronomers in the year 1054.
The neutron star must be terribly small, about the size maybe 20, 30 kilometers across, it's
got to be the size of a small town.
Imagine that, spinning 30 times per second.
It's got to be more massive than the white dwarf, ah, so its mass is probably one and
a half to two solar masses, maybe three solar masses, something like that, rotating around.
Now, it goes back to the collapse of the iron core of the type II supernova.
The iron core collapses in on itself, conservation of angular momentum.
It's going to be rotating, everything's rotating and as the thing collapses from something the
size of the earth and iron core of the size of the earth, down to the neutron star, the
size of a small town, it spins faster and faster and faster and you wind up with a rapidly
spinning neutron star.
Stars have magnetic fields too.
They all do to some degree because of their rotation and convection and if you collapse
the iron core you're also collapsing an ambient magnetic field, so you can concentrate the
magnetic field too.
These neutron stars must have powerful magnetic fields, perhaps a trillion times give or take
the magnetic field strength of the earth, now the sun's is similar to that of the earth.
We find a few wide dwarfs that have magnetic fields that can be millions of times that
of the earth.
Now you're talking a trillion times the magnetic field strength, that's a million million,
the magnetic field strength of the earth.
Magnetic fields concentrated so tightly can generate energy, they accelerate electrons,
so what seems to be happening is that you have a rapidly spinning neutron star.
The magnetic field, however, is going to be tilted.
The earth is tilted by 10 or 11 degrees, Uranus Neptune tilted way over by 40, 50 degrees.
The magnetic field is almost always tilted relative to the rotation axis and you are
beaming energy out along the magnetic field axis.
So the thing acts like a lighthouse or like the beacon on top of the tower of an airport.
Think of it in the extreme that I can be a rotating neutron star for example and here's
my magnetic field axis, it doesn't have to be inclined that much but it's one way of
thinking and I'm beaming out energy along the magnetic field axis, radio and in the
case of highly energetic pulsars, optical energy like we find in the crab nebula and
I'm spinning around and every time I point at you you get a burst of energy and when
I'm pointing in the other direction of course you can't see anything.
So it's every time that magnetic field axis sweeps past you, you get that burst, pop,
pop, pop like this pulse, pulse, pulse.
New neutron stars, young ones, will be spinning very rapidly as a result of the conservation
of angular momentum but they are radiating their energy away.
You can't get something for nothing as they say, that energy has got to come from something
and ultimately it's coming from the rotation.
New neutron stars are of course also blasting a powerful wind that energizes things like
the crab nebula.
Several of these pulsars now have been found inside their remnant supernova debris.
So you've got really two kinds of remnants, so supernova, you've got the neutron star
in the middle and then you've got the expanding cloud that used to be inside the star is now
being blown away littered with iron atoms and all the byproducts of explosive thermonuclear
processes, violent thermonuclear processes and all that will ultimately be left is that
little neutron star, madly spinning but it's radiating its energy away so it gradually
spins slower and slower and slower and we can actually see that.
In looking at neutron stars we can see them slow down with time.
On that we can also get an idea of the age of the things even if we don't have the records
of the original supernova.
As they slow down they lose their ability to radiate high energy radiation.
The crab pulsar no more than a few tens of kilometers across spinning 30 times per second.
The burst of energy is only a thousandth of a second or so, it's very, very, very short
and in between that burst of energy there's nothing, effectively no radiation at all.
That's why almost all pulsars work, they're on or they're off and they're on for a very
short period of time within the pulsing cycle.
The crab pulsar is producing radio energy all the way from the radio spectrum up through
the x-ray spectrum, even into the gamma ray spectrum, it covers everything.
But as it spins down it will lose its ability to radiate x-rays and lose its ability to
radiate optical radiation and finally once the cloud around it has dissipated into interstellar
space you're left behind with a lonely neutron star very slowly pulsing at the rate of maybe
just once every second or two and gradually it'll even lose its ability to produce radio
pulses and it will disappear altogether.
We know of hundreds of these pulsars, huge numbers of them.
They are the remnants of normal core collapse, if you call anything like that, normal core
collapse, high mass stars and there must be vast numbers of others that have completely
disappeared altogether.
If you think that one, just assume one percentry, the galaxy is somewhere just round things
off, say 10 billion years old and you get one percentry, that gives you 10 million neutron
stars in the galaxy, the things have got to be everywhere, most of them completely unobservable
because they spun down to the point where you can't find them anymore.
They're very safe, like any other star, the odds of anything like that colliding into
it are very, very low, it's hard to know what the closest one is, some of them have actually
been recovered, non-pulsing neutron stars have been seen, very hot, temperatures can
hit a million degrees at the surface, they are the hottest stars known and gradually
cooling off with time, little tiny things, they can't radiate much except as a result
of their high temperatures because their surface areas are so terribly low.
The pulsars, there are enough of them correlating with supernova remnants, the cloud of gas that's
been expanding from the exploded star to know that the two of them are clearly related to
each other.
The neutron stars are moving so fast, there are no spectrum lines, so we can't get back
and forth motions, but we can watch their proper motions across the sky.
Through detailed radio observations, the things moving fast, some of them are moving at hundreds
of kilometers per second.
It seems that the detonation that takes place when the core collapses, from a core collapse
supernova, it's a little off-center and that can produce a tremendous kick to the pulsar.
And the pulsar or neutron star goes flying off at a high speed, it can actually be ejected
from the disk of the galaxy, and some of these are probably littering the halo as well, again
shows the violence of the event when you can kick a neutron star to speeds of a few hundred
kilometers per second.
Neutron stars are held up by degenerate neutrons.
The neutrons will behave like waves too, and the wave motion, the wave effect produces
the same kind of degeneracy in the neutrons that it does in the electrons that support
the white dwarf.
White dwarfs have a limit of 1.4 solar masses, beyond which you can't have a white dwarf.
The same thing will happen to degenerate neutrons.
The number isn't known all that well, but it's somewhere around two or three times
the mass of the sun.
At that point, the neutrons can no longer support the neutron star, and the neutron
star has to collapse.
Star evolution is sort of a battle of the forces.
It's the battle between the outward push of energy from thermonuclear fusion, balanced
against the inward pull from gravity, and then you reach the remnant state of the white
dwarf where it's the degeneracy of the electrons that keep the star up.
Fine, it's going to be up now forever that way, unless it gets overloaded by a companion
to produce type 1A supernova.
And then if the collapsing mass is too great, which you get in a high mass star, you produce
this neutron star that's held up by degenerate neutrons, and you stop the gravitational collapse
at that point.
Once you exceed that three solar mass limit, however, nothing can hold gravity back anymore.
You've reached the end of the line, and the little critter in there over three solar masses
now must collapse forever.
There's nothing left to hold it back.
Now, if you take a ball outside and you throw it up, it comes back down again.
If you throw it up faster, it goes higher, and it comes back down.
There is a limit, however.
If you throw the ball up at seven miles per second, about 11 kilometers per second, it
is at what is called the escape velocity of the Earth, the Earth's gravity.
And while the ball is always in the gravity, it's now moving too fast ever for gravity
to bring it back.
So the ball has been launched into a hyperbolic trajectory, hyperbolic orbit, and it will
never return.
The Voyager spacecraft, for example, are in hyperbolic orbits relative to the Sun, and
they're never going to come back again.
Those wonderful spacecraft that visited Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, who launched
them into interstellar space.
As you shrink a body, you get closer to the atoms of the body, and the escape velocity
has to go up.
Run up and experiment in your mind.
Shrink the Earth.
Pretend you can go over here and push a button on the wall, and the Earth starts to shrink
down, and the escape velocity gets higher and higher.
See, on the Moon, with its lower mass, it's only two or so, much, much less than that
of the Earth.
But you shrink the Earth, and the escape velocity is going to go up, higher and higher and higher.
Although you could never do this, this is impossible, of course.
When you get down to the Earth the size of a golf ball, or a little smaller, the escape
velocity at the surface hits the speed of light.
At that point, light can't get out anymore, and while the body still has its gravitational
field, it is, after all, the gravitational field that's holding the light back.
Light can't escape, and the thing disappears from view, and you've got a black hole.
The famous black hole is a surface within which you have the mass.
It's a surface that contains the mass.
It's the surface at which the escape velocity is equal to the speed of light, at least in
the standard classical view of it.
It's really a problem of Einstein's relativity, more than anything else.
Einstein viewed gravity as a distortion of spacetime.
This is the way the world seems to really work, because we can't really explain it
any other way that the fabric of the universe consists of three dimensions of space and
one dimension of time, and that gravity acts as a distortion of that.
You can think of a bed, for example, as kind of a two-dimensional version of four-dimensional
spacetime, put a bowling ball in the middle of it, which is mass, and that bends the bed
down like this, and then things roll down the hill, and gravity is us rolling down the
hill in this distortion in spacetime.
Well, if you have a mass that gets more and more concentrated, your well is deeper and
deeper and deeper, and finally your well just does this, and it just keeps going down,
and you wind up with a black hole, kind of a puncture in spacetime in a loose sense.
And you can't get back out of it again.
You're lost.
Anything in there is lost.
No information can get out, and the common question is, well, what's in there?
We have no idea.
What are the laws of physics in there?
We have no idea.
We can't get any information out of it.
It's just a mass.
In a sense, it's a very, very simple body which has its gravity, but you can't see it.
It's gone.
Stars can do this.
You couldn't do this with it, but if you shoved all the mass and the sun down to something
that small, the size of a village, the sun could become a black hole.
If the sun were to become a black hole, which is impossible, remember, we're still just
doing a thought experiment here.
If the sun were to become a black hole, it would disappear from view, but its gravity
would stay the same as it is now.
The earth would continue to orbit just as it does now.
The black hole doesn't suck things into it unless you get things so close to it that
there are other interactions that can cause it to spiral in tidal effects, interactions
among surrounding stars and so on, but the black hole by itself can't do that.
Now, the sun can't become a black hole.
The kid can only become a white dwarf, which of course is the size of the earth itself.
However, as you go up the main sequence to more and more massive stars, presumably that
neutron star that is created by the collapse can reach the black hole limit of three solar
masses or so.
We don't know where this happens, and nobody has yet demonstrated that it really works
this way, but we think that it's the very, very, very upper tip of the main sequence.
Above maybe 40 solar masses, 50 somewhere in there, up to the limit of 100.
These stars are exceedingly rare, but it's the collapse of the iron core and knees that
is beyond the neutron star limit, and the thing just goes right down to the black hole.
Many years ago, during Cold War, the United States launched a satellite that an orbit
around the Earth that was designed to look for gamma ray flashes from below.
It was designed to look for atomic hydrogen bomb explosions, spy satellites, so to speak.
Didn't find anything from below, but it found bursts of gamma rays from the sky.
Later, we launched a satellite designed to look for these things, a gamma ray satellite,
and it found gamma ray bursts coming from the sky about once per day, all over the sky.
They didn't seem to be coming from the disc of the galaxy, because then they would be
concentrated to the Milky Way.
They didn't seem to have any relation to any nearby galaxies, they were just these mysterious
pops of intense gamma ray, highest energy radiation there is.
In relatively recent times, we began with the biggest telescopes to find that Cheethy's
gamma ray bursts seem to be associated with ultra-distant galaxies near the fringe of
our ability to see them, and finally, we found that some of them, at least, were related
to what appeared to be supernovae, immensely powerful supernovae, that are so strong they've
gotten the name hypernovae.
You have to discriminate between the ordinary supernovae that produces your average supernova,
big deal now, now the hypernovae, and even then the gamma ray bursts were too powerful,
so we think what happens is that when they think collapses to the black hole, radiation
is beamed. You get this beamed radiation. Remember, we've got beams coming out even
in forming stars that produce the Herbie-Hero objects of one of the previous lectures.
If we only get the gamma ray burst, if we happen to be in the line of sight, otherwise
we don't see it.
These may be the most powerful events in the universe. There are other possibilities for
gamma ray bursts, and maybe there are different sources of them. One other theory is that
neutron stars too close to dissipate their energy via sending out waves in their gravitational
fields, and they get close and they merge, and you have the merging of two neutron stars
and a tremendously powerful gravity, and that can produce the gamma ray burst too,
perhaps, and there may be more than one root to the same thing. We don't know at this point,
but it looks clearly as if these hypernovae may produce these immensely powerful bursts.
The best candidate we have in our galaxy for a supernova is a strange star in the southern
hemisphere called Ata Corini in the constellation Corina, part of the great ship Argo, the ancient
constellation. It's probably about a hundred solar mass star in the middle of the 19th century.
It blossomed to become one of the brightest stars in the sky. It didn't explode. It erupted
more than a solar mass of gas, which is now expanding around it. Apparently, it undergoes
these eruptions every once in a while, and it may be on its way to becoming not just a
supernova, but one of these hypernovae. Presumably, it beams the radiation out along its rotation
axis of some sort, and the speculation of the Earth were in the way of one of these things.
Ata Corini is about 7,000 light-years from here that it could kill life on Earth, 7,000
light-years away. Fortunately, we have a good idea of the rotation axis, and it's being
someplace else, so it's somebody else's problem, not ours. But it does show the power inherent
in nature of these most violent of events, the gamma ray bursts, which may create the
black holes. Do they actually exist? Can we see black holes? You can't see black holes.
Black holes are dark. They don't radiate anything, so there may be many of them out there just
in orbit around the galaxy. We may have one pass close to us once in a while. We would
not know if they're naked black holes, but like many other stars, there's no reason why
a black hole can't be in orbit around an ordinary star. Just because a star blows up doesn't
mean it does violence to its companion. There are going to be massive stars where the more
massive of the two goes into the supernova. In some cases, if the exploding star gets
kicked off this way by an off-center detonation, it will launch its companion off in the other
direction and create what's called a runaway star. So these runaway stars can be created
both by binary action and by the explosions of companions. But in some cases, they can
survive. The star is amazingly hardy, and if one star blows up, you may wind up with
a neutron star or a black hole as a companion to a more or less normal star that could range
from anything from a very massive normal star to just an ordinary dwarf star like the sun
or maybe even lower mass. So we can have neutron stars as companions to other stars, or we
can have black holes as companions to other stars. Digress for a minute and look at what
happens if you have a neutron star. It's kind of fun to look at this. If the two are close
enough, remember the nova, you have a white dwarf and you have an ordinary dwarf and the
ordinary dwarf can dump matter onto the white dwarf and produce a nova, the surface explosion.
Now you have a neutron star in orbit around a ordinary star. The ordinary star can throw
matter onto the neutron star and start spinning it up because if the matter hits at the edge,
it's like hitting a bicycle wheel on the side, and the neutron star rather than slowing down
can be sped back up again to produce what is called a millisecond pulsar. There are
some of these things that are pulsing with periods that are not much more than a thousandth
of a second. They're spinning six, seven, eight hundred times per second. Imagine something
now the size of Manhattan spinning seven hundred times per second. Nature does get bizarre,
doesn't it? At least from our rather lowly point of view, our provincial point of view.
Now imagine the black hole and a massive star in orbit around it. If they are close enough
together, the large star can be tidally distorted and pass matter into the black hole, but it's
not going to get dumped right down the drain. Instead, it will go into a disk surrounding
the black hole and then go down the drain from the disk. These disks are very common.
Generally in mass transfer from one star to the other, you will very commonly get a disk
first around the receiving star and then matter falls in the disk onto the star in the middle
of it. Well, that disk around the black hole is going to get really, really hot in the
100,000 degree range. And when it does that, it's going to radiate x-rays, so we look
for x-ray sources in the sky. The classic example is a star called Cygnus x1. Wonderful
name, isn't it? Cygnus x1 is an ordinary. We get terribly blasé here. It's an ordinary
class B supergiant. They'll probably blow up itself unless it gets eaten away by the
black hole. It has a huge amount of x-ray emission coming out of it. Now ordinary supergiants
don't have that kind of x-ray power. So something else must be going on. And we can also look
at the spectrum back and forth, back and forth of the supergiant. And it's got something
in orbit about it. And we can estimate the mass at roughly 10 times or so of the mass
of the sun. There's a body with a mass greater than the neutron star limit in orbit about
this class B blue supergiant. We can't see it and the system is emitting powerful x-rays.
It fits the theory beautifully that mass is being transferred from the supergiant into
the black hole and radiating x-rays. So we look for these x-ray stars and we find quite
a number of candidates. And we take this as evidence that the black holes really are there.
Now there's other lines of evidence that lead us to believe they're there. If you have
a lens, you pass light through it, you will magnify the distant object. It's how refracting
telescopes work. Curiously gravity does the same thing. Mass bends space-time. That's
why you feel weight. So we have a body here. You're the observer out there. And there's
another body that gets exactly in back of a foreground body. The light can be bent by
the distortion of space-time around the foreground body and the distant body can become brighter.
It's called a gravitational lens. These things are fairly common in intergalactic space once
we look at the universe at large. And we've actually seen events in which looks like stars
are blossoming up as a result of their light passing around a black hole. So we do have
other evidence for them. And some of the best evidence for their very existence probably
lies in the centers of galaxies where the evidence is even better that we have massive
black holes, supermassive black holes. It's actually better for that. And if we have the
supermassive ones, generating the smaller ones is probably not all that difficult. Moreover,
if you take these stars, more evidence, these black holes in which matter is being dumped,
just like mass that is falling onto the nascent Titori star, stars that are in the process
of birth, not all the mass goes down the drain. Some of it will get shot off in jets. That's
seen as well. These jets can pour out of the black hole at speeds nearly that of light.
There is such a powerful gravitational action that does, or maybe magnetic action, but the
result is that not everything gets down into the black hole. Some of it gets spiraled away
as well. This seems to be a common state of affairs. These are seen as well. So the sum
total of the evidence is that they do exist. So we're back again to the four end products,
the white dwarf, the neutron star, yes, the black hole, and total annihilation, the final
byproducts of the stars. At this point, we now have to look at the grander scale. All
of these stars, the forming stars, the interstellar medium, the dying stars, the end products
are all part of this gigantic system called the galaxy. So we expand our view from the
units of astronomy as stars to the units of astronomy as whole galaxies and look at the
systems, our system first as a unit as it's all put together and from there we'll expand
our view to other galaxies and finally to the universe at large.
This ends lecture 10. Remember to visit this course's web page at www.modernscholar.com
where you'll find additional information about the lectures that you just heard. If
you borrowed this course from a public library and would like your own copy of the course
guide for future reference, call recorded books at 1-800-636-3399 and we'll send you
a free copy. A shipping charge will apply.
