Recorded Books is pleased to present the Modern Scholar Series, where great professors teach you.
My name is Richard Davidson, and I'll be your host.
Today, we begin a course entitled Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe.
Your professor is James B. Kaler of the University of Illinois.
Professor Kaler received his BA in astronomy from the University of Michigan and his PhD from UCLA.
He's taught at Illinois for over 40 years.
His research area, in which he has published over 120 papers, involves dying stars.
But Professor Kaler's interests reach far beyond this topic, and Professor Kaler has published widely in the area of popular astronomy.
Among his many critically acclaimed books are Stars and Their Spectra, The Little Book of Stars, The Ever-Changing Sky,
The Hundred Greatest Stars, and Extreme Stars, which was the American Association of Publishers' Choice for Outstanding and Scholarly Title in Physics and Astronomy for 2001.
Professor Kaler also served as a consultant for the Time Life Books Voyage Through the Universe series, and he appears frequently on various radio and television programs to discuss topics in astronomy.
Currently, Professor Kaler serves on the board of directors of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, and he continues to be a much sought-after speaker and lecturer on astronomical subjects.
This course is a companion to Professor Kaler's other course in the Modern Scholars series, entitled Astronomy, Earth, Sky, and Planets.
For almost as long as human history is recorded, man has looked to the heavens with wonder and amazement.
Indeed, astronomy is among the most accessible of all sciences, for at a primal level, all one needs to do is look up.
In the daytime, there's the sun, our closest star.
Sometimes we see the moon, while at night we can feast our eyes on planets and myriad stars, not to mention the occasional interloping meteor or comet.
But beyond this basic level, a world of fascination exists as we explore how over the centuries mankind has come to better understand his place in the universe by gazing out at the heavens.
Which is exactly what this course is about.
Exploring the vast realm beyond the boundaries of Earth.
Not simply for the pleasure of gazing at the stars, but to understand how they were created, how they affect us back here on Earth, and what their fates, and perhaps ours, are likely to be.
For more information on this course, please visit its webpage at www.modernscholar.com, where you'll have access to links to related sites, a seminar room to share your thoughts with other students, and yes, of course, a final exam.
And now we begin Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe Lecture 1, The Neighborhood.
And now, Professor Kaler.
Using the Sun as a stepping stone to the stars will look at the great variety of stars that are out there from the small ones that go from the size of Manhattan to the huge ones that would dominate practically the entire solar system if you could place them where the sun is.
We'll then look at the stars in the context of this whole system called our galaxy, our Milky Way galaxy.
The structure that actually makes the Milky Way that you can see splashed across a beautiful summer sky.
Our galaxy is only one of a great many others that are out there.
Not just millions, not just billions, but literally trillions of them, that all together construct this magnificent structure known as the universe.
The end will look at the whole universe, the entire picture, and finally, at the very end, bring it all back to the Earth and see what meaning it has for us as human beings.
But the best thing really is to start with the Earth before we come back to it, begin with it, and look at its place within this solar system.
You go on outside on a nice clear night and you see the moon, the planets, the stars all arrayed for you on what appears to be a giant dome.
And everything looks to be at the same distance. It is such a grand illusion.
The moon is only a quarter million miles away. The planets may be millions or billions of miles away.
And the stars, we don't even wish to use miles. We use light travel time.
How long it takes a beam of light to get from there to us, years, hundreds of years, thousands of years.
And in the case of galaxies, millions, if not billions of years, everything out there is at a different distance.
So we must begin in near space, in what we might think of almost as inner space.
Take a look at the planetary system, this small structure within the context of this huge galaxy in which we live.
Because we're really most familiar with that in with our Earth. Our Earth is a planet, one of nine planets, traditionally nine planets,
in order outward from the sun, Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, all of which are fairly similar to each other.
They are called terrestrial planets because they're like Terra, our own Earth.
And they're made of rock and iron and not very much else.
Unusual bodies, which are kind of a distillate of the sun and of the other stars.
Working out farther, four large ones, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune.
Jupiter and Saturn quite similar to each other, two very large bodies each ten times the size of Earth, roughly speaking.
And then Uranus and Neptune a bit smaller, farther away.
And then little tiny Pluto out there at the end, which is one of a great many other smaller bodies out at the fringe of the planetary system.
The most difficult thing to do in looking at the solar system is to get a sense of size and scale.
In almost all of astronomy, the separations between things are vastly bigger than the things themselves.
Most of the universe appears to be empty space.
Well, not really empty. There's always a little gas here and there, but that's not what we're talking about.
We're talking about actual, reasonably sized physical bodies.
The sun is 93 million miles, 150 million kilometers away from the Earth.
It's a standard unit called the astronomical unit with a capital A and a capital U.
The AU, we'll be using that quite a bit off and on over the course of this course.
The sun dominates everything. It's a star.
Although loosely we speak of the sun and the stars because we really want to separate the sun out from the rest of them because it is such a standard for us.
Almost everything in astronomy is put in terms of solar size, solar scale, solar mass.
The sun is 860,000 miles across, 150 million kilometers.
109 times the diameter of the Earth and a hundredth of an astronomical unit.
It's kind of nice to be able to keep these numbers in some kind of memory bank as we proceed.
And fortunately, things tend to come out nice round units of a hundred.
We're not picky here about individual numbers to many decimal places.
A rounding office is just fine because it gives the ideas, that's all, the ideas of sense, of size and scale.
The sun is a hundredth of an astronomical unit across, so you could line up 100 suns between us and the Earth.
But the Earth is only rounding off a hundredth the size of the sun, so you could line up 10,000 Earths from here to the sun.
We are just a moat. We're just a tiny speck compared to the size and scale of the planetary system.
Mercury is four tenths of the way out, Venus is seven tenths of the way out of an astronomical unit, Mars,
the last of the terrestrial planets is 1.5 astronomical units out.
And it's certainly fair to include the moon in this gang because it's structured very much like us,
30 Earth diameters away from us, a quarter of a million miles, that's all, a quarter of a million.
And we have taken this grand step to put humans on the moon and it seems so far away,
and yet it's only a quarter million miles out of the almost 100 million miles of the astronomical unit.
We have a long, long way to go, yet robotically we've done very well.
We have actually sent spacecraft out of the planetary system altogether.
We then make the big jump from Mars to Jupiter.
Jupiter ten times the size of the Earth, 300 times the mass of the Earth, it dominates the whole system.
You roll all the other planets together and they still wouldn't come up to giant Jupiter.
Loaded with cloud belts spinning many, many times faster than the Earth, beautiful sight from the Earth,
little points of light out from it, the satellites discovered by Galileo so many years ago,
which are worlds in themselves.
Each of these giant planets having their own little planetary system surrounding them, a hierarchy.
We call them satellites or moons, but after all the planets are the moons of the solar system.
They're the moons of the sun in broad, broad sense.
And then you make an even farther jump out from Jupiter at 5 astronomical units to Saturn at 10 to Uranus at 19
to Neptune at roughly 30 and then to oddball little Pluto out there at 40, which actually goes from 30 to 50.
Pluto doesn't quite fit, so we put in an extra planet with the moon.
We could probably take out Pluto if we like and wind up with nine planets again, but everybody loves Pluto.
So let's keep it in.
So now we have 10.
You see how loose the definition can be.
We don't have to be terribly structured here.
The planets are in orbit about the sun, just as the moon is in orbit about the earth.
They're tied together and put into orbit as a result of gravity.
An orbiting body is literally a falling body.
The moon wants to fall to the earth.
Instead, it is moving this way.
However, if you cut off the gravity, which, of course, fortunately we can never do, it's impossible.
But if you could, Newton's first law, remember Newton's first law back there in some science class so long ago,
if you could cut off the force that tied the moon to the earth, the moon would go out in a straight line,
never deviating from that and never coming back.
It's sometimes said that astronauts are out of the earth's gravity.
Nobody ever is out of the earth's gravity.
It's simply not possible because gravity goes on forever.
As Newton found, it drops off as one over the distance between the two bodies squared.
The centers is what counts.
You double the distance from the center of the earth to the body.
Coming out to here, you cut the gravity by a factor of four, but it never goes to zero.
That's the beauty of gravity.
It ties everything together throughout the entire universe.
It's, in a sense, the broad glue that holds everything a piece that allows the universe to be the universe.
If you could stop the moon and let it go, it would simply fall to the earth.
Much as when you jump up in the air, you fall back down again.
So as it falls toward the earth, it keeps falling, but it is moving around the earth and it can't catch up with the surface.
The universe goes around and around and around.
As a result of gravity, without the gravity, it couldn't be in orbit.
That's true of anybody.
It's true of the shuttle.
It's true of any spacecraft.
It orbits because of gravity.
The force of gravity Newton found was equal to a constant, which we can find in the laboratory,
times the product of the two masses divided by the square of the distance between the centers of the masses,
providing their spherical.
Everything works this way.
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, they all go around the sun as a result of the mutual gravity between each of the bodies in the sun.
So the earth is literally falling toward the sun, but it can't get there because it has this horizontal motion
that keeps carrying it around as it tries to fall at the same time.
We're fooled.
Newscasters are often fooled by looking at astronauts in orbit who are weightless.
Even NASA uses a phrase called microgravity, which is kind of a catchphrase for effectively feeling no gravity.
But you don't feel gravity when you jump.
If you jumped off a building or if you were a skydiver, you don't feel the gravity until you land.
The only reason astronauts are weightless is because both the astronaut and the spacecraft are falling toward the earth
with the same acceleration, with the same increase in speed, with the same deviation of the curve.
And consequently, since there's no difference between the two, they simply feel no weight,
but they're all within the force of gravity.
Planetary orbits were defined by Johannes Kepler, beginning around roughly 1610 or so,
based upon observations made by the greatest of the pre-telescopic observers, Tico Brahe,
Danish nobleman who compiled the best catalog of the day, of the positions,
the coordinates of the stars in the coordinate frame of the sky.
He came up with three different rules.
First, that planetary orbits are ellipses with the sun at one focus of the ellipse.
The ellipse is a curve defined by two foci, two points.
The sum of the distances from the curve to each of the foci is a constant to go around the ellipse.
Circle is an ellipse, a special case.
You put the foci together at the center, you've got a very symmetrical figure.
If you separate the foci, then you get longer and longer and longer and skinnier ellipses.
Planetary orbits are ellipses.
The distance between the sun and the earth changes slightly over the course of the year.
When the earth is closest to the sun, we call it perihelion.
Perihelion closest to the sun, helios from the Greek for sun.
Perihelion farthest from the sun, and one commonly hears that,
oh, this is why we have seasons.
No, we get all our heat from the sun, true.
But the distance has nothing to do with the seasons.
The seasons have to do with the tilt of this axis and the sun moving from,
or the course of the year, from overhead in the southern hemisphere to overhead in the northern hemisphere,
and better and better, heating as the sun gets higher in the sky.
Nevertheless, the distance really does change.
We just don't really notice it.
We're closest to the sun on roughly on January 2nd,
and we're farthest away from the sun about the 4th of July.
All planets undergo this variation, this difference in distance.
Kepler also found that when a planet gets closer to the sun speeds up.
It came up with a very nice rule that describes the speed with which the planet goes.
I mean, it's effectively because when the planet's closer to the sun,
the gravity is greater and the planet moves a little bit faster.
And then he came up with a beautiful third law, which he called the harmonic law,
or at least which we call the harmonic law now,
where the squares, the periods of the planets in years
equal the distances the planets from the sun in astronomical units cubed.
P squared equals A cubed, a phrase that pervades astronomy,
one that we couldn't do without.
The distance of a planet from the sun, we mean the average distance,
which is half of the major axis of the ellipse,
what we call the semi-major axis of the ellipse.
It goes by a little letter A, so P squared equals A cubed.
Beautiful law.
Isaac Newton then took his three laws of motion,
you know, body rest stays at rest, body motion stays in motion, and so on.
Force is equal to mass times acceleration,
and the action-reaction law for reaction, there's an equal and opposite reaction.
We've all been through this.
And the law of gravity, which I've already expressed,
and he re-derived Kepler's laws in a magnificently general way.
The first law was generalized that it's not just ellipses,
you can have what are called hyperbolas.
They're open-ended.
I hate to use the phrase open-ended ellipse,
because that's certainly a contradiction.
But a body can come into the earth, go around it at perihelion,
and go back out again, and never return.
It's perfectly acceptable orbit.
It's just a one-way orbit, one-time affair.
The second law is called the conservation of angular momentum.
If you imagine yourself tying a rock to a string
and spinning the rock around the string is a certain length.
The rock has a certain velocity, and it has a certain mass.
You multiply those three together,
you get something called angular momentum.
Angular momentum is conserved.
It stays the same unless you have some sort of outside force acting upon it on the body.
Consequently, as you swing it around, you bring in the string,
the body whirls faster.
Skaters do the same thing.
You set a spin, arms come in, you speed up.
Kepler's second law is basically the conservation of angular momentum.
You get closer to the earth,
an asteroid or some body from space gets closer to the earth.
It speeds up, goes through a pair of G in the case of the earth,
closest to the earth, and back out again.
So we actually move faster when we are closer to the sun and a little bit slower
when we're farther away from the sun.
Not something terribly sensible.
You don't really pay much attention to that sort of thing
because the earth's orbit is really pretty circular.
The third law is quite extraordinary,
and it's one that I think will put off until the second lecture
because it requires a little bit more background,
but it's how we get the mass of the sun.
So let's take a look at that one when we actually get to the sun itself.
There's a lot more in this system than just the planets.
In between Mars and Jupiter are a whole bunch of small bodies called asteroids.
And if you collect them all together, you'd have a mass less than the earth.
You have a mass less than Mars.
You really wouldn't have very much.
You can accumulate them and almost pretend they're yet another planet.
They would have been a planet except Jupiter has kept them stirred up.
Jupiter's gravity dominates the planetary system outside of the sun.
The sun, of course, controls everything.
But beyond that, Jupiter can make an interesting mess of things.
It has kept the asteroids from accumulating themselves into a planet.
Over the last four and a half billion years of the earth's existence.
Yes, we really do know the lifetime.
We know how long we've been here.
Thanks to the asteroids, and in part thanks to the Apollo astronauts
and all the geologists who have examined the earth over the years.
We'll take a look a little bit farther down the line at atoms and their variants.
But we don't need much technical detail to understand that there are a set of
chemical elements, the heavier ones in particular, that are radioactive.
They decay away.
Uranium is familiar to everyone.
Uranium is a radioactive element.
It's unstable.
It decays to a lighter element.
Uranium decays to lead, a particular variety of lead.
And by comparing the end product of this decay with the predecessor,
in other words, the lead to uranium ratio, if you use the right kinds,
you can tell the age of a rock since it's solidification.
If you know the decay rate, which you can get from the laboratory.
And there are a variety of these radioactive elements that you can use,
the parent product to the daughter product.
And the earth's rocks come out to be, well, three, three-and-a-half,
maybe a little older, billion years old, the oldest ones we can find.
There's an active body.
Some rocks are of zero age.
You can see this when lava flows come up from inside the planet.
But the most ancient ones are in the upper billions of years.
So the solar system, all of which was formed at the same time,
that's almost patently obvious.
All the planets go around the sun in the same direction.
In the equatorial plane of the sun, most of the spin axes are more or less perpendicular
to the plane of the orbit.
They all kind of spin in the same direction.
The symmetry of the solar system shows this.
Everything was made at the same time.
The oldest rocks in the moon go back beyond four billion years.
And then you have the asteroids.
We've not been to the asteroids, but the asteroids have been to us.
Many times a day we get hit by meteorites.
Meteorites are small asteroids.
Once we think of it, you can pick off the ground that you look at in museums.
They're small asteroids.
You don't want to get hit by a big asteroid.
You get hit by a big asteroid, then we wouldn't have to worry much about radioactive dating
because none of us would be here.
Say, if something 10 miles across hit us, it would change the Earth so much
that it would probably wipe out most of the species here.
Something that happened 60 or so million years ago
and the dinosaurs disappeared.
But now we're talking about small ones.
We can take them into the lab and we can do radioactive dating on these.
And they uniformly come up with ages of four and a half billion years old.
So we look for the oldest things we can find,
and that seems to be the age of everything
since everything was formed at once.
Four and a half billion years old.
The sun, the planets, the moon, all of us.
You go out beyond Pluto
and there's all of this little stuff, hundreds of small bodies.
Pluto seems to be the largest one.
Occasionally one of these small bodies will work its way
via the gravitational effects of the outer planets
into the inner solar system.
They're small, icy, dirt-filled bodies.
When they get close to the sun, the sun heats them up
and the ices turn into gas, the dust gets released
and the pressure of sunlight and the solar wind,
something that's going to become very important in this course,
which is a flow of matter coming outward from the sun,
picks up the gas and the dust and blows it back away from the sun in a long tail
and we have a comet in the sky.
It's one of the great realms of the comets out beyond the order of Pluto.
Pluto is not a comet.
It's a body that was assembled from primitive comets
and then in the process of the origin of the solar system,
it just didn't have enough raw material to go any farther.
But that will defer to a later time too
because one of the lectures about midway through this course
will be on star formation and then we will look at not just star formation
but planet formation because planets seem to be a natural byproduct
of the formation of stars.
And then we'll bring it right back home again
and see where all of this stuff really came from.
Now we're just setting the scale in the context.
The system of planets is often taken as the solar system.
It's not true.
The system of planets, you could say, is the planetary system kind of redundantly.
The solar system is much bigger than that
because we extend outward through this realm of comets called the Kuiper Belt
after Gerard Kuiper and then in an enormous volume
that seems to extend a good fraction of the way to the nearest star
is this so-called Oort, O-O-R-T after Jan Oort,
comet cloud which is the realm of a lot of the leftovers
of the formation of the planetary system.
See, the planets seem to have accumulated from tiny dust grains
through bigger bodies and bigger bodies and bigger bodies
and it's not 100% efficient and there's a lot of stuff left over.
So the solar system, this sphere of influence of the sun
is vastly larger than the planetary system.
Probably all stars, or at least most stars,
those whose systems have not been disrupted for one reason or another,
have, quote, solar systems like ours.
There may be many, many, many more planets out there
and we're beginning to find them and we'll look later at how we actually have found them.
We do know of planets in orbit about other stars.
The evidence is absolutely overwhelming.
Although we've never seen one yet, we will, we will as technology advances.
Our planetary system is but on the average here, allowing for Pluto.
Let's go out to Pluto.
40 astronomical units in radius, 80 astronomical units across.
The comet cloud may be tens of thousands of astronomical units across.
Take the jump to the nearest star.
Again, you look out and you see the planets, the wanderers
moving against the background of the stars and the constellations.
They look all at the same distance, but the stars are vastly farther away.
The planets really are not very bright.
They all shine by reflected light only.
Turn out the sun, they'd all disappear.
Stars are self-luminous.
They're luminous because of a process, at least most of them,
called thermonuclear fusion, something we'll look at in quite a bit of detail.
Another lecture down the line in which light chemical elements
get converted into heavier chemical elements with the release of energy,
which is what keeps the sun and the stars alive.
The distances are almost ridiculous compared to the sizes of the planets.
You really can't envision them.
I don't think a human mind can entirely encompass them.
We get, we get, we glibly talk about how far away they are,
but to try to imagine it is quite mind-bending.
The nearest star is called Alpha Centauri,
the brightest star in the constellation Centaurus,
the centaur in the southern hemisphere.
Can't be seen from most of the northern hemisphere.
It's about 270,000 astronomical units away.
Now, we've been from here to the moon,
a mere tiny fraction of an astronomical unit,
about 400th of an astronomical unit,
and we sent robotic craft out to now 50, 60 astronomical units.
We have Voyager spacecraft, for example, have exited the planetary system.
They are bound for interstellar space.
They are on hyperbolic orbits relative to the sun,
and they're not coming back.
But then you make this jump to almost 300,000 astronomical units,
which shows you how difficult star travel is going to be
if ever we master it at all.
And that's the nearest one.
Now, we can't continue to use the astronomical unit
when you're talking about stellar distance scales.
A distance unit is just too small.
So let's have another one.
Light travel time works very nicely.
Light goes at a speed of 186,000 miles per second.
That's about eight times around the world, this Earth, in one second.
Travel is about that far in a trillionth of a second.
So see, we as people are completely unaware of light travel time
relative to one another.
It takes eight minutes for a light to get from the sun to us.
So we say the sun is not just an astronomical unit away,
but we could say that the sun is eight light minutes away.
It's a distance unit, not a time unit.
That is, we see the sun as it was eight minutes ago,
but if you and I were standing here having a conversation,
you were a few trillions of a second ago,
so this doesn't really bother anybody.
Now is as I perceive it, as the light gets to me.
And I look at everything around me at different times in the past
because of light travel time.
It never bothers us as people or human beings.
So we ignore it with stars as well.
Stars live far longer than their light travel times.
The sun does.
So do stars.
The nearest star is four light years away.
You see Alpha Centauri as it was four years ago.
And that's the closest one.
Most of the stars that make the familiar constellations
are maybe 20, 30, 40, 50, 100.
A thousand even light years away.
The farthest thing you can see with the human eye,
farthest star, is in the thousands of light years.
You see it before the ancient Greeks even existed.
But it doesn't bother us.
There's nothing we can do about it anyway.
You can't tell.
You can never tell what has gone on with a star
until the light actually hits you.
So now is as we see it.
The stars are gathered together in a galaxy.
Our galaxy is about, rounding off,
100,000 light years across.
It doesn't really have a sharp edge.
It just sort of fades away.
Roughly 100,000 light years across.
Our sun is about three-quarters, two-thirds, roughly,
out from the center of it.
We're sort of at the fringe, fortunately,
because it's kind of quiet out here.
If we were really close to the center,
the interactions of things would be so great
that we might not even exist.
So we're in a quiet part of the galaxy.
You stand outside in a clear night.
You can see that galaxy around your head.
Our galaxy is a flat dinner plate shaped affair.
Very thin.
So when we stand in the middle of this plate,
you see the galaxy around you as a Milky Way.
You see the combined light of all the stars.
The stars that make the nighttime sky
are all relatively close to us.
They're local.
They're just our local neighborhood.
Looking out into the broad distance
and you see the combined light of billions of stars.
There are at least 200 billion stars in our galaxy
and we don't have a full census.
We couldn't count them all.
We certainly aren't ever going to catalog them all.
Astronomy is, if nothing else, it's a statistical science.
We sample.
And we don't even know the lower limits to mass.
There's some stars that are so dim.
We haven't even begun to count them yet, their number.
So now we've got a galaxy of 2 to 400 billion.
Yes, billion stars.
All in orbit about the center.
All held together by gravity.
Most of the stars going around in circuit orbits.
It takes our sun about 250 million years
to make a complete turn
at a distance of somewhere around 25,000 light-years
out from the center, give or take.
But we're not alone.
Here's our galaxy.
And over here, here's another one.
And over here, here's another one.
Separated from each other.
In the very early days of galaxy studies,
they were sometimes called island universes.
A very bad term.
The universe is what encompasses everything.
So we don't want to really use that.
But a galaxy here, a galaxy there, a galaxy here.
All of different sizes, different shapes,
many, many, many different kinds.
Again, something we're going to look at farther down the line.
Examine the tremendous variety that there are.
Everything from little shards, little scraps to monsters
that are 10 or more times the size of our own.
The nearest one can be seen in the constellation Andromeda,
rising in northern hemisphere, autumn skies.
The nearest one comparable to ours, I should say.
Called the Andromeda Galaxy.
It's easy to see with a naked eye.
The farthest thing the human eye can see without a telescope.
Two million light years away.
And now we have to expand the definition of local.
Oh, this is just a local galaxy.
We have a local group of galaxies.
About three dozen galaxies that all orbit a common center of mass.
It's our little cluster of galaxies.
And out here, here's another cluster.
If you go out to about 50 million light years,
we find a gigantic cluster in the constellation Virgo.
And that's one of the nearest ones.
There are thousands of such clusters.
Astronomer at the Hubble Space Telescope
organized a little program to look at a little blank area of sky.
Hubble Telescope, which orbits the Earth above the Earth's
disturbing atmosphere so we can get very good views from up there,
has a very small field of view.
This picture was taken over a span which is only about a tenth
the angular size of the moon.
The moon's only half a degree across.
This is just a little dot in the sky.
And within what appeared to be blank from the ground were almost 3,000 galaxies.
Replicated over the whole sky, that's a trillion or so, give or take,
that could be counted from the Earth.
Again, we're a statistical science.
We can't catalog a trillion galaxies.
A trillion is a vastly too big a number for anybody to write down one through a trillion.
And those are just the big ones.
The distances go out into the billions of light-years.
The tens of billions of light-years, ten billion light-years.
It's a huge system that we live in.
All of this, then, of all these galaxies of different kinds,
each one of which has hundreds of billions of stars,
at least the large one, of which we're just one,
encompasses the universe.
And the universe has a very curious property of expansion.
It appears as if all of it was compressed together into a very hot, dense state at one point,
13 billion years ago, or so.
And suddenly the whole thing expanded for reasons we do not understand,
and we're now seeing the results of the expansion.
We look out into distant space,
and the farther away we look, the faster the galaxies are going.
We haven't even really begun to make a sense of all the stuff that is out there.
The science of the universe at large, cosmology,
the subject that will conclude this course,
is only about a century old.
There's a feeling afoot at times,
I encounter this on occasion,
that you scientists ought to know all this stuff.
Well, if we knew it all, there wouldn't be a science,
and we'd all be out of jobs.
It sounds silly to say, but we don't know yet what we don't know.
There's so much out there that is yet to be discovered
that we are undoubtedly unaware of.
Every time we have a new instrument,
every time we have a new technology,
we find more and more things that we didn't know were there in the first place.
This was true going back to Galileo in his first telescope in 1609, 1610.
Suddenly, the world opened up.
The moon's a Jupiter, mountains on the moon, sunspots.
Nobody knew of their existence before this.
The Hubble Space Telescope did the same thing.
Our own century that we've just come out of,
the 20th century, was notable for opening up
what we call the electromagnetic spectrum.
That is, all the different kinds of light waves,
from infrared to radio, which we'll look at in the next lecture,
allowing us to see glorious visions of things
that we didn't even know existed
as little as a few decades ago.
It's the joy of exploration of science and of astronomy, I think,
that may be the most important part of this course.
Not the details of, this star is so many masses,
this star is so many masses, this temperature, this temperature.
That's interesting, but the real grabber here,
the important thing is the excitement of this extraordinary field,
which encompasses literally everything,
and at the same time, encompasses the body on which we stand,
from which we look out into the depths of space
to examine, to bring the universe into our minds
so that as small as we are, seemingly insignificant,
no, not so insignificant, a star cannot understand another star.
It has no intelligence.
We, however, can begin, at least, to make some kind of sense of it all
so that we can place our own Earth within the context
of this wonderful scheme called the universe.
And we'll spend the next 13 lectures doing just that.
This ends lecture one.
