Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies and the Universe, Lecture 14, Cosmic Origins in the Big Bang
Now we have the data. In the last lecture we almost finished it with looking at the
expansion of the universe and what it really means. One more piece of information to fit
into it and then we look at the overall picture of the universe. In this lecture we will look
at the theories of how the universe began, filtering down to one theory that everybody
is pretty convinced of at this point, how the universe is shaped because space time
can be bent over vast distances, how the universe is put together, how the galaxies came to
be, feeding all the way back to our own sun and our own earth. There are three broad principles
in dealing with this study of cosmology. Cosmology, the study of the cosmos, the study
of the entire universe as a unit. One is very familiar to us all, it's called the Copernican
Principle, the basic idea that the earth is not special. It's special to us, yes, because
we live on it and it may be special in a variety of ways, but I mean it's in no special position.
See, it's not at the center of things. That's very clear. We have spent centuries displacing
ourselves from the center. We had first thought the earth was at the center of the whole universe.
Then maybe the sun was at the center of the universe or at the center of the galaxy. It's
not, it's off to the side. Maybe our galaxy was central to something, but it's not. It's
just one of many, many galaxies and although we look to be at the center of the expansion
of the universe, we're not. There is no center. Everybody looks like they're at the center.
So we've been completely displaced. The earth is not at the center of anything except our
attention. The cosmological principle says that there is no center. Centers don't exist.
There's no special place. That's a better way of putting it. There's no special place
in the universe. All places are in the sense the same as every other place. Then we can
extend that to what's called a perfect cosmological principle, which means there's no special
place or time in the universe. That is, no matter where you look at it from, no matter
where your point of view in space is the same, but no matter where in time you look at it
from, it's the same. It'll be the same 10 billion years from now as it is now. We need
to filter these out and see which is or are correct. We know that the Copernican principle,
so far as we know, is correct. The earth is not in any kind of special place. Which of
the two, the cosmological principle or the perfect cosmological principle, is correct?
Or does our hierarchy stop? For many years, there were two competing ideas as to the origin
or at least the nature of the universe. One was the steady state theory. That was championed
by a famous astronomer named Fred Hoyle and others who thought that the universe was always
the same. It was not an evolving universe. It was the same in time and space. That is,
it upheld the perfect cosmological principle. Sure, the universe expanded and things moved
away from us, but the steady state theory requires that as the galaxies get farther apart,
as the clusters of galaxies get farther apart, new matter must form in the spaces in between
to take the place of the departing matter so that new galaxies could be created. It required
a continuous creation of matter, which bothered a lot of people. On the other hand, this matter
had to get here from some place and why not be continuously created in the so-called vacuum
of space as opposed to being created all at one time. Either way, you have a problem.
The alternative view sponsored by George Gamoff and others was that of a universe that expanded
suddenly from a hot, dense state. In the last lecture, we talked about the Hubble constant.
Now we need to look a little bit better at what the Hubble constant actually means to
us because if you tip it upside down, the Hubble constant is the rate at which the universe
expands, some 20 kilometers per second per million light years. If you tip it upside
down, you get an age for the universe. That is, how long did it take this galaxy to get
from us out to here? You know the speed, you know the distance, you divide one number by
the other, you get how long it took to get there. But if you go twice as far away, you've
got twice the speed, so it doesn't matter which one you use, you come up with the same
kind of answer. The age of the universe you get from the Hubble constant is in the neighborhood
of 13 to 14 billion years. That's pretty much the same age as we get from the globular clusters.
Isn't that remarkable? From two completely different points of view, you look for the
oldest things you can find, the globular clusters. And from the expansion rate of the universe,
you get pretty much the same number. This really means we must be doing something right
if it's an evolving universe. Gamov had the universe and his compatriots compressed to
a hot dense state from which it expanded 13 billion years ago. That is, there's no continuous
creation of matter. It's a one-way street and the universe does evolve. So which holds
the cosmological principle or the perfect principle where the universe is constant in
space and time. And the arguments raged up until the mid-1960s when two Bell telephone
engineers began to search for a source of background radio radiation. Where was it coming from?
They built a large antenna and they found that there was radio radiation coming from
everywhere. No matter where they pointed the antenna, there it was. And if you looked at
different frequencies, different wavelengths, you found that it was as perfect a black body
as has ever been seen. They could even measure the temperature at slightly under three degrees
above absolute zero. Gamov had predicted in his group that if the universe had started
in a very dense, truly dense state, far beyond nuclear matter, a dense state of uncountable
proportions and temperatures of huge numbers, and that it expanded, it would cool as it
expanded and matter would have poured out of the energy of the expansion to create the
galaxies of today. And after so many billions of years and they didn't have a good handle
on the Hubble constant or the age of the universe at the time he was doing it, the prediction
was that it should have cooled because of the expansion of the universe. You see the
photons that were created in the hot dense state at the expansion of the universe would
have been trapped in the expanding space. And just like a photon being emitted from
a distant galaxy gets stretched as it goes to us explaining the red shifts of galaxies,
so would the photons of the Big Bang. And now, billions of years down the line, they
would have stretched out and in a sense cooled and they predicted a temperature of around
10 degrees or so. Given their knowledge of the expansion rate, it was right on the money.
What the engineers had discovered is the cosmic background radiation at 3 degrees Kelvin or
the 3 degree background radiation is sometimes called the CBR, cosmic background radiation
that pervades the entire universe. We're bathed in it. Photons are coming through the room
now from this cosmic background radiation. There's no place for it in the steady state.
It fits perfectly with the Big Bang. The idea that space time simply began to expand from
a hot dense state. Where did the Big Bang take place? People ask. Over there, over there.
No, it took place right here. We're in it and we're still in it. We're inside it. The
whole universe was involved in it. It is not an explosion, another misconception. It is
truly not an explosion of things into space. It is the expansion of space itself carrying
all the matter along with it. That's what it's really all about. And the galaxies that
form from it are simply going along for the ride. Gravity fills all space as a result
of the mass in the universe. I'll bet very few people remember taking a geometry class
in high school and remembering the postulates upon which the old Greek mathematician Euclid
based his geometry, the geometry we use today. It's based upon common sense rules. Straight
lines are the shortest distance between points and so on and so on. And there is the famous
fifth postulate that you may remember when it's described. Draw a line, then put a point
up here. And the fifth postulate says that you can draw one and only one line through
that point parallel to this line. It makes perfect sense. And then you build the whole
geometry on this and other logical ideas. But is it true? Nobody really knows. Not really.
Do parallel lines exist? If, for example, you stretch those parallel lines far enough,
would they eventually meet? That is, maybe there's no such thing as parallel lines.
Now, you can draw this out on a piece of paper and they sure look parallel, but you don't
know. You see, you can't stretch these lines out to infinity almost, you know, to billions
and billions of light years. Maybe if you go far enough, they'll actually meet in distant
space. If that's the case, then a triangle, which in flat space where there are parallel
lines, then a triangle, the angles of a triangle will all add up to 180 degrees as we all learned
in school. But if parallel lines meet, that means that space must be somehow curved and
curved back in on itself, perhaps, and that triangles are really bowed and that the angles
of a triangle will add up to more than 180 degrees. We can try it. We can lay it out,
add them all up. They'll add to 180 degrees to a certain error. But what if you put something
here in a billion light years over here and a billion light years over here? Will it still
add up? Well, we have no direct way of doing that to test the curvature of space time.
Remember that gravity involves a curvature of space time. That's why we feel the gravitational
force. That's why we flow down to the earth and the bending and the distortion of space
time. In the universe at large, there's a lot of gravity. So gravity should or could
conceivably distort things. And if parallel lines meet, gravity could take all of space
time and bend it back in on itself and make what we call a spherical universe. Now this
is like no sphere anybody's ever seen or envisioned. It's a multi-dimensional sphere
with nothing outside it. That's the important thing. There doesn't have to be anything outside
it. It is all of space and time and it just simply folds back in on itself so that if
I walked out the door over here and kept going in what I considered to be a straight line,
I'd come in through the window over here after a certain period of time, having gone in a
straight line all the way around the universe. The early ideas were that if I see a galaxy
in this direction, I would see it as fainter in this direction. That can never be seen
because if the structure is built like that, it's too large. But at least that's the idea
is contemplated. Now there are other possibilities. You can have it flat, parallel lines, curved,
parallel lines meeting, or why not have maybe more than one line through this point parallel
to this one. If you put them close enough together, maybe there's such thing as multiple
parallel lines. It sounds bizarre, but it's a possibility. If that's the case, then space
is curved in kind of an open fashion, hard to describe. It's completely unclosed and never
comes back in on itself and folds outward in a sense as the jargon term is hyperbolically
instead of spherically. There are whole geometries built upon these non-Euclidean principles.
You can take mathematics courses in college and non-Euclidean geometries. In near space,
they're all fall together pretty much the same thing. On the Earth, you can't tell the difference.
You could only tell the difference over large spans of space. So what kind of universe do
we live in? There are other possibilities as well. We can have all manner of different
shapes that close in or do not close in, open, closed, whatever. Not all of this is understood.
We can come up with various ideas. The only way we know which idea is correct is to look
again at the data and try to make some judgment as to what kind of universe we actually live
in. The simplest ideas, however, are the flat and Euclidean, the closed and spherical work
triangles bow outward like this, or the open where triangles are kind of caustic. They
do this and the angles of triangles add up, sum up to less than 180 degrees.
Let's look at the open universe. In an open, fully open universe, we have a one-way street.
The galaxies, clusters of galaxies move farther and farther apart forever, and they never
come back on itself. The Big Bang is one way. Off it goes. Stars evolve within the expanding
system and they just die out. It's a one-way street, almost kind of depressing, isn't it,
and we never return to what we were just one way. In a spherical universe, however, there's
enough gravity to stop the expansion. Expansion slows down and stops and then begins to come
back in on itself. It may even rebound. Who knows? We don't know. In a flat universe,
it's kind of in the middle between the two. It'll expand forever and close to a stop after
an infinite period of time, and it's still kind of a one-way street, but at least we're
dealing with nice, good old Euclidean rules, which makes us a little bit happier. What
kind of universe do we actually live in? The cosmic background radiation is rippled. One
of the great discoveries of the late 20th century. It's almost a perfect black body
at three degrees Kelvin, but if we look very carefully and remove all the effects of the
galaxy and other radio radiation, we see that there are tiny fluctuations within it of only
100,000th of a degree. So it's not a perfect black body. It's close, but it's not quite
perfect. From the number of ripples and the different sizes of the ripples, we can begin
to construct a picture of the universe. We can determine the expansion rate of the universe
surprisingly enough. We can determine the kind of material that the universe has in
it, and these ripples, which are the very beginnings of the vast systems of clusters
of galaxies, we do believe, these ripples can tell us the age of the universe. They
can tell us the expansion rate, and what do we get from it? We get an expansion rate of
about 20 kilometers per second per million light years. It's pretty much the same as
we find from the Hubble expansion, leading us to believe that we're doing something quite
right. We can find the amount of dark matter in the universe. We can find the amount of
dark energy in the universe, and it all seems to fit. We're beginning to think we understand
what we're actually doing. Stars constitute in bright matter, things that actually radiate,
less than 1% of the mass of the universe. Now, I've got to qualify mass here. We're talking
about mass-energy. Remember, E equals MC squared. We can convert back and forth between mass
and energy, so we have to add the two together in this concept called mass-energy. Can we
close up this universe to become a spherical? If we have enough matter in it, we can stop
the expansion. As a concept, we'll get back to the ripples in a minute. There's a concept
here or a number called omega. Omega is the ratio of the actual mass-energy density of
the universe compared to that needed to flatten it out. Close it, in a sense, to flatten it
out and make it Euclidean. We've been looking for what this omega is for a very long time.
We've had the feeling for a long time that omega is exactly one. It almost has to be
in the minds of many cosmologists. Otherwise, we probably couldn't live in a universe in
which we could exist. It would have either run away with itself or would have collapsed
on itself very quickly. Omega is so close to one that it practically has to be one,
but can we find the things that actually produce the energy and mass that can actually close
it out and make it into a flat Euclidean universe? Well, stars can't do it. Omega, stars, is
under 1 percent stars in interstellar matter. When we add in the kind of matter that is
like stars that we can't directly see, it comes up to about 4 percent ordinary matter.
This includes hot gas in the space between the galaxies, which has come to light, radiating
its x-rays. We can actually come up with about 4 percent of normal matter, 4 percent of omega
equals one. It's still a small number, nowhere near enough, but then you factor in the dark
matter. We can get the amount of dark matter from the rotations of galaxies. We can also
get it from the ripples in the cosmic background radiation, and the numbers are coming up with
it close to 25 percent. If we factor in the dark matter and the real matter that we can
see, we come up to about 25 percent rounding things off because the numbers are sure to
change slightly over time. We'll round it off about a quarter. That seems to tell us
that the universe is not dense enough ever to stop the expansion. Again, it's a one-way
street, and this event that happened 13, 14 billion years ago will never come back again.
It's certainly not rebound, but what about the dark energy? Energy and matter are pretty
much the same thing. It's just two ways of looking at things. From the acceleration of
the universe that we get from looking at distant type 1A supernovae, we know that somehow this
dark energy exists that's causing an acceleration. We can also get the same thing from the ripples
in the cosmic background radiation, and we come up with about three quarters of omega.
We can add all the little pieces together. Omega seems to be one, and that means the
universe truly is flat, and we can forget about the non-Euclidean geometries at least
for the moment. We're beginning to make some progress in our study of the Big Bang and
our study in the shape and nature of the universe. There are many other possibilities, but this
is the basic outline, the basic sketch. So what actually happened? We can take the universe
and bring it back, squeeze it in. Even if it's infinite, we can still bring it back to a
higher and higher and denser and denser state and a higher and higher temperature. Bring
it back to the beginning. Can we do that? We actually can't. As we bring it back to
the beginning, curiously, the four forces of nature are thought to have been melded
into one. And there is a principle in basic physics, because of things or waves called
the Heisenberg, named after a famous physicist, the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, which
means you can never exactly tell the position and velocity of a body at the same time. It's
not a manner of being able to measure it. It's just an ultimate limit because the bodies
that you're dealing with are waves and not necessarily solid particles. There is, related
to that, a minimum time to which you can go. The time is in exponential units, which we
have not used through this course, but are almost forced to use now, called 10 to the
minus 43 seconds. It's a so-called Planck time. And it's 1 divided by 1 with 43 zeros
on it. A very short interval indeed. We can take things sort of back to that theoretically,
but beyond that, we lose the physics. We don't really know what's happening. But we can at
least take it back to that point, raise the temperature of the universe to 10 to the 30th
some 35th or more degrees Kelvin. That's one followed by 35 zeros to a tremendous density.
And then watch it expand and what happens. The idea is that as it began to expand, it
underwent a period of extraordinary inflation over the first 10 to the minus 35th or so
seconds, expanding countless numbers of times, which is what seems to have been responsible
for flattening out the system and flattening out the universe, this inflation. Not everybody
agrees with it, but we're kind of stuck with that sort of concept, although it's hard to
imagine the forces that were involved in doing it. But then we have an expansion of a tremendous
energy from the Big Bang. And as it cooled, the energy converted itself by equals mc squared
again into matter. And within about a hundred thousandth of a second, we began to get the
conversion into actual protons, neutrons, and the things we know of today. The matter
formed quickly out of the energy very quickly. And because of asymmetries in the universe,
we have a little more matter than antimatter, matter with its properties reversed and the
matter won out. So you can remember take matter and antimatter and bang them together and
get gamma rays. You can also take two gamma rays and hit them together and produce matter.
You can go back and forth in both directions. And that you would have established an equilibrium
in the early days, the early fractions of a second. But then as the universe expanded
and cooled, the energy largely, or a good fraction of it, converted into the mass that
we have today. And then the universe continued to cool. And after about three minutes into
all of this, the temperature was dropping down comparable to the temperatures inside
of stars. And the protons and the neutrons began to fuse. And they fused into helium.
That is, you had a natural fusion reaction going on for a short period of time. But unlike
a star in which the temperature is constant, or at least goes up for a while, the temperature
was dropping. So the hydrogen protons, neutrons, fused first into deuterium, light helium,
ordinary helium, helium-4, four nuclear particles, and a little bit of lithium. And it would
have kept going had the temperature stabilizer dropped more slowly. But the temperature was
dropping so fast, the big bang got stuck in hydrogen and helium at a tiny, tiny fraction
of lithium. And it couldn't fuse anymore. So the big bang creates the simplest things
in the universe. But that's all. No heavy elements whatsoever. And then it expands more
and more and more. And after about a hundred thousand light years, it neutralizes itself.
That is, ions are combined with the electrons. And the cosmic background radiation is released.
And it becomes the first thing seen. And it's still pervading all of space, except now it's
cooled down to three degrees Kelvin. It's still here. The big bang is still going on.
And we're still inside it. Now, here is some marvelous evidence that the big bang really
did take place. It's not just the expansion of the universe, but we can calculate how
much helium should have been created. It's about 8% of the number, 92% hydrogen, about
8% helium. And we can calculate the abundance of helium-3 and deuterium and lithium as well.
So we look into the oldest stars we can find. And guess what? They have the chemical compositions
consistent with the chemical compositions calculated by the big bang. That's why stars
are 10% helium, 8%, 9% helium, 90% or so hydrogen. This is a gift of the big bang. It's changed
a little. Yes, the helium content in the universe has gone up some as a result of the evolution
of stars because helium is created in stars from hydrogen. Some of that helium finds its
way out in stellar explosions and winds from lower mass stars. So it's gone up by a little
bit. But if you look at the oldest stars, they actually support the chemical composition
calculated by the amount of matter that we actually see. That is, it all fits together
with this 4% or so percent of kind of ordinary matter that we see, which gives you the omega
of 4% for the bright stuff, for the ordinary matter. The stars and then the hot gas, the
rest of the stuff, irrespective of the dark matter and the dark energy. So it fits. This
is some of our best data that we have that the big bang really did take place. And we
think that the galaxies formed within, probably within a billion years, if you look back into
the great distance with something like the Hubble Space Telescope, you can see galaxies
formed just slightly after the big bang took place. It's like they couldn't wait to develop.
And it seems to be the ripples in this cosmic background radiation that produce the strings
of galaxies. And galaxies probably start off small. In fact, this seems to have solved
the good ol' population three problem of where are the stars with no metals. Because
the intersecting ripples of the big bang could well have created very massive stars that
as stars may have formed even before galaxies. Supermassive stars that would have exploded
as supernovae as the galaxies themselves are getting started and being constructing themselves
by mergers. These ultramassive stars would have collapsed into black holes as they exploded.
And then the galaxies organize themselves around the black holes. So you solve two problems.
This is where the black holes come from inside of galaxies. And they grow and grow and grow
as the galaxies grow and merge. At the same time, the exploding stars produce the first
metals. Now, these first generations of stars were all massive. And there weren't any low
mass first generation. They're all gone. So there is no population three left to be seen
that as stars that are made purely of hydrogen and helium and that little salting of lithium.
The earliest ones we see are the first stars that were created in the developing galaxies.
And these have metal contents, about a 10,000th or so, of the mass of the metal content of
the sun. And now we go back to the formation of our galaxy itself because now we can get
the whole scheme running. Low mass stars or low metal stars, rather, blow up. They spread
more of their stuff within the framework of the galaxy. New generations of stars come
along as a result of the exploding stars. They have a higher metal content. The galaxy begins
to form, collapsing out of blobs, merging small galaxies, merging to become big galaxies,
all from the ripples of the big bang. And we come back home to where we are today with
our galaxy, which is now rich in metals, relatively speaking anyway, getting richer as time goes
on, growing through mergers. And we can look back into the distant space. We can look back
in time and begin to see all of this take place. And as we build bigger and bigger telescopes,
better and better space telescopes, we'll be able to look back farther and farther into time. And
it seems like we actually sort of know what's going on here. In spite of the fact that we have no
idea what dark matter is, all the candidates are there, but none of them seem to be correct so far
as we know. And we're even more hopelessly lost, I suppose, in what dark energy is. We don't know
what that is either. Yet we begin to get the picture of how this system was put together. How
did the big bang get there in the first place? We have no idea. Maybe there are such things as
multiple universes, which are at least suggested that big bangs can take place in an almost infinitely
large super universe of some sort, and that there are other universes out there. It's kind of a bad
use of the term, because universe means everything. But we're thinking of our universe, which we can
access visibly. The other ones, if there are such things, we can't access. Maybe they spring
suddenly from the foam of some infinitely large, bigger structure. We don't know. All we can do is
speculate at this point, because we have no data from those times. But we do seem to understand
something of our own. There's a lot left to be learned. Dark energy, dark matter, where is it?
Many, many, many are the details. And then we come back to our own system and our own sun that was
born some five billion years ago, out of a cloud of gas that was enriched by earlier generations
of stars. And we look around in space and see if anybody else out there is wondering the same
thing. Are there other planets out there, whether they're things like us, or are we all alone in
this marvelous universe that was there? In a sense, for us, it helped create us, or at least it
created all the other things around us, if there are other people out there or other creatures
thinking these same thoughts. We don't know. That argument rages on too, and it's one of the great
unknowns, just like dark energy and dark matter. Are we alone or not? And the philosophical ideas
go back and forth with time. Some people believing that the universe teams with life, others believing
that we're alone. And belief is not a substitute for scientific study. We simply have no data at
this point. Curiosity about the newly found planets, though, is that the stars that seem to hold them
tend to have higher metals. And this implies that maybe in the early days, there wasn't enough
metal to form early planets. So maybe planets tend to come along in the later days of the galaxy.
Maybe we're the first to come along. Interesting idea. Maybe not. Maybe there are thousands of
civilizations out there, all of us thinking the same thoughts, into the infinitely distant universe
with its trillions of galaxies, each one of which contains billions of stars.
And we look out from our lonely planet, looking out into space, into a nighttime filled with
8,000 stars, and with telescopes into a galaxy filled with a couple of hundred billion stars,
and out farther into a universe filled with a trillion galaxies and probably more, we have no
idea the true number, each one of which contains billions of stars. And then we ask the question,
is it all for us? Or is it all for everybody else that's out there? And we don't know.
And we look and think, oh, maybe we're so insignificant. We can't even think about these
things. We don't want to think about. But again, don't confuse size with significance.
We can look out into the cosmos and in even our poor way begin to understand at least something
of what it is all about and have an appreciation for the glory and beauty of the universe and the
cosmos and the galaxy and our sun and our beautiful planet and all of us who live upon it.
And we're back home where we started. And that's where I want to leave you.
That and with a quote from a great thinker, Cicero, which expresses a great deal
of what astronomy is and can be about, that the contemplation of celestial things will make a
man both speak and think more sublimely and magnificently when he descends to human affairs.
Now that you've completed this course, be sure to test your comprehension by taking the final
exam. You'll find the exam on this course's web page at www.modernscholar.com.
If you enjoyed this program, the Modern Scholar series from recorded books offers courses in a
variety of subject areas taught by the world's greatest professors. Call 1-800-636-3399 or visit
the course web page for a free catalog. This course, produced by John J. Alexander,
is copyrighted 2004 by Recorded Books, LLC. The lecture text is copyrighted 2004 by James B.
Koehler. The lectures were recorded under the direction of Matthew Kavanaugh.
