Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe, Lecture 11, The Galaxy.
In the last several lectures, we've looked at the different kinds of stars,
the variety of them, how they're made.
We've looked at stellar evolution of the intermediate mass stars like the Sun,
and then the high mass stars that produce the supernovae.
All of these different kinds of stars inhabit our galaxy.
One of many of a particular kind known as a spiral galaxy, sometimes a disc galaxy.
We'll look at some of the other varieties in the next lecture.
Our galaxy could be thought of as a flat plate, a dinner plate, a very thin one,
where most of the stars reside.
The disc roughly 80 to 100,000, let's round it off, 100,000 light years across.
There's no edge. You can't really draw it on a blackboard without airbrush techniques
that just sort of gradually fade it away.
But 90, 95% of the stars are within that 100,000 light year diameter.
We're located about 25,000 light years out from the center.
So far away that in the optical spectrum, we can't even see the center because of all the dust.
But we know it's there. We'll look later at how we know the dimensions of this system of ours.
So we're located out toward the edge, and 98% or so of the stars are in this disc.
So the disc is the major portion of it.
Surrounding the disc is a giant halo of different kinds of stars, very sparsely populated.
And in the middle of the disc, the disc sort of bulges up above and below.
So there's a bulge of a few thousand light years across in the center.
And dead in the center is the nucleus.
We'll pick all these apart and look at one after the other, after the other, after the other.
The different portions, the different parts of the galaxy.
See where they came from, what relationships they have with one another.
And then at one of the most mysterious things in the universe,
matter that is there in producing a gravitational field.
But matter we can't see, known as dark matter, entirely distinct from black holes.
There's nothing to do with that, we think anyway, although black holes can be a part of it, but that's a quibble.
At the dark matter that actually pervades much of the universe.
And finally take a look at how the system may have been built up, something of its origin and its evolution.
And of course, as of its age.
Look at the disc first. Pick the disc apart.
If you were looking at our galaxy from another galaxy, from way off in the distance, from the Andromeda galaxy, for example,
the big other galaxy in our little cluster, you would see us as a flat plate in which was embedded spiral arms.
The whole thing rotating around like this.
And kind of like stirring a cup of coffee where you'll see these arm structures.
Try it sometime. You'll see it in the cream.
Spiral arms come out from the center.
These spiral arms are where stars are heavily concentrated.
And they're heavily concentrated to the arms, because that's where the interstellar matter is concentrated.
So consequently, that's where stars are born.
And in particular, it's where the hot blue stars are born.
And they light up the spiral arms beautifully with this lovely blue color.
During World War II, when the lights of Los Angeles were blacked out,
Walter Bada, who was the astronomer at Mount Wilson, was doing some experimental photography in the red part of the spectrum.
Photographic plates are not very sensitive to the red light.
Most people use plates that are sensitive to blue.
And he made an astonishing discovery that the central regions of our neighboring galaxy, the Andromeda spiral, were reddish.
Whereas the spiral arms were blue.
The blue light coming from the embedded stars, dust, gas, or the interstellar medium.
The central regions of the Andromeda spiral, and hence of our own galaxies we discovered, however a different color, they're red.
And he divided the stars in a galaxy like ours and Andromeda up into two groups, which he called population one and population two.
Never mind the fact now that we know that type one supernovae occur in population two.
Type two supernovae in population one, we get used to this sort of thing in astronomy when you start naming things before you understand what's going on.
Population two stars have no blue stars, have no blue component. They're low mass stars.
Population one pervades the disk. It has the spiral arms.
It has the dust and the gas out of which new stars are formed.
You can see the relation in that that's where you find the O and B stars, the young stars.
They're all in the disk. There are no young stars in the halo.
There are fewer young stars in the bowl. The bulge tends to be reddish. The halo is reddish.
That's your classic region of population two.
Population one, the disk contains the gas and dust, the young stars, the spiral arms that are the result of disturbances in the disk.
Gravitational disturbances that propagate through the disk. The spiral arms themselves are not permanent.
They come and they go. If you could watch them as the galaxy rotates.
The sun therefore goes in the spiral arm and it comes out of a spiral arm back and forth, back and forth.
They're just concentrations of interstellar matter and hence of young stars.
Otherwise, the stars are also distributed in the space between the spiral arms.
This is where you find the open clusters. That's where you find the vast majority of the mass of the galaxy.
Out in the halo, it's very different.
In the halo, we find stars scattered here and there. Only a couple of percent of the stars are out in the halo.
That's where you find the globular clusters.
These massive spherical clusters that can contain up to a million or more stars.
In the disk, you can't see very far. That's why you get the great rift running down the Milky Way.
The Milky Way is the personification, so to speak, of the disk.
It's what gives you that band across the sky, the combined light of millions of stars.
But running right down the middle of it, in the thinnest part of the disk, you have this thick layer of dust.
We can't see more than a couple of thousand light years.
If that, within the disk, our view is simply blocked by the dust.
This allowing us, from seeing very far, most of the stars in the disk are really relatively local to us.
We can't see the galactic nucleus. It's impossible.
One photon and a trillion from the galactic nucleus actually gets through and penetrates to the Earth.
However, if you look perpendicular to the disk, you can see out into the universe at large.
That's where you see the realm of the other galaxies because the dust in the disk is not blocking your view of the other galaxies.
You can also see the globular clusters in the halo.
If you look this way, you don't see them.
If you look in the disk, it's hard to see them except for the local ones.
But if you look away from the disk and the dust, they're the globular scattered all around.
We can get the distance of any cluster from the kinds of stars that it contains.
You can plot an HR diagram, a Hertzsprung-Russell diagram of any cluster.
Even if you don't know the distance, you can get the spectral classes of the stars.
You can get the apparent magnitudes of the stars, sure.
Then you look at the main sequence of a globular cluster or even an open cluster.
If you have a class F main sequence star, class anything main sequence star, you know what its true luminosity is
because we have stars close enough to us that we can access with parallax and get the true luminosities.
So in a distant star or in a distant cluster, we know the apparent brightnesses of the stars.
But we also, from other analyses, know their absolute luminosities.
You compare the apparent brightness of the star with what we know is the true luminosity,
how much energy is pumping out, and you can get the distance.
You reverse the process, you get the distance.
So we can get the distances to any of these clusters we like.
We can then get the distances to the globular clusters in the halo.
And we make the assumption, it was done early in the 20th century,
that the distribution of globular clusters is spread around symmetrically with the center of the galaxy itself, which you cannot see.
So all you need to do is plot the positions of the globular clusters, find the center of their position, bingo.
You've got the distance to the center of the galaxy.
So we know how far away it is even before we can actually see it because we can make use of the things that are in the halo.
The halo has no O and B stars. It has no young stars.
Consequently, no star formation.
It has no gas and dust to speak of, except something that gets blown out by exploding stars,
but it's nowhere near thick enough to produce stars.
Star formation is all gone in the halo.
It's only in the disk where you find it.
As a result, heavy elements have not been deposited in the halo.
What we find there are ancient stars.
In the disk, however, with the young stars, we had lots of time, lots of supernova exploding stars to build up the metal content in this thick, dusty gas.
So the metal content of the disk is high and the stars formed out of this disk, the ones currently being formed, are relatively high too.
And that even includes the sun, only five billion years old.
The stars of the halo, however, have very low metal content, showing us that the halo came first.
It developed before the disk. The disk somehow developed out of the stars of the halo.
Somehow it collapsed to form the disk.
The stars of the halo of the globular clusters in particular have metal contents that range from under a tenth down to well under a hundredth,
the content of the sun's metal content.
A metal soon astronomer, by the way, we're a simple kind of folk.
Rather than breaking down all of the periodic table which we've done off and on, there's a simple jargon shorthand for hydrogen helium and just call all the rest of them metals.
That completely violates the chemistry view of metals, but that's the way the astronomer often means the term metal as a shorthand.
And you can relate that to the iron content pretty well, although there are divergences from one chemical element to the other.
In other words, the heavy element content, the stuff out of which the earth was made, is much lower in the globular clusters and in the halo than it is in the disk.
The ages are different, too.
We look for the oldest open cluster we can find, or the oldest white dwarf.
Remember that all the white dwarfs that have ever been created are still out there.
And they go down to around 3,500 or so degrees Kelvin and down to a certain lower magnitude limit.
We don't see them any fainter and it's not too difficult to calculate how long it takes to burn off the white dwarfs, to cool the white dwarfs down to a certain limit.
From that, you can derive the age of the galaxy.
And you can derive the age of the galaxy, of course, from the most massive star that is still present in the most ancient clusters you can find.
The open clusters and the white dwarfs in the disk give us an age of about 10 billion years.
Our disk is about 10 billion years old.
The sun came along about halfway through.
The globular clusters, on the other hand, have been burned down to class G, what we would call class G in the disk.
And the ages that you calculate are closer to 12 or 13 billion years.
It's in that general neighborhood.
And they're all pretty uniformly the same.
Nature no longer makes globular clusters in our galaxy.
We do not know why.
It made globular clusters in the ancient days, but not now.
And there is a range.
They weren't all made at exactly the same time.
There's a range in distribution.
There's a range in quality.
There's a range in metal content and the like.
But basically, they're all 11, 12, 13 billion years old, somewhere in that general neighborhood.
Go back to the disk now.
Let's keep going back and forth for a while.
The stars in the disk are in more or less circular orbits about the galactic nucleus.
Take the sun.
We can measure its speed.
We can measure its speed by looking at things outside the galaxy, relatively local things outside the galaxy.
And if the sun is moving this way, things over here will have, on the average, a velocity of approach.
Things over here will have a velocity of recession.
So we can get an idea of the speed of the sun.
It's about 220 kilometers per second in orbit around the center.
We know how big the orbit is, so we can calculate roughly a period of about 250 million years, about a quarter of billion years.
Five billion years old, we've gone around five times four, 20 times since we were born.
This is why our siblings, the cluster or the group out of which we were born, has long since dissipated.
Now, the sun has an orbit about the galaxy.
Isaac Newton, when he formulated his law of gravity, realized, calculated actually, that the earth behaves as if all of its mass were concentrated at a point in the center.
So if you shoved all the earth to a point in the center and then you stood on a platform 4,000 miles high, the radius of the earth,
you'd feel exactly the same as you do here.
It wouldn't make any difference.
The galaxy does the same thing.
Here's the orbit of the sun around the galaxy, and then think of all the mass inside the orbit of the sun and squeeze all that down to a point in the center, in your mind.
And you have a two-body problem.
You have the inner part of the galaxy inside the solar orbit and the sun, and they act just like Newton's classic two-body problem.
The sun is going around the galaxy, accelerating around in its curve track like this as a result of the combined gravity of all the stars interior to its orbit.
You can therefore use Newton's third generalized law, its surfaces again, to calculate the mass of all the stuff interior to the sun's orbit, which is about 90% of the stars.
It's the bulk of it because they're heavily concentrated in the middle.
And what do you come up with but a mass of about 100 billion solar masses?
You can make a little correction for the stuff outside the sun, which has no effect on the sun to speak of.
Part over here balances the part over here, outside the solar orbit.
The result is that we can measure the mass of our galaxy from Kepler's third generalized law again.
And we have about 100 billion times the mass of the sun in the galaxy, most of it in the disk.
The average star has a mass of about half a solar mass.
This is irrespective of the mirrored brown dwarfs.
We don't even know how faint they may be at this point.
But let's say the average star has a mass of about half that of the sun, which means we've got about 200 billion stars in our galaxy.
You take the mass and you multiply it by two.
200 billion stars, it may be three or four hundred billion if we've got a lot of the little ones down there.
So we can get a count of the number of stars without having to go one, two, three, four, which of course isn't possible to do.
We can do that to some degree sampling and it's consistent with the mass of the galaxy found through the gravitational field.
So we know how big we are, we know how big the disk is, we know how big the halo is, we know how big everything is.
We look into the bulges, we go toward the center of the galaxy, the metal content increases as we stay in the disk.
And it should, shouldn't it?
Because as we go toward thicker and thicker crowds of stars and more and more interstellar matter, the star formation rate goes up.
As the star formation rate goes up, not only the number of stars go up, but the number of exploders goes up too.
So as a result, you get more and more metals dumped into the disk.
So the inner part of the disk has a higher metal content than the outer part of the disk.
We find that in other galaxies as well.
You get into the bulge, rather mysterious bulge.
There appears to be actually a bar through the bulge that, that is, is heavily populated with stars.
Well, we can't, we can just barely make it out from here.
And then you get to the nucleus.
You can't see the nucleus with an optical telescope, impossible.
However, again, you can penetrate this dust if you go to the infrared and particular if you go to the radio part of the spectrum.
In the early days of radio astronomy, radio sources were thought to be rather unusual.
In other words, there was a spot of bright radio light over here, another spot over here.
They were named after their constellation of residence.
Cassiopeia A, brightest radio source in Cassiopeia, first one found.
It turns out to be a, to be a supernova remnant.
It turns out to be a distant galaxy that's somehow in ways we'll talk about in the next lecture, rather active.
And then Sagittarius A, one of the brightest sources in the sky, right in the middle of the thickest part of the Milky Way.
We have identified Sagittarius A with the center of the galaxy, with a huge amount of radio radiation penetrating the dust, pouring out of the center.
Smack in the middle of Sagittarius A is a brilliant point of radio light, which has been seen in the infrared too, called Sagittarius A star.
Now, it's a superscript star up here. It is not a star, bad nomenclature perhaps, but Sagittarius A star is a little portion of Sagittarius A.
And we can measure its size by taking radio telescopes and separating them by great distances and replicating a huge radio telescope that gives us great resolution.
And it's only a tiny fraction of a second of arc across.
It's a tiny, tiny point out of which is pouring a huge amount of radio radiation.
We can, in the infrared, go into the center of this thing and see things in orbit about it, about Sagittarius A star.
And we can measure not only its size with the radio telescope, but we can measure its mass.
And in the center of the galaxy is tiny mass, tiny point that seems to have a mass.
The number keeps changing as we get better and better results, but roughly one and a half million times the mass of the Sun.
But a continuous argument as to what this thing is, and there are a few astronomers who still hold out that it may be just a dense cluster of massive stars,
but the data are becoming more and more consistent with this core in the middle of the galaxy, Sagittarius A star, being a supermassive black hole.
If you get enough matter in a small enough volume, you have no choice but to have a black hole.
If it's bright, how can it be a black hole and bright? Remember Cygnus X1.
Because you've got matter that's being thrown from this blue supergiant into the black hole, you've got an incredible density of stars in the center of the galaxy,
far too many probably for any planets or planetary disks to survive.
The stars are milling about all the time, always in contact, although not necessarily colliding in some kind of gravitational contact,
but one of them may be thrown right into the black hole. The black hole may eat a star a year or so, but not all the matter goes down the tube of the black hole.
It gets whirled around in a brilliant disk first, and the radiation we're seeing is coming from the disk, and then some of it gets shot out in twin jets.
And we can see evidence for that as well, and we can see much better evidence for such things in other galaxies where we can see them optically.
There are other galaxies with other supermassive black holes, with jets being shot out of them over enormous distances,
and we seem to have a small example of that in our own system.
So we've got the disk, we've got the halo, we've got the bulge, and then we've got this extraordinary nucleus,
and it's beginning to look more and more as if large galaxies are almost organized around this black hole at the middle,
and if the galaxy can have a huge black hole, surely stellar mass black holes can exist as well.
It gives credence to our idea of the hypernovae dropping their central masses right down the tube of the black hole.
We seem to have understood all of this now, except there's a little minor problem here.
Back in the 1930s, Fritz Zwicky again began to look at the motions, the back and forth motions of galaxies in clusters of galaxies,
a subject that we'll address in the next lecture.
The galaxy should be orbiting a common center of mass, and you should be able to calculate their speeds based upon the mass that you see.
Unfortunately, the galaxy is moving faster than could be expected on the base of the mass you could see,
and Zwicky said either the clusters of galaxies are falling apart, which didn't seem likely because there's still air after these billions of years,
or there's more mass within that cluster than is visible.
There must be some invisible mass out there.
For a long time it's called missing mass, missing matter, but it's obviously not missing, it's there, so that's a bad term.
We found it in our own galaxy.
As you go away from the sun, the speeds of the planets decrease.
Mercury is whipping around at high speed, the Earth at about 30 kilometers per second, Mars slower, and Pluto is just dragging around.
Not only do the outer planets have farther to go, but they're actually moving more slowly in a weakened gravitational field.
It's called Keplerian motion.
Same thing, the outer rings of Saturn are moving more slowly than the inner rings, for example.
And one would expect that as you go away from the sun, moving at 220 kilometers per second around the center,
that the stars farther out would be going more and more slowly because they're getting farther away from this condensed mass.
Sure, as you go farther and farther away, a star is incorporating more mass within its orbit, but not that much more.
And you should reach a point where as you increase the orbit, you're adding so little mass that it doesn't matter,
and the speed of the star in orbit should decrease according to Kepler's laws.
When you look, however, and you measure the speeds, the orbital speeds, they don't drop off.
They stay constant or flat away from the center of the galaxy,
which means that as you increase the size of the orbit, you are proportionately increasing the amount of matter within the orbit to keep the speed up.
But we look out there and we don't see it. The stars aren't there.
The interstellar matter isn't there. It's now called dark matter.
We have no idea what it is. Don't confuse that with the dark interstellar clouds.
That's bright matter in its own way because that radiates in the radio part of the spectrum, even though it might cause a coalsack against the background of the Milky Way.
So in a sense, that's not really dark. It does radiate just in a different part of the spectrum.
The dark matter doesn't radiate at all. You do not see it.
We don't know what it is. We look at other galaxies. We see exactly the same thing.
If we look out from the center, the speeds of rotation is determined from the Doppler shift. Just stay constant as far out as you can see.
So there must be some stuff in there that's keeping those speeds up. We don't know what it is.
Oh, the candidates abound. Maybe a bunch of black holes, but who knows where they come from? It doesn't make sense.
People have suggested everything from bowling ball-sized grains. There's no other evidence for such things.
To compact objects the size of planets that we can't see, white dwarfs that are too cool to see, we'd see them all.
Maybe many brown dwarfs, but they can't be enough. The numbers we're turning up are not enough to account for the dark matter.
The list goes on and on. We've suggested such things as exotic atomic particles.
There's one candidate called Weekly Interacting Massive Particles, WIMPs. You don't see him.
The idea is that every subatomic particle that's for every strongly interacting particle, there is a low mass particle, like a photon,
which interacts strongly but has no mass. There would be a massive counterpart that doesn't interact with things, so you can't see it.
So maybe there's lots of these subatomic particles out there, but again, there's no laboratory evidence for any of this.
It's one of the most enduring mysteries in all of astronomy. There's a saying in astronomy that all problems are solved within 20 years.
And it's odd how often that actually happens. If you're willing to stretch the 20-year definition a little bit, it took a little bit longer for the solar neutrino problem to be solved,
closer to 30, a little bit beyond that, but hey, what's the factor of one and a half?
But the dark matter problem has been around since the 1930s for a long time, and we're really no closer to solving it now than we were back then.
We simply don't know what the stuff is. As we look farther and farther beyond our own system, we see that not only is there a lot of it out there,
but that bright matter, bright in the sense of the stuff that we know of, and that includes stars, interstellar matter, and all the other stuff,
that that is only a small fraction of the actual mass of our galaxy. Our galaxy seems to be a disk inside a huge dark matter halo.
This is not even what we've talked about as a halo of our galaxy. That's a little bitty ball inside this dark matter halo.
Separate the halo of the galaxy from the dark matter halo, and that may actually provide stability for the inner galaxy.
The galaxy then being just the peak of the distribution of matter, of a mysterious dark matter that we don't understand at all,
and that seems to pervade the whole universe. As you'll see at the end, stars and bright matter may constitute well under 1% of all the mass of the universe,
and it seems a little perhaps presumptuous to go about constructing great theories of how all this works when we don't understand but a fraction of what's out there.
But we persist anyway. What else are you going to do?
How did this system come about? The standard idea, which goes back a long ways, is that it began as a cloud of intergalactic gas,
which consisted of nothing more than hydrogen and helium, as we'll see toward the end here in this course.
The Big Bang, which seems to have created our universe, what we call our universe, created hydrogen and helium, and that's it.
This is a mattering lithium, but that doesn't really count. Let's just say hydrogen and helium.
All the rest of the chemical elements have come from the evolution of stars, high mass stars, intermediate mass stars like the Sun.
So we start with a ball of galactic proportions of hydrogen and helium, and then the first stars somehow mysteriously formed in that,
and they should have had nothing but hydrogen and helium in them, and they blew up and evolved to produce the first chemical elements.
And as they were evolving, the galaxy was contracting gravitationally, so each generation of stars had heavier salting of heavy chemical elements.
And the galaxy, as it contracted spun faster and faster, the globular clusters were created first.
They have long elliptical orbits into the center of the galaxy because they were created out of a contracting cloud.
And then the whole thing flattened out as a result of conservation of angular momentum, flattening just like the Earth flattens somewhat because of its rotation.
Flattens out, and we wind up with a younger disk that is now filled with heavy metals. The very nice idea.
The correlations are not all that good, however. Nevertheless, it gives some sense of what's going on.
The problem is, if there were stars, this first generation of stars had zero metal content, where are they?
We give them a name. Give it a name, it sounds less mysterious. Population 3 stars.
We can find stars in a halo that have a metal content of 10,000, that of the Sun.
We can get down to very low levels, but we can't find any that have no metals. There is no Population 3 visible.
Now, it wouldn't take many. So, stars to produce this. The idea is now that first stars, because they were made out of only hydrogen and helium,
had to be very massive. That is, there were no low mass Population 3 stars, which is why we don't see them.
It's kind of a neat way around the problem. And the massive stars blew up very quickly and provided the first heavy elements out of which you could then create dust.
Now, it's not clear how these first massive stars could be produced, although if you look on a galactic and intergalactic timescale,
and if you look in the context of the Big Bang, maybe we're starting to get the idea. We'll reserve that for the last lecture of the course.
The curious and the support for this idea is that the chemical compositions of the lowest metal stars are just what you would expect from an early version of core collapse supernovae,
and the kind of chemical elements you get with a very rapid, very energetic neutron capture. So, we really do have evidence that there was once a set of high mass stars,
but nature just made them high mass and not low mass because we don't see low mass population 3 stars. Still a bit of a mystery, which I think we're beginning to solve.
It's a neat picture, but it can't be all. There's got to be more to it than this. When we look out into the distant universe with the Hubble Space Telescope,
which gives us the best view, now we're looking back into time. Now, we don't much care when we're looking at a star four light years away that we're looking back in time.
This doesn't matter very much because stars live longer than that anyway, and who cares? Even to the edge of the galaxy, who cares? 20,000, 30,000 light years, big deal.
It's not very much, but when you look at even a nearby galaxy, 2, 3 million, 10 million light years, nothing much happens to a galaxy in 10 million years.
But now look out to a billion, 2 billion, 3 billion light years away, and you're actually looking back truly in time.
You're seeing the way galaxies used to be toward the beginning of the universe itself, and if you look back 5 or 6 or 7 billion years, you've got yourself a natural time machine.
Now we're talking serious time delay. The galaxies were different back then. Again, the subject that will arise in a later lecture.
They were scrappy little things. They weren't as big, and the idea now is that galaxies began small, and while this collapse and rotation idea may be part of it,
what is also part of it is continuous mergers. We see galaxies colliding together, that large galaxies grow by the merger of smaller galaxies until we get a large system.
We're among the larger of the galaxies, certainly not the biggest, but among the larger ones. And we have one merging with us right now.
There's a little dwarf galaxy off in the direction of the constellation Sagittarius that is plowing right through ours. We can tell from the velocity of stars.
This sort of thing happens continuously. So we keep building the big at the expense of the small, and isn't it rather like building planets at the expense of planetesimals?
It's amazing sometimes how one concept can pervade the subject like jets coming out of T-Tari stars, which come out of high-mass black holes,
in which we see come out of supermassive black holes in other galaxies. And we have the same thing of mergers, continuous mergers, to build big structures out of small structures.
The result? Our own galaxy. We're a long way from a true, perfect theory of how our galaxy was constructed and how it works, but we're certainly zeroing in on it.
We know its structure very nicely now, even though we're inside it. All the evidence is there. We can build up the observational pattern to know what we're like.
And we can see ourselves reflected in the other galaxies as well. So we now, in summary, looked at the various structures, the various parts of our galaxies.
Pick it apart. Everything from the huge dark matter halo, which we can't see, but gravity is as good a probe as light.
We see that dark matter halo. See it in a loose sense via its gravitational effect. Got to be something out there.
Down to the inner disk, the halo of stars surrounding that, all the way down to the bulge, all the way down to the central black hole nucleus.
And now, in the next lecture, let's go out and look at the distant reaches of space where we can see our own galaxy mirrored at galaxies similar to ours,
and also at galaxies wildly divergent from our own, and look at all of nature has to offer us.
After listening to lecture 11, a student posed this question to Professor Kerr.
Is there an alternative explanation to what dark matter is? Let's listen to the professor's response.
It may need to be said that there are minority points of view as to what the dark matter is.
There's an idea of what has been for a while that the dark matter is not really there,
that what we see as the effect of what we surmise as dark matter may be the result of changes in the constants of nature,
such things as the speed of light, as the universe expands over time.
It's very much of a minority view, but I suppose we can't rule out changes in the fundamental constants.
There is some minor evidence that it may happen.
We won't know until we are able to dig deeper and deeper into the universe with better and better instrumentation
and look back into the distant past in distant galaxies.
Right now, we're really unable to do that.
