Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe, Lecture 9, Catastrophe.
In the last lecture, we looked at what we might think of as the intermediate mass stars,
those from 0.8 of a solar mass, below which no star has ever evolved in the whole history
of the galaxy, of the universe, up to around 10 solar masses.
These die off as very dense white dwarfs, every one of which is still visible to us.
In this lecture, we're going to look at this evolution of the tiny fraction of high mass stars,
the 0.0001 whatever percent of all the stars, the O stars,
in addition to looking at some of the effects of the evolution in double stars,
both of which can produce spectacular explosions of stars.
And as rare as these events are, and they are blessedly rare because we don't want one of them very close to us,
as rare as they are, they provide the vast bulk of the heavy elements,
all of the iron, all of the nickel, so much of the familiar substances of the Earth.
So we'll first look at the evolution of high mass stars, single stars,
and see what happens in their cores and what is it that makes them blow up,
and why we can relax and be convinced that the sun is not going to do this.
And then look at double stars and how they blow up, too,
and produce even more violent explosions than the single stars do.
And then at the remnant clouds that expand their way through interstellar space
and how these affect interstellar space and how these feed back into the births of stars,
not just the high mass stars, but births of stars like the sun.
Catastrophic evolution being mandatory, in a sense, for the production of ourselves
and of all the stars that we have in the galaxy.
In 1574, Tycho Brahe, who provided the data with which Kepler formulated his laws of planetary motion,
observed a brilliant new star in the sky in the constellation Cassiopeia.
It was called a nova, Latin for new.
They thought it was a brand new star that had just popped into being somehow.
We know now that the word nova was wrong for this 1574 event.
It was brilliant.
It reached the brightness of Venus at its brightest.
You could see the thing in the daytime, and it lasted for a couple of years.
Now, everybody saw it.
Tycho wasn't even the person who discovered it, but he did something just wonderful.
He watched it.
He compared it on different dates with Jupiter, with Mars, with different stars.
So we know just how it behaved, even as long ago as the 1500s.
He provided the observations we needed.
That's one of the things that set him off on his astronomical career, in fact,
was this amazing, wondrous new star in Cassiopeia.
Well, it wasn't new, and it turned out to be old.
How could he know?
And the word nova doesn't quite describe it.
It turns out that there are what we now call novae, which are surface explosions on white dwarfs,
in double stars, which we'll talk about a little bit later in this lecture.
What he saw was a supernova, like giants and supergiants, a supernova,
something far grander than an ordinary novae pop off all the time.
Nothing terribly unusual about them.
Supernovae are terribly rare, fortunately.
They're just enough to provide what we need for life on Earth, to be honest.
The Chinese have kept very good records of these things for a variety of reasons.
Over the last two millennia, we have records of, for example, of Halley's Comet going back to BC times.
The same is true with the exploding stars.
They assiduously recorded everything.
In the year 1054, for example, they saw one very much like Tycho had seen.
Again, at rival Venus in the sky.
And in the 11th century, there was one that appeared far brighter, many times brighter than Venus.
These seemed to pop off about every 200 years on the average.
In 1604, Kepler saw another one.
That became known as Kepler Star.
We now refer to Tycho's event as Tycho Star.
We haven't seen one since 1604 in our galaxy.
We saw one in a nearby satellite galaxy of ours in 1987.
Quite a good distance away.
But we're still waiting for a nice nearby one.
Not too close, but close enough so that we can study.
They don't occur every 200 years.
This is an average, for example.
Tycho's and Kepler's Star were bang, bang like that.
And then it's been a long, long dry spell.
It'd be kind of nice to get another one soon.
Our study of these exploding stars, the supernovae, is almost confined to looking at them in other galaxies.
If they occur every couple of centuries, most of them that take place are hidden by interstellar dust.
So we figure maybe one every 50 years in our galaxy.
Maybe one every 100 years.
It's still not enough.
But there are many, many galaxies around us.
So we can look at them in other galaxies.
If we take enough galaxies, we find many, many supernovae per year of these exploding stars.
They divide into two broad groups.
And before anybody understood how they were actually made, we simply called them Type 1 and Type 2.
Type 1 showed no evidence of hydrogen in the spectrum.
Type 2 did.
Sorry for the technical detail here, but it's really important to look at these type distinctions, at least very briefly.
And then the Type 1 were divided into a Type 1A and B and a couple others, which aren't terribly important at this point.
The Type 1A and the Type 1B, neither of them had hydrogen in the spectrum.
But the Type 1B turned out to be more like Type 2, OK?
So I'm really going to make a distinction here between what is now called Type 1A supernovae and Type 2 supernovae.
And we'll maybe worry about the Type 1B a little bit later.
It's not that important for now.
Type 1 got reduced to Type 1A.
There are other distinctions.
Type 1A supernovae take place in the disk of a galaxy, but they also take place in the halo of a galaxy, the outer parts.
They take place where there are no high mass stars.
Type 2 always take place where there are high mass stars.
Type 2 correlate with the positions in the sense of O stars.
So we realize the Type 2 supernovae are coming from the O stars.
That's our first clue.
Whereas the Type 1A's are coming from something else.
So let's stick with the Type 2 for now.
They are related to the evolution of high mass stars, stars that have masses greater than 10 solar masses, the O stars.
All up the main sequence, stars die from the sun on up to around 10 solar masses, stars die as white dwarfs.
As you grow the star, as the initial mass of the star increases up the main sequence, the size of the white dwarf increases as well.
They get bigger and bigger and bigger.
The sun will die as a white dwarf of roughly half a solar mass.
All the rest of the matter will be thrown back into space.
When you get up to around 10 solar masses, the white dwarf is closer to one and a half times the mass of the sun.
And again, all the rest of the stuff gets thrown back.
So you have an initial mass and a final mass with any star in the intermediate part of the main sequence.
The degenerate matter that makes a white dwarf is truly strange.
We can't produce this sort of thing on Earth.
It's the electrons that are said to be degenerate.
And they have a maximum density for a certain speed.
That's what makes it degenerate.
And if you can always increase the density of the white dwarf, as you increase the mass, you will increase the density inside.
But you have to do it at successively higher and higher and higher speeds.
And when you start reaching the final white dwarf of a 10 solar mass star, the speeds that you're adding are huge.
They begin to approach the speed of light and you have to invoke Einstein's theory of relativity in the white dwarf.
It's not an easy thing to do.
This was first done by a young man back in the, I think the 1930s, named Subramanian Chandrasekhar, an Indian scientist,
a young man who was traveling to England to work with the great astrophysicist of the time, Sir Arthur Eddington.
And on the journey, he began to work on the relativistic theory of white dwarfs.
It was a long boat trip.
And he realized that once you hit a mass of 1.4, as it turns out, times the mass of the sun for the white dwarf,
the degenerate electrons, which are behaving in their wave-like fashion, providing the outward pressure that prevents the collapse of the white dwarf,
they can't do it anymore because the rules change when you have to invoke Einstein.
And the white dwarf must collapse.
This is what gives your limit at around 10 solar masses.
White dwarfs are stable below 1.4 solar masses.
1.4 solar mass, white dwarf, comes out of roughly a 10 solar mass star.
Above that, all the rules change and you cannot make a white dwarf.
This limit for which Chandrasekhar, among other things, won a Nobel Prize in his later years.
This limit is still known as the Chandrasekhar limit.
Sometimes it's called the white dwarf limit and it's 1.4 solar masses.
It is one of the most critical masses in all of stellar astronomy, one of the most important numbers,
because it divides the stars from those that will become white dwarfs and those that blow up and produce what we now know are the type 2 supernovae.
So let's look at the evolution of a high mass star of an O star.
O stars are different from all of the others.
The Akipai, Scorpius, Orion, they're rare, but they're brilliant.
So we see lots of them as just matters of selection.
We can see them over great distances. None of them are terribly close to us.
A high mass star will start off the same way that a low mass star, an intermediate mass star will.
You'll have the core will fuse from hydrogen into helium.
Then you'll have a helium core that will contract.
The star will go from being an O star, zip across the HR diagram and grow into a red supergiant.
Supergiants are the progeny of O stars and it will become quite large.
And then it will settle down and do the helium burning bit, the helium burning into carbon and oxygen, just like the intermediate mass star.
Coming from a high mass star, though, the supergiants can grow enormously large.
Up to the orbit of Jupiter, beyond the orbit of Jupiter, the biggest ones,
Musephiae, for example, Herschel's Garnet star, sometimes called VVcephiae, a huge variable star,
begin to approach the size of the orbit of Saturn, enormous things.
Most of their life is spent their short lives, they're spent fusing hydrogen into helium,
and then maybe 10% of that lifetime helium into carbon and oxygen.
And that's where the intermediate mass star stops, carbon and oxygen.
But even though these red supergiants are losing mass like mad from their surfaces,
they are so massive that they can't remove the overburden very quickly.
And the temperature of the carbon and oxygen core continues to climb.
This is where they start to differ from the intermediate mass stars because when the temperature of the carbon and oxygen gets high enough,
the C and O will begin to burn to a mixture of, it's quite complex but it will simplify it as much as possible,
oxygen, neon and magnesium, let's say.
So we'll now have a fusing core of carbon and oxygen going to oxygen, neon and magnesium,
and that's surrounded by a helium burning shell, which is surrounded by a hydrogen burning shell.
Eventually the core in the middle will be pure neon, magnesium and oxygen, a few other things, and the carbon burning will cease.
And then that core will collapse, will contract further, the temperature will go up.
Then we'll have additional fusing of the neon, magnesium and oxygen,
and we'll start fusing into a mixture of silicon and sulfur, and a few other things as well.
So now we've got a silicon and sulfur core beginning to grow inside the star,
and that is being surrounded by successive shells of the previous, all the previous nuclear burning states.
The star is beginning to layer itself like an onion, and eventually it will wind up with a little ball,
a tiny ball of silicon and sulfur in the middle, which will be surrounded by neon burning,
which will be surrounded by helium burning, which will be surrounded by hydrogen burning.
You get the idea at this point.
The silicon and sulfur ball will squeeze down a little bit farther, and that will start to fuse to iron,
and the star will begin to develop an iron core surrounded by all these other nuclear burning shells.
The iron core will grow to about a Chandrasekhar mass, roughly one and a half times the mass of the sun.
We're growing iron white dwarf, in a sense, inside this supergiant.
We can't tell by looking at any individual supergiant what stage it's in.
It's a very difficult thing to do.
The various nuclear burning states go at successively higher and higher speeds.
Most of the star's life is spent on the main sequence, hydrogen and helium,
then helium to carbon and oxygen, about 10% of that,
and it's successively shorter and shorter.
Silicon burning to iron in a really high mass star is over in a couple of weeks.
You can see that something horrible is about to happen to the star,
because these successive stages take faster and faster.
You develop the iron core, and it can't fuse into anything else.
Iron's the end of the line. It's the most tightly bound nucleus of all.
There's no more burning available. That's it.
The iron hovers on the edge, and suddenly it starts to contract
and begins to break down into its component constituents
and collapses at a good fraction of the speed of light.
Suddenly, catastrophically, collapses to a ball of neutrons,
not much bigger than the size of a large city.
Wham! Down it goes.
Everything gets broken down in the collapsing body to protons and electrons.
The electrons get jammed into the protons to create neutrons,
and you wind up with a neutron ball in the middle,
what eventually will become a neutron star,
which we'll talk about in the next lecture.
But it just can't stop.
You're squeezing that stuff down to nuclear matter.
You're literally squeezing all of the space out of the atom,
and then you hit the bottom of nuclear density itself
at a density of somewhere around 100 trillion grams per cubic centimeter,
and the ball bounces.
That and all the neutrinos that are being produced in the creation of the neutrons
have to work their way out of the star,
and that blows the outer part of the star to smithereens.
The temperatures are enormous.
It's so high that nuclear reactions in the expanding ball go berserk
and create iron, nickel,
and in fact all the elements of the periodic table,
which are then blasted into space.
And someone on Earth, when the light finally gets to us,
sees a supernova blossom into the sky,
the supernova of 1054 that the Chinese recorded,
off the horn of Taurus, your Zeta-Tauri,
now has a bloomingly large nebula around it.
It's called the Crab Nebula.
It's easy to see from your backyard in a small telescope.
It's expanding away.
The gases are expanding at 10,000 kilometers per second,
just blossoming away,
and in the middle is a neutron star.
We'll talk about these in the next lecture.
A core collapse supernova.
These stars can reach luminosities trillions of times out of the sun.
They can be seen all over the galaxy unless they're hidden by dust,
which many are.
They can be seen in distant galaxies,
out to distances of hundreds of millions of light-years,
a billion light-years.
They are so intensely brilliant,
marking the death of an O-star.
The explosion can produce a tenth of a solar mass of iron.
How do we know?
We can look at the expanding debris
in what is called the supernova remnant,
the remnant being the gaseous cloud that is expanding away.
They're loaded with iron and a lot of heavy elements.
All of these heavy elements get mixed into the general interstellar medium,
and they get incorporated into new stars,
and they get incorporated into the planets
that ultimately orbit the new stars.
As violent as these are,
they almost pale beside the Type 1A, surprisingly enough.
Let's go back now to double stars.
We're going to do a bit of a shift here,
and then put the two together.
Two stars are born close to each other,
by accident of some sort.
We don't still understand how double stars are entirely created.
There may be many roots to stellar duplicity.
One star expands.
The more massive the two expands as a giant,
and it can throw matter onto its companion.
In fact, it can even, in part, encompass its companion.
As the stars orbit, they then orbit closer and closer together.
They're brought together as a result of stellar evolution.
The more massive the two winds up as a little white dwarf
next to a main sequence star,
an ordinary dwarf that has yet to evolve.
Now we've got a white dwarf in close company with an ordinary dwarf.
If they're close enough together,
the white dwarf can raise tides in the ordinary dwarf.
A tide is a stretching force.
If you have two bodies, it will stretch the body out.
This is why the earth's waters are stretched out toward the moon.
You rotate under them, and the water at the shore goes up and down.
It's a differential gravitational effect across a body.
Stars do this if they're close enough together,
and the white dwarf is compact, very dense,
and it's not going to be distorted,
and distort its companion.
Therefore, matter will now flow in the other direction
from the companion onto the white dwarf.
Well, the white dwarf is a ball of carbon and oxygen,
and it's very dense, so you make a very dense layer of fresh hydrogen.
When the matter falls from the ordinary dwarf onto the white dwarf,
you create an additional skin of hydrogen,
whose temperature and density build up the great proportions.
And when they have built up to high enough proportions,
the surface hydrogen on the white dwarf explodes as a nuclear bomb
via the carbon cycle, actually.
This is the hydrogen burning where you're using carbon as a nuclear catalyst.
We talked about briefly with the sun.
All high mass stars run off the carbon cycle.
It's the other way of producing helium from hydrogen.
Now, that produces what's called a nova,
and they can become very bright,
but we see several in the galaxy per year.
They're not all that uncommon.
And then the white dwarf settles back down again,
and maybe 100,000 years later,
there's enough matter on the white dwarf,
and the whole thing goes off again.
Every 100,000 or so years, it pops off,
and you have these repetitive nove.
We even see a few where the repetition is enough
so that they can be seen to blow up within two or three times in a human lifetime.
Now, let's get a star that's very close to the Chandrasekhar Limit.
Here's your white dwarf.
Now it's a massive white dwarf.
Talked in next to maybe an ordinary dwarf,
maybe a giant star, whatever.
It doesn't really matter.
What matters is that the white dwarf has a mass
very close to the Chandrasekhar Limit,
and then the other star, the companion,
begins to dump more matter onto the high mass white dwarf.
It may explode as an ordinary nova,
but gradually what will happen
is that the white dwarf will increase its mass,
and it will get to reach that magic number of 1.4 solar masses.
You have now overflowed the Chandrasekhar Limit
by dumping matter onto it.
The white dwarf cannot take this,
and it, in a sense, collapses.
It will begin, actually, a runaway nuclear reaction inside
that explodes the entire star.
It doesn't turn into a ball of neutrons.
It doesn't collapse downward like this.
It begins to squeeze down,
which causes a runaway nuclear reaction
that blows the entire star apart,
annihilates it completely.
These white dwarf supernovae
are the ones that create the Type 1A,
and that's why they don't have the hydrogen absorptions
because they're balls of carbon and oxygen.
Very little hydrogen is involved,
and off they go.
These create the most brilliant exploding stars
known in the universe.
They can be seen for distances of billions of light-years away,
and as we'll see later, they provide a marvelous way.
When we look at them in other galaxies,
they provide an excellent way of gauging the distance
of these distant galaxies.
The Type 1A supernovae will produce upwards
of three-tenths of a solar mass of iron.
Most of the iron that we have
is coming from these white dwarf supernovae.
You put the two together,
all of the iron in the universe
has come from exploding stars.
There is no other source that we know of
for heavy elements.
Iron, nickel.
A little bit comes out of the intermediate mass.
A lot of the smattering
is some of the heavier elements,
but the bulk of what we have in the Earth
has come from exploding stars.
What's the Earth made out of?
It's made out of iron, nickel,
deep in the core,
this outer mantle of silicon and oxygen.
The only sources of these things are exploding stars.
The exploding stars then salt the interstellar medium.
With the heavy stuff,
two stars are born out of that.
So as a result,
the chemical composition of the universe
increases in heavy elements.
That is, the heavy element content
goes up and up and up.
When we look at the most ancient stars,
the globular clusters,
they have a very low metal content.
Their iron content is maybe only a hundredth that of the sun.
They're very, very old.
And as we look toward younger and younger stars,
we go forward in the galaxy.
To say the sun,
we have a higher metal content,
and there are some stars born in places in the galaxy
with a higher metal content yet.
The whole metal content of the universe is going up
in a kind of a herky-jerky fashion.
It's not all that smooth,
but it is going up as a result of stars that explode.
The supernova remnants,
the clouds that are expanding around the
dead thing in the middle,
are nothing at all.
In the case of the Type 1 supernovae,
provide compression in the interstellar space.
The expansion rates are so large
that we think that, in fact, we're almost certain,
that atoms can ride the shock waves.
In a sense, the overpressure waves from the shock,
because the gas is coming out
at greater than the speed of sound in the medium,
and that provides kind of what is an interstellar sonic boom.
The energy level is so great
that the heavy atoms can ride the shock waves
like surfers and be expelled at speeds,
near the speed of light.
These things form what are called cosmic rays.
The Earth is constantly being hit by them.
They're atoms, hydrogen nuclei mostly,
but they've been found all the way through iron.
Nuclei that hit the upper atmosphere of the Earth.
They don't penetrate down to the ground.
These cosmic rays hit atoms in the Earth's atmosphere
and break them up.
It's a natural atom smasher,
and then a shower of subatomic particles
comes crashing down to Earth as a result.
And we live in this.
This is part of our natural environment,
cosmic ray showers.
They were known for a century or so.
And then we flew high-level balloons.
We can pick them up in satellites and balloons.
We can pick up the primary particles of tremendous energies.
The most energetic cosmic ray known
has the energy of a professionally pitched baseball.
One atomic nucleus.
So the stars not only reach out with their light,
they reach out and touch us.
The Sun does this.
Remember, through the solar wind.
Well, we're living in particles from the Sun
that are from other stars
that are blowing through the solar system.
And by that, we're constantly being hit by particles
from other stars, the cosmic rays.
These are the same cosmic rays
that go penetrating through the dark clouds
that produce the ionization trails,
that slow the clouds,
that help produce the molecular content of the clouds.
So the supernovae are providing heavy metals,
out of which to make planets.
They're providing compression of the interstellar medium
that can help generate cloudlets in molecular clouds
that ultimately collapse into stars.
They're providing the cosmic rays.
The deaths of stars are then helping to create new stars.
The Sun is probably in some loose sense
the product of supernovae.
The Earth certainly is.
This planet we're standing on
consists largely of supernova debris.
So when we stand here and look out at the nighttime sky
and look at these exploding stars,
they've literally reached out to touch us and create us.
We're kind of a special place, aren't we?
We are the distillate not of the Sun so much,
but we're the distillate of supernova,
of exploding stars, of the whole galaxy,
that has conspired through this vast synergy,
this interlocking of processes to create us
as a very special place,
from which we can look out and examine the processes
that actually made us.
We can think about it and understand it.
This is sort of the intermediate step in this lecture
of a three-step process in looking at stellar evolution.
We looked at the intermediate mass stars in the last lecture
to produce the myriad, huge numbers of white dwarfs
that surround us.
And in this lecture at the high mass stars,
there's that little tail of the main sequence,
the O stars, that are so necessary to stellar life
and stellar birth.
We haven't looked at the final remnants yet,
so in the next lecture,
we will take a closer look at the neutron stars
at the neutron star limit,
because neutron stars are held up by degenerate neutrons
rather than electrons.
They have a limit, too.
And once you exceed that limit,
all you have left is gravitational contraction
and the ultimate, the black hole.
And in the case of the Type Ia's, nothing at all.
So in the next lecture, we'll look at the final products,
put the whole thing together,
and from there, launch ourselves into the depths
of intergalactic space,
where we begin to look at our galaxy,
other galaxies,
and this grand structure called the universe.
