Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies and the Universe, Lecture 7, Star Birth
In the last lecture we looked at the birth places of the stars, the interstellar medium.
In this lecture we're going to look at how we know they're the birth places of the stars.
Look at nascent stars, the stars that are just beginning their lives.
We can identify brand new stars out there.
And then look at the theory of how they're born, how they're created.
The theory which matches up with what we see.
And when you get the birth of stars, you're also going to get the birth of planets.
So we'll look at that as well and bring the whole thing from the vast interstellar medium
right back to the formation of the planets and right back home.
How can we identify new stars? How can we identify their birth places?
There's lots of ways we can do it. There are a number of observations we can make
that show us that some stars are genuinely young.
The easiest is probably to look for the very, very bright, the ultra luminous O stars, the B stars,
the ones way up high at high luminosities on the main sequence of hydrogen burning stars.
We'll note as a prime subject of the next lecture that high mass stars die first.
This seems somehow out of balance.
One would think that a high mass star with all that fuel would last such a long period of time
and that low mass stars should just twinkle out quickly.
It's just the opposite.
Low mass stars use their fuel at a very, very low rate.
They're very parsimonious.
The high mass stars at the high temperatures they have use their fuel supply up very, very quickly.
As a result, the O stars die out before the B stars and then the B main sequence stars die out
before the A stars and the main sequence just disappears from the top down.
O stars can never live very long, few millions of years at the most.
They're always found near bright clouds, always, very, very commonly.
Look at the Orion Nebula.
Within the Orion Nebula, we find the O stars.
Within the Lagoon Nebula and Sagittarius, there's the O stars.
O stars are generally found in groups, in associations surrounding and in the neighborhood of diffuse nebulae and interstellar clouds.
These must be the youngest stars and that's where they're located.
They're expanding away from a common center.
We commonly find O stars and B stars together in these large associations of which the Orion constellation is one,
of which much ascorpius is another one.
These stars are not bound together gravitationally.
They are all moving away from a common center.
However, when you trace them back to the common center, you can see that just sometimes even a cluster in the middle.
You can associate the youngest stars with the interstellar clouds.
And the original argument was that stars have to be born someplace.
We don't actually see them being born.
Where must they be born?
They must be born in hidden regions of the galaxy.
Where better to hide them but in the dark clouds themselves?
These clouds are so thick that optical radiation cannot penetrate through to the outside.
So all manner of things can take place in the dark clouds and you can't see it, not with the human eye.
However, just like radio waves can penetrate a dense fog and you have no trouble at all picking up your radio station on a foggy or cloudy day,
the radio waves from space can just complying right out of the dark dense dust clouds.
So can the infrared.
This allows us with infrared telescopes, with radio telescopes to penetrate into the dark clouds and see what's going on.
They can't hide themselves anymore.
And sure enough, we find some very strange behavior within the dark clouds themselves.
Another point of evidence was a strange set of variable stars that began to be found around 1945 or so.
The first one known was T. Tori.
Now, it may come as a surprise that a great number of the stars out there are not constant in light.
They vary.
Some of them considerably so.
Some over periods of minutes, some over periods of days, some over periods of years.
They vary in brightness.
Some subtly by a fraction of a percent.
Some by a factors of a hundred or more.
Some so obvious that you can't possibly miss them.
We're talking about eclipsing binaries here where one star gets in front of the other.
We're talking about a single star that might pulsate like this and vary in its brightness.
They're really quite common.
They tend to go by Roman letter names.
For historical reasons, the first variable found within a constellation,
unless another name was called R.
The first variable in Taurus was R.
Tori.
The second one was S.
And then we went to double letter names and finally to V.
And the whole thing is rather messy.
Here's a single or double letter combination.
It's usually because it's a variable star.
T.
Tori was a strange variable that erratically changed by a few magnitudes.
It was anomalously bright in the infrared, as we know now.
It's anomalously bright in the ultraviolet.
It kind of looks like the sun in its spectrum,
but the variation and the odd brightnesses at odd points in the spectrum
let us to suspect that something strange was going on.
And we found one or two or three or four more and finally dozens and finally hundreds
and a whole class of stars known as T.
Tori stars.
The classes are usually named after the first one of the example that's actually found.
T.
Tori stars are always found near dark clouds.
Where do you find them in Taurus?
You find them by the Taurus molecular clouds, the dark clouds of Taurus.
Where do you find them in Ophiuchus,
which has great star-forming regions around the Ophiuchus dark clouds,
and so on and so on.
Their infrared radiation and the ultraviolet radiation
suggest that matter is falling upon them,
that they are somehow being heated by extra processes.
And we now know that they're actually most likely accreting matter from interstellar space.
They're most likely growing as new stars.
Many years ago, back in the 1950s, two astronomers, George Herbig
at Lake Observatory in Guillermo-Harrell at the Observatory in Mexico,
discovered odd blobs of illuminated gas that kind of looked like flecks from a diffused nebula,
except they had no illuminating stars.
They were called Herbig arrow objects.
And nobody knew what they were.
We thought for a time that they were stars in the process of formation,
and then we found that they came in pairs,
and right in the middle was a T. Tori star.
And then when we looked carefully,
we could see a jet coming out of the T. Tori star, light years long.
Not small scale, light years long,
ramming into the Herbig arrow objects.
These T. Tori stars are not only gaining mass,
but they're losing mass at the same time in twin outflows.
And like a boat plowing through the water,
the outflows produce shock waves, bow waves,
off the prow of the boat, off the prow of the jet.
And that rams hard against the ambient interstellar medium
and produces a shock front to Herbig arrow objects.
Again, leading to something strange going on here,
and we believe that in its mass infall,
somehow into the new star that gets whirled out as an outflow.
New stars seem to be characterized by this.
How do you get an outflow?
There must be some kind of ring of stuff around the star that focuses the outflow.
We can look in the infrared and we see these stars glowing brightly,
anomalously brightly in the infrared.
When we heat the Earth by sunlight,
it re-radiates infrared energy because it's not all that warm.
It's only about 300 degrees Kelvin,
300 degrees above absolute zero.
The radiation from the T. Tori stars led us to believe
that there was a thick cloud of dust around the star.
There should be so much dust that you shouldn't be able to see the star,
yet there was the star.
The only way you could see it is that the dust must be in the form of a ring,
and you're looking over or under the ring to see the star in the middle.
And that ring is most likely perpendicular to the jet.
And in recent times, in fact, the Hubble Space Telescope has seen exactly that.
Now you take a radio telescope,
and you look at the radiation coming out from inside these dark clouds.
And what do you often see?
A thick knot radiating ammonia radiation.
Ammonia has a peculiar characteristic.
It really likes to radiate in very dense regions of the interstellar cloud.
It's showing that there's a dense knot of material.
They've become known as ammonia cores.
Ammonia is just a tracer.
It's really molecular hydrogen.
Ammonia cores are sometimes dense cores.
And what's coming out of the dense cores?
Flows of gas.
We're seeing the predecessor to the T. Tori star.
We're beginning to put it together purely from the observations.
Now we reverse the process.
How can you get a star to form so as to replicate what it is that we actually see?
Well, the molecular clouds are exceedingly shredded.
They are lumpy.
It's a very complex mix.
Why should they be lumpy?
Well, again, you can get a star blowing up over here.
Exploding stars are very rare.
It's the O stars, the most massive ones of the main sequence that actually do the job.
The sun cannot ever, ever explode.
We know that for as close to an absolute certainty as we know anything.
But you can get a star blowing up here and that sends out a tremendous shock wave.
Shock wave is a pressure wave that is moving faster than the speed of sound in the material.
And this shock wave sweeps up the clouds of interstellar material.
And you can shred the interstellar cloud.
You can make a lumpy mixture out of it as a result of the shock wave.
That's one way of doing it.
There may be others.
And it could be just random processes.
What happens when you get a lump of matter that is now dense enough that it can begin to contract under its own gravity?
It will begin to shrink as it shrinks, it heats up, and you can birth a star from the collapsing cloud.
Maybe even a whole cluster of stars if the blob is big enough to start with.
Enter the conservation of angular momentum.
You take a blob of dusty gas.
Remember the gas and dust are always found together.
And roughly the same proportion, about one part and a hundred is the dust and mass.
The cloud is shrinking, but as it shrinks, just like the spinning skater,
it's got to spin faster and faster and faster and faster and faster until it spins itself out on a new disk and shatters.
Therefore, stars cannot be born.
End of lecture.
Well, except that tonight I can go out and look at the nighttime sky and there they are.
Somehow the stars know how to do it.
And we didn't.
The only way you can birth a star is to slow the thing down.
That is this spinning blob.
It's like stopping a rampaging elephant.
How do you slow down something that might be light years across and have dozens,
if not hundreds, of solar masses in it, depending upon how many stars are going to be birthed from the original cloud?
This is quite a puzzle.
The first step in star formation is slowing that thing down.
And we've learned how.
Again, it's the synergy of the galaxy as a whole.
Nothing is in isolation in this system.
Everything is working together to produce stars so that stars die.
Deaths of stars feeding back into stars that will live in future generations.
All of which ultimately birthing the Earth and the rest of the planets of our solar system and the rest of the planets of other systems out there.
The first step involves the galaxy as a whole.
The galaxies are rotating system.
Much of it is in the plasma state, ionized.
You start moving around ionized gases.
You will generate a magnetic field.
You move around a liquid iron core in the Earth.
You get a magnetic field.
You move around the plasma gases, the ionized gases of the sun and the convection and the rotation.
You get a magnetic field.
The same is true of all stars.
Stars have magnetic fields.
Some intensely powerful, some far more than the sun.
The whole galaxy has a magnetic field.
It is very weak.
It is only about a 10 millionth the strength of the Earth's.
However, when you add that field up throughout the whole galaxy, the amount of energy tied up is very, very large.
Well, here we have our molecular cloud.
Within it are dusty cloudlets that are trying to collapse.
They may have enough gravitational force to be able to collapse into a star.
And they would start spinning faster and faster.
But remember from the last lecture, we have another star blowing up in a cosmic ray,
a high-speed particle from the exploding star slams right through the contracting cloud.
This is one of the things that begins the molecular chemistry of the cloud.
But here it has another role.
The ionization, the stream of ionized particles caused by that high-speed cosmic ray,
suddenly wake up and see the magnetic field.
Neutral particles cannot detect the magnetic field of the galaxy.
But the ionized particles can, and they grab on to the magnetic field of the galaxy.
And by their motions, the ionized particles also grab on to the neutral particles around them.
And the magnetic field of the entire galaxy acts as a set of ropes that thread through the contracting cloud
and begin to slow it down.
Without the galaxy, you're not going to birth the star.
The whole galaxy is acting to help create the star.
Gradually, the neutral slide away from the ions and you release the hold on the galaxy.
The galaxy rather releases its hold on the star, but by then you've slowed it down enough
that it can really, really begin to contract without shattering.
There are other ways in which you might do it as well.
As the star contracts, maybe it separates out into a double,
and the energy then goes into the orbit.
It's not clear whether you can produce double stars that way.
But perhaps you can.
We still know little about the production of them.
As it contracts more and more, the interior of the star heats up.
The stuff that doesn't fall into the star spins out into a disk as a result of first conservation of angular momentum.
And just like the Earth, it's spinning, it spins out into the equator.
The equator gets bigger and bigger.
You wind up with a forming star, with a disk around it.
Matter is forming from the disk, is falling from the disk rather, onto the star.
The star is accreting more matter from the disk.
The disk is producing infrared radiation being heated by the star, to some degree.
That's the disk we see around the T-Tauri stars.
The T-Tauri star is in this stage.
It's the stage that has begun to free itself from the grip of the molecular cloud.
And then it sends out jets.
We don't know why.
There are various theories for it, but we can't really confirm them.
It could be that the spinning disk makes magnetic fields and that you have a magnetic acceleration.
But we don't really know why.
But the energy drawn away from the star by the jets can slow it down as well.
The result is a star with a disk around it.
Maybe some stars interact together tidally.
One captures the other, maybe make a double star.
Or maybe the disk can consolidate into a second star to produce a double star.
Maybe two disks and two double stars like this can consolidate to produce a double-double.
We're not really sure.
The mathematics of this has not been carried forward that far.
It will be.
And we'll someday learn how the whole hierarchy of doubles can be produced.
A collapsing cloud may contain many, many cloudlets within it.
Each one of which just sees fit to form a star, and you wind up with a cluster.
And the stars within the cluster can double up to form binary systems, triple systems.
So you get the hierarchy of doubles within a cluster.
The stars gradually get released from the cluster.
The stars gradually get released from the dark cloud of interstellar space.
The sun was undoubtedly born this way.
Four and a half billion years ago, our cloud certainly has long since lost.
It's probably all dissipated.
But we had stellar siblings at some point.
It seems rare and seems odd for a star to be born in complete isolation within a small cloud.
We can't rule it out, but mostly they're probably born in groups,
either in clusters or in these large associations that gradually dissipate.
Kind of intriguing to think that the sun has sisters and brothers, so to speak, out there, that it was born with.
We may even be able to see a few of them with the naked eye.
Who knows?
We'll never know, because we've gone around the galaxy almost two dozen times
since we were born.
Everything is on different orbit around the center,
and our family is certainly lost by this time.
And that is how stars are born.
Now, nature seems to really like making the small ones.
The M-stars down at the bottom, the brown dwarfs even.
There's even evidence for almost planetary-sized bodies within the Orion nebula.
And as you go up the main sequence, fewer and fewer stars are born per unit volume
until you get up to the O-stars.
They're rare.
There are many molecular clouds that just don't even have O-stars being born.
But then there's some thick ones where there are hosts of them being born.
And the O-stars, the bright ones at the top, do a terrible thing to some of the smaller ones.
We can see the disks in the Orion nebula of new stars, T-Tori stars.
We can actually image them with the Hubble Space Telescope.
And here's Theta-1 Orionis-C.
You remember this guy, the one that illuminates the Orion nebula, ripping the disks apart.
So it looks like these disks may dissipate if you happen to be a little bit too close to one of these O-stars.
Fortunately, we weren't, and our disk remained.
Why is that fortunate?
Let's take it to the next step.
We had a disk around the forming sun, a spinning disk, a dusty disk filled with molecules.
The dust grains begin to accumulate.
Where you started with one dust grain, so small you could not see it with the eye.
It turns into a bigger dust grain consisting of two.
They stick together.
And then you grow bigger and bigger and bigger dust grains until you can see them.
And before you know it, you've got a bunch of little rocks about a millimeter across,
and then they're a centimeter across, and then they're a meter across,
and then they're kilometers across at which point you begin to call them planetesimals.
Little planets.
And these start hammering away at each other.
In the inner part of the planetary system, it's hot.
The forming planetesimals can't accumulate gas from the inner planetary medium.
They can't accumulate even molecules such as water.
Water doesn't want to stick to them because it's too hot in there.
The water would just boil away.
But in the outer part of the system, the planetesimals get wet.
They begin to accumulate ice.
So you have icy ones out here.
Way away from the sun, you have rocky ones in here.
The rocky ones accumulate.
The biggest ones develop enough of a gravitational field to begin to absorb the other ones
to be able to win out over the collisions.
The big ones gain at the expense of the little ones.
Before you know it, you've got four or five rocky bodies in the inner part of the solar system.
The terrestrial planets, dry, made of heavy stuff, iron, rock.
In the outer part of the planetary system, you've got wet planetesimals,
wet in the sense of ice, not liquid.
You can't have liquid at these temperatures, but icy ones.
And they accumulate to form giant planets.
And the giant cores of these planets can accumulate the hydrogen from the inner planetary medium.
And they grow fat, so we've got big Jupiter out here where it's cold, big Saturn.
You get out to Uranus and Neptune.
The raw material starts to drop off and you get to the outer part of the disk.
And what do you have left but a whole bunch of little icy planetesimals that are too thin to accumulate?
They tried to make a planet in Pluto and couldn't quite get there to a big body.
This is the zone of what we call the Kuiper Belt.
We don't know how far it extends.
40, 50, 60 astronomical units, perhaps, but way outside the realm of the planetary system.
The process doesn't take very long.
We calculate that it must take about 10 million years, 100 million years at the outset.
And it's gone.
And what do we see from the T-Tauri stars?
These disks dissipate very quickly.
T-Tauri stars contain large quantities of, relatively speaking anyway, large quantities of a chemical element.
Lithium, which is number three, three protons.
Lithium, beryllium, and boron are all very rare elements in the galaxy.
They're rare because it's very difficult to form them by nuclear processes and stars.
Lithium, beryllium, and boron, these three, before you get to carbon, are also easy to destroy.
They're destroyed under rather low temperature conditions.
The Sun has very little lithium because the lithium in the Sun is brought down by convection
to a region where it's hot enough for nuclear reactions just to take the lithium apart.
Young stars, therefore, should contain a full budget of interstellar lithium.
And sure enough, the T-Tauri stars have it.
Whereas aging stars like the Sun do not.
So we can gauge the age of a star by its lithium content.
We can also gauge the age of a star through calculations of its evolutionary processes.
It's using up fuel on the inside.
That changes the outer characteristics slightly.
And by the temperature and luminosity of the star, we can again tell within certain limits how old it is.
And sure enough, these disks disappear at around 100 million years or all gone.
Now, it doesn't mean the disks themselves are all gone.
It means the dusty disk, the dusty part of it, is for the most part gone.
And what do we conclude?
But that, gee, maybe that dusty stuff in all these other T-Tauri stars has consolidated to create planets.
So the idea is that planet formation is a natural part of the process of star formation.
Well, we still have kind of a dusty disk around our own Sun.
It's dust consisting of smashed up asteroids, the bodies in between Mars and Jupiter
that didn't make it into a planet because Jupiter kept it all messed up.
But we still have a lot of leftover junk within the planetary system.
The Earth is still sweeping this up.
So are all the other planets.
In fact, in the early days, the planetary system went just after the solidification of the Moon and Mercury and many of the smaller planets.
They swept it up like crazy.
This caused tremendous numbers of impact craters on the surfaces of these planets.
They're all over the place.
You can tell if a body has the scars of this heavy bombardment in the sweep up of the debris just by the number of craters it has.
The Earth doesn't show it much because continental motion, erosion, whatever just tears them away.
We have no record of these early days.
But particles from the asteroid belt, even flakes of cometary stuff are hitting us all the time as meteors
and some of the heavy stuff from the asteroid belt gets through.
The Earth has an iron core.
The Earth was mostly molten when it was born because of the giant collisions that produced it.
The iron sank to the center.
The light stuff floated to the outside.
Asteroids did the same thing.
They smashed themselves up, releasing the free iron, which then hits the Earth as an iron meteorite.
You're looking at a planetary core in the dry part of the solar system.
The outside of the planet is released free.
The outside of the asteroid is released free.
Some of that hits the Earth too.
This is a primitive, it's called a carbonaceous chondrite.
It's primitive meteorite.
It's dated through radioactive dating of 4.5 billion years.
The oldest thing we know.
That must be the age of the planetary system.
Within it you see evidence for the creation of the planets themselves.
Little circular inclusions called chondrules.
We don't know where they came from.
They bear evidence of flash heating and sudden cooling.
One of the most remarkable things about this particular stone, actually,
other examples of it have been analyzed in the laboratory,
is that it contains not only the material solidified from the earliest days of our own planetary system,
but pre-solar grains of dust.
Grains of dust that existed in the interstellar medium before even the sun was born.
Direct from interstellar space.
And from these particles we can tell a great deal about how our planetary system
was born, the composition of the stuff from outer space.
Carries along with it all sorts of interesting things.
Complex chemicals that may have landed on Earth to become the seeds of life perhaps.
A speculation we don't really know.
Same thing should have happened elsewhere.
All these other planets, all these other stars, should have planets.
Can we find them?
Sure.
Go out and look for them.
How do you look for them?
You couldn't see Jupiter in orbit about a solar-type star, no matter how close it was.
The solar-type star would overwhelm the reflected light from Jupiter.
Forget it. You can't see it.
But orbits are mutual.
Remember double stars?
Think of a double star, quote, with a star and a planet around it.
You can't see the planet, but the planet moves the star.
Orbits are always mutual.
The star is a little orbit around its planet, so to speak.
And the star moves back and forth.
And you can see the spectrum lines of the star shift back and forth.
Not by very much, but you can get the velocities from that.
Velocities are only a few tens of meters per second.
They're very low.
But they show us from the period of the oscillation of the spectrum lines
from their velocities, you can infer the mass of the orbiting body.
You can at least infer a lower limit.
What are we coming up with?
Jupiter-sized masses.
The first ones found were remarkable.
They were coming from Jupiter-sized bodies that were a tiny fraction of an astronomical unit
away from their sun where no self-respecting Jupiter should ever form.
You should have your mercuries there, not Jupiters.
However, we are awfully provincial, aren't we, as humans?
We think everybody should be like us.
All planetary systems should be like our own.
Oh, no.
What would happen if this disk of stuff out of which the planets were formed around the sun were very thick?
Then a Jupiter-formed way out there could spiral in as a result of viscous friction
and wind up close to its star.
And just before it wound up in the star, the disk dissipated,
and you're stuck with a star with a planet in orbit about it very close like that.
We actually saw one of these near-Jupiter objects pass in front of its parent star,
thus dimming the light just like an eclipsing double star,
and we're able to measure its size.
It's really a Jupiter.
Where there are Jupiters, there may be Earths.
We haven't seen any yet.
The Earth reflects a very feeble amount of light into space,
and its gravitational effect on the star is very small,
but NASA is planning Earth-planet finders that sometime in the distant future
we hope will be able to identify even Earths in orbit about other stars.
And if there are Earths, perhaps there's life out there too.
We don't know.
We're the only example of life that there is.
We don't know what conditions it takes to create it.
We have no idea whatsoever.
However, here we are.
Let's not be too provincial.
Maybe somebody else is out there.
We don't know what form it might take
unless it is an intelligent technological civilization like our own
that's broadcasting radio waves like our own.
The Earth is very radio-bright as a result of commercial broadcasting,
and it has been for decades.
Our signals have encompassed millions of stars, huge numbers of stars.
So we can look out perhaps and see if we can pick up any of these radio waves from space.
We don't. We've looked. We haven't found anything yet.
It doesn't mean it's there. It doesn't mean it's not there.
We simply don't know at this point, but we'll never know if we don't look.
So the search for extraterrestrial intelligence goes on.
There's nothing to do with flying saucers.
UFO is a serious search for somebody broadcasting signals that we can pick up
to see if we can find ourselves in the worlds of interstellar space.
Well, here we are.
The Earth formed from the dust of interstellar space.
It makes this kind of special, doesn't it?
A little different.
It gives you a different perspective.
We were born in those dark dust clouds of the Milky Way.
We're children of the stars.
We're children of the galaxy.
We're children of those dust clouds.
We're not born in isolation,
and we share the same history with any other planet that is out there.
Where do we go from here?
The sun's not going to last forever.
So now we have to look at other processes that will age the sun,
and even over the last five billion years the sun has aged some,
and that's changed the characteristics of the sun,
and what has that meant for the fate and the future fate,
the past history and the fate of the Earth?
So here we have, over the course of this lecture,
looked at how the interstellar medium has brought stars into being,
how it has brought planets into being.
From here on out, in the next lecture,
we'll begin to look at stellar death cycles.
At the death of the sun,
which is a paradigm for the deaths of all modest mass stars,
and a little bit farther down at the deaths of the high mass stars
that produce the supernovae, the exploding stars.
That ripple the interstellar medium,
and that create the heavy elements that got into the dust
in the first place that create the Earth.
Our cells not just children of the galaxy,
but the children of stellar death cycles
that took place long before the Earth was born.
