Infectious diseases have been known to dramatically affect the outcomes of wars.
One classic example of this phenomenon was during Napoleon's campaign against the Russians
in 1812. Starting with half a million troops, he set out to conquer Europe, then invade Russia.
Now Napoleon was fastidious about sanitation and ensured that his troops followed his lead.
However, his troops disobeyed his orders to resist fraternizing with the local population in Poland,
where many citizens were suffering from typhus, as well as living in filthy conditions with disease
spreading lice. Typhus made its way back to his camp, where tens of thousands of French soldiers
died during the first month. Despite sickness and starvation, Moscow was captured in 1812,
but only half of his original troops were still alive. By the time the army made their way back
to France, only 7,000 of his original troops remained. Some remains of Napoleon's army
were found in 2001 in trenches in Lithuania, where 30% of the remains showed evidence of
both typhus and another louse-borne disease known as trench fever. This story demonstrates the
ability of tiny wingless insect, the body louse, to cause disease and infiltrate a large group of
people swiftly and efficiently with devastating results. Typhus caused a similar problem with
troops in Europe from all countries during the First World War. Today, we'll be looking at the
public health effects of wars and natural disasters. We'll also explore the health risks associated
with worldwide travel and how to protect yourselves from getting sick. Let's first consider the
situation in Syria during 2013 and the devastating effects of Syria's civil war on the health of
its population and its neighboring countries. The date was November of 2013, and the World
Health Organization, or WHO, has confirmed a polio outbreak in Syria. Syria had been free from polio
since 1999. However, since war broke out in 2011, the polio immunization rate fell from 91%
to 33%. That meant that around half a million children were vulnerable to polio.
The public health system was disintegrating, with over half of their medical facilities
damaged, and there was a shortage of precious antibiotics and vaccine. A typhoid epidemic
caused by salmonella bacteria also erupted. In addition to polio, viral hepatitis, measles,
and mumps surfaced, thought to have originated from an influx of unvaccinated Pakistani fighters
into Syria. Syria itself was already hosting over 100,000 refugees from other war-torn countries,
including Iraq, Afghanistan, and Somalia. Syrians were also fleeing their country,
seeking refuge in neighboring countries. There were over 4 million displaced citizens of Syria
who were in need of aid. Damage to roads and infrastructure complicated health care efforts
to reach remote areas. A massive immunization effort was undertaken targeting the refugees,
and native parts of Syria that could still be reached by aid workers. Contagious diseases were
spreading by the oral fecal route due to contaminated water from the rivers and wells.
People were drinking water straight out of the Euphrates River, which was contaminated with
sewage. The increasingly large piles of garbage were causing more sand flies to swarm, transmitting
an ulcerative parasitic skin condition called leishmaniasis. The situation appeared unmanageable,
and the outlook was dim. In nearby countries, almost 2 million Syrian refugees took shelter in
camps or host communities. You can imagine the refugee camp conditions, inadequate clean water,
lack of food, lack of sanitation, and limited access to medical care. Refugee camps on the
Turkish-Syrian border began experiencing cases of cholera and malaria. Since Turkey shares a 500
mile border with Syria, it was impossible to monitor and register all refugees that were
crossing the border. Some Syrians crossed the border that were sick and will bring new cases to
areas where they were not prevalent. They may also continue to make their way across Turkey and
into Europe, creating a further potential for disease spread. The host countries are bulging
at the seams, dealing with the increasing health threats to their own populations. In addition,
their own resources are being diverted to the overwhelming numbers of refugees that are pouring
in. This formula yields the perfect breeding ground for infectious disease to spread at a rapid pace
to contiguous countries. Wow. Well, wherever there's war, this healthcare disaster scenario
will continue to occur with similar themes, just at a different time and at a different place.
War is a man-made disaster, but natural disasters can also have an equally devastating effect
on human health. Let's look at the earthquake in Haiti in 2010.
The first thought on most people's minds is that the post-disaster environment becomes a breeding
ground for disease. But as a general rule, the risk for outbreaks from the natural disaster
itself is actually low. The risk actually results from displaced populations. People are forced
to live in conditions similar to the refugee camps we talked about, crowded with a lack of
sanitation and clean water and the lack to medical access. In fact, 60% of children in the tent camps
after the earthquake had diarrhea or respiratory illnesses. You've probably heard about the
cholera epidemic that occurred in Haiti after the earthquake. Believe it or not, the cholera
strain that killed thousands of Haitians was likely brought into Haiti by UN Nepalese disaster
relief team. There was actually a cholera outbreak in Nepal at the time the soldiers
were transferred to Haiti. A deadly mistake was made. The soldiers were not tested for cholera
before leaving their posts in Nepal. And the disease broke out several months after the
peacekeepers' arrival. They lived on a base with inadequate sanitation so that fecal matter entered
the rivers. And the river's water was used for bathing and drinking, washing and recreation,
and provided the perfect opportunity for fecal oral transmission.
So cholera had nothing to do with the earthquake. 700,000 were infected and there were over
8,500 deaths. Now, of course, the UN denied being responsible for the outbreak, but molecular
epidemiology fingerprinting confirmed that the Haitian strain of cholera was nearly an
identical genetic match to the strain from Nepal that came from the same summer. Ironically,
prevention and close monitoring of the early outbreak could have prevented thousands of deaths
that yielded a double dose of misery in Haiti. Well, now that we're talking about cholera,
you might be wondering what actually happens when a person contracts cholera? When ingested,
the cholera bacteria latch onto cells in the digestive tract to cause diarrhea and potential
fatal dehydration. The bacteria do not invade the intestinal cells, but they secrete a toxin
that attaches to the surface of the intestinal cell. This alters the normal dynamics of the
intracellular energy package known as ATP. Subsequently, this promotes the secretion of
water and loss of sodium and chloride minerals. Once bodily fluids from those infected
leach back into the groundwater or drinking areas, a few cases of cholera can quickly
escalate into an outbreak, and this is exactly what transpired in Haiti. Oral and intravenous
fluids, as well as the antibiotic doxycycline, can save many lives if the supplies are available.
The WHO also controls three licensed formulations of the cholera vaccine for worldwide outbreaks.
The vaccine efficacy ranges from 66 to 85%. Note, these are not routinely given in travel clinics,
but unfortunately, the WHO did not initiate vaccine efforts in Haiti until late in the outbreak.
So, when we think of conditions that spread diseases after natural disasters, like crowded
conditions, the lack of medical access, and the lack of clean water, we're basically dealing with
many of the same warlike conditions that affected Napoleon's army. Let's review the disease impact
of a tornado. What about the tornado in Jopla, Missouri in 2011? Victims of this disaster suffered
from mucormicosis, a rare but serious fungal infection that can start as a skin infection,
but disseminate throughout the body and become deadly. This happened because flying debris
containing soil contaminated with a fungus, mucor, penetrated the skin, and infected wounds.
Cutaneous mucormicosis after natural disasters is not unprecedented. In fact,
eight cases were reported after a 1985 volcanic eruption in Colombia.
What about hurricanes and their public health problems? Let's take a look at the New Orleans
Hurricane Katrina. In the 1800s, in addition to malaria, New Orleans suffered outbreaks
of cholera and typhoid fever because contaminated water was hospitable for breeding germs
in the most tropical environment in the United States. Over time, an improved public health
system kept epidemics at bay, but after the hurricane of 2010, several infectious diseases
became problematic again. Whenever there is raw sewage in the street or standing water,
there's the potential for disease. This can include bacteria from both animal and human
feces, as well as rotting biological matter. For example, hepatitis A virus is spread from
contaminated food or water, so this is an issue with all flooding since adults are not normally
vaccinated against hepatitis A. In addition, standing water from flooding increases the
mosquito population and increases the potential for spreading new diseases like West Nile virus.
So, between wars and natural disasters, is it safe to leave home? What precautions should
we take when we travel? So, let's say you've signed on for an educational trip through Turkey for a
week. You time this trip to overlap with your son's study abroad program in Ankara. You're
looking forward to a relaxing week aboard a small ship cruising the Aegean and Mediterranean seas
and then spending a couple of days in the city with him. But a warning on the CDC website for
travel says that there are over 7,000 cases of measles in Turkey. Should you be worried about
contracting measles? This is when you start looking for specific resources that can aid you in
preparing for the trip, starting with your local travel clinic. If you don't have a travel clinic
in your city, two organizations can help you find one, the International Society of Travel Medicine
and the American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. It's unlikely that your primary
care physician will have either the knowledge or the vaccination resources to handle this
or other complicated travel agendas. A travel clinic can help you determine the medications
you should take with you and the vaccinations that you may need.
While your son has likely had two measles vaccinations as part of the MMR vaccine to enter
college, your last measles vaccine was likely decades ago when only one was routinely given.
The travel clinic would recommend a booster measles vaccine for you under these circumstances.
Travel clinic recommendations also include a typhoid vaccine and hepatitis A vaccine
since there is a potential for food and water contamination.
In addition, the clinic offers advice about malaria prevention and gives you the option of
either taking preventative medications or just packing insect repellent since there's limited
malaria in Turkey. The clinic also updates you on mosquito avoidance behaviors and the symptoms of
malaria. In the meantime, your son lets you know about a cool new app called Outbreaks Near Me
that gives real-time updates on outbreaks in specific locations. This app is part of HealthMap,
an online information source for monitoring disease outbreaks. It was developed by a team
at Boston Children's Hospital in 2006 and it uses informal sources for real-time surveillance
of emerging public health threats. It collects and aggregates informal data from sources such as
online news and eyewitness reports as well as official reports. From there, it can provide a
comprehensive view of current infectious disease risks both locally and globally. In this way,
it facilitates an early detection of a public health threat and a quick response.
You think this might come in handy when you're traveling, so you download the app,
you take a deep breath, and prepare to fully enjoy your trip. Let's talk a little bit about
trends in global travel. With the number of international travelers rising each year,
particularly traveling to developing countries, how do you know if it's medically safe to travel
to certain areas? Interestingly, demand for international tourism in 2013 was strongest
for travel to countries with the most infectious disease potential, Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe,
and Northern Africa. This means that people need to ideally prepare themselves
for health risks months in advance and must monitor the situation in these areas on a regular basis.
The U.S. State Department posts traveler safety and early health warnings. However,
they are not the only organization that is constantly monitoring outbreaks and epidemics
around the world. For example, in 2014, the CDC site posted warnings for over 10 countries with
emerging polio. Of course, during the Ebola outbreak, it posted the highest level alert
for Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Guinea. It also posted occurrences of natural disasters
and potential health implications for travelers. For example, in 2013, the Philippines was already
dealing with a significant outbreak of measles when typhoons struck the area, increasing the risk
for disease spread. The CDC's travel site allows you to plug in information relevant to your trip
and will give you information about associated infectious disease health risks. For example,
if you select your destination as the Dominican Republic, your results would recommend that you
should be up to date on all routine vaccinations. It also recommends hepatitis A and typhoid vaccines.
It alerts you to the possibility of contracting rabies if you interact with certain animals,
or hepatitis B if you decide to get any tattoos or body piercings. Finally,
it warns of the potential of malaria, dengue fever, or chikungunya fever if you're bitten by mosquitoes.
Having this information allows you time to get the needed vaccines and pack both insect repellent
spray and insect repellent clothing as well. You can also receive helpful recommendations
for water precautions like taking a water bottle and water purifying tablets along,
or buying one that has a special filter. Technologies like the Lifesaver Bottle claim
they can remove all bacteria, viruses, cysts, parasites, fungi, and waterborne pathogens,
and even polio and E. coli may be useful. There's a wise saying that when you eat
food in developing countries, you should either peel it, boil it, cook it, or just forget it.
For example, don't eat foods like salads, raw fruits and vegetables, raw or runny eggs,
food at room temperature, or bushmeat. For drinks, realize that ice cubes are often contaminated,
so stick to bottled drinks and pasteurized beverages. Under most circumstances, you should
even brush your teeth with bottled water just to be safe. If you follow the CDC guidelines,
will you really be safe? In most cases, the answer is yes, but for special medical conditions,
like pregnant women, I would say no. Going to malaria endemic zones while pregnant
is definitely not recommended, as preventative medications are limited and the health impact
on the fetus may be significant. The CDC website is a valuable place to start,
but travel clinics do have special resources as well. In my opinion, a website or book
should not be a substitute for a real travel clinic visit, if at all possible.
Travel clinics are also especially important if you're going to an area of either South America
or Africa where yellow fever is endemic. Yellow fever is caused by a potentially deadly virus
that is mosquito-borne, that rapidly attacks the liver and leads to yellow jaundice, hence
the derivation of its name. Only certified travel clinics can administer the yellow fever vaccine,
and an official booklet stamp is required to enter other countries after visiting countries
with yellow fever risk. Plan ahead. Some vaccines need multiple injections and have to be given in
a series months apart. This means you have to work backwards in your timetable in order to
fully be protected by the time you leave. Our travel clinic frequently receives last-minute
phone calls of panic travelers who are leaving for remote destinations in under a week.
Health officials recommend finishing all vaccines at least one week before traveling,
in case you have a rare serious side effect, and in order to give your immune system time
to form immunoglobulin G antibodies. Additional planning is also important
so that you can identify medical care available in the area where you're traveling.
If you buy travelers health insurance, they usually work with specific providers
in the country they serve. Otherwise, there is a list of organizations you can contact in case
of emergencies, like the U.S. Embassy and the International Association for Medical Assistance
to Travelers. Now, my wife laughs at me when we travel because I carry two medicine kits,
one for the usual daily routine, but the other filled with what-if medications,
and the what-ifs may include those for diarrhea, decongestions, motion sickness pills,
antacids, antibacterial creams, selected antibiotics, and sometimes more.
And when traveling with three children, these have often come in handy.
Take the time to assess your own needs and pack accordingly.
Now, let's figure out what to do if you are sick or ill after your trip.
Hopefully, you kept track of the places you went, noted if you were bitten by insects at the time,
if you had contact with animals, what kind of food and drinks you had,
if you swam in lakes, rivers, etc. These are important pieces of information your doctor
will need to know to create a differential diagnosis for your illness.
You might be wondering, are there any other organizations looking out for global health
issues that might affect the U.S., helping to protect us against outbreaks and epidemics?
During wartime or during natural disasters or outbreaks, public health surveillance
is critical to providing evidence for sound decision-making during crises.
It provides a formal system of collecting, analyzing, interpreting, and disseminating data.
Let's take a quick look at how surveillance efforts were successful during the SARS epidemic.
In 2002, a severe pneumonia epidemic broke out in China, spread to Hong Kong in 2003,
and later to Singapore and Canada. It was called Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, hence the
name SARS. It was identified as a new coronavirus, and more than 8,000 people in 26 countries were
affected with over 700 deaths. The WHO spearheaded efforts to control the human health epidemic.
China, after initially hiding the disease events, also mobilized its trained health workers
who started collecting data. Collection and sharing of data between countries with outbreaks
revealed there was an incubation period of the virus of about 10 days.
It was decided that quarantine measures would be useful to gain control of this epidemic,
and it was stopped in its tracks in July of 2003. However, the WHO, as well as all developed
nations, were criticized for their allegedly slow response to the West Africa and Ebola outbreak.
The WHO also monitors trends, disseminates information, and hosts the Global Health Observatory.
This is a data repository for such health-related topics as world health statistics,
disease-specific statistics, and environmental risks. Formal reports are actually generated.
Data from informal sources such as telephone calls from individuals reporting urgent health
events all over the world are welcome. Suspicious informal reporting allows for a potential
earlier response to health threats. There are other systems and organizations
that are tasked with monitoring health in the U.S. and all over the world.
The geosentinel surveillance network has been monitoring health around the world for over a
decade. This network has 57 medical clinics through each continent, which continually
collect information on ill travelers, immigrants, or refugees who have gone to their clinics.
And the clinic's fax information to a central data site where this is all aggregated.
In this way, unusual illnesses in unusual locations are quickly communicated to partners
to assess trends and to share information. Finally, both the CDC's National Center for
Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases and the International Society for Infectious
Diseases are heavily involved in preventing diseases and deaths due to infectious diseases
using the One Health Strategy. They also publish the current outbreak list and
pro-med digest, which lists all domestic and foreign infectious disease events and outbreaks.
The Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service coordinates efforts to monitor plants and animals
coming into the United States to ensure they don't carry any diseases that can be transmitted.
Now, what about reporting health risks via social media? We have seen examples of how social media
has helped in various disaster situations. Videos are taken by bystanders who bear witness
to the devastating circumstances of war and post them on YouTube for the world to see.
For example, using YouTube videos that provided real-time information in Syria,
clinicians were able to firmly conclude that serine nerve gas had been used based on the
signs affecting the victims. Pictures are sent on twit pic to show the reality of desperate
situations. In fact, donations to the Red Cross for Haiti relief poured in over text messages
pledging $10 each, adding up to over $30 million. Also, after Haiti's earthquake in 2010,
Yu Shahidi, an open web source platform, used information that was crowdsourced to link
healthcare providers who needed supplies with people who had the supplies.
And closer to home during flu outbreaks, some health departments have tweeted and text
to campus students where they should go to get vaccines. So it looks like social media will
have an expanding role in the future that may be extremely helpful for monitoring public health
all over the world, even to the point of confirming diagnoses. Lastly, we should not forget the One
Health Initiative, which is the collaborative effort among human, animal, and environmental
health professionals. From today's lecture, you can see why it would be important to collaborate
and share information from all three sources to identify potential dangers and to coordinate
response efforts. We know that many of the emerging infectious diseases are zoonotic,
and many emerge because of the artificial alterations in the environment. It's a fact
that we are inextricably linked to the health of all three of these health groups.
So stay safe during your travels and be prepared.
Next time, we'll tackle an infectious disease that sounds relatively innocent, the flu virus,
but in fact has created some of the deadliest pandemics of all times. See you then.
