So, to start our lecture today, you probably won't believe I have yet another story about
my children getting some weird infectious disease.
Yes, my oldest daughter contacted me one day from a farm in Southeast Asia.
She was using Skype from a mud hut with a satellite telling us she was very sick.
Since I had already given her the Japanese encephalitis vaccine and other travel vaccines
before she departed, I knew my diagnostic skills were going to be put to the test.
It's always difficult from thousands of miles away to make a diagnosis.
Her symptoms included fever, muscle aches, a headache, pretty nonspecific, except she
told me that her muscle and bone pain was so severe she could hardly move.
She was traveling in a known malaria and dengue fever area in Southeast Asia, but she was
taking malaria prophylaxis medication.
To complicate her story further, she also remembered being bitten by an Asian tiger mosquito.
This mosquito has invaded countries and is known for being aggressive both day and night.
It is a vector transmission for several viral pathogens including yellow fever, dengue and
chikengunya fever.
So there were a few different illnesses in the quote differential diagnosis for my daughter.
For now though, let's focus on the dengue virus, which is a leading cause of illness
and sometimes even death in the tropics.
It's now become important to us in the United States because of its new environment in the
Caribbean and even rare cases moving into the Florida Keys and Texas.
The word dengue means careful in Spanish and it may relate to the cautious movement of
patients suffering from the pain in their muscles, bones and joints.
The symptoms of dengue are high fever, severe headache, severe pain behind the eyes and
muscle and bone pain that lasts up to a week.
It's often referred to as bone break fever.
A small proportion of dengue cases will progress to severe dengue, referred to as dengue hemorrhagic
fever and dengue shock syndrome.
Dengue epidemics occurred throughout the South Pacific in the Second World War and continue
through the present day.
Human studies estimate that worldwide roughly 400 million dengue virus infections occur
each year.
About one fourth or 100 million of those infected will have symptoms of the disease and the
remaining infections will be either asymptomatic or subclinical.
Because of overlapping symptoms, dengue is frequently misdiagnosed as malaria.
It's imperative for travelers to be aware that dengue fever is now endemic in Puerto
Rico and many other popular travel destinations in Latin America and Asia.
As with other zoonotic diseases, the mosquito vector is infected with dengue when it bites
a person who has the virus in their blood.
It then bites others who become infected, a vicious cycle.
It cannot be transmitted person-to-person though.
Current efforts are focusing on a dengue vaccine and three of five vaccine candidates
are of the live attenuated type.
Although current dengue vaccines do not offer complete protection against all four virus
types, there were reductions of about 50% of dengue cases in clinical trials.
Let's look at another emerging infectious disease, the Ebola virus.
Well, the outbreak of Ebola in 2014 in West Africa became an international crisis in a
matter of weeks.
This involved contiguous West African countries at first, but then hopped across oceans.
Beginning in Guinea, then spreading to Sierra Leone and Liberia, over 18,000 cases have
been confirmed with a death rate of over 50%.
Viral hemorrhagic fevers have been around in West Africa for decades, but have stayed
within Africa until now.
These are still RNA viruses with Ebola part of the Filovirus family.
Other virus examples in the group include Lassa fever, Rift Valley fever, and Marburg
virus.
Infections cause victims to bleed uncontrollably in multiple organ systems, as well as causing
intestinal fluid losses that can rival cholera.
Without proper and immediate medical care, death can occur rapidly.
There are actually five different types of Ebola virus, named after the places where
they originated.
Ebola has a characteristic electron microscopy shape of a stylized key.
Now, the outbreak was so significant that governments revived a disease-fighting measure
that had not been used in nearly a century, known as Cordone Sanitaire.
This means an imaginary line is drawn around the infected area and no one is allowed to
leave.
This tactic was common in the medieval era of the Black Death, but had not been used since
1918 when the border between Poland and Russia was closed to stop typhus from spreading west.
Centuries ago, in the most extreme form, everyone within the boundaries was either left to die
or survive until the outbreak ended.
So how long has Ebola been around?
It was first discovered in 1976 in the Congo and is named after the Ebola River in that
country.
Scientists aren't exactly sure where the virus originated, but they think that fruit bats
are the likely culprits.
After bats were thought to be the host, Guinea implemented a ban on bat soup, which is actually
a common street food.
They also ban the consumption of rats and monkeys.
Other animals carry the Ebola virus, though including chimpanzees, gorillas, and other
monkeys.
It's thought that transmission between countries is explained by the flight of bats.
Scientists believe that the original method of transmission to humans was either directly
from bats or by handling infected animals that were infected by bats.
Now how is Ebola virus transmitted from human to human, though?
Since the virus is found in body fluids like human blood, urine, and saliva, people caring
for victims are particularly at risk, especially family members and healthcare workers.
Fortunately, it is not believed that Ebola can be spread by airborne transmission, which
helps with containment.
Many healthcare workers, in spite of what was thought to be optimal protection, still
caught the virus and died.
The number of virus particles in one drop of blood is more than a million times greater
than HIV, which increases its capacity for contagion.
This led to a huge increase in the production of protective garments, boots, masks, and gloves
known as personal protective equipment.
Hospitals in the U.S. increased their supplies of the protective gear and provided first-hand
training to the first-line staff on how to put on the equipment and take the personal
equipment off.
Financial support from other countries allowed the purchase of similar equipment for affected
countries.
After discussing Ebola in West Africa, we need to make our way back across the ocean
to the United States.
Do we have to worry about Ebola in the U.S.?
Well, the answer is a resounding yes based on our 2014 experience in Texas where our
first imported case occurred.
But even before that, there was a less known outbreak of Ebola in the U.S., the Reston
Ebola outbreak.
In 1989, the U.S. was faced with a possible Ebola outbreak in Reston, Virginia, transmitted
from monkeys.
100 Makaw monkeys were shipped from a farm in the Philippines and trucked to Reston,
Virginia, to the Hazelton Laboratory Facility where they would be quarantined for 30 days.
In a short period of time, an unusual number of monkeys died.
At autopsy, the monkeys had a large spleen, blood in the intestines, and were thought
to have simian hemorrhagic fever.
The veterinarians shipped frozen samples to a specialized Department of Defense lab
where then they came up with a diagnosis of the Ebola virus.
Testing of employees showed that six workers at the Reston Facility serial converted, meaning
they had detectable antibodies in their blood, evidence of the Ebola infection.
Amazingly, no workers became ill.
Why not?
We'll find out in just a minute.
This case highlights the increasing concern over global travel and trade, as this virus
probably originated on a monkey farm in the Philippines.
Although no one died, the story took a bad twist for our concerns over handling biohazardous
material.
Scientists were charged with euthanizing all the remaining monkeys, and others were
assigned to decontaminate the building.
A team was sent to the Hazelton lab to sterilize the site.
To their disbelief, they found that the staff of the Hazelton group was still working in
the building without hazmat suits and totally unaware of the danger.
Researchers discovered that this was a new species of Ebola, now named Ebola Reston.
It was virulent in monkeys, but fortunately not in humans.
The fact that Reston Ebola was not pathogenic to humans was just a stroke of luck.
This incident was described in detail in a nonfiction book in 1994 called The Hot Zone
written by Richard Prustin.
The author even visited caves where the bats causing Ebola are thought to live.
Stephen King, famous for his own horror books, described this book as, quote, one of the
most horrifying things I have ever read, unquote.
And a viral hemorrhagic fever similar to Ebola is the virus of choice in the movie Outbreak
from 1995, starring Dustin Hoffman, Renee Russo, and Morgan Freeman.
After the Reston outbreak, Ebola didn't cross into the United States until it was exported
from West Africa.
In 2014, three infected American healthcare providers in West Africa were brought to Emory
University Hospital for treatment.
With the supportive care of modern medicine, like replacing fluids and controlling bleeding,
they survived.
A man from Liberia brought the virus to Texas, where in spite of their best efforts, he died.
The fact that two nurses who had cared for him became infected brought to light the need
for better protocols, better protective equipment, and more rapid deployment of the Centers
for Disease Control or CDC staff.
So you can see that there are no global boundaries with infectious diseases, and this was just
a serious wake-up call for those who think that faraway diseases won't cross the ocean.
Meanwhile, another disturbing situation was occurring, which was also imported to the
U.S. This time, it was MERS.
A startling announcement in 2014 occurred that the first case of Middle East Respiratory
Virus Syndrome, or MERS, had invaded the United States, brought by a healthcare worker who
had been in Saudi Arabia caring for hospital patients.
He left Saudi Arabia traveling by plane to London, then on to Chicago, where he took
a bus to Indiana and began to feel ill with shortness of breath, coughing, and fever.
Based on his symptoms, the travel history and his blood tests, the CDC confirmed MERS.
But this case was almost not the first case of MERS in the United States.
I almost saw the first patient.
During the late 2013 influenza season, I personally treated a returning immigrant who had spent
three months in the MERS zone of Saudi Arabia.
He had symptoms of fever, headache, muscle aches, and respiratory virus symptoms.
Of course, it was Sunday, so staff levels were at a minimum.
And I put the Wisconsin Public Health Department on high alert.
They quarantined the patient until the test results came back.
Now, fortunately, the test results were negative for MERS, and instead, they were positive
for para-influenza, a much less severe respiratory illness.
But that was really a close, personal, scary call.
With new viruses like MERS emerging and our experience with Ebola in the United States,
stringent protocols have been put in place by the CDC to rapidly diagnose these patients
and contain the illness.
In addition, the CDC continues to upgrade preparedness for airline and airport staff
who are crucial to the containment.
Now, 10 years has passed since the original Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, or SARS
outbreak of 2003.
Although there were only eight confirmed cases of SARS in the United States, there were more
than 8,000 global cases, with almost the 15% death rate.
Both the SARS and MERS viruses are part of the coronavirus family.
Coronaviruses are known for the crown-like spikes on their surfaces.
The virus causes disease in the lungs with a bloody pneumonia.
Importantly, coronaviruses can remain suspended in the air and travel more than 8 feet.
They can be transmitted from person to person.
MERS first surfaced in the Middle East in 2012, and most cases have occurred on the
Arabian Peninsula.
The World Health Organization, or WHO, is concerned about MERS.
We don't know what the reservoir is or how it's transmitted.
An unlikely animal reservoir was discovered in Saudi Arabia, a camel.
However, it's unclear if the camel is actually the direct source of the virus or just a vector
of transmission to humans.
In one instance, a Malaysian man died of MERS contracted from drinking camel's milk.
After studying the milk, it was found that the MERS virus can live in camel's milk
for up to 72 hours.
The other postulated reservoir is, once again, bats.
The WHO is particularly worried about opportunities for spread of the virus amongst large communities
and large gatherings.
Think of the potential for disease spread among millions of people who travel to Mecca
each year for their pilgrimage.
Fortunately, they are better prepared to deal with MERS because of their experience with
its cousin, SARS.
Because of the intense coordination and collaboration effort between countries during the SARS outbreak,
they were able to contain the virus.
Now, containment of the disease was possible because the incubation period of both of these
viruses is about 10 to 14 days, and the old-fashioned quarantine was successful.
There is no vaccine or specific treatment for MERS or SARS.
The WHO also implemented reporting requirements and early identification measures for MERS.
For now, monitoring will continue to ensure that epidemics are prevented and scientists
will continue to study the virus and its transmission.
Let's get back to mosquitoes again and talk about a virus that's emerging in the United
States, West Nile virus.
This virus was first detected in the United States in 1999, although it was found in Israel
in the 1950s and spread throughout Europe, North Africa and Asia over the next decades.
After being bitten by an infected mosquito, surprisingly more than half of the infected
people are completely asymptomatic.
Those who are symptomatic usually have a high fever and muscle aches for 48 hours, similar
to but not as severe as dengue, with resolution of the illness over the next few days.
But, those over the age of 50 are more prone to neurological sequelae that may include
meningitis or even encephalitis, which could result in death.
Fortunately, this is a rare occurrence.
Interestingly, one of America's favorite and most identifiable birds, the American
Robin, was found to be one of the most prevalent carriers of West Nile virus.
In Chicago, the Robin is known as the super spreader of the West Nile virus.
In fact, a single storm sewer drain in Chicago was found by epidemiologists to be a huge
breeding ground for mosquitoes.
When in 2005, Illinois had 400 cases of West Nile and 21 deaths.
As we've learned, it's the mosquitoes that actually serve as the vector of the disease.
They bite the Robin, which harbors the virus without symptoms, then the mosquitoes pass
it on to humans.
One thing you can do for your community is to report dead birds to your state health
department.
This helps the surveillance efforts to monitor where possible outbreaks might occur.
Well, we're not quite done with emerging mosquito diseases.
Chikungunya is a viral disease transmitted to humans by the bites of infected mosquitoes
which are found across the globe.
First described in an outbreak in southern Tanzania in 1952, the virus then spread to
Africa, Asia, and the Indian subcontinent.
Originally believed to be a tropical disease, experts were surprised when an outbreak occurred
in northeast Italy in 2007.
Now it has spread further to 14 Caribbean island countries since it was first detected
on the island of St. Martin in December of 2013.
In May of 2014, the Caribbean Public Health Authority declared it an epidemic with over
5,000 probable cases across the region.
Its symptoms are very similar to dengue viral infection, although it may not be as severe
and deaths are exceedingly unusual.
Because the Caribbean islands are close to the United States, the virus made its premier
appearance in the U.S. in 2014.
And the CDC has been working with its partners and airports with flights to the Caribbean
to educate outgoing travelers about how to stay safe from chikungunya and returning travelers
about what symptoms to be on the lookout for.
We'll be watching the progress of this virus.
In the meantime, put mosquito spray in your packing list if you're headed for the Caribbean.
Brand new diseases aren't popping up as fast as the reappearance of old diseases that were
nearly eradicated.
Re-emerging diseases are due mainly to human factors like technology, social behavior,
international travel, and trade.
For example, measles was declared eradicated in the U.S. in 2000, yet measles and mumps
are on the rise.
Some people contracted these diseases because they were either unvaccinated or not up to
date with their immunizations and encountered someone, perhaps while traveling, who had
the measles.
As measles is one of our more contagious diseases due to its airborne capacity, this is a growing
problem.
For example, a large outbreak occurred in 2009 when a traveler contracted measles in
Britain and he unwittingly transmitted it to his friends at a summer camp in New York,
eventually infecting 1,500 others.
The past several years has brought the return of other measles outbreaks in the United States.
While vaccination deficiencies can also lead to mumps, the mumps virus has mutated enough
that the original vaccine does not confer 100% protection.
It's estimated that the mumps vaccine is only about 80-90% effective.
And several college campuses are seeing outbreaks of mumps, and now most colleges require proof
of two vaccinations as a freshman.
In 2014, for example, the Ohio State University and surrounding community had 63 cases, right
before spring break.
And of course, if they did realize they were sick, the students probably got on a plane
to a beautiful beach and unknowingly carried the virus with them.
Even the National Hockey League was left unprotected.
Some of you may have acquaintances that have recently contracted whooping cough as an adult.
Pertussis was never eradicated in the U.S. like measles and polio, so its surface is
from time to time.
However, the incidence is increasing.
California had over 10,000 cases in 2014.
Why?
Well, from an immunological standpoint, in the 1990s, the U.S. switched from a DTP vaccine
to the DT attenuated P, which contains a modified, safer version of the pertussis component
eliminating the risk of seizures.
It is postulated that this new vaccine does not last as long as the first one, so our
protection wanes quickly over the years.
A current national recommendation is for all adults over 50 and especially over 60 who
are in contact with infants to get a pertussis booster vaccine.
Adults experiencing immune senescence will reacquire immunity and prevent transmission
to vulnerable children under the age of one who may die from pertussis.
All three of these diseases, measles, mumps, and pertussis, are carefully monitored by
the CDC.
In addition, scientists are continually working to improve vaccines.
Recommended child and adult boosters are listed in the CDC schedule on the website.
Now, let's get back to my daughter who we left stranded in Southeast Asia.
As you probably surmised, she most likely had dengue fever.
She did go to a nearby hospital where they drew blood, which showed a low white blood
cell count.
That's often seen in viral illnesses and malaria.
A malaria blood screen was negative for parasites.
The hospital did have the capability to perform an antibody test for dengue, and since she
had been ill for several days before she sought medical care, her test was positive.
All of this cost a whopping 40 U.S. dollars, thanks to the international health insurance
policy we got her.
Now, on to one last intriguing topic.
Scientists think that chronic diseases may actually stem from an infectious disease cause.
What if I told you we might be able to cure chronic diseases like heart disease with an
antibiotic?
Further studies into whether or not other diseases might also stem from infectious roots
have been turning our thinking upside down.
This has major implications for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases in the future.
A significant breakthrough happened when we discovered that peptic ulcer disease was
not caused by stress, but by an infectious agent.
In 1985, doctors Warren and Marshall proved instead that it was caused by a bacterium called
helicobacter pylori, which is curable with antibiotics.
Dr. Marshall even went so far as to swallow a flasca bacteria to cause the disease in
himself to prove his theory.
Presently, there are several chronic medical conditions that might be caused by a known
infectious agent and other illnesses from unknown infectious organisms yet to be discovered.
Some conditions under investigation include coronary artery disease, inflammatory bowel
disease, arthritis conditions, diabetes, and even some neurological disorders.
Sometimes the microorganism can be the direct cause of the disease, while other times the
germs could incite an autoimmune reaction similar to rheumatic heart valve disease from
strep or neurological weakness syndrome, Guillain-Barre.
We are learning that interactions between humans and microorganisms are wondrous and
complex.
Extraordinary changes will continue to occur over time in our understanding of infectious
diseases.
I hope you've enjoyed hearing about these emerging and reemerging and unknown infectious
diseases and the implications of them for all of us.
Join me next time for the Grand Finale, where we'll take you on a hunt for the next great
pandemic.
See you then.
