The threat of a global pandemic, an epidemic that crosses continents and spreads worldwide,
is thought of by most scientists, not in terms of if it will occur, but more in terms of when.
Disease names that were once confined to medical journals and conferences have become household
words. Everyone with access to news media or the internet knows about the harsh realities
Ebola experience. But how worried should we be about the next pandemic being the one deadly
enough to cause hundreds of thousands of deaths worldwide, spreading through countries,
leaping across oceans, and overwhelming entire continents? We already know that microorganisms
have an evolutionary advantage over humans, and the potential exists for them to mutate
into a form that no one will be prepared for. Will the next pandemic be the one to devastate mankind?
I would like to invite you to join me today using your newly acquired infectious disease
knowledge to look into the future and help me discern what the next pandemic will be.
Our focus will be on not just a pandemic confined to a few countries, but a cataclysmic pandemic,
one that would reach all continents quickly, be difficult to treat, be extremely deadly,
and perhaps threaten the very survival of the human race.
To accomplish this goal, let's review some of the many concepts we've discussed over the course.
We've learned that diseases are transmitted by bacteria and viruses, but can also be vector-borne.
Different germs have different modes of transmission.
We learned about increasing bacterial resistance by overuse of antibiotics,
but we have advanced with preventative measures like vaccines to stop outbreaks.
Globalization has had far-ranging impacts on diseases. We learned how globalization has impacted
the ability of germs to spread far, wide, and quickly.
We studied the differences between developed and developing countries and their ability to handle
outbreaks. We also discussed the huge burden of disease on nations at war and neighboring countries.
And finally, we discussed special issues such as environmental destruction and the impact it has
on emerging diseases. So let's look now at the diseases we have been studying to try to figure
out which ones would be the likely candidates. There are four categories of germs that we
must consider, bacteria, viruses, insect-borne diseases, and tick-borne diseases.
Keeping these diseases in mind, let's talk about pandemic elements.
What are the crucial elements that are ideal for the creation of a pandemic germ?
First, human-to-human transmission has consistently been present in the pandemics of the last century,
as we saw with the Spanish flu. Secondly, the potential to mutate rapidly.
Remember the HSNNs of influenza or HIV virus mutations. Thirdly, there is no known treatment
or vaccine, like Ebola in 2014. Fourth, the capacity to spread rapidly, especially in crowded conditions,
like cholera. Fifth, a high but not too high mortality rate, like SARS.
Sixth, a short incubation period, so the disease has likely been spread to others
before the person is sick, like the common cold. Seventh, resistance to multiple antibiotics
or antiviral medications, like some forms of tuberculosis and E. coli.
With these clues in mind, can we exclude any of our four categories? Let's look at tick-borne diseases.
Even though we continue to see new diseases emerge, and some even be fatal, these diseases will
continue to be regional, not global. Since they are not transmitted from human to human,
and there are medicinal treatments for most of them, we're not as concerned about these
becoming our pandemic culprit. So, at this point, we'll rule out diseases in this category.
So, let's concentrate on the bacteria, viruses, and insect-borne diseases.
We're also going to exclude insect-borne diseases. Why? Well, because a specific vector
has to be present in the geographic area, since specific insects transmit specific diseases.
For example, malaria requires the Anopheles mosquito for transmission, and these mosquitoes
are found mostly in India and Africa. Also, these illnesses result from statistical chance
occurrences between animals and insects. And also, in developed countries, we have the means to
control the deadly vectors of transmission. Finally, for the most part, these diseases
have not demonstrated the capacity to be transmittable between humans.
Let's focus our attention then on bacteria and viruses. First, let's look at the historical
lessons from pandemics of the past to assist us in determining which the next one might be.
There have been seven cholera pandemics, including the latest which has been ongoing
for over 50 years. Do you remember cholera? It's caused by the Vibrio cholera bacteria,
which releases potent toxins resulting in severe diarrhea. The first cholera pandemic
was documented in 1860 in Bengal, India, and the latest one started in 1962 in Indonesia.
There have been several pandemics attributable to the plague. Remember, the plague was a
vector-borne disease spread by the bite of fleas that fed on rodents infected with
Yersinia pestis, also a bacteria. Sporadic cases still occur in the United States,
and nearly 100 cases erupted in Madagascar in 2014. There have been four influenza pandemics
in the last century, all the result of reassorted viruses. So, cholera plague and influenza have
been wreaking havoc for many years. What factors have changed since the 19th and 20th centuries
that might influence our pandemic possibilities? Are these older pandemic germs now under control?
Well, we do have better control of diseases at least in some areas. For example, we have better
diagnostics and treatments. We have new vaccines, better protective equipment like gloves and masks,
improved funding from global sources, global surveillance systems that coordinate responses.
So, keeping in mind the concepts we've learned and the variables that create a pandemic,
the disease control issues, let's start working through our pandemic puzzle.
When do you think the next pandemic will occur? In the next 10, 25, or 100 years?
To give you a perspective regarding the pandemic timing, there have been eight influenza pandemics
alone over the last 300 years. The length of time between pandemics was as short as three years
and as long as 56 years. But here are a couple of other time factors to think about.
Remember the new and emerging diseases that we talked about.
As the number of these diseases increases, does the threat of a pandemic increase as well?
Since the 1990s, we've seen AIDS, SARS, MERS, MRSA, swine flu, and drug-resistant forms of
tuberculosis. We've also seen old diseases like cholera and dengue reemerge.
Well, what about environmental influences? If we keep destroying animal habitats at increasing rates
and entering places where man has not lived before, how does that affect the timeline?
For example, in the last 40 years, 20% of the Amazon rainforest has been destroyed.
In Indonesia, palm oil plantations have contributed to the loss of over 20 million acres of forested
land, half the size of England. This makes contact with species in those forests more likely and could
bring more zoonotic diseases with pandemic potential. Even climate change affects infectious
disease rates, since vectors like mosquitoes and ticks, bacteria and viruses are affected by
temperature changes and the amount of precipitation. For example, some scientists believe that cholera
may become more common as the bacteria grows more rapidly in warmer waters. Others believe
that mosquito-borne diseases will be more prevalent as the warming extends their life cycles.
Well, of course, there is no definitive answer, but a notable epidemiology group made several
pandemic predictions. 90% of them believe that there will be a pandemic during our children's
or our grandchildren's lifetime. Based on predictive models, the same experts believe
that the pandemic will spread across the world within three weeks with billions infected.
When it will come, though, is anyone's guess. Secondly, where do you think the
ground zero of the pandemic will be? China, where the H7N9 avian flu is emerging as well as where
SARS originated? The Middle East, where MERS began and where H5N1 flu is in Egypt? Africa,
the home of the HIV pandemic, with rapidly mutating strains? India, where most of cholera
pandemic started? Southeast Asia, where populations often come into contact with wild animals in
their blood and where there is a major human intrusion by destruction of rainforests and
habitats? The United States, due to an escape germ from a lab or a bioterrorist attack?
It's clear that each regional area has its own issues that may contribute to a pandemic.
But what additional germ breeding issues do each of these geographic areas have
that may make them prime candidates? Well, we talked about access to clean water and healthcare,
for example. While there were more than 20 Ebola outbreaks before the 2014 epidemic,
it was poor infrastructure of the healthcare system that allowed the disease to spread.
In 2005, a National Geographic article predicted that ground zero would be Hong Kong. But since
then, they have put in place stringent poultry control measures, testing, and regulations for
eradicating H5N1 avian flu. All of these sites are possible, of course, but due to environmental
factors, scientists still seem to favor East Asia or Southeast Asia. This hypothesis is based on
the extensive contact with both wild animals sold for their meat and farm animals as part of huge
crowded farming operations. In addition, there are densely populated areas in which a pathogen
could spread rapidly. Thirdly, what type of germ do you think the next pandemic will come from?
Let's compare bacterial and virus pandemic potentials. When considering bacteria,
there are three main biological behaviors to consider. The only bacteria on our list that
can spread beyond eight feet is tuberculosis. There are some multiple antibiotic-resistant germs,
including TB and E. coli. And the growth rate of bacteria, for example, TB, is very slow.
What about virus qualities? Viruses are smaller than bacteria, have a more effective aerosol
spray within eight feet, several can ride the air currents so they can be quickly spread,
they replicate rapidly, and they mutate quickly. They do not respond to antibiotics,
and the antivirals are limited. So at this point, I think we should keep both bacteria and viruses
in the running. Fourth, what do you think the mode of transmission will be? Will it be direct
contact with a sick person's skin, blood, or body fluids, like kissing or touching?
Or by infected droplet transmission, like coughing, sneezing, or talking. The germs are large,
and they can't stay suspended in the air falling to the ground within eight feet.
Will it be airborne where droplet residues or dust particles containing microorganisms
stay suspended in the air and can survive outside the body for extended times? Could it be through
the fecal oral route, or by a combination of several of the above?
Looking at the potential viral pathogens on our list, let's review their mode of transmission.
Ebola and HIV are spread by direct contact with body fluids. Smallpox is spread by direct
droplets and airborne. Influenza is mostly limited to droplet transmission with some contact.
SARS and MERS have both droplet and airborne capacity, and all of these viruses are transmitted
human to human. So whether viral or bacterial, germs spread by a combination of methods
probably are the most likely candidates for our next pandemic, with droplet and airborne
being the most efficient combination. Can we remove any more germs from the list?
First, let's look at bacteria. One, what about bacterial spores like anthrax? We know they can
travel long distance by air and are highly lethal when contracted, but that's another irony regarding
pandemic germs. If they're too efficient to killing their host, they're not likely to be
propagated on a large scale. What about extensive drug-resistant tuberculosis? It has good transmission
ability by aerosol, but it grows too slowly to be our pandemic culprit, since it could be controlled
by quarantine measures. Three, why not cholera? It meets several of our criteria as a candidate.
It jumped from Nepal to Haiti by the fecal oral route. However, it's not likely to take hold in
developed countries due to modern medicine, vaccines, and improved sanitation conditions.
Fourth, what about plague? While extremely deadly, it still has vector-borne restrictions unless we
postulate a bioterrorist attack with this germ. Five, the New Delhi strain of E. coli that is
resistant to all known antibiotics is spread by the fecal oral route, but mostly in developing
countries. So we will rule out the pandemic probabilities of anthrax, drug-resistant TB,
cholera, plague, and drug-resistant decoli. To summarize thus far, we've decided that
a pandemic could occur at any time. It's most likely it would start in Southeast Asia or East
Asia. Transmission will likely be aerosol and airborne. Tick and vector-borne diseases are
unlikely, and certain bacteria are possible, but less likely. Let's review the viral scenarios.
What about the Ebola virus? Ebola can be spread by close contact or blood,
but ironically, like anthrax, it is too efficient at causing deaths, meaning people aren't traveling
long distances when they're ill. In fact, they're dying, so the spread is more contained.
In developed countries with a three to 21 day incubation period, quarantine measures may also
be effective. What about the coronaviruses, SARS, and MERS? Yes, they are good candidates
since they're easily transmitted, have a modest mortality rate, and have no known effective
antiviral medications. But ironically for coronavirus, the incubation period is the
four to seven days, so patients can be isolated and transmission interrupted. This is how the
original SARS outbreak was contained, so maybe we'll reduce our chances of SARS and MERS for now,
because we may be able to contain them. Measles and mumps are on the list, but they're unlikely to
occur unless there's a significant mutation in childhood viruses that will render our current
vaccines ineffective. Smallpox could be a problem due to its ease of transmission,
its high mortality rate, and since there is virtually no natural immunity from the lack
of previous virus exposures. But we'll consider it less likely since there are no natural reservoirs
in the world, we already have a vaccine, and we're working on improving our laboratory safety.
What about HIV? Again, the developed countries have a better chance of stemming the HIV infections
with cutting edge diagnostics and drugs. This will probably remain a deadly killer
in developing countries. Finally, influenza. We've already discussed the pandemic potential
of influenza, past and future, and it is still likely that influenza will be the cause of the
next cataclysmic pandemic, possibly H5N1 or other flavors of avian influenza, such as H7N9.
Let's see if influenza meets our criteria for a pandemic. Influenza has already been
implicated in four pandemics in the last hundred years. It has a short 48 to 72-hour incubation
period, so you've already transmitted the virus before you know you're sick. It's also tough to
implement quarantine with this short time window. Influenza makes people ill, but it usually doesn't
kill them, so people are carrying the virus at various stages of their illness and could infect
many others. Influenza can mutate rapidly and undergo antigenic shift or drift, as you know
from our H&N discussion. Well, fortunately so far, avian influenza H5N1 strain does
not transmit easily between humans because certain throat cell receptors are missing.
However, it had a 50% mortality in the 1,000 cases in the 20 countries it affected,
so this could really be a force to be reckoned with. Most of these cases were a result of direct
contact with humans and infected poultry. China has seen the emergence of a deadly H7N9 virus
that could be especially deadly because it's made up of four different avian flu viruses
from a wild duck, wild bird, and two species of chickens. We also know the current world
population has not had much exposure to any of the avian flu variants, so there's very little
natural immunity. All these viruses would need to do to have a pandemic is an enhanced capacity
to transmit from human to human or a resistance capacity to all current antiviral medications
or worse, both. We are fortunate that avian influenza is still sensitive to neuraminidase
inhibitor drugs, but would there be enough to go around? Since influenza can mutate so rapidly,
we also would need a new vaccine that would need to be produced quickly and made readily available
worldwide. Finally, based on our experience with the 1918 flu pandemic, many of the deaths resulted
from secondary infection from bacterial pneumonia. We now have antibiotics, but the idea of
copathogens playing an additional role in a pandemic must be considered. So, in conclusion,
a strain of avian influenza or unknown emerging zoonotic virus are our most likely future culprits,
but smallpox could surprise us and bacteria resistant to all antibiotics might not be far behind.
Now, let's assume we're in a pandemic mode and let's look at three more questions that directly
affect you. How would we find out about the pandemic? How long would it take to develop an
antidote or vaccine? And what can you do to prepare yourself and your family?
We talked about new technologies, for example, that would be helpful in an outbreak situation.
Do you think the best source of information would be mHealth, meaning an alert by the latest,
most innovative, wireless mobile healthcare technology? How about a Google Flu Trends report
on the Internet? How about outbreaks near me app? A Facebook posting or a Twitter tweet?
Or the regular news media? All of these, of course, are good sources depending on your daily life
habits. To help out, there will be several worldwide disease alert systems that are already in place,
and most will accept incoming information from any source, individual or otherwise.
Canada's Global Public Health Intelligence Network, or GFIN, uses automated, aggregated news feeds
based on search queries and was the first to identify the SARS outbreak in 2003,
even before the WHO report, which came out months later. Because of early detection,
early detection, they were able to contain the outbreak.
A collaborative effort of many World Health Organizations, known as the Global Early Warning
System, or GLUS, exists to improve early warning and risk assessment on zoonotic and emerging
infectious diseases. And Google and Yahoo are using key search words to determine whether this
type of collective intelligence gathering could predict outbreaks. One thing we can predict is
that the technology will continue to evolve just as fast as the diseases. Another important question
to consider is, how long would it take to find an antidote or vaccine if it's a new disease?
It used to take a decade or more to get vaccines through the rigorous requirements of the FDA.
With a global health crisis, it's been reduced to four to six months, depending on the pathogen.
But this means that those populations affected early in the pandemic
will not have an available vaccine and will have to rely on current medications and supportive care.
But remember what happened with the outbreak of Ebola in 2014? This was a game-changing
instance where rules got broken. Extraordinary measures were taken by the NIH during this
outbreak to accelerate the timeline for FDA approval of the clinical trial for vaccines.
This became a matter of moral duty, with drugs not tested and proven through lengthy clinical
trials for effectiveness and safety. Another rule-breaking decision was made by the WHO
panels of ethicists who were in unanimous agreement to offer untested treatments.
One example of this was ZMAP, a drug that had been in development for over 10 years,
but had not been tested. It was given to two Americans who contracted Ebola in Africa
and were flown to the US for treatment. The Americans recovered, but other patients given
the same drug died. Unfortunately, the drug was only available in a tiny quantity since it was
produced in genetically engineered tobacco plants, and it would take many more months to make more
of the ZMAP. It appears that vaccine and treatment testing regulations may continue to be broken in
the event that there's a global health threat in the future, potentially for the good of all of us.
Finally, you might be wondering what you should be doing to protect yourselves and your families.
Obviously, staying away from sick people is just good common sense. Putting together an
emergency kit and stocking up on food, water, and supplies would of course be helpful,
and getting one of those N95 masks that can filter small particles, bacteria, and viruses
would also help. Scientists predict that in the event of a cataclysmic pandemic,
airline travel would shut down, international trade would be curtailed,
and internet access may be limited or fail. Can you imagine the economic impact this would have?
Every business should have a preparedness plan in place that would enable people to
telecommute and still keep businesses going. The flu.gov site has a business preparedness checklist
to help you get organized. Finally, the good news is that by joining me in this course,
you are more prepared than most people. You can see that the future of infectious diseases
is one of rapid changes. Infectious diseases can evolve rapidly, but our knowledge of disease
causes and treatments is also evolving. Worldwind developments in technology improves both our
capacity for diagnosis and treatment and our ability to detect outbreaks before they get out of
control. In an ever-changing world where humans are overrunning animal habitats,
where diseases are jumping onto planes spreading worldwide in a matter of hours,
scientists around the world are constantly looking for signals that will help avert the
next infectious disease disaster. The key to containing the outbreaks will be a combination
of enhanced surveillance, early detection, and rapid response. We are fortunate to have many
organizations worldwide that are watching over our health in this regard and have access in this
country to many forms of technology to keep us informed. I hope that you've enjoyed the
roller coaster ride through the perpetually challenging and fascinating field of infectious
diseases. Stay well.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
You.
