You might be wondering how a lecture about fungal infections could be so interesting.
Well, I'll be telling you about situations that could place any of us at risk of acquiring
a fungal infection, even events as benign as creating a flower arrangement or going on
a camping trip.
Let's start learning about fungal infections with a camping trip scenario.
Let's imagine you're going to spend part of your summer vacation with your son or grandson
and a Boy Scout trip to northern Wisconsin.
This trip includes several nights at a camp near the Eagle River.
The camp has 40 acres of pine and hemlock forests, and there are over 6,000 visitors
to the camp annually who participate in all types of outdoor activities, including lectures
and ecology projects.
There are four cabins for overnight guests, and the meals are prepared and served in the
dining hall on the camp grounds.
Let's also suppose that six or eight weeks after your stay, your son or grandson becomes
ill with a fever, a dry cough, and chest pain.
He's taken to his pediatrician, where a diagnosis of walking pneumonia is made, and he's prescribed
an erythromycin-based antibiotic.
Several of the boy's friends who are also scouts are ill with similar symptoms.
However, the families don't make much of this connection since the boys are frequently
playing together.
A health officer at the Wisconsin Public Health Department is getting an unusual number of
case reports of elementary school students visiting their primary care physicians with
fever, severe cough, chest pain, and this diagnosis of, quote, walking pneumonia.
Eventually, spetum specimens are coughed up from several sick children that show an
unusual finding under the microscope.
Chest x-rays are taken and reveal multiple nodular-appearing spots in the lungs.
What's your diagnosis?
Do you think it's a virus, a bacteria?
We'll make our diagnosis a little bit later.
Although fungal diseases usually don't involve humans, they can indirectly involve humans
and they've played a major role in human history.
A less well-known outbreak of disease, the Irish potato famine began in 1845.
The fungus killed off Ireland's potato crops, and more than a million people died of starvation
and illness brought on by malnutrition.
The potato was the basic staple in the Irish diet, so when potatoes turned into a slimy,
decaying pile of rot, many theories abounded.
One was this was a result of static electricity from the new railroad locomotives, but actually
the cause was an airborne fungus that had traveled from Mexico to Ireland in the holds
of ships traveling to Ireland.
The fungus was destroying the roots of the potato plant.
And even back then, global trade was affecting the health of people all over the world.
Besides hunger, many people died from diseases associated with malnutrition, which indirectly
causes deficiencies in the immune system, making those affected more prone to infectious
diseases.
In 1861, a scientist proved that a fungus caused the blight disease.
The fungus still causes disease in potatoes in other countries.
A more destructive fungal strain than the 1840s Irish potato one is threatening potato
fields in Russia.
Now fungi are eukaryotic cells containing a nucleus and many organelles.
These are more complicated life forms.
They require oxygen to live.
And fungi are structurally divided into yeasts, similar to the yeast used in baking bread,
and molds, the green circles on moldy pieces of bread in the refrigerator, or blocks of
cheese that you find in the back of the refrigerator.
Molds are actually composed of many hyphal elements.
Now hyphy are thread like branching tubules composed of fungal cells attached end to end.
Most fungi are either a yeast or a mold.
However, there are some fungi that are dimorphic.
They exist in one shape in the human body and a different shape in laboratory culture
media.
A yeast is a unicellular form of fungal growth.
These cells can appear spherical or elliptical and they reproduce by budding.
Cells are the reproducing bodies of molds.
Cell membranes of fungi are also more complex than those of bacteria.
The outer cell contains a building block called ergosterol.
Now ergosterol is similar in structure to cholesterol, which is an ingredient of human
cell membranes.
This can be important since some antifungal medications may have side effects that are
associated with the structural similarity between ergosterol and cholesterol.
Now here's a personal example of a fungal infection that could happen to almost any way.
Years ago the Yale golf coach called me on the phone saying that both of his hands had
swollen to enormous proportions such that he could no longer even grip a golf club.
He had returned four weeks earlier from teaching younger golfers in St. Andrews, Scotland,
where he uncharacteristically had plotted through the Scottish heather looking for their
golf balls.
Complaining to his primary physician, he received a course of oral antibiotics, but his hands
were not getting any better.
Over the phone I was suspicious about a fungal infection since he had many scratches on the
back of his hands from the Scottish heather bushes and he had not responded to antibiotics.
Now since he was returning to St. Andrews for more golf instruction in a few weeks,
it was imperative that I help him with his diagnosis and treatment.
I called in a long distance prescription for an antifungal medication and after four weeks
of treatment I was pleased to find out that he was cured.
And I'll explain this fungal condition shortly.
Fungal infections are generally characterized by the depth of invasion into the human body.
There are surface-based skin infections, infections underneath the skin, body-wide infections
associated with specific geographic areas, and then infections in patients with compromised
immune systems.
I'd now like to introduce you to the fungal infections of the skin surfaces and of hair
and nails.
These are known as dermatophytes.
These fungi live in the dead outside layers of the skin, hair, and the nails.
Now keratin is the primary structural protein of these body components.
And dermatophytes secrete an enzyme, keratinase, which partially digests layers of these body
components.
The disruption of keratin causes the loss of hair, scaling of the skin, and crumbling
of the nails.
And when the nails are involved, the term is known as onychomycosis.
This leads to thickened discolored and brittle nails.
Fungal nail infections do become more prevalent as we age, and about half of adults over the
age of 70 are affected.
Superficial fungal infections are also nicknamed as tinnia.
So tinnia corpus forms a ring shape with a red-raised border and is known as ringworm.
When these dermatophytes involve a scalp, they're known as tinnia capitis.
When they involve the foot, they're known as tinnia pedis, causing, quote, athlete's
foot.
The athlete's foot causes cracking and peeling of skin between the toes.
Moving deeper into the skin, subcutaneous fungal infections usually enter the body following
injury to the skin rather than a digestive enzyme.
They usually remain localized to the tissues just below the top layers of the skin or spread
to local lymph nodes.
One important yeast that can cause an either superficial or subcutaneous fungal infection
is known as candida albicans.
And candida species, like bacteria, are part of the body's normal microbiota.
When antibiotics can kill the bacteria, but not the yeast, candida can take over and expand
their growth without competition.
Candida causes diaper rash in newborns, as well as overgrowth in the vaginal area after
antibiotics while leading to a white discharge, or sometimes we see a white pattern in the
mouth known as oral thrush after antibiotic therapy.
Candida can also be involved in body-wide infections in patients who are hospitalized
and subjected to extensive antibiotic therapy and invasive medical devices such as intravenous
catheters.
Now, the Yale golf coaches' hand infections were caused by sporotricosis, considered a
subcutaneous yeast, but I'd like to tell you a slightly different story about this fungus.
In Wisconsin several years ago, the health department was notified of four employees
at a garden center with suspected sporotricosis.
All four were involved in making floral arrangements for grave sites.
Each had developed an ulcerative lesion on the hand or the wrist that was originally
thought to be a bacterial infection.
Next, they developed an ascending infection of the lymph system, and fungal cultures from
the lymph nodes grew sporothricks.
When investigators finally connected the dots, the four employees were cured with an
oral antifungal medicine known as chitocomazole.
So what was the common culprit?
Well, samples of the sphagnum moss used during the production of the floral arrangements
at the garden center were tested and were positive for sporothricks.
The sphagnum moss had been harvested from bogs located in central Wisconsin and was
purchased from one wholesale dealer.
Other cases in the Midwest occurred related to the distribution of the moss.
Now this case suggests that workers in contact with moss could reduce their risk of acquiring
disease by wearing protective clothing, but particularly protective gloves.
This can also result from injuries associated with handling of contaminated firewood or
rose thorns.
So if you're a gardener, you should take extra care and wear gloves while handling roses.
As an infectious disease clinician, I have had one case of even a snowmobile driver who
acquired sporodercosis after scraping against a rusty fence in the middle of winter.
Eventually this progressed to disease which wasn't diagnosed until the spring time.
Next, we're going to turn our attention to more serious fungal diseases.
The most common fungal infections that cause systemic or body-wide disease in humans are
histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and coxidomycosis.
All three are examples of dimorphic fungi growing as a mold in the laboratory and as
a yeast in the human body.
What is unique about these three fungal diseases is that they characteristically inhabit a unique
geographic area of the United States and hence are called endemic mycosis.
Histoplasmosis and blastomycosis are commonly found in the drainage area of the Mississippi
River Valley, but isolated cases of both diseases may occur in other parts of the country.
Coxidomycosis is unique to the southwestern United States, including Arizona, New Mexico,
and Southern California.
Well, now is a good time to return to our opening story of the camping scouts from
Wisconsin Summer.
Eventually, several children were diagnosed with blastomycosis.
A large epidemiologic investigation was undertaken trying to locate the source for this mold.
Was it randomly found in Wisconsin backyards or was there a more common source?
This is one that a detective epidemiologist went to work.
They obtained clues that linked the children to summer scouting activities.
This raised the suspicion that the fungal infection may have been acquired when they
were close to where they were staying.
Several scout groups were interviewed in an attempt to locate the source of the blastomycosis
and it was deduced that the most likely exposure locale was the beaver pond where the ecology
was taught.
The closer and more frequently the children were to the beaver pond, the more likely they
were to become ill and the more likely the illness was actually to be serious.
65% of the children with disease remember picking up objects from the ground, hence
creating a small dust cloud that was likely inhaled.
Now, the relationship of beavers to an outbreak of blastomycosis had not previously been described.
Environmental features such as the chemistry of the soil, air humidity conditions, and
the presence of beaver excrement likely combined in the right formula to allow blastomycosis
to flourish.
More generally, all three endemic mycosis have one of three clinical presentations.
You might be surprised to know that the majority of cases are asymptomatic or at worst a mild
respiratory infection that generally does not get reported or even come to medical attention.
When a more significant load of fungal spores are inhaled, this will lead to pneumonia similar
to our blastomycosis scout cases.
Usually with a normal immune system, the body will recover without specific antifungal therapy.
However, now that antifungal therapy is more readily available, these mnemonias can be
treated and resolve sooner with medications.
On rare occasions, these fungal diseases can spread outside the lung throughout the body,
including the brain, liver, and the spleen, and the disease is labeled as disseminated.
Another true case example I would like to show you is how the pervasiveness of fungal
infections can extend beyond the scope of a Boy Scout troop.
A massive outbreak of fungal disease occurred in Indianapolis several decades ago.
Nearly 40% of young adults and 9% of persons older than 55 who lived in certain parts of
Indianapolis were presumed to be infected on the basis of serological or blood test
data.
This represented nearly 100,000 individuals.
The outbreak was also unusually severe.
There were 15 deaths and 46 cases of progressive disseminated histoplasmosis.
Patients presented little by little over the course of four months with symptoms of a dry
cough, coughing up blood, chest pain, fever, and body aches.
They presented to different physicians' offices and it took several months before the scope
of the outbreak was known.
Sound familiar?
Surprisingly, in spite of a large epidemiologic investigation, no exact common source outbreak
location was identified.
Histoplasmosis was, however, cultured from all over Indianapolis.
Cases appear to have clustered near the center of the city along the White River and Fall
Creek that ran through Indianapolis.
An old amusement park close to the center of the outbreak and demolition activities
for a new tennis stadium were strongly suspected as the exact source of the fungus.
Now histoplasmosis outbreaks are otherwise notorious for occurring after other common
exposures such as cleaning a chicken coop, clearing a bird roost, demolishing an old
building, or cave exploration where bat guano is abundant.
The mold especially likes to live in the soil where bird or bat droppings provide extra
nutrients to support its growth.
One of the bigger lessons learned from the Indianapolis outbreak was the capacity to
inflict a large incidence of disease in a major metropolitan area, a harbinger of our
concerns of bioterrorism.
There are many other fungal infections of clinical importance.
Cryptococcus neiformens is a yeast that is found in the soil throughout the United States
and when inhaled by patients with compromised immune systems can lead to pneumonia and serious
infection around the brain or spinal cord known as fungal meningitis.
Cryptococcus has a very thick, walled, sugar-based capsule which prevents white blood cells from
attacking and destroying the yeast.
Hence, aggressive antifungal therapy is required to successfully treat this dangerous and often
life-threatening condition.
And while we're talking about meningitis, our discussion of fungal disease would not
be complete without discussing the 2012 outbreak of fungal infections of the central nervous
system.
A multi-state outbreak of fungal meningitis and infectious arthritis was detected in the
eastern United States in September of 2012.
Over 700 patients who received steroid injections produced by a single pharmaceutical compounding
center developed meningitis or spinal infections.
And more than 30 patients who received injection into the joints, like knees, developed the
same infections.
This serial hyalum species, a brown-black fungus, was the cause.
The injections were being given for pain since steroids reduce inflammation and pain, shutting
down the body's immune response at the site of the injection.
Now, 18 days was the average time from the injection to the beginning of symptoms.
Another epidemiologic investigation revealed the risk of infection was associated with specific
batches of the steroid and older vials of the steroid.
And naturally, the more injections the individual received, the larger the volume of the steroids
and the greater the risk of infection.
Now, the Tennessee Department of Health sounded the alarm based on a telephone call from an
alert clinician treating a patient with this unusual form of fungal meningitis.
With information rapidly communicated from Tennessee, the Centers for Disease Control
reached out to state and local health officials and took collective action.
Within days, the source of the outbreak was identified, and a massive effort was undertaken
to identify and contact nearly 14,000 potentially exposed patients and their physicians across
23 states.
Vorokonazole, an antifungal medicine, was used to treat most patients, but some were
treated with a more special, dangerous antifungal medicine, amphotericin B.
Since amphotericin does not distinguish well between ergosterol and cholesterol in cell
membranes, serious side effects such as kidney failure occurred.
Unfortunately, there were many deaths and many patients left with long-term disabilities
from this tragic outbreak.
Moving forward, let's talk a little about our normal environment.
Now, you might be surprised to know that in spite of the, quote, clean air in our home,
outside there are actually thousands of fungal mold spores that are floating around, invisible
in the air.
Normally, our immune system is sufficiently strong that occasional spores that land in
our lungs do not cause infections.
Patients with compromised immune systems, these spores can enter the lung and cause
an established fungal infection of the lung.
Aspergillus is the most common mold to cause infection in immune compromised patients.
This is a significant problem with transplant recipients as up to 5% of transplant patients
may die from invasive fungal infections when this aspergillus is inhaled into the lung
and the immune system cannot compensate.
Now, what would happen even with a normal immune system if the air was filled with a
large number of fungal mold spores?
Would we get sick?
Well, some individuals may manifest non-life-threatening yet annoying allergic symptoms for mold similar
to hay fever allergies.
Those already with allergies might notice the allergies being noticeably more severe.
Some concerns are raised regarding mold overgrowth in building, producing quote, toxins that
cause quote, sick building syndrome, or mold illness in the home environment from toxins.
Well, a full discussion of these conditions is a bit beyond the scope of this course,
but the term toxic mold is not really a clinical disease entity.
The actual mold is usually not directly toxic, and by and large, having your household duct
system routinely cleaned is probably an unnecessary expense.
However, allergy sufferers may find this individually useful for them.
Let's talk a little bit about antifungal drugs.
We've developed a variety of antifungal medications to treat various fungal conditions.
Some of these medications are topical.
Many of you will remember using Genshin Violet, which caused uterine purple for the treatment
of ringworm.
This is rarely used today as other topical medications are usually effective for superficial
fungal infections.
However, treatment of fungal nail infections still presents an extreme challenge.
There's only a 5% or 10% rate of long-term success, so Genshin Violet is still used for
this condition.
The prototype antifungal medications are known as azole drugs.
They interrupt the cell wall synthesis in fungi, blocking ergosterol production and leading
to the incomplete synthesis of the cell wall.
Since fungi do not replicate as quickly as bacteria and they have a slower growth rate
of metabolism, antifungal therapy needs to be continued for longer than antibiotics.
Now, two other antifungal drugs used for systemic infections include the Echinocandin medications
and amphotericin.
Echinocandins disrupt the cross-linking of the fungal cell wall and amphotericin directly
attacks the fungal cell wall, leading to alterations in the permeability of the cell wall and subsequent
fungal cell death.
Well, in concluding our fungal lecture, I need to tell you the beginning of a sad tale.
It seems that humans may not be the only victims of fungal infection.
White-nosed bat syndrome is an emerging fungal disease of hibernating bats that started in
the northeastern United States and is spreading rapidly into the central United States.
So far, it has affected seven bat species.
Since this syndrome was recognized in 2007, millions of insect-eating bats in at least
22 states and five Canadian provinces have died.
The infestation gets its name from a white fungus, pseudo-gymnoactis destructans that
affects the muzzle, the wings, and ears of hibernating bats.
This behavior of infected bats usually results in alterations in their mannerisms as well.
Why should we care about bats?
The economic effect on the insect suppression by bats to U.S. agriculture is valued in billions
of dollars per year, and the true ecological consequences are not yet known.
Bats are major consumers of insects, and an increase in these pests could result in damage
to crops and forests, and lead to a need for increased pesticide applications.
Bats also play crucial roles in plant pollination, seed dissemination, and cave ecosystems.
Bat guano is often the basis of the cave's food chain among animal and plant species.
And it's estimated that there have been a loss of almost 80 percent of the bat population
in the northeastern United States since the white-nose syndrome appeared.
This sudden and widespread mortality is unprecedented, and in spite of efforts to contain the disease,
it unfortunately continues to spread without a cure in sight.
Finally, let's turn to the effect of fungal diseases on plants and how they are currently
affecting our lives.
And I'm not talking about potato blight.
How closely are you paying attention to the price of your cup of coffee?
In 2014, a fungus nearly destroyed the coffee bean known as Arabica in Central America.
Leaf rust is a fungus that chokes the coffee plants as they grow.
The fungus seems to have a predilection for the Arabica coffee bean, which accounts for
75 to 80 percent of the world's coffee production.
Now, why is this occurring?
It appears that a slightly higher temperatures in Central America have allowed the fungus
to thrive at higher altitudes where this coffee bean grows best.
Starbucks has even bought a Costa Rican farm to research the devastation of this coffee
pathogen.
Get out your wallets, your coffee habits just got a lot more expensive.
So today you've seen that fungi have devastated crops and affected animals and humans in various
ways.
In our next lecture, we'll introduce you to some of the people who have helped us develop
infectious disease tools to identify different microorganisms and help in our efforts to
control them.
See you next time.
