In Chinese culture, Yin and Yang represent a philosophy of opposites in nature, which
can be applied to our topic today, the good and bad bacteria, a normal amount of bacteria
versus an overgrowth, bacteria residing in the right places versus the wrong ones.
Did you know that microbial cells outnumber the cells of the human body by about 10 to
There are roughly 100 trillion cells in the human body, but 90 trillion of them, 9 out
of every 10, are different kinds of bacteria, not your cells.
There is more foreign genetic material in the body than our own, yet here we are listening
to this lecture.
Tetanus is a general term for organisms usually too small to be seen by the naked eye.
In the human body, these include bacteria, viruses, yeast, protozoa that lie in between
these categories.
Let's start with a real infectious disease case.
Clostridium tetanide is a bacterium that can be generally found in the soil everywhere.
It causes tetanus, an illness that leads to spasms of all the muscles of the body.
One hallmark of the disease is the jaw of the mouth getting stuck, giving it the nickname
lock jaw.
Spores, which are dried out dormant forms of the bacteria, can survive in the soil for
many years.
When the spores are exposed to a favorable environment, such as water and sugar, the
bacterium can become active again.
So let's picture a child walking barefoot around his yard.
He unfortunately cuts his foot on a piece of glass that becomes embedded deep in the
skin.
The glass shard is intact in one piece, so his parents remove the glass with a pair of
tweezers and clean the wound with over-the-counter soap and water.
Still do they know that the glass shard unsuspectingly had spores of clostridium attached?
Now the spores have been deposited in the nice warm, nutrient-rich environment of the
child's foot, and they are ready to revive themselves into virulent clostridium bacteria.
Our child is developing muscle spasms and twitching.
We will return to his case at the end of our lecture.
In this lecture, we'll be discussing some of the essential factors of bacteria.
We'll see how bacteria can be advantageous, hostile, or simply innocent bystanders.
We'll learn about their anatomy and functioning.
We'll explore how they can cause disease and how they have come to adapt themselves to
be elusive to our immune system.
So what exactly is a bacterium?
The term bacterium was invented in the 19th century by a German biologist Ferdinand Kohn
based on the Greek word bacterion, meaning small rod, even though there are actually
three shapes of bacteria, rods, spirals, and spheres.
Bacteria are everywhere and very small, usually less than two microns in size.
For comparison, the width of a human hair is about 75 microns.
Bacteria are single-celled organisms that contain the barest essential components for
staying alive and reproducing.
Bacteria are a chromosome, ribosomes, cytoplasm, and an outer membrane.
Bacteria are a simple form of life known as prokaryotes.
In the center is the genetic material known as deoxo-ribonucleic acid, or DNA, which is
bundled into a central structure known as a chromosome.
DNA encodes for a specific sequence of building blocks known as amino acids, and these amino
acids are combined into proteins at the ribosomal structure.
Proteins are subsequently used to control cellular function.
The internal fluid, otherwise known as cytoplasm, is surrounded by an outer membrane, and prokaryotic
bacteria hence resemble a water balloon filled with bacteria.
On the other hand, more complex microorganisms contain eukaryotic cells.
These have a nucleus that contain multiple strands of DNA organized into multiple chromosomes.
They also have more complex internal structures, such as mitochondria, which produce internal
energy.
Eukaryotic cells utilize more formal membrane structures, such as a nucleolar membrane to
contain DNA.
The simplest one cell eukaryote that you might remember from school biology class is a protozoa
called a paramecium.
Other examples of multicellular eukaryotes are fungi, plants, and of course animals.
Prokaryotic bacteria reproduction is under the control of the DNA in the chromosome.
Since bacteria multiply rapidly by a process known as binary fission, the repeat replication
of DNA is prone to errors.
Hence genetic mutations can occur that can either lead to a survival advantage or disadvantage.
For example, resistance might develop to an antibiotic that's trying to kill it.
Or the mutation can be unfavorable and lead to destruction and death of the germ.
DNA replication is controlled by an important enzyme known as DNA polymerase.
DNA polymerase is a prime antibiotic target since the goal is to halt DNA replication.
Some DNA may not be in the center of the cell, but is located in the cytoplasm, forming circles
of DNA known as plasmids.
And plasma DNA may also be transferred from one bacterium to another through various mechanisms
when bacteria touch one another.
Conjugation is one of these means.
When this happens, genetic characteristics among bacteria are shared.
This is important in the development of bacteria that are resistant to multiple antibiotics
or for other evolutionary traits that support their survival.
Synthesis of cellular proteins such as enzymes or toxins is under the control of DNA, acting
through the ribosomes which combine amino acid building blocks in the cytoplasm.
The ribosome is also an excellent target for antibiotics because they can interfere with
protein synthesis.
Let's examine the role of enzymes a bit further.
Enzymes are responsible for controlling all the ongoing work in a cell.
Enzymes are chemical reaction machines which either break molecules apart or put molecules
together.
This is how a cell functions from minute to minute.
Another enzyme function is to link amino acid building blocks together to form a protein.
A bacterium may have over a thousand different types of enzymes floating around in its cytoplasm
at any time.
Now, for bacteria to interact, there are special structures called fibrae and pilae on the
surface that can help them attach to other bacterium or even to human cells.
Now, let's look at how bacteria interact with humans.
These interactions can be divided into three general categories.
First, some germs are good bacteria and help us directly, such as assisting in food digestion.
Some germs are known as commensal bacteria.
They live happily with other bacteria without causing us any harm.
And finally, some bacteria are harmful and are known as pathogenic.
Let's take a look at the good bacteria first.
What roles do these good bacteria play in some of our organ systems?
Here's a couple of examples.
The job of the bacteria in the intestines is to break down nutrients, such as sugars
and fats, which humans otherwise could not digest.
Most of these gut bacteria do not like the oxygen in the air and are known as anaerobes.
Besides eating and digestion, gut bacteria also synthesize certain vitamins and aid the
immune system.
More specifically, Escherichia coli, or E. coli, is a common bacterium in the intestines.
Unlike others, this germ happens to like oxygen, so it's known as an aerobic bacterium.
E. coli has been extensively studied and is probably the best understood bacterium of
all.
I know some of you are thinking that E. coli has been in the news a lot, usually associated
with something bad, such as therista diarrhea.
But here's an example where a germ can be both good and bad.
We'll be talking more about bad E. coli when we tackle foodborne illness.
For now, its good role is to synthesize vitamin K, which is essential for normal blood clotting.
When patients receive antibiotics, the antibiotics can kill the good E. coli as innocent bystanders
and alter clotting function.
In recent years, good bacteria have been in the news.
You may have seen the cover of the National Geographic magazine's 125th Anniversary Edition,
discovering microbes within us.
This highlights our renewed interest in our own bacteria known as the human microbiome.
Thanks to the Human Microbiome Project launched in 2007, scientists are learning about the
influence of microbes on physiology, human development, immunity, and nutrition.
Five microbiome sites are being studied, the nose, mouth, intestines, vagina, and skin.
So how do our bodies first attract bacteria?
The microbiome begins its development at birth as babies pass through the birth canal.
They pick up bacteria, lactobacillus, during the birthing process through the vaginal canal.
Over the next two or three months, infants' microbiomes diversify while at the same time
their immune systems are maturing and learning not to attack the good bacteria.
Now I'm sure you are tempted to ask, what about babies born by caesarean section?
It has been shown that these babies start out with less diverse microbiomes, which may
have an impact on the development of their immune system.
During a C-section, it was found that newborns acquire organisms from the environment, predominantly
skin bacteria.
Specifically, C-section babies are missing the lactobacillus species of bacteria from
the mother's vaginal birth canal.
Rest assured, however, as the newborns matured over the first months of life, their microbiomes
of the different infants began to converge as they became exposed to more and more varieties
of bacteria.
But the question still remains as to whether or not early microbiological differences can
have later consequences.
For example, there is some evidence that the administration of antibiotics during childhood
may be responsible for the U.S. obesity epidemic which began in the 1970s, around the same
time that antibiotics saw increasing use in common childhood infections.
Now on to bad bacteria.
A pathogen is any germ that can cause damage and disease via its interaction with a host.
What can be slightly perplexing is that humans often harbor bacteria with pathogenic potential
on our skin or our mouth, but unless the right circumstances occur that lead to invasion,
there are usually no consequences for simple colonization by these pathogenic bacteria.
Instead, a person may serve as a carrier to transmit diseases to others.
For example, in the back of 20% of teenagers' throat is a potentially deadly germ, NYS,
which causes a deadly infection of the brain.
However, most teenagers never become ill with this bacterium.
It just lives there causing no harm.
Another example of the paradoxical nature of pathogens was typhoid Mary.
In the early 1900s, Mary Malone was a cook for a banker's family on Long Island.
She had no symptoms of typhoid illness.
First, one of the banker's daughters became ill with typhoid fever, caused by a strain
of the salmonella bacteria.
Next, the wife and two maids became ill, then the gardener and another daughter.
An investigation traced the source of the outbreak back to Mary's cooking responsibilities.
Analysis of her stools confirmed that she carried the bacteria, which she transmitted
during food preparation.
Since there were no cures, she was placed in isolation on an island for years, until
she agreed never to work again as a cook.
Unfortunately, she broke her promise and she did work as a cook again under an assumed
name in the maternity hospital in Manhattan.
This caused an outbreak of 25 cases of typhoid fever and two deaths.
She was subsequently imprisoned on the island for the rest of her life.
What are some characteristics that make bacteria pathogenic and cause human disease?
Bacteria have the ability to create toxins, which are chemical poisons that interfere
with cell function, digest normal human enzymes, evade infection-fighting white blood cells
and immune clearance.
They can produce protective capsules or slime material so they can't be swallowed by white
blood cells, adapt DNA that can encode for antibiotic resistance.
Even good bacteria in the wrong place can cause infections.
The microbes that inhabit the skin and mucous membranes such as the mouth are known as normal
flora or normal microbiota.
They play a part in the normal healthy human physiology unless they become too populous
or they inhabit places in the body that they don't belong, such as the bloodstream.
Another important concept is that there are some anatomical sites within the body that
are normally sterile.
These include, for example, areas around the brain and spinal cord or the lower portions
of the lung.
When bacteria invade these normally sterile spaces, they will produce disease and hence
become pathogenic.
For example, bacteria in the spinal fluid will cause bacterial meningitis.
But how do bacteria invade these sterile areas of the body?
Well, there can be any number of entry points for bacteria, such as cuts or break in the
skin or mucous membranes in the mouth or bleeding intestines.
For example, staphylococcal bacteria can invade a hole in the skin and cause a skin abscess.
Next, how do we distinguish among bacteria?
One of the simplest ways to classify bacteria visually is on the basis of the specific stain,
the gram stain.
This method is named after the Danish bacteriologist Hans Grahm, who devised the technique in 1882.
This is one of the most important staining techniques in microbiology.
It is usually the first test performed by the microbiology lab and infectious disease
specialists in the identification of bacteria.
The gram stain procedure distinguishes between gram positive or violet colored and gram negative
or red colored bacteria.
It has three steps, staining with violet dye, decolorizing with acetone or alcohol, and
counter staining with saffron, a red dye.
Gram positive bacteria stain purple due to the presence of a specific sugar layer in
their cell membrane, which retains crustal violet stain and is not washed out by alcohol.
Gram negative bacteria, on the other hand, stain pink because they have a thinner sugar
wall which allows the crustal violet to get washed out during the decolorization process
with alcohol.
Restaining with a saffron dye results in a red color.
Of the four bacteria highlighted in this lecture, diphtheria and tetanus are gram stain positive
while pertussis and plague are gram stain negative.
Next, let's use the components of the DPT vaccine to learn more about three bacteria
which produce dangerous toxins.
Carani bacterium diphtheria, the D, bordadella pertussis, the P, and clostridium tetani,
the T.
Let's take a closer look at carani bacterium diphtheriae and see how it causes human disease.
The germ is a gram positive staining, aerobic, and has a rod-like shape.
Unlike Nigeria, carani bacterium diphtheriae is a germ that is not normally found in the
back of the throat, but before the DPT vaccine was developed, this germ sometimes found its
way there and into the nose.
What then happened is it caused a sore throat, fever, and swollen glands, but the classic
sign of diphtheria disease is a thick sheet of gray material that covers the back of the
throat, blocking the airway, and causing difficulty breathing.
Diphtheria infections are somewhat unusual since the bacteria can only invade the surface
cells of the throat.
However, the protein toxin produced spreads throughout the circulation and non-specifically
attacks other cells of the body.
Severe infection with diphtheria toxin can cause death by interrupting the function of
essential organs like the heart, kidneys, liver, and lungs, blocking all protein synthesis
in affected cells by interfering with a key enzyme at the ribosomal site.
How does this bacteria enhance its own survival?
Well, when a person coughs or sneezes, the germs are spread through tiny droplets into
the air where they can infect others within an 8-foot range.
They also can spread from mucous on a used tissue or from silverware that's been in
an infected person's mouth.
In the U.S., due to the efficacy of the DPT vaccine, cases of diphtheria are extremely
rare.
Russia and Eastern Europe have not been as fortunate, where there are thousands of cases
due to low rates of vaccination.
Or to tell a pertussis, which causes the illness whooping cough, is extremely contagious
through respiratory droplets.
After the germ settles in the respiratory tract, the bacterium uses several toxins to
bind and destroy the epithelial or surface lining cells.
The pertussis toxin enters the cells and interferes with communication between the cells.
It also releases a throat cytotoxin, which causes the destruction of hairs, known as
cilia, on the epithelial cell layer.
Cilia are responsible for keeping our airways free from bad bacteria.
A hallmark of pertussis is its violent coughing fits, which are so frequent and forceful that
it's hard to breathe.
After coughing, individuals infected with pertussis need to subsequently take an inhalational
breath that results in a whooping sound.
These coughing fits can last more than 10 weeks, or more, even if the germs have been
killed by antibiotics, due to the damage inflicted on the epithelial cells.
Severe disease affects mostly infants and young children.
And it's particularly worrisome and toddlers under the age of one.
These babies sometimes contract pneumonia and end up in intensive care.
Due to the vaccine, deaths from pertussis have greatly declined.
But illness is occasionally still seen in infants that have not been fully immunized
and unvaccinated adults.
There is now a recommendation that all adults over the age of 50 get a booster vaccination
to rekindle their immunity and prevent the accidental spread to small children in their
role as grandparents or child care providers.
Pertussis cases have actually been more frequent over the past decade, so it is considered
a reemerging infectious disease.
Now so far we've been focusing on one virulence factor, toxin production.
There are other virulence factors worth knowing about, and we'll consider these in the course.
Let's use the infamous plague bacteria, yourcineus pestis, as a means to introduce another deadly
virulence factor of gram-negative bacteria, known as endotoxin.
The plague, the outer gram-negative cellular membrane, also contains a special compound
known as lipoparili saccharide, or LPS.
LPS has a structural chain that extends into the surrounding environment.
On the inside of the LPS is a special compound known as lipid A, and lipid A is extremely
toxic to humans and forms the basis of endotoxin.
When bacterial cells are broken apart by the immune system or by antibiotics, fragments
of the cell membrane containing lipid A are released into the bloodstream.
This can trigger a deadly cascade of events known as the sepsis syndrome, or more commonly
known as blood poisoning.
Another factor that helps bacteria escape the immune system are thick capsules, which
are protective barriers made of sugars outside the cell membranes.
These enable bacteria to be more evasive because the white blood cells, which are part of our
immune system, are subsequently unable to swallow the germs.
The germ streptococcus pneumonia, which is the most common cause of bacterial pneumonia,
has a very thick and elusive capsule, and is one of the reasons that the pneumococcal
vaccine is so important to prevent pneumonia.
Next, a biofilm is an extracellular sugar network that forms a scaffolding around the
bacteria.
The biofilm, basically a slime layer, allows bacteria to bind to artificial devices such
as plastic intravenous catheters or even artificial joints.
The germs go into hibernation, and the biofilm protects the germs from the immune system,
similar to using a large umbrella in the rain.
Finally, some bacteria may be swallowed by our white blood cells, but yet manage to survive
inside of these cells unharmed.
These bacteria inhibit specific killing mechanisms and are thus safe from our immune systems.
Mycobacteria, including mycobacterium tuberculosis, or TB, possess a unique cell membrane which
contains mycolic acid and is able to survive intracellularly.
This is one of the reasons that TB poses one of the three largest threats to world health.
Finally, let's return to our Clostridium tetanus case, the glass in the boy's foot.
How did the boy get so sick?
Well, tetanus toxin, produced locally by the bacteria, spreads throughout tissue spaces
into the blood.
It enters the nervous system and attacks the site where nerves meet muscles.
The tetanus toxin causes spastic paralysis by blocking the release of a chemical responsible
for the transmission of nerve impulses, gamma-amino-butyric acid, or GABA.
GABA works by slowing down muscle fiber contraction.
The net effect is that muscles are overperforming, leading to the spasm that is visually seen.
The shorter nerves are more vulnerable to being inhibited, and the nerves of the face
and jaw are most susceptible, leading to lock jaw.
Another early symptom in the face and jaw include a stiffness of the neck and trouble
swallowing.
The toxin can penetrate into larger nerve bundles and even into the brain, and death
can result from heart rhythm disturbances or respiratory paralysis.
Vaccination in the tetanus vaccine utilizes a modified protein toxin form known as a toxoid.
Thanks to early vaccinations, there are fewer than 30 cases of tetanus in the United States
every year.
These cases tend to occur in unvaccinated children whose parents objected to vaccination.
This should be advised of the seriousness of tetanus and be informed that there are no
other preventative measures other than vaccination to protect their children from tetanus.
After a three-dose childhood series of vaccinations, tetanus boosters are recommended every ten
years unless there is a high-risk injury like stepping on a rusty nail.
Then a booster would be given before ten years.
Now fortunately for our child, the family recognized that something was wrong when his
muscle twitches progressed to difficulty swallowing.
They took him to the emergency room where his illness was fortunately recognized before
it was too late.
The doctor administered tetanus-immune globulin, which immediately neutralized the tetanus toxin.
Then the child received antibiotics, which killed the tetanus germ, and with supportive
care, our child survived.
Phew, that was a close one.
Well, if you think bacteria are complicated, remember we're just beginning to scratch
the surface of learning about microorganisms.
In our next lecture, we'll tackle the world of viruses and several germs that lie between
the categories of bacteria and viruses.
I look forward to continuing our journey.
