I would like to start our Human Immunodeficiency Virus or HIV lecture with a true tragic story.
This will not only demonstrate the deadliness of this infection, but also convey the risks
of health care workers that are exposed to HIV and other potential pathogenic viruses
in their daily routines.
A few decades ago, a close friend of mine was doing his training in internal medicine
at a prestigious U.S. medical institution.
It was Sunday afternoon, and he was not on call.
But by a bizarre quirk of fate, he chose to spend Sunday in the medical library, not
far from the bone marrow transplant unit.
Suddenly, a nurse came running into the library and shouting, Can you help us?
Your patient is bleeding from his intestines.
Being the dedicated medical professional that he was, he immediately came to the patient's
assistance.
He first needed to know what the patient's red blood cell count was to determine the
severity of bleeding.
At the time, the quickest method was to prick the patient's finger and use a tiny hollow
glass tube to allow blood to flow into it.
Then you would spin the tube in a centrifuge to measure the volume of blood or red blood
cells.
Only this time, while placing the glass tube in the machine, the tube broke and it stabbed
his finger.
And six months later, my friend developed a flu-like illness, and all of his blood cell
counts abruptly dropped.
He made a partial recovery from this illness and was tested for known infectious agents.
Hepatitis C and HIV tests were not yet available, though.
The cut to the chase when the HIV test became available a couple of years later in the mid-1980s,
he was tested and tragically found to be infected with HIV in a very advanced form.
It turns out that his patient, in addition to dealing with leukemia, had a blood transfusion
that was tainted with the HIV virus.
Two antiretroviral medications were just making their way into the marketplace, and my friend
started taking both of them.
But tragically, eleven years after his intervention to help a patient, my friend died from HIV,
and so did the young man.
So it is my honor to dedicate this lecture to my friend and to healthcare workers all
over the world who put themselves at risk daily in dealing with HIV and other potentially
deadly infectious diseases.
In today's lecture, we'll examine how HIV affects the body, why HIV continues to be
a worldwide problem, how we're trying to reduce the spread of HIV, and what treatments and
vaccines are now becoming available.
More than three decades after the first cases of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or AIDS,
we are still dealing with a pandemic of 33 million people currently infected with the
virus, of which around 3 million are children.
There is still no cure, and we've lost nearly 25 million people to the disease.
HIV is the number one cause of death in Africa, and the leading single cause of death from
infectious disease all over the world.
Even though the numbers of deaths have declined partly due to new treatments and prevention,
there are more than 6,000 new infections daily worldwide.
You may be surprised to know that most of the new cases are transmitted heterosexually,
although many people in the United States think of HIV as a disease of gay males.
In fact, over half of the HIV victims worldwide are women.
Even in the U.S., there are over a million people living with HIV, and these are just
the reported cases.
Of those people in the United States who are infected, around 16% don't know that they
have HIV.
The incidence of HIV infection in the U.S. over the past decade has decreased by 33%.
But one very disturbing fact is that one-fourth of the new cases of HIV in the U.S. are between
the ages of 13 and 24, and the majority are unaware that they're infected.
You can see that this has major implications for our country's youth.
Unfortunately, only 22% of high school students who are sexually active have ever been tested
for HIV.
Patients are infected by sharing body fluids, including blood, seminal, and vaginal fluids,
and even breast milk.
If the fluids contain HIV virus come into contact with a damaged mucus membrane or the
skin, the virus can enter the surface cells, and then, over the course of the next several
days, make their way into the bloodstream and spread.
HIV can be transmitted by needles, by intravenous drug use, for example, and shared needles
result in a direct inoculation of the blood.
When HIV was first discovered, people were very wary about socializing those who were
infected with the virus.
They didn't understand how it was even transmitted.
Even my friend was hesitant to come over for dinner after his diagnosis.
But HIV is not spread by hugging, or by shaking hands, or by sharing dishes, or glasses, or
toilet seats.
Although it seems logical that HIV could possibly be transmitted through the spread
of saliva, the saliva of infected individuals contains only non-infectious components of
HIV.
HIV has immune defense properties that disrupt cells that are the actual carriers of the
virus.
Importantly, HIV cannot be transmitted through the air, and it doesn't survive long outside
of the body.
The only mandatory testing for HIV in place at this time is for blood and organ donors,
military personnel, and some inmates, and occasionally in newborns in other states.
The CDC does recommend routine HIV screening in primary care settings for all adults ages
13 to 64, at least once in your lifetime, and repeat screening at least annually for
those who are at high risk.
Now, can the HIV virus be transmitted during birth?
Yes, HIV can be transmitted from mother to child during pregnancy, birth, or even breastfeeding.
Accordingly, the CDC recommends routine testing as part of prenatal care.
Now, HIV is a linty virus, a family of viruses which typically has a long incubation period
before it causes clinical illness.
It's also classified as a retrovirus, which I will explain shortly.
Once individuals are infected, similar to herpes viruses, they're infected for life.
The human immune system can't seem to make the virus disappear.
Paradoxically, because the virus is actually attacking the portion of the immune system
that is normally responsible for immune clearance.
We know that HIV can hibernate for extended periods of time in the body, but especially
in the lymph nodes, bone marrow, and spleen, areas of importance to our immune system.
The main cells that HIV attacks are of the immune system, and they're known as the CD4
cells.
T-helper cells, as its name implies, assist with a larger number of important immune responses
of the body.
With reduced T-helper CD4 cells, the immune system is handicapped and may eventually be
crippled.
The HIV virus has the ability to destroy more than a billion CD4 cells daily, and HIV replication
occurs directly in these cells.
After the initial infection, the body's production of CD4 cells can compensate for the losses.
But over time, as the HIV destruction process continues, the immune system gradually declines
with reduced numbers of CD4 cells.
We know that HIV is the virus that causes AIDS, but what exactly is AIDS?
AIDS isn't really a disease.
It's a complicated syndrome with many symptoms.
AIDS is the last stage of an HIV infection.
The immune system is so damaged that people begin to get opportunistic infections, meaning
they normally would not occur with a healthy immune system.
Typically, the normal number of CD4 cells in our body is greater than 500 cells per milliliter
of blood.
When the cell count falls to under 200 per milliliter, infections are likely.
Examples of such infections include pneumocystis pneumonia and cryptococcal fungal meningitis.
Symptoms are also much more common in AIDS, including lymphomas and a particularly virulent
skin cancer known as Kaposi's sarcoma.
Fortunately, in developed countries with antiretroviral drugs, most patients no longer
get to this stage of their illness.
With proper treatment called antiretroviral therapy or ART, patients can usually keep the
level of the HIV virus low.
ART is the use of HIV medications to fight HIV infection.
It involves taking a combination or cocktail of HIV medications every day.
These medications control the virus so the patients can live a longer, healthier life.
ART also reduces the risk of HIV being transmitted to others.
Today, people in developed countries who are treated before the disease becomes advanced
and have their illness under control can have a nearly normal life expectancy.
For example, Magic Johnson, former star basketball player, was still healthy more than 20 years
after his HIV diagnosis.
But surprisingly, it's estimated that only 35% of those with HIV in the United States
have their disease under control.
Deaths from other diseases have surpassed deaths from opportunistic infections in the current
ART therapy era.
HIV patients have started worrying about their cholesterol levels and preventing coronary
artery disease again.
No safe and effective cure for HIV currently exists, but scientists are working hard to
find one and remain hopeful.
An intensive effort was being made to rid the HIV virus from a newborn who began ART
immediately after birth and was thought to be successful for a couple of years.
However, to the great disappointment of the scientists who actually thought they had the
first cure, the virus was redetected.
Stem cell transplantation has been tried but has been unsuccessful with one exception.
Consequently, HIV prevention is paramount.
HIV is also a retrovirus.
This means its genetic material is RNA instead of DNA.
Once the virus enters a CD4 cell, it uses an enzyme called reverse transcriptase to implant
its RNA genetic code into the DNA of the CD4 cell.
It also encodes for production of HIV RNA, which is used to create daughter viruses from
the very DNA that it just disrupted.
The HIV virus also tricks the invaded cell into using its own DNA to signal the production
of proteins and enzymes that are essential for the HIV virus survival.
Also by implanting its RNA in the DNA of the CD4 cell, it's also able to pass along
this genetic blueprint material to newly dividing CD4 cells.
By the way, the virulence potential of HIV-1 is illustrated by its incredibly rapid genetic
change in a short period of time.
It evolves one million times faster than the DNA of mammals.
What progress have we made towards managing this terrible disease?
The first drug breakthrough came when Jerome Horowitz, a scientist studying cancer, developed
Zidoveudin, also known as AZT.
In 1964, it was originally designed to be used as a cancer drug, but it was a failure.
25 years later, it was surprisingly found by other scientists to have antiretroviral
activity, and it became the first art medicine.
This was the first treatment to give hope to HIV patients.
As a physician, I personally remember participating in the earliest nationally sponsored drug trials
in the 1980s where AZT was compared to placebo.
Patients had to set their watches for the middle of the night to take their medication
every four hours.
While AZT was found to be effective, it only made a small dent in the patient's viral
burden in the blood.
This reduced the viral load by one logarithm, for example, from 1 million down to 100,000
virus particles.
Also when used alone, resistance rapidly developed.
Also, AZT was not without significant side effects, especially nausea.
However, due to the crisis state of HIV and AIDS pandemic, and for humanistic reasons,
this drug was approved within 20 months rather than the usual 8 to 10 years.
Let's take a closer look at antiretroviral therapy, or ART.
There are six classes of ART drugs currently in use.
I'd like to briefly discuss their mechanisms of action at different portions in the virus
life cycle.
There are ART drugs matching six targets in the HIV virus replication cycle.
At the beginning of virus replication, HIV must enter the host cell.
Entry inhibitors and fusion inhibitors act to block this attachment and movement into
the cell.
A receptor on the cell membrane, known as CCR5, is crucial for HIV viral attachment.
Virus RNA is guided into the host DNA by an enzyme known as integrase.
Integrase inhibitors are another weapon for restricting viral replication.
Drug classes known as NRTI and NNRTI focus their attention on the most important enzyme
in RNA and DNA synthesis, reverse transcriptase.
NRTI stands for Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase Inhibitors and are the oldest therapies and
include AZT.
They are nucleoside analogs or building blocks of DNA.
But they lack an oxygen and hydrogen atom at the core sugar structure.
So once they're incorporated into replicated viral DNA, the reverse transcriptase enzyme
is forced to terminate the addition of more amino acids and halts protein and enzyme synthesis.
Another class of art known as NNRTI also inhibits this reverse transcriptase enzyme,
but it accomplishes this task by physically putting itself in the pathway of the enzyme
in order to block DNA synthesis.
Another drug class is known as the protease inhibitors and they act by binding to HIV protease.
This enzyme is responsible for allowing the virus to exit the host cell and this leads
to the inability of the HIV virus to exit.
By combining drugs of different classes, we're able to suppress viral replication at different
points in the HIV life cycle.
For example, combining nucleoside analogs with different drugs that mimic DNA structure
increases the chances of the blockade of viral reverse transcriptase.
A combination of at least three art medications at one time is the current standard of care.
The recommended first and second line art regimens undergo revision nearly every six
months and need to be published online due to the rapid changes in ART science.
The goal of combination therapy is a three to five-fold logarithmic reduction in the
viral load of the blood, attempting to drive the viral burden down to under a hundred and
even to undetectable levels.
However, the virus is still present in the body in lymph nodes and other sites known
as hidden sanctuaries.
Since there are between 1 and 10 billion HIV viruses replicating daily, there is a large
and rapid turnover of genetic material, and hence a high probability for the potential
of drug-resistant mutant viruses to emerge.
HIV reverse transcriptase also has a high error rate in its reading of its genetic code,
so this enhances the potential for mutations and drug resistance.
Finally, if patients are not adherent to taking all the doses of their medications,
this can result in subtherapeutic drug levels, which greatly increases the risk of viral
mutations.
In fact, the odds of being affected with the HIV virus without mutations that encode for
drug-resistant is becoming increasingly rare.
You should be aware that sometimes mutant HIV virus is not necessarily more virulent.
In fact, mutant virus can be weak enough that it will not have a long-term survival advantage
and hence becomes clinically insignificant.
The capacity for rapid mutations reinforces the need for continued aggressive pharmaceutical
development in the field.
What is being done for prevention to keep people from getting HIV in the first place?
Since HIV is so difficult to treat once the virus is acquired, and since management requires
lifelong attention, the ideal means to manage HIV is through prevention.
Since HIV may be transmitted from blood contamination, avoiding blood spatter is common sense.
This is why you see first responder emergency personnel and medical providers wearing equipment
such as gloves and face shields for protection.
This is part of the universal precautions.
Realistically, HIV acquisition would require an open break in the skin or splash to the
eyes, but sometimes skin cuts could be small enough to go unnoticed.
Since the main transmission of HIV is through sexual contact through secretions, means to
reduce direct contact with infected fluids is a priority.
In the U.S., there has always been an outcry for safe sex, which involves barrier precautions
not only to prevent HIV transmission, but also other sexually transmitted diseases.
But this concept is not embraced in many countries and cultures.
In very general terms, the CDC has launched a strategy for HIV prevention called serostatus
approach to fighting the epidemic, abbreviated SAFE.
But this program is mostly public health education.
We know that adherence to art will reduce the viral load in blood and body secretions
and statistically will reduce the risk of infection transmission.
This concept has been extended to HIV positive women who want to deliver their babies by
natural childbirth.
If the woman is taking ART and her blood viral load is less than 1,000 copies per milliliter,
the baby is at very low risk of HIV acquisition and vaginal delivery is allowed.
Otherwise, C-section is the recommended means of childbirth.
A number of special preventative strategies have been adopted for other cultures, while
not accepted for all cultures.
We know that male circumcision reduces the risk of HIV transmission.
Testing of sexual partners to see if there is serodiscordance with one partner positive
for HIV and the other one negative could be important to prevent HIV transmission, although
many people just don't get tested.
The CDC and World Health Organization have recommended a strategy known as pre-exposure
prophylaxis or PREP for those who are at high risk of acquiring HIV.
This includes serodiscordant couples, couples not using condoms, and injection drug users
who share needles.
This means the non-infected partner takes a limited ART regimen daily, not just before
a high risk encounter.
When medications are reliably taken, the risk reduction may be as high as 90%.
Control of HIV nationally and worldwide obviously also requires extensive financial support.
So what role is the United States playing internally and worldwide?
The U.S. has a master plan called PEPFAR, the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief.
This program targets resource poor countries that are hit hardest by the HIV pandemic and
is mostly coordinated by the CDC.
In 2011, President Obama announced a vision of an AIDS-free generation via PEPFAR.
PEPFAR is committed to supporting 6 million AIDS patients who are in treatment and providing
drug therapy for their lifetime for 1.5 million pregnant women and their babies.
We must face the fact that in spite of all the prevention efforts, a vaccine will be
required to end the global HIV pandemic.
The challenge in this development of such a vaccine appears to be unprecedented.
A vaccine that is modeled using classic vaccination concepts remains the ultimate goal for HIV.
The vaccine will induce an immune response that prevents the establishment of HIV infection.
This would occur by clearing the virus before latent viral reservoirs are produced outside
the bloodstream.
The development of a vaccine would produce broadly neutralizing antibodies, or BNABS,
which could potentially halt primary infection, and this is a priority.
The exact antigenic protein or combination of proteins to target for these antibodies
has been elusive so far.
We do, however, know that BNABS are produced in HIV-infected individuals, but unfortunately
not for several years.
We're not yet sure how to speed up this process.
Also in contrast to the relative ease of producing influenza vaccines, the genetic diversity
and mutational capacity of HIV is much greater than that of influenza.
This creates a larger challenge to attaining a vaccine.
Remember as well that HIV rapidly integrates into the CD4 genome and establishes latent
reservoir of the virus.
Any vaccine would also need to produce other T lymphocytes that would control these latent
sites.
Now this goal may not be achievable with the first vaccination attempts.
Instead, the first vaccine may need to be designated to reduce HIV viral levels and preserve
uninfected CD4 cells.
As we know from our study of art, the natural history of HIV infection shows that viral
blood burden correlates with disease progression.
Reducing viral RNA by one or more logarithms should slow disease progression.
What other strategies are being tried in the meantime?
With all of these frustrations facing researchers, some have turned their focus to a different
strategy, modifying the genes of host CD4 cells to make them resistant to infection.
It's also known that a small percentage of humans lack a receptor on their CD4 cells,
the CCR5, and are actually immune to HIV.
Conceptually, researchers are targeting the CCR5 gene in stem cells to make the CD4 cells
automatically lack the CCR5 receptor and naturally block infection.
Now as far-fetched as this may seem, the first person considered cured of HIV, known
as the Berlin patient, received a stem cell transplant in 2008 to treat his leukemia from
a donor who had a genetic abnormality called CCR5 Delta 32 mutation.
That made him naturally resistant to HIV, and he is thought to be the only person cured
of HIV.
Now HIV and AIDS will continue to be an elephant on the back of the world as we struggle to
control it.
Let's continue this discussion of global health crisis next time as we take a closer
look at malaria and tuberculosis.
These diseases indiscriminately continue to threaten thousands of lives on a daily basis.
See you next time.
