These lectures are part of the Great Courses series, they are produced by The Teaching
Company. The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines. The lectures
in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long. By listening, for less than an hour
a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks. Browse our catalog or website
and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year
in the best college classrooms in the world. The lecturers are university professors carefully
selected by The Teaching Company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching
excellence. These lectures are titled The Great Ideas of Classical Physics, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Stephen Pollock. Professor Pollock is an associate professor
of physics at the University of Colorado at Boulder. He completed his undergraduate
work at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and went on to receive his masters in Ph.D.
in physics from Stanford University. Prior to taking his position at the University of
Colorado at Boulder, Dr. Pollock was a senior researcher at the National Institute for Nuclear
and High Energy Physics. Professor Pollock is the author of Physics
1, a multimedia textbook created by Thinkwell. He became a Pew Carnegie National Teaching
Scholar in 2001 and is a member of the American Physical Society, Nuclear Physics Division,
and also the American Association of Physics Teachers. Professor Pollock is the recipient
of the Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship, the Boulder Faculty Assembly Teaching Excellence
Award, and the Marinus G. Smith Recognition Award, which is awarded by parents and students.
Professor Pollock prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures. The course
guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical
notes, and bibliography. To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to
follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Welcome. My name is Stephen Pollock, and this is a course on the great ideas of classical
physics. I'd like to jump right in by taking apart these words and let's talk about what
I mean by great ideas and what is classical physics. Let's start with the easiest perhaps.
What is physics? Physics is the study of the natural world. It's the study of the physical
world, the world we live in. It's experimental science, and it's really the heart, the core
of all other experimental sciences. Physics goes beyond just a simple description of nature.
It's an attempt to unify a broad variety of phenomena that we observe in the world, both
the natural world and the technological world. We're looking for the underlying principles,
the explanation, the prediction. We would like to be able to really understand the world
around us, measurable things in particular. Physics studies matter and energy, space and
time, studies particles and waves, forces, and motion. These are a lot of words that
we use. We have deep intuitive sense about what those words mean, and part of what we're
going to be doing in this course is to start looking carefully at each of these words.
What do I mean by energy? What do I mean by force? How would I define that in a laboratory
and measure it, and what use is it? How does it help me to understand things about the world?
We're going to spend some effort to try to be careful about our definitions. We will
create what I call operational definitions, definitions which are something you can do
in the laboratory so that we know precisely what we mean by these kinds of words. Ultimately,
we're always looking at the world. We're looking at things. Physics is about stuff. How does
it move? Why does it move? How does it work? We're trying to look at the underpinning
principles to understand how and why things behave as they do.
You could distinguish physics from other sciences, and in some respects the boundaries
are artificial. Is it physics or is it chemistry? Chemistry, I would argue, is a kind of a specialty
arising from physics in which you study a particular aspect of the world, materials
and how they mix together and combine to form different materials, different properties.
Of course, there are people who are chemical physicists and physical chemists, and for
those people, the distinction is very blurry. We are going to be zooming in on the core
ideas so that we can then move up if we want and understand other fields. Chemistry, biology,
geology, astronomy, all these other disciplines, scientific studies, they are under my broad
definition, physics. They are attempts to understand the natural world. Living organisms
for biologists, well, that's part of the natural world, and so you could argue that
that's physics, and sometimes physicists will make that argument, but we're going to be
looking at the basics here. We're looking at the rules of the game. We're trying to understand
what are the key players, what objects can we think about that will help us to understand
a broad variety of other objects, and what rules do we need to understand in order to
understand as much as we possibly can about things that we see, things that we measure.
If you watch an Olympic high diver, they go off, they do some spins and flips, it's a
complicated system. It's clearly a physical system, and as a physicist, you might want
to be able to describe it, predict what's going to happen next, make sense of it. And
what we will often do as physicists is idealize, simplify. I will talk about point-like objects
throughout this course, like that Olympic diver whose center of mass acts like a point-like
object, arcing through the air. And so, you know, you can make a joke about it, the physicist
who's trying to help the farmer and says, let's consider a spherical cow. And it is
a joke. On the other hand, depends a little bit on the question that you're asking. So
if the farmer wants to know how many cows will fit in a barn, it may not be a terrible
approximation to a sumo spherical cow. If you're interested in more milk production,
it's probably not the most fruitful approximation. And so, in the end, we can always go back
and add in complexity. But we'll always start with the basics. Physicists are, in some
respects, simpletons. I love to think about a point-like object obeying fundamental laws,
let's neglect friction, let's not worry about complications. Now, if you hear that and you
say, what do you mean, neglect friction? Friction is everywhere. It's part of the world. How
could you possibly understand the world if you neglect parts of it? And my argument is,
well, first we neglect it, we get at the core ideas, what is going on, and then we add it
back in. Physicists certainly don't neglect friction. In the end, it's just another force
among many forces. And if we understand the nature of force as a concept, then we can
add in specific ones as we wish. This is really one of the central ideas of this course, is
to try to break things down, look at the underpinning story. And that's really what I mean when
I talk about the great ideas. The great ideas of physics would be those essential fundamental
principles, the guiding core principles that we need to understand. Now, I can't just list
them for you. I wish I could, but first of all, the list is essentially everything we're
going to talk about and maybe even more in this course. Every idea in the history of physics
has in certain sense been a great idea. Furthermore, what was a great idea in one period of history
became developed and evolved, and it turned into other great ideas. And the original one
lost some of its everyday usefulness or necessity. It's still an underpinning story. It's just
not necessarily a great idea depending on the particular question that you're asking.
So in the end, what we're going to discover is that the great ideas of physics are simply
the deep ones, the principles that we're interested in, and that's what we're going
to be focusing on. Let me give you an example of a great idea of physics. One of the truly
spectacular ideas, which arose historically all around the 1600s, was that the world can
be understood by doing experiments. It's an empirical question, not a philosophical question.
Before that, it might seem obvious to you that if you want to understand the world,
you should measure it. You should do experiments on it. But that's definitely not been the
case for much of human history. People just philosophized, and what we today call physics
was once upon a time called natural philosophy. It was the philosophy of the natural world,
and people would argue, well, I believe that the world should be this way, and I believe
that the world should be such a different way, and the arguments were often intense
and deep, and they were grounded on elements of observation. But they weren't thinking
about making concrete measurements, and then testing their ideas. The experimental method,
or the scientific method, turns out to be one of the truly spectacular, successful, powerful,
great ideas in the history of human civilization. Let me say a word about the scientific method.
This great idea really has itself many pieces, and you can define the scientific method in
a variety of ways. I'm going to go for a kind of a simplistic, but essential definition of
the scientific method as a set of ideas. You begin in science by observing. Look at the
world. Get curious. I would argue that curiosity is part of the scientific method. But that's
not enough. That's not enough to be doing science. You have to stop and hypothesize. You try
to figure out what are the deep ideas, what are the organizing principles. Can we connect
this observation with a very different kind of observation? If you do that, then you will
realize that you have to go back. You have to think about your observations. You have
to do experiments. You have to make measurements. There's this cycle in the scientific method.
You observe. You hypothesize. You theorize. You experiment. It's really not an orderly
process. It can be very messy in real life. Sometimes you do things in funny orders, but
ultimately this scientific method is grounding. When you believe something about the world,
you have to be able to test it. You have to think about consequences. Once you've made
a hypothesis, you look for other situations, broader applications of this idea, and you
test them. You often do this with mathematics. Mathematics is really just a tool to formalize
logical consequences. Mathematics is not about formulas and plugging numbers in necessarily.
It's more about relationships. Formulas tell stories. They say, if you change one thing
in the world, then another thing will respond. Mathematics is about cause and effect, and
so if you want to understand the world, if you want to understand cause and effect, mathematics
is a delicious and powerful tool. It's definitely part of the scientific method to make your
theories quantitative, to make measurements that you can compare with experiment, and
then make numerical predictions. We're not going to emphasize the mathematical side,
but we won't neglect it either in this course. We'll talk about the mathematics, not in
terms of really doing it. You don't need to know mathematics in this course. I really
want to think about it as simply an expression of relationships, and so we'll think about
the stories that scientists are telling with the underpinning mathematics.
Physics is a tapestry, and this is a big goal in this course, is to begin to step back and
see what the tapestry is showing us. There will be ideas that you introduce, and then
you weave them with other ideas, and with experiment. Everything in physics has to connect
with everything else. If it's an isolated topic, or an isolated fact, it's not really
so interesting to us. We want to be able to make sense, which means to make connections,
and in the end, this tapestry not only has to be self-consistent, it has to be elegant,
and it has to connect to our experiments. We have to go out there and test it out and
see where are the edges, and do we need to re-weave a little bit. This is part of your
goal as you go through this course, is to try to keep thinking about the big picture.
What are the fundamental ideas? What are the core elements?
We will constantly be asking, why do I believe this? Professor Pollock is telling me a fact.
How do I know it's true? Why should I believe that? I want you to constantly be questioning
what I'm saying, and think about your experiences. Physics is about the natural world, and so
you should be able to make sense of these ideas. If you can't make sense of it, then
go back. Think about it again. That's really your task throughout the course, is to say,
how does this fit together into a coherent framework?
That's physics and the great ideas. Let me be a little bit more specific about what
I mean when I use the adjective classical. What is classical physics? There are many
branches of physics. Classical physics is really a very broad and overarching title.
It spans a huge fraction of the physics that we know, and it's really a set of ways of
thinking about and investigating the world that's built on the scientific method, and
it follows some philosophical principles. The philosophical principles we'll be talking
about throughout the course. There is, for instance, a belief that the world is real.
It's out there, and it's independent of you or me or our beliefs about the world. The
moon goes around the earth, and during a time of day when the moon is not visible because
it hasn't risen, it's on the other side of the earth, it's still there, even though you
can't see it. You know that it's an object out there, and it was there before there were
human beings, and it's going to be there perhaps if human beings ever were to disappear from
planet earth. There is an external reality, and physicists are trying to make sense of
that external reality. Now, you can question this philosophical approach, and I'm going
to argue that classical physics is simply, it makes this assumption, and we discover
how spectacularly profitable it is, how valuable it is in terms of sense-making and abilities
to connect things and abilities to apply these ideas. Realism is one piece of the story,
but there's more to it than that. It's not just that the moon is real. It's that I understand
it. It's deterministic. So the rules, the laws of nature, the principles of physics
are going to tell us not only what the moon is, but what it's doing, and where it's going
to be tomorrow, and when's the next eclipse going to be? And I can predict that arbitrarily
far into the future. I can tell you when they were historical eclipses, even if nobody
ever looked at it. Determinism is very powerful again. It's this tool that was developed in
the 1600s, and the 1600s were really this sort of profound era historically when we shifted
from philosophizing about the world to really believing in this classical physics world view.
And once you've accepted determinism, so you're thinking about the world in a kind of a clockwork
fact, fashion, you also recognize that the world is simple. We can reduce complex things
into simpler entities. Reductionism is the word that I will use to argue that we can
understand complex things. Just take a deep breath. When you look around you and you look
at some thing and you think, how could I ever understand that? You say, well, it's made
of objects, and the objects obey the laws of physics, and there's only a couple laws
of physics that we're going to be learning about in this course. By the end of this course,
you will have the tools to make sense of arbitrarily complex phenomena in general. Of course, I
can't make absolute statements. Will you be able to understand human consciousness by breaking
it down into the motion of atoms in your brain? Well, maybe that's a sufficiently complicated
thing that maybe reductionism isn't perfectly usable. But how about something just a little
bit less complicated like predicting the weather? Classical physics says we should be able to
understand this complicated thing called weather because it's after all just little atoms of
air and water bouncing around. And indeed, we really can. We've made great strides in
using the fundamental idea as a classical physics to understand something like that.
Historically, classical physics spans a period of time starting in the 1600s up to and perhaps
beyond the early 1900s. And we're going to focus on the ideas that human beings understand
the best, believe the most strongly, have experimentally verified the most so that we
really are talking about the physics that is, it's beyond question in a practical sense.
It's really the description of the world we live in. And now I turn to a different question.
If we can do this, why would you care personally? Now you're here, you're interested in this
course, so you obviously have some intrinsic curiosity. But I think we can start to articulate
a lot of practical reasons why learning some classical physics is, it's fun, it's interesting,
it's beneficial, it will change in a certain way and certain to a certain extent the way
you think about the world you live in. So just look around you right now, look around
you and think about this rich and complex world that we live in. Some people look around
them and they see things, some of which are magical and some of which are incomprehensible
and we just accept it and we go through our lives. But as a physicist, everything you
look at, you kind of have this desire, well why is that working? How do I understand it?
So you look at technology, you look at, just not necessarily technology, look at the color
of objects, think about the light striking your eyeballs, think about the sounds that
you're hearing right now, think about textures, the softness of your hand, the hardness of
the table, the almost impossible to feel but it's there softness of the air around us.
If you can make sense of these things, then this is the goal of classical physics is to
be able to say all of those things arise from a couple of ideas and if I understand those
ideas I will recognize them in my world, not just the world but my world. Physics is well
established and it's extraordinarily useful. So when you go to the kitchen and you turn
on the toaster oven and you turn on the light switch and you turn on the microwave oven,
I would like for you to recognize that these principles of classical physics apply there,
they apply everywhere. Even high tech things where you might wonder does classical physics
really apply, it's very useful and it may give you a sense of what to do when the toaster
oven is broken or the light bulb doesn't light up. At least it might empower you to recognize
that you could understand it and that a little bit of extra effort is all that's required,
you have the underpinnings and you really can make sense of the world around you.
When I look at something beautiful like a rainbow, I go outside and it's just stopping
raining, I love rainbows and I do consider them to be magical. I'm happy to use that
word, I know the feeling, there's an artistic quality to the rainbow and I want to share
it with a friend and I appreciate all of these aspects and yet I'm a physicist so I also
look at that rainbow and I think I get this extra pleasure by thinking okay the sun must
be behind me and I know where it is and I know what's going on, I understand that the
rays of light are traveling in straight lines, they're reaching the droplets, they're refracting,
bending and they're coming back to my eyes and the colors of the rainbow which are just
different frequencies of light are striking my eye and I'm recognizing them, I love that,
I think it makes the rainbow all the more beautiful and the fact that I can now connect
that to the way my glasses work and how it is that I can see more clearly and the colors
of the rainbow that appear on a little oil slick that appears on a puddle on the road
after that same rainstorm, all of these things are interrelated, it's all ultimately understandable
by these principles of classical physics. So there's this great pleasure that I think
you will find of looking at the world and thinking about it not just with this sense
of wonder and surprise but also with this sense of we know what's going on, we can
know what's going on. Physics is about sense making. You may walk into this course believing
that physics is a set of topics and what I'm going to be doing throughout this course is
telling you facts, giving you information and that's not at all, it's not even remotely
what physics is. So you've got to shift your perspective if that's what you were expecting
and recognize that physics is really about making connections. It's about those aha
moments, it's about thinking about something and saying wait a minute, I've never studied
this before but really what I'm looking at is the same thing as one of these core ideas
of physics. It's tying ideas together and going oh I see, I get it, I'm hitting the
brakes, my car is skidding, it's just conservation of momentum and object in motion is remaining
in motion, topics that we're going to be talking about throughout the course that apply all
over the place. I hope at that moment you figure out what to do in the skid because
you have this deep intuitive sense of classical physics. The ideas of classical physics are
very powerful and very general and there's another misperception I think about physics
that many students walk into my classes thinking this is hard, people are often nervous about
physics, they're thinking I'm not sure if I'm going to really be able to do this physics
stuff and I'm going to make a couple arguments about that. The first is that everybody knows
physics, you live in the world, you know about how the world works, you already know everything
I'm going to teach you. All we're going to be doing is organizing your thinking, helping
you to see connections about things that you thought were disconnected or separate that
really ultimately have a lot in common. So it's crazy to think that people can't understand
physics because we all ride bicycles and drive cars and throw balls and when you throw a
ball you know pretty much exactly where it's going to land, that's physics. It's predicting
and understanding behavior of objects in the world. Now it's also true that as a human
being we developed what I might call a superstition, it's beliefs about the world that are not
correct, they're simply false. This is a beautiful thing about physics, you can go out and test
your ideas about the world and every now and again you'll find that you believe something
very deeply which is in disagreement with the way the world really does work. The human
brain is a spectacular pattern creator, we look at things and we see patterns and sometimes
the patterns represent something real and repeatable and sometimes we're just making
it up and this is a key part of this course is to recognize and locate within ourselves
moments, places where we think we understand how the world works and we're not 100% correct.
Let me give you an example and you may or may not subscribe to this misconception but many
people do. Imagine that you grab two objects and one of them is extraordinarily heavy, it
weighs 30 pounds and it's the size and shape of a small cannonball. Then you take an identically
sized and shaped object but it's hollow and it's made of plastic, one of them is enormously
heavy, the other is extraordinarily light and you hold them in front of you and you let
go of them. What happens? Well they fall because there's gravity and we know that, everybody
knows what happens. Everybody knows what's going to happen when they reach the ground
but different people will know different things. Some people will strongly believe they will
know that the heavy object obviously is going to hit the ground first. Hello, heavy objects
fall to the ground faster than light objects. Other people will know that they hit the ground
at exactly the same time. So which is correct? That's really what we're after in this course
is let's think about how would we do this experiment. It's not that hard, you can just
pick up some objects and try it out. We'll talk about this experiment and we're going
to try to make sense of it. It's not so much interesting to just know the answer. It's
interesting to be able to explain it and to make sense of it and to see the connection
between what happens with these two objects and what happens with other objects in totally
different circumstances even as far distant as the moon going around the earth which is
in a certain sense exactly the same story. In this course we've got to make a path. There's
a lot of ideas of classical physics, ultimately a few basic ones and many many applications.
I'm going to try to follow a path which emphasizes the central ideas and we're going to follow
what I would call a quasi-historical path. Human beings began studying this stuff in
the era of Copernicus Galileo, Isaac Newton who's the hero of this course back in the
1600s and that's pretty much where we're going to start. Very quickly we will start thinking
about what was the world that they lived in? Where did their ideas come from? What were
the old ideas that they were working off of and how did they develop and introduce the
ideas of classical physics? Then we will work our way forward through history but following
the great discoveries and the great ideas. Since I'm a physicist, when I tell you history
stories, they're physics history. Physicists are infamous for being revisionists. Example,
we're talking about the heavy ball and the light ball. I'll tell you the wonderful story
of Galileo climbing to the top of the Leaning Tower of Pisa, a dramatic experiment to do
precisely what I just described and let's just see back in the 1600s which one hits the ground
first or do they hit at the same time. Now it's quite likely that that never really happened.
I have learned just in recent times that people now question this story but it doesn't really
matter so much to me because the story is lovely. It's a human story about somebody trying to make
sense of the world. It helps us to remember what happened and why it happened. I'll certainly
try not to make up stories and we'll use history as a tool to help us to make sense of the
experiments and the development of these ideas. We're going to begin with a branch of classical
physics called mechanics. Mechanics is really, if you think of this new metaphor instead of a tapestry,
let's think about a cathedral. If you think about physics as a cathedral, I want to start at the base.
I want to build some strong underpinning structure upon which we can build some of the turrets and
flying buttresses. So we'll begin with mechanics. Mechanics is the study of force, energy and motion.
Mechanics looks at objects and it asks, how do they move? Why do they move that way? We'll spend quite a bit of time and
effort trying to understand this because it's a really deep set of ideas and this is really the physics of
Isaac Newton. Isaac Newton helped us to understand this. These form the rules of the game and everything
that we do throughout the rest of the course is going to be built on mechanics. It is really what you need
to understand all of and any classical physics. When I think of the word mechanics, I think of an automobile
mechanic and it's again a nice metaphor. You're thinking about this person working on a complex object and they
know what it's built from. They know what the building blocks are and how they fit together and if you can
understand that, then you can predict how the car is going to work. You can fix it when it's broken. So mechanics
really is the underpinning story. Once we've got that, we will then start to build on it. We will add some novel
ways of rethinking the old classical ideas into newer classical ideas and then we'll start to look up at the
structure of classical physics itself. We'll look at some of the forces of nature. We'll think about gravity and
friction, electricity and magnetism. Extraordinarily important in our lives, these last two, electricity and
magnetism are really what technology is all about and even the natural world. When we get back to questions about
why are some objects solid and others are liquid, the microscopic force involved is often electrical or
magnetic or electromagnetic in nature. We'll study consequences of electricity and magnetism. We'll think about
optics and light. We'll think about waves, waves versus particles. We will think about atoms, the true microscopic
building blocks of the world and consequences of putting all of this together. Heat, thermodynamics, temperature. These
are the topics that we're going to be covering. It's really a connected whole. By the end of this course, you can watch
the sparks from a Fourth of July fireworks and you can watch the Olympic High Diver and you can look at the moon and you
can see that these things are really all the same story. They look dramatically different, but there's really only a few
underlying principles. And as we move through this course, bear in mind, keep in mind the underlying themes. We're
looking for simplicity. We're looking for organizing tools. We're looking to unify as much as possible. The goal would be for you to
make sense. If you can get curious, if you can recognize the connections to your life, if you can enjoy this process of making
sense of the world, that is what this course is going to be all about.
Lecture 2 Describing Motion, A Break from Aristotle
Roughly 2,000 years ago, maybe a little bit longer, Greek natural philosophers were thinking very hard about the world that they lived in,
the natural physical world. And some of them were making observations, some of them were thinking about how the world should work. By and large,
they were doing philosophical study, natural philosophy. And in the course of their efforts, they established a lot of important ideas,
some of which are part of classical physics or even modern physics. And yet I cannot call what they were doing classical physics
because they were really missing this essential ingredient, the scientific method was still not present. They weren't being systematic in their approach.
They were reflecting on how things should be or seemed to be, but missing this idea of testing and formulating theories. I would like to go back
2,000 years and talk a little bit about some of the key ideas in particular of one of the key players, Aristotle, who was one of the most
influential Greek natural philosophers. And his ideas about the world have been influential for a lot of reasons. In fact, many people today continue to hold
Aristotelian ideas about how the world works. It's quite natural if you don't investigate carefully or scientifically. And what we'll find is that it took
over a thousand years before somebody, namely Galileo, who we're going to talk about today, decided to challenge these ideas of Aristotle with some very
simple, very elegant experiments. And in fact, one of my favorite experiments of all time, rolling little marbles down an inclined plane.
There's an awful lot to say about such a simple little experiment. And today we're going to really focus on what we can learn from doing that kind of
experimentation. So let's talk a little bit about Aristotle's ideas first so that we can understand what it was that Galileo was trying to make sense of
and challenge. Aristotle lived about 300 years BCE. He's thinking about religion. He's thinking about biology. He characterized a number of
physical systems with observations. And as a contemporary physicist, when I look back and think about Aristotle's study of the natural world, it seems
somehow murky to me. And it's a little bit confusing. And so it's worth trying to make some sense of what he was saying. Part of the reason why it's murky for me is that
of course I have my contemporary classical physics way of thinking about things and trying to imagine how you could view the world in this old way is
challenging but perhaps informative. So Aristotle watches things, just looks around the world and he says, it seems to me like every object has a
natural place. I just look around you. If there's a chair, its natural place is on the ground. If there's a very heavy object, its natural place is down
or even in the ground. Maybe light objects belong up in the air. So feathers or dust or smoke belongs. It has a natural place which is up in the air.
And then you look up in the sky and you look at the sun and the moon and the stars and you say, those are something totally different. Obviously not part of our natural
world. Those are some sort of mystical things. Possibly religious, possibly, who knows. They seem to be ideal. They seem to be little perfect dots and circles.
Now Aristotle is not experimenting. He's just thinking about how it seems like things ought to be. And part of the problem was that he wasn't being careful in defining what it was
that he wanted to be measuring. So if you're talking about motion, that's a vague word. And what we're going to want to think about in today's lecture is how you might get a little bit more
rigorous about defining something like motion or what you mean when you say faster or slower. In fact, it'll be both this lecture and the next lecture where we want to work out those ideas.
I call this operational definitions. If you're going to use a word and you want to talk about how the natural world is, then we need a definition which is not philosophy.
We need to be able to define our words by what you do to measure it. What kind of experiment, what kind of steps do you have to take in order to, for instance, distinguish between a faster object
and an object which is accelerating. So speed or velocity and acceleration, all three of these words we often use kind of informally as motion, and we're going to want to firm that all up.
If you don't firm it up, then you probably go through life as an Aristotelian. And that's no disaster. He was a smart guy. But it's an unexamined and only partially correct worldview.
And in the end, if you start to think about things, you'll find the Aristotelian worldview is unsatisfying. So let's continue back to this idea of the natural state of things.
So if you believe that objects have a natural state, what if you perturb them? So, for instance, you push a cart and you let it go. Well, Aristotle knows what's going to happen.
It's going to grind to a halt, at least if it's on a flat road or even any kind of a road. That cart is going to come to rest.
So Aristotle would argue that the object comes to rest because it's the nature of a cart to come to rest.
So he's attributing the cause to the object itself, which is a funny way of thinking, but not entirely unreasonable.
So now you think about a heavy object and a light object and you drop them. We mentioned this experiment last time.
And Aristotle is thinking about, well, which one is going to hit the ground first? And it's obvious. It's completely obvious to him because the heavy object has a natural tendency to be on the ground, which is much stronger than the light object.
So he writes that it's clear that the heavy object would strike the ground first. And he believes that's the fundamental nature of the object to do so.
So you don't have to ask why. He's not really asking a question of why or explanation. He just thinks he's describing nature.
If an object is in motion, Aristotle asks a question. He says, what is it that keeps it in motion? If the cart is moving, why does it keep moving?
Seems like a natural question. Aristotle is puzzling over this. And it turns out, interestingly, that this is an unproductive question.
In fact, it's the wrong question. And so we're going to have to come back and rephrase the question properly.
So I'm just trying to establish the sorts of things that Aristotle was thinking about.
He has a philosophical outlook, which is that the world can be understood by contemplation.
And maybe observation, he's certainly not going to object to watching the real world, but he doesn't want to get his hands dirty and do experiments.
That's not the way he thinks that we should need to proceed to understand the world.
And I don't know. I find it kind of remarkable that it took the world thousand-plus years before somebody just picked up some objects and dropped them in order to try to test Aristotle's ideas.
So we'll have to come back to that.
The person who is most famous for doing this is Galileo.
Galileo is certainly not the first. And it's a little bit unfair for me to attribute everything to individuals.
It's part of my historical oversimplification to talk about some of the key players and the big ideas.
We're talking late 1500s, early 1600s. It's Italy.
Galileo is part of the Renaissance. And he is beginning to challenge some of these old ideas.
He's a sharp-witted, brilliant young character. He loves to argue. He's always fighting with people.
I would love to encourage you to read some more about Galileo. There's lots of delightful biographies of this character.
And like many of the people who are going to be talking about in this course, it's a lot of fun to learn about the world he lived in and what it took for somebody to really challenge established worldviews.
So it would take us a little bit too far afield from the physics content to spend a lot of time on these characters.
But I encourage you to do so yourself.
Realize that the world that Galileo lives in is changing radically.
There are new ideas, rediscovering old ideas from the ancient Greeks, from the Arab world.
There are ideas which people, I'm not sure if it was some sort of global European inferiority complex, but people seem to think that these ancient ideas were the wisdom of ancient times and must be correct.
The profound and they seem to contain everything and it's just a question of collecting the old writings.
So it's a schist in worldview to challenge that and this is one of the things that Galileo ended up doing.
And in part, his rolling marbles down an inclined plane is it epitomizes the kind of experiment that you would want to do to question what Aristotle would be saying about the nature of objects and the motion of objects and what's natural
and how do you develop a language to talk about it.
So Galileo is the true Renaissance man, both literally and in the sense that we use that today.
His insights were not just about marbles on inclined planes.
He was looking at astronomy and he was thinking about motion and he was thinking about time and he was thinking about relativity.
In fact, the theory of relativity is really attributable not to Albert Einstein but to Galileo and we'll talk a little bit about that.
In this lecture and the next couple of lectures because there were lots of big ideas of classical physics being developed by Galileo.
This is still pre-Isaac Newton.
We're kind of laying a groundwork here.
In this lecture, I would really like to focus on meta themes.
Meta meaning I'd like to step a little bit beyond just the physics itself and I would like to look at the scientific ideas, the methodology rather than the physical principles.
So we'll focus on the physical principles more in the next lecture.
For instance, Galileo is telling us collectively we should do experiments.
If you want to test something, you should measure.
You should use tools and you should develop some kind of standards.
All of these are ideas that we just take for granted.
It's part of what we think of when we think of science today.
It's the heart of the scientific method and Galileo was recognizing that if you want to make measurements, you should really pick a phenomenon, decide what it is that you want to be studying and then isolate it.
It's a brilliant idea. It's one of those great ideas of classical physics.
So you should be able to watch something and describe it.
So that's our first step towards science, being able to describe something carefully, accurately, being able to reproduce experimental measurements.
And so Galileo is thinking about motion and he says, all right, we've got this problem.
When I drop objects, they accelerate very rapidly and gravity is darn strong.
So how am I going to study this idea of Aristotle who said, obviously, heavy things and light things fall at different rates?
And there's a couple of ways you could imagine proceeding.
Imagine it's the 1500s and you want to study this question.
You would like to weaken gravity, but of course you can't.
There's no knob to turn in an experiment to turn off gravity.
And so this was one of the great ideas of Galileo was to create a little artificial environment in his laboratory in which gravity is effectively weakened.
And that's this inclined plane.
If you drop something, it accelerates very rapidly.
So rapidly in the 1500s, it just hits the ground.
It's hard to measure.
But if something rolls slowly and then faster and faster down a ramp, you can really make some precision measurements.
So this is part of the story of what Galileo is doing.
And indeed, these measurements were critical.
So if you want to talk about motion, you better be able to measure distance and you better be able to measure time.
So distance, well, you have some sort of standard.
You're going to have a ruler.
Time is tricky.
So imagine what it's like in the 1500s.
There's no modern clocks then.
In fact, Galileo is one of the people who helped invent the pendulum clock.
This is one of the things which we really won't be talking so much about that he's famous for.
So how are you going to measure timing?
Well, he had lots of creative ideas.
One of the ways that he measured timing was just to listen to his own heartbeat.
So you time your heartbeat, your heart rate, and you can use that as a clock.
But of course, if you're getting excited about the physics that you're measuring, that's not going to be the best clock.
So you've got to think of more rigorous ideas.
He had two very clever ideas.
One of them involved water droplets and he didn't invent this, but he used it to great effect.
You have a little tub of water and the water drips out of it and it drips at a regular rate and you collect the water in a pan and you weigh the pan.
So this is a timing measurement that makes use of an accurate weighing device.
Again, part of the idea of modern science is to make some sort of operational definition of how we're going to measure time and it may involve other things that we can measure equally well or even better.
The other trick that Galileo used was to lay little strings across the track and listen.
And he would hear the marble as it rolled down the inclined plane striking the strings and he was very musical.
And so he could hear when the rhythm was steady.
And so it didn't matter so much what the steady rhythm was, but that it was steady, which was part of the measurements that we're going to be talking about.
So Galileo is thinking about careful standards.
He's thinking about isolating the phenomenon, gravity and simplifying it.
You're manipulating nature rather than just watching it.
And he does a mathematical analysis as well.
So one of the last and essential ingredients of this new field of physics is to be quantitatively rigorous about what you're doing.
He's not the first, of course. In fact, ancient Greek astronomers were making mathematical analyses, which we'll be talking about.
But this is certainly part of what he's bringing back into the world view in the late 1500s.
So this experiment that I'm describing goes by a physics name.
It's kinematics.
Kinema, think of cinema.
Cinema is motion pictures.
Cinema means we are measuring kinematics, is the mathematical or measurement of motion.
So we are trying to describe motion.
We are not yet trying to explain it.
Galileo is not in the end really going to have a deep explanation for why the different marbles rolling down the track behave as they do.
He just wants to tell us clearly, with a very careful language, with very careful measuring tools, what's going on, how does it work?
So Galileo, of course, is suspicious that heavy things and light things should fall at very different rates, and he's not the first person to be suspicious about that.
You are probably kind of suspicious about this idea.
But let's think about the kinds of experiments that you might do.
So first of all, I would love to encourage you to please try this experiment.
There are many times in this course where you should just go after class and play a little bit.
So pick up two objects and drop them and just watch.
Now, if the first two objects that you were to pick up, you wanted something light and something heavy.
So you pick up a piece of paper in one hand, and you pick up a heavy book in the other, and you drop them.
So let's take a pen and a piece of paper, and we'll pick them up and drop them, and it's very clear who wins the race.
When Aristotle is quite correct, the heavy object lands much faster, much earlier than the piece of paper.
So you're going to stop and think about this.
Why did that happen?
Is it intrinsic because the pen is heavier?
So let me try another experiment.
Take the pen and the piece of paper again.
This time I'm going to crumple up the piece of paper.
So look, I haven't changed the weight of this piece of paper.
Aristotle would say if you didn't change the weight, you didn't change its desire to be on the ground, its natural state.
And so Aristotle would presumably predict the exact same result of the experiment.
But now when we let them go, it's completely impossible for me to see which one hits the ground first.
They seem to be hitting it exactly the same time.
And this, of course, is Galileo's observation.
This is that famous experiment where you go to the top of the Leaning Tower of Pisa,
and you drop a really heavy cannonball and some light cannonball, maybe a hollowed-out cannonball.
Similar shape, similar size, that's an important element of this story.
And you realize that it's not the weight which is pulling it to the ground faster.
And indeed, these two objects are traveling together.
They're doing the same thing, all objects that you drop.
If you can get rid of complications, crumpling up the piece of paper is getting rid of a complication, namely air resistance,
which is something other than gravity, and this is part of Galileo's insights, is to recognize that you need to simplify.
Get rid of friction, make gravity as weak as possible by rolling things down an incline instead of dropping them straight,
and you can access a fundamental truth.
So this is a lovely and important element of Galileo's experiments.
Part of Galileo's achievement then is to recognize that if you've got different stories going on at the same time,
you must simplify, simplify, simplify.
This is the sort of core idea of physics today.
And so if you can take different marbles and roll them down different tracks and you start smoothing it down,
you will begin to realize that the same thing begins to happen.
And it doesn't matter if you have an extraordinarily dense marble or an extraordinarily light marble,
as long as the friction is small and they're going down the same incline, they'll do the same thing.
Let's go back because I don't want to zoom in on the physics too much.
Today I want to keep at the meta-physics level. Let's think about the measurements.
So if you want to measure distance, distance traveled, you would like some kind of unit.
And today we have standards. We've all agreed we're going to use the meter.
And you can go out and buy a meter stick and see exactly what it is. It's very close to a yard.
In Galileo's day, people were arguing about what the standards should be
and how we should define a unit of distance so that everybody in different laboratories can be in agreement.
And so again, Galileo certainly knocked the first.
There was ancient Greek measures of all the units' time and distance.
Galileo is measuring time in these various different ways
and ultimately leads us down this sort of steady path historically
till the definition of the meter and the definition of the second.
And these contemporary units are very important to us.
Throughout this course, I will be using by and large the metric unit system.
I know most of us are familiar with pounds and feet and inches.
And to a physicist, I sort of shudder and use those sometimes,
but if I can possibly avoid them, I do.
The United States is now the last country in the world still using these ancient measurement units.
And the metric system, it's really very human.
It was designed by a group of people in Europe in the 1700s
so that we would have well-established common frame for talking about measurements.
Galileo is also using another kind of tool, which is a mathematical tool.
If you've got marbles rolling down an inclined plane and you want to describe what's going on,
you make measurements of distance, you make measurements of time,
and now you need to relate these things.
How far do you travel in a given time?
And this is the physics that we're going to be heading towards.
And Galileo is sort of struggling with this.
He uses by and large geometrical arguments.
He would think of ratios.
So he would say the time taken for this marble is to the time taken by the second marble
as the distance traveled, well, he would think about some kind of ratio of this type.
And that works.
It's an awkward mathematics.
And today, when we think about the kinds of measurements that Galileo is doing,
we wonder why didn't he use algebra?
Algebra is so much simpler than geometry for this kind of problem.
And algebra basically is a symbolic way of describing these things.
So, for instance, if you want to talk about the speed of the marble, you say how fast is it going?
Well, we all have a good intuition about speed from our automobile.
It's distance divided by time.
It's miles per hour.
And when you're driving your car and you see that speedometer and the needle says 55 miles per hour,
it's just so easy and you could write it down on a piece of paper.
And Galileo wasn't thinking that way.
He was thinking about the ratios of distances in two circumstances and times in two circumstances.
So what now takes us a very minimal effort to make sense of,
Galileo really struggled in impressive ways to figure out the rules and behavior,
which we're going to be talking about in the next lecture.
If you're rolling marbles down an inclined plane,
there's a couple of things that you have to think about.
So you have to think about eliminating friction.
You have to think about different angles.
So rolling down a steep incline is going to give you a different result,
obviously, than rolling down a shallow incline.
And Galileo has to think hard about how to be quantitative, new measurement, angle.
And he also has to sort of compare results at different angles.
And indeed, we will see that he saw something very profound when he thought about the limit,
either as the angle goes to 90 degrees, so that's when you're dropping the objects,
and that's the limit that Aristotle was talking about, so that's one place to go.
The other limit would be the limit where the incline goes to zero.
And that is going to lead us to many wonderful ideas about the nature of the world.
So Galileo is doing a lot of cool things.
He's quantifying measurements.
He's isolating phenomenon.
And one of the observations that he makes is this observation that we just made
doing our little experiment with the pen and the paper, which is that all the marbles
are going down the ramp and tying at the bottom, if the angle is the same.
And he can now talk about what fast means.
So remember, this is one of Aristotle's big, deep problems.
Aristotle says one object goes faster than the other.
What did he mean?
So Galileo says, let's be careful.
I'm going to define for you what fast means.
It's going to be speed, which I'm defining now to be distance traveled divided by time taken.
So we'll be able to distinguish between the speed of an object and, for instance,
the rate at which the speed is changing.
So in all of these circumstances, Galileo is beginning to create a mathematical framework of kinematics.
He is describing motion, and he's explaining what's happening,
and he's leaving it to a next generation of physicists to try to make sense of this behavior.
You're going to have to analyze this theoretically and quantitatively.
And it's so useful to us that he worried about defining these words.
I can't even think about speed any more.
It's just obvious, right?
You know what speed means, but in that era, speed was not such a well-defined idea.
So let's think a little bit more about measuring speed.
If you go 55 miles per hour, that's what you're doing on the highway,
you're imagining picking a fixed unit of time, one hour, and measuring how far you went.
So you've got to have some sort of markers along the side of the highway.
If you've got a marble rolling down the inclined ramp and you want to measure its speed, it's the same game.
You're going to start your clock and stop your clock,
and of course Galileo doesn't have a stopwatch, which would have been so convenient for him.
And you've got to then make measurements of distance and simply compute the ratio.
So this is the sort of story behind the physics results of Galileo,
the kinds of tools that he's developing, both scientific tools, mathematical tools, standards tools.
And in the end, what he's really doing is he's challenging the status quo.
So for forever, as far as people in the Renaissance were concerned, everybody knew about motion,
everybody knew that all marbles want to be sitting down on the ground,
heavy ones want it more badly, so they'll get there first.
And Galileo says, wait a minute, let's make some measurements, that's not what's happening.
And what's ultimately going to be a result of this is that you can connect the motion of a marble to the motion of anything else.
So on the one hand, you've abstracted to this sort of absurd little toy system.
It makes you think of an elementary school science fair project.
It would probably be a great little science fair project because there's a lot of good physics in those rolling marbles.
But so what? Why would you care about rolling marbles?
And the point is once you understand how marbles work, then you can ask the question, does everything else work that way?
And can we make sense of the world by thinking not about where the marble wants to be,
but to reframe our questions and to ask what causes motion, what causes change in motion,
is really going to be the question that we want to head towards.
So yes, Galileo's ramp is an awfully simple little experiment.
It almost looks like a toy experiment.
But these results were pretty painstaking.
It took him a while, and in the end, he established these insights that did indeed turn out to be universal.
Now, Galileo didn't get everything right.
So he's not some sort of demigod.
Like every scientist we're going to be talking about, he got some ideas right and some ideas wrong.
It was still a crude stage, and he's still really focusing on the first question of physics,
which is kinematics, the description of motion.
And as we will see, once we are able to describe the kinematics, we are just ripe to be able to explain them.
Lecture 3 Describing Evermore Complex Motion
Last time we were talking about Galileo's inclined plane experiments.
400 years ago, these beautiful, simple, elegant little experiments of marbles running down a ramp.
They're deceptively simple.
There's some very big ideas of science that are developing, as Galileo is thinking about and articulating,
what do you need to do such an experiment?
He's looking not just at the science, but at the meta-science issues.
So you have to make decisions.
You have to reduce friction.
You have to reduce gravity.
You have to think about what measurement tools you're using.
You have to come up with some clever timing tools.
You are deciding to manipulate nature purposefully in order to learn something about nature,
rather than just straight observation of the world around you.
You're quantifying the data, trying to get numbers that are rigorous.
You are being very careful about your definition of words and terminology.
You're deciding about units and measures.
All of these things are part of the scientific practice of the scientific method,
which future scientists appreciated and have used to great power over the years.
The result of this experiment was a direct contradiction with Aristotle's writings.
Aristotle said very clearly that heavy object and light object,
when released and subject to the force of gravity,
not his language, but rephrased in contemporary language,
should strike the ground at very different times.
The heavy thing should reach the ground first.
And so you have to appreciate the huge social implications of demonstrating very clearly
in a way that was easily reproduced that this is not correct.
So you're questioning the wisdom of the ancients and in fact demonstrating that it's incorrect.
So think about all the ramifications.
Think about how uncomfortable this might make a church in that era,
which has made certain public statements about how the world works,
and in particular about astronomy, which we will be coming back to.
So Galileo is certainly on the verge of something very big,
and we really haven't talked enough about the results of his measurements.
So that's what I want to focus on today.
And we're going to start for about the first half of today's lecture with the kinematics alone.
Kinematics is the description of the motion.
So I would like to think about some of the words that I've been using,
casually, speed, velocity, acceleration.
And we're going to try to define these.
We're going to try to understand exactly what we mean by them.
We will find that acceleration is the most subtle of all,
and it's also the most fundamental.
In physics, when you're talking about the rate of change of something,
that's a very, very important idea, and we'll see this over and over again in our course.
So this is the first important example of a place where a thing
and the rate at which that thing is changing are both separately very important.
Once we have described the kinematics,
once we have been able to define these words,
we will discover it's more than just a description.
You can predict the future if you know kinematics.
Kinematics is velocity, for instance,
and if you know velocity, then you should be able to predict where it was before
and where it's going to be in the future.
So kinematics is already a part of physics, which can be very useful,
and it's going to guide us to ideas that are yet more fundamental
because we're going to start asking, yeah, but why?
Why is its velocity what it is and why is it changing the way it is?
So that's where we're headed.
Let's start with speed.
We defined speed last time as the distance you've traveled
divided by the time you took.
And if you want to be really careful, let me call this the average speed.
Average because I'm measuring your speed over some finite chunk of time.
So if you're driving to a destination, driving to grandma's house,
what you want to know most likely is your average speed for the trip.
You want the total distance and the total amount of time,
and it doesn't really matter so much.
You're sort of assuming that you'll have some rest stops along the way,
you'll speed up, you'll slow down.
What you care about is the average.
Now, if your average is 60 miles an hour, then that carries a lot of information.
If you say it's a steady 60 miles per hour, there's extra information there.
So let's think about 60 miles an hour.
It's already fruitful to analyze such a little simple term.
So 60 miles in 60 minutes, that's one mile in one minute.
I've just changed units from hours to minutes.
So you can do that anytime you're talking about a physical quantity.
I can measure time in hours, minutes, seconds, years you choose.
I can measure distance in miles or feet.
So it's just a calculation.
If you know how many feet there are in a mile, you pull out your calculator
and I urge you to try this out and check for yourself if 60 miles an hour is 88 feet per second.
88 feet per second means every second as the clock ticks,
you've traveled another 88 feet or 27 meters.
These numbers, of course, you can't compute in your head.
You have to have done them on a calculator and remember them.
60 miles an hour is such a common speed that I happen to know those unit conversions.
But otherwise, you simply need to know how many meters are there in a mile
or how many meters are there in a foot.
You look it up, it's human conventions.
The word steady carries some information.
So if it's a steady 60 miles per hour, it means your cruise control is probably on.
And it's 88 feet every second, second after second.
And so here's where I'm arguing that knowing kinematics predicts the future.
So if you're going a steady 60 miles per hour on the highway with the cruise control on,
then you know exactly where you're going to be in two hours.
Barring some unforeseen change, in two hours you're going to be 120 miles further down the road.
And you know how far you're going to be in 10 minutes.
10 minutes is 10 miles if you're going 60 miles per hour.
If that went by too fast, think about it, convince yourself.
Really what I'm doing is a little algebra problem in my head.
And we're pretty used to that on the highway.
When you look at the signs, and it's especially easy at 60 miles per hour
because it's exactly one mile per minute, you can do this in your head.
But what you're doing in your head is the algebra problem speed equals distance divided by time.
60 miles divided by one hour, that's what you mean by your speed.
And Galileo is thinking about speed without using this kind of algebraic relationship.
And I'm not quite sure how to think about it in his way, and it's more awkward,
so there's probably no need to go back to that old mathematics.
Distance divided by time, it's a ratio.
I don't think of it as a template to plug numbers into my calculator, it's telling me something.
It's what speed is, how far you go every second.
And the fact that it's a steady 60 miles per hour tells me that the ratio is steady.
So if I go for twice as long, I'm going to go twice as far.
That's more of a Galilean way of thinking about it.
The ratio stays constant.
So that's what we mean by speed or average speed.
But in physics, we're often interested in what's going on now.
What's the instantaneous speed?
So what do I mean by that?
Well, that's exactly what you're looking at when you're looking at the speedometer.
You say, oh, now I'm going 60.
Oh, now I'm hitting the brakes.
Now I'm going 50.
Now I'm going 40.
When you say, now I'm going, you're thinking about an instantaneous speed.
And when the police officer pulls you over, it's not going to do you any good to say,
but officer, my average speed for this trip was below the speed limit.
The officer will say, yes, but your instantaneous speed was above the speed limit.
And they know the difference between instantaneous and average.
You can be going 60 miles an hour, and you don't have to go for an hour.
60 miles per hour right now just means that if I were to go for an hour, then I would go 60 miles.
So it makes total sense to talk about your instantaneous speed,
but you have to think carefully about how you would measure that.
It's very easy to measure average speed.
You just lay out a ruler.
You see how far you went.
You start that stopwatch and you end the stopwatch.
Average speed is easy to define operationally.
But instantaneous speed is a tricky business.
So what could I mean by that?
Well, let's see.
If I'm going 60 miles per hour, what I really mean is let's figure out
how far I went in a pretty short amount of time, like one second.
And if I went 88 feet in one second, that's an average speed of 88 feet per second,
averaged over one second, and that's a short enough time that I might say comfortably,
okay, I'm going 60 miles an hour.
But technically speaking, what you really mean is 60 miles an hour over an arbitrarily short amount of time.
You have to think about taking the limit as you measured over to shorter and shorter imaginable times
until you've gotten down to some infinitesimal little time.
And the way your automobile really does this in practice, the wheel is turning,
and in the amount of time it takes your wheel to go around one revolution.
That's a very short amount of time.
Of course, your automobile knows how big your tire is,
and so it knows how far your automobile has traveled.
So if you measure the time for the wheel to rotate once,
then you can figure out your average speed over that incredibly short amount of time,
and that's what the speedometer is reading.
Now that we've talked about instantaneous speed, we can talk about the change in that speed.
So I can be going 60, and then I can go slower, and then I can go faster.
And those words mean something now.
Faster means a higher instantaneous speed.
Slower means a smaller instantaneous speed.
But oftentimes what you care about in real life is how rapidly are you going from fast to slow,
or from slow to fast.
So think about the difference between a fancy little sports car
sitting at the edge of the road on the on-ramp trying to get on the highway
and an old VW microbus.
Each one of them is at rest.
Each one of them wants to be going 60 miles per hour,
which is the flow of traffic on the highway,
and they're going to do it in a different way.
So let's think about this sports car, you jam on the gas,
and in three seconds, who are you up on the highway at 60 miles per hour?
That's a spectacular change in your speed in a very short amount of time.
So this distinction between how fast you're going and how rapidly your speed is changing,
it may seem obvious, and then it's one of those ideas that's going to slip away.
So we're going to keep talking about the rate of change of something,
because it's absolutely critical that we distinguish between how fast you're going
and how rapidly you're changing your speed.
If you stop, then the difference between a rapid acceleration
and a slow acceleration, a large or small acceleration, is going to be humongous.
So acceleration is going to be defined as the rate of change of speed.
That is to say, how much faster did I go divided by how much time did it take me?
The rate at which the speed is changing is the acceleration.
So how are we going to measure that? What kind of units would we use?
It's not miles per hour. That's speed.
And I'm talking about how rapidly did you change.
So for instance, for that sports car, it might be miles per hour per second.
Let's think about it. We went from 0 to 60, so that was a change in speed of 60 miles per hour,
and it took us three seconds.
So it took us three seconds to change by 60.
That means 60 divided by 3, we were changing by 20 miles per hour every second.
And that is the acceleration.
20 miles per hour per second would be the acceleration of a very, very good sports car.
So 20 miles per hour per second, what does that mean?
Well, after one second, how fast is that sports car going?
It started at 0, now it's going 20.
One second later, it's now going 40.
One second later, now it's going 60. 0, 20, 40, 60 miles per hour.
Every second, it's increasing by another 20.
What about the VW micro bus?
So let's suppose it takes it a minute to get up to highway speeds.
So you're chugging away, and there's a little bit of a headwind,
so your acceleration would be 60 miles per hour divided by 60 seconds.
So not 20 like the sports car, but in this case one mile per hour per second.
So each second, the VW micro bus is going one mile per hour faster.
Now they both started at rest, and they both ended up going 60 miles an hour on the highway.
So the fact that they have very different accelerations,
one of 20 in these units and one of one in these same units
doesn't tell me about where they started or what they ended up at,
it just tells me about the rate.
So this distinction between the speed and the rate of the change of the speed,
it's a tricky business.
So if I tell you I've got a motorcycle and I'm on it,
and I'm speaking on my cell phone, this would be really dangerous on a motorcycle,
and I say my motorcycle has got a huge rate of acceleration right now.
Am I going fast?
You have no way of knowing.
I'm telling you that I'm accelerating rapidly,
but I might be telling you that just the moment that I started,
I might be accelerating at 20 miles an hour per second,
but I've only been accelerating for a half a second,
and so I'm not really going fast yet.
Or I might be telling you after three or four seconds,
and then I really am going fast.
So knowing my acceleration all by itself,
knowing my acceleration now does not tell you my speed now.
The two things are connected.
Once you know one, it helps you figure out how the other one is changing over time.
If I'm on my bicycle and I'm going 20 miles per hour,
that's a moderate rate of speed on a bicycle,
then I stop gently so I've touched the brakes a little bit,
and maybe it takes me 20 seconds to cruise to a stop
because I see that stop light coming up.
That's very relaxed.
I can feel that rate of change.
Your body is able to detect accelerations.
Now imagine that I go from that exact same starting speed,
20 miles per hour,
and I go to that exact same final speed, 0,
but this time I do it in a millisecond.
How would you do that?
Ouch.
If you run into a parked car,
that exact same starting and ending speed
has a very, very different feel to it.
You've got broken bones.
It's a bad story.
Acceleration is a much, much larger number in that case.
It's negative because my speed went down
instead of going up,
and it's the change in speed,
negative 20 miles per hour,
divided by the amount of time taken.
1, 1,000th of a second,
20 divided by 1, 1,000th is 20,000 miles per hour per second,
and that's the kind of acceleration that breaks bones.
The Aristotelian language, fast or slow, was vague.
It was inadequate.
In order to carefully describe a marble rolling down a ramp,
we're back to Galileo
because Galileo is really the one who's figuring out this story.
He recognized the need to distinguish
between how fast is the marble going
and what's its acceleration or rate of change
because as you watch a marble go down a ramp,
it starts at rest,
and then it rolls slowly at first,
and then faster and faster and faster,
it speeds up.
Indeed, what Galileo observed was
that there was a constant or steady acceleration,
so every second the speed would increase by the same amount,
second after second after second,
for a given incline.
And it didn't matter if it used a heavy or a light marble,
but it did matter what the angle of the incline was.
If you make the ramp steeper,
it should be obvious, and it's quite correct,
that the marble will accelerate more rapidly.
So Aristotle might have said,
hmm, how fast is the marble going?
And that's a nonsense question.
It's not a sensible question
because I would say, how fast is it going?
When? When it started, they're all going zero.
The question would really be better phrased as,
either what's the speed at a particular instant in time,
what's the instantaneous speed,
but you'd really like to know that
over a bunch of different instants of time,
and that's what the acceleration is telling you.
Aristotle didn't even think about this distinction,
and this is one of the great discoveries
of rolling little marbles down an incline plane.
Language matters.
In physics, we're often using words
that are English language words.
I talk about speed, and you know what that means,
and velocity, and acceleration.
And in English, the word acceleration
can sometimes be used synonymously with speed
if you're being very casual,
but physicists get very uncomfortable when you do that
because to me, acceleration means a totally different thing.
And so throughout this course,
we try to be very careful when we use physics words
to define them, hopefully in an operational sense.
So I tell you what set of measurements
would you need to make to measure speed.
You have to take a very short amount of time
and measure the distance traveled.
Then you do it again a well-measured time later,
and now you've got a change in speed and a change in time.
So in principle, once we've got this kinematics,
once we can describe instantaneous speeds and accelerations,
then we've got a very powerful tool to predict the future.
So if I know how rapidly a marble is accelerating down a ramp,
I can predict not only how fast it's going to be going
a second from now or two seconds from now,
but I can even work out where it is
because the acceleration over time,
really that's acceleration multiplied by time
if you're thinking about the math,
acceleration occurring over some time period
will give you a change in speed,
and if you think about what speed means,
that's telling you the change in position over time.
And so you put this all together,
the math is not so hard,
and it's one of the things that we work on
in a more traditional, mathematically focused
introductory physics classes,
working out where's the marble at various times.
Police are very good at this, by the way.
They can look at an accident,
they look at the tracks, the skid marks on the highway,
and they can make predictions or calculations
working backwards in time.
So they look at the final state,
and they are able to calculate
how fast were you going before the crash
to decide whether they should give you a ticket.
We'll have to talk more about that later in this course.
So let me wrap up what I might call
the first part of Galileo's marble experiment.
The first part was pure kinematics.
We thought about acceleration and velocity,
we've distinguished them,
we've recognized that heavy and light marbles
all have the same acceleration
as they roll down the ramp,
and I haven't explained any of this.
I'm just describing it, this is the way nature is.
These are useful constructs
in order to describe what's going on.
Okay, now comes another part
of Galileo's marble experiment,
and this one, I'm not 100% sure if he did it,
or if he just thought about it.
So you can talk about a thought experiment in physics,
and it's just something where
that's all you need to do.
So sometimes those old Greek philosophers
were on the right track.
You can think about what should happen.
Of course, in the end, you better try the experiment
and make sure.
So you've got this down ramp,
the marble speeds up,
and at some point the ramp runs out,
and so now the marble is running across the flats.
And now imagine that you add an up ramp
on the other side.
So it goes down, goes across, goes back up again.
Okay?
Well, we've got some description of the motion,
and we know that as it rolls down the ramp,
we can describe it now.
As it rolls across the flats, we can describe it now.
As it rolls up the other side,
we can describe how rapidly it's slowing down.
What would really help experimentally
is to observe how high it goes,
because that's a little bit tricky to just guess.
And so when you make a measurement
of how high it goes,
you observe that it goes almost to the starting height.
Not quite.
And how about if the down ramp is steep
and the up ramp is shallow?
Well, it goes further and further and further
along that shallow ramp until it reaches
basically the same height where it started.
Any configuration you can think of,
shallow versus steep,
long versus short,
the marble will try by itself
to go back up to the same height
as where it started from.
So this is interesting.
We're discovering something universal,
and you're beginning to wonder,
is this some principle of nature?
Is this something fundamental about this?
So the fact that you can change the angles
around all you want,
and you can change the marbles around all you want,
it seems like we're on to something
that's a little bit more than just
the description of motion.
We're on to something
which is telling us about
the reasons.
So,
Galileo's thinking about this,
and he says,
there seems to be some
some rule here.
What would happen
if I roll the marble down the ramp
and the
angle, the up angle,
is very, very shallow?
So he's thinking to himself,
well, it's going to have to go a really long way
because if it's a shallow angle,
it's going to have to go a long way
before it reaches the original height.
What if I take the limit?
What if I take the limit of no angle at all?
Hey,
you got a marble rolling down the ramp,
it reaches the flats,
and then there is no uphill at all,
but we could call that an uphill of zero angle.
And what Galileo realizes is,
oh, holy smokes,
what's going to happen is it's going to keep on going forever
because it's trying to get up to its original height.
That's what it always does,
and in this one case,
we're frustrating that little marble,
and it's just going to keep rolling and rolling and rolling.
This may seem obvious,
but it's not at all obvious
in Galileo's time.
It's a direct contradiction.
Remember to Aristotle who says,
objects want to be at rest.
That's their natural state.
And so what Galileo is saying is that
if you don't have an uphill or a downhill,
if you just let the marble do its own thing,
and in particular,
of course, you've got to get rid of friction,
then the marble will continue
in a straight line forever
at a constant speed.
Now, that friction part of the story
was part of Galileo's genius.
He's mucking around trying to reduce friction.
He notices that the less friction he's got,
the closer the marble gets
to reaching its original height.
So he takes that last step.
It's a thought experiment
where you can't absolutely,
completely eliminate friction in real life,
but you can imagine what would happen if.
And that is a huge step,
because as soon as you ask
what would happen if there was no friction,
and you say, hmm, seems like
an object in motion would remain in motion,
now you've discovered that
there's this big idea
that doesn't have to do with the object.
It's a principle of physics.
It's Galileo's principle of inertia.
Principle of inertia says
an object in motion
in the absence of other forces
trying to speed it up or slowing down.
In the absence of forces,
an object in motion will remain in motion forever.
Straight line, same speed, forever.
So this is the beginning
of a new way of thinking about the world.
It is dynamics.
It's just at the fringe
of a new kind of physics.
And so you have to concede
that friction is present in real life
and gravity is present in real life
and ask yourself, yes,
but what's the intrinsic nature of motion?
And so this is the principle of inertia.
The intrinsic nature of motion
is for objects to continue.
Aristotle doesn't get this, right?
Aristotle is saying,
no, it depends on the object
and objects have desires
and needs some properties.
And this is much broader.
This is much general.
And of course, it's experimentally verifiable,
which Aristotle's were not.
So Galileo is beginning to see a universality here.
And it's very simple.
It's very regular.
And it's very predictable.
And here's the key,
which we're going to have to come back to in future lectures.
That marble on the flat ramp,
you don't have to ask,
what do you have to do to keep it going?
That was Aristotle's question.
What is required to keep an object in motion?
Absolutely nothing is required.
Objects in motion will remain in motion
spontaneously. That's the nature
of the physical world.
So these ideas,
they arise with marbles,
but they're going to be true for, you name it,
baseballs, rocket ships,
planets orbiting the sun,
atoms inside of materials.
This is really cool
because you will no longer need to invoke
a mystical story about the planets.
Why does the planet
go around the sun,
or why does the sun go around the earth?
This is still in debate
in Galileo's time.
But either question,
you would have to be sort of wondering,
well, what would make it?
And the motion of planets
just makes very little sense.
If you don't have this principle of inertia,
that the objects will want to continue
in their motion.
This is a straight line, so we're going to have to think about that.
Why do they go in a circle?
We don't have to invoke angels
or God, and of course that's quite heretical
in the 15 and 1600s,
and it's part of what got Galileo
into a lot of trouble with the church.
This inertia principle
is critical because
it's going to connect the motion of marbles
to the motion of planets
and the motion of everything.
There's one little
point that I want to make
just to wrap this up
about terminology.
So I've been trying to be careful about
operational definitions.
I've been a little bit sloppy about speed
and velocity.
In English, those are completely synonymous.
Your car has a speed of 55 miles an hour.
You could probably, although you wouldn't,
you could say it's got a velocity of 55 miles.
Did I say that right?
55 miles per hour.
So there is a distinction
to a physicist between speed and velocity,
and at the moment, it's not all that big of a deal.
But velocity carries
with it an extra piece of information.
If I say
my car is going 55 miles per hour,
I need to tell you
something else for you to really
visualize my automobile. I have to say
north or southeast.
I have to tell you not just
how fast I'm going, but also
which way I'm going in order
for you to know how I'm moving.
Kinematics requires that
you know by my description
what the motion is.
When you're talking about velocity,
you're talking not just
about the magnitude
or strength, the speed,
how many miles per hour,
but you're also talking about which way.
Galileo's principle of inertia
says that when there are
no forces, an object in motion
will have a constant velocity.
I'm done.
A constant velocity means
same speed and same direction
forever.
This may seem like a technical point
right now, and we'll come back
and see when we're looking at circular motion
where objects are changing
in the direction that they're traveling,
that this is in fact an important idea.
It just fits in here
and we'll come back to it.
But let me wrap up this lecture.
Galileo has taught us a lot of wonderful things
about the world just by looking
at his example.
He's shown us in many ways
how wrong Aristotle was
not just about his answers to questions
but the way he was thinking about the questions.
His inertia principle is telling us
that there's something very deep
and important here
and there's a new question to ask.
Not what keeps something in motion.
The more important question would be
what would change the motion?
Let's go back to the
lecture four.
Astronomy as a bridge
to modern physics.
Galileo's experiments were happening
in a very rich context.
This is the Renaissance.
The world is completely changing in this era.
It's not just science.
It's politics. Art.
Galileo's experiments
are happening in the context
of lots of other scientists
or people who are
beginning to become scientific
and
you might wonder how can I get so excited
about a marble rolling down a ramp?
And it is exciting
in the sense that he is leading
the way to this spectacular
revolution in the way we think about
our place in the universe.
We're trying to develop a story
so that you can see
the coherence and connection
between the astronomical
developments, the physical developments,
the origins of matter developments.
All of the pieces will fit together
and we're setting that stage today
and
so I'd like to step back a little bit
and talk about some astronomy.
So for today's lecture we're going to
go before Galileo
and ask about
the developments that were leading people
to ask questions about our place in the universe.
The structure of the universe.
These were big questions
and they've always been big questions.
I think just about every culture
develops some kind of
cosmology.
Cosmology would be the science
or it doesn't have to be a science
I suppose. It's trying to make sense
of the structure, development
and nature
of the universe that we live in.
It's a very primal field of study
and
it turns out to be very central
to the development of science.
It's part of everybody's culture
it's a driving and compelling question
it gets mixed in
with religious questions
and
if you look back historically
I think every culture has had some kind
of cosmology
which they could articulate.
You just look up at the sky
and you see some common things. Everybody sees
sun and moon
and the fixed stars
which appear in the same patterns
night after night, season after season
and then there's some
slightly unusual things. If you watch
the night sky you will notice
that for instance there are a couple of stars
which are in a different
position with respect to the constellations
every night. They wander
and these are the planets
and then every now and again
at even rarer intervals
there are these completely bizarre things
like a lunar eclipse
or even more rare
a solar eclipse
or some sort of a comet
in the night sky. Some phenomenon
that just evokes wonder
and surprise and people want to understand
what the heck is this?
How do we make sense of this
world that we're looking at
in the night sky?
Today astronomy is very definitely
another science. You've got physics
which is sort of the underpinnings
and then chemistry and biology and astronomy
and geology and you name it
but in the early days
astronomy and physics
were intimately coupled
and astronomy really
made physicists
start to think about how
the world fits together
and of course it's also been
one of the places that drove data collection
so although
we've been attributing some of this scientific
method to Galileo
it's certainly fair to talk
about the ancient Greeks who collected
an awful lot of astronomical data.
When you're thinking about astronomy
it's a realm of knowledge which is
primitive
it's sort of deeply human
to wonder about these things and it can be
very sophisticated and abstract
so it's accessible to everybody
I think almost anybody can get curious
by looking at the night sky
and in this sense
it's also very empowering
when you have solved a primal mystery
you can't
feel anything but this enormous satisfaction
by having conquered
some deep question about the way
the world works and you can also see
how touchy this would be
in a world
in the late 1500s in which the church
dominates certain aspects
of your freedom of thought
so for instance
to claim that the earth
goes around the sun is not just
another idea that you
can debate and argue about because it's
a heretical idea
and so this search
for truth
is one where
astronomy really plays this huge role
and I should apologize
right now for my Eurocentric bias
maybe I should have apologized earlier
this is part of
being a physicist trained in the United States
there was a lot of astronomy
developed in other parts of the world
lots of physics developed in other cultures
and really this course
is going to focus on classical physics
which is by and large
a European invention
and so I can merely
apologize for all the wonderful
stories and ingredients
that I'm unaware of
if you go back to the Greek natural philosophers
they were making big progress
in astronomy
this is one place where they really had
gone a long way towards
an almost modern scientific method
what is the structure of the universe
that we live in
for instance you ask the question
is the earth flat or is the earth
a big ball
today we all know the answer
everybody knows the answer
and it's a bizarre question
it's embarrassing to ask that question
but it shouldn't be
how do you know that the earth is round
and don't tell me
because I heard it when I was
in elementary school
how would you prove to a skeptical friend
that the earth is not a big
pancake or something
some people think that Columbus
discovered that the earth is round but that's preposterous
the Greeks not only knew that the earth
was round 2,000 years earlier
but they knew how big it was
Eratosthenes in ancient Greece
came up with a very simple little experiment
and I'm not going to go through the details
of that experiment
but what I would do is encourage you
after class today
to think about how you
by yourself
with just primitive technology
not allowed to use cell phones or GPS
or any modern technology
how would you figure out how big the earth is
and
it's a lovely puzzle
and if you want to know the answer to that puzzle
just about any introductory physics or astronomy
the textbook will go through the details
and I've got some references
which I can
point you to
associated with this class
if you want to find the answer
but puzzle over it a little bit
think about 2,000 year old technology
that measures the size of the earth
I'm going to argue that if you want
to do such a measurement
you already have to begin with a world view
to believe that the earth is a ball
and maybe think about
how far away the sun is
and how the sun rays
come towards the earth so that's a clue about
how you might go about doing such an experiment
once you've got this idea
in your head
the measurement isn't so difficult
so that's one question
here's another question
is the earth at the center of the solar system
or is the sun at the center
or is something else going on
and again ancient Greek
question and it was answered
by many different philosophers
in many different ways
Aristarchus was the one
who postulated that
it's heliocentric, helios for the sun
and
that was an interesting idea
it was a philosophical idea at that time
not an experimental question
and people argued
vehemently that this is
obviously wrong
because if the sun is at the center
then the earth would have to be going around it
spinning in order to make sense of
day and night
and this is crazy
because if you're standing on planet earth
and it's spinning
well you know what it feels like to spin around
you get dizzy
and things fly around
and this is obviously not happening
so
to most people
and really even today
if you challenged your understanding
of why do I believe
that the sun is at the center
and you started to think about it
you might begin to get a little bit perplexed
about how anybody could believe such a crazy thing
that the earth is the thing that's doing all the moving
there was a model
which was created by
a Greek astronomer
and philosopher named Ptolemy
and Ptolemy
tried to make sense of
as many astronomical observations
as he possibly could
quite quantitatively
a model
and I want to talk about that word a little bit
it's an important word to physicists
we're always busy thinking about models of the world
it's one of the ways that you do
theoretical physics
so a model is some kind of representation
of the world
could be a physical representation
like a toy model airplane
that would be a model of an airplane
but it can also be
an abstract model
so you can think about
mathematics that describes a regularity
and Ptolemy's model
of the solar system was somewhere in between
it was fairly concrete
he's visualizing
objects, the sun, the earth
and he's visualizing them moving around
one another
and the model helps you
to answer questions about the world
it always intrinsically
limits what you can answer
this is part of science of course
is that you're only asking specific questions
and the model helps you
connect what you measure
with what questions you're asking
so the models guide you
and they can constrain you
and then you can ask
the question is my model true
that's a very interesting question to ask
once you've created this little
simplistic mental model
what would it mean for it to be true
it is a simplified version
of the world
so Ptolemy
is trying to create this mental model
of the solar system
and his mental model
is the following
it's obvious that the earth is at the center
everything revolves around us
just watch, the sun goes up in the east
goes overhead, sets in the west
everybody sees this, it's quite obvious
that the sun is traveling around us
so Ptolemy says alright
sun goes around the earth
also the moon, the moon rises
goes up in the sky, sets every day
so it's obvious that both of these objects
are going around us
now this is already
some kind of model
in which these objects are real
and they're external to us
so it's leaving a kind of a mysticism
you could imagine world views
where there's this painted sky
or you could have all sorts of other
kinds of models
so this is very definitely the beginning
of a physical model of the solar system
what about the planets
they are the tricky business
in this astronomy story
because the planets
if you watch, say
Venus in the night sky
it will appear in one spot and then the next night
the slightly different spot
and as you watch night after night Venus
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn
the four big bright planets
in the night sky they wander
and so you need to be able to craft
a model which explains
and predicts where they're going to be
so here's how Ptolemy does it
he says the planets
must be going around us
but they can't just be going in a perfect circle
because then they
would look just like the sun and the moon
and they don't, they do something very different
when you watch carefully in the night sky
they wander and so
he postulated that they do go in circles
but the circles
are centered on points
that are themselves going in a circle around the earth
it's a little bit complicated
but it's just a wheel around
a wheel around us
he called these epicycles
they're cycles that are built on other cycles
and it's a lovely model
and it works pretty well
so you can predict the positions
of the planets as seen
by earth
and you can predict
certain other astronomical
phenomena like
eclipses
and
so now I ask you the question
is the model right
we all know, we learned in school
that the sun is supposed to be at the center
but come on, it's a good model
it describes the data
if you lived 2,000 years ago
it describes the data as accurately as
you can possibly measure
and so
I'm not sure what to make of a question
like is it true or not
it's really a question of how well does it work
how generalizable is it
can it help predict new phenomenon
and will it survive
as the data gets better
and it did survive for a long time
it survived for a thousand years easily
and it was
Nicholas Copernicus
in the 1500s
who questioned the
the model
and Copernicus
is
suggesting that
the astronomical data that he's collecting
isn't consistent with this old model
the old model had been getting
a little bit more and more complicated
as the data, as the astronomical observational data
got better and better
the
requirements of the model
got more and more complicated
so instead of having a circle around a circle
the center of that circle would have to be offset
a little bit and so these epicycles
began to get rather complicated
and so Copernicus's
new idea
took a step and says
you know what, maybe all these wheels around wheels
are not the way to think about it
it could be much much simpler
it could be beautiful and elegant
suns in the middle, planets all go around the sun
and it's just a question of perspective
so you're here on one planet
which is just one of many
we are also going around the sun
and so where you look in the night sky
you will see the other planets at varying places
as time goes by
it was 1543
and Copernicus published
his book, The Revolutionibus
and I have no idea how to pronounce that book
it was and has always been
since then referred to as
a grand revolution in physics
although I'm going to make the argument
that it really wasn't a revolution
right away
revolutions take time in science
often
and Copernicus
had proposed this idea
he waited until he was near death
before he published it
and it was probably a good thing
because this was a really radical
anti-Catholic church
idea that the earth
is not the center
now there's no obvious reason in retrospect
why the church should have taken
this earth centered viewpoint
there are certain biblical passages
which can be interpreted as saying
that the earth stands still
of course nowadays church
is quite able to connect
contemporary
science with biblical
reference but in that era
they were sticking to their line
and this was not acceptable
idea
so now I ask you is Copernicus
is the Copernican Revolution science
he is basing
his ideas on data
but the data is not convincing
indeed it's worse than not convincing
turns out that when you work
Copernicus's idea out in detail
that the planets go
in circles around the sun
they disagree with the data
at least as badly as Ptolemy's model
was beginning to disagree
at the level of very very subtle
incorrect predictions of
planetary motion
so the disagreement of both
is small
and they're disagreeing on different points
but neither one is matching the data
perfectly by the mid-1500s
so this
Copernican Revolution
is really just
an idea that's now percolating
and it became a revolution
after Galileo
thinks about what the consequences are
and as we will see
what other observational scientists
like Kepler and
Teco Brahe
Danish astronomer
were measuring
and describing
so
this revolution is really just
putting an idea out there
that can be tested and of course this really
is the beginning of the way
I think about science is
you create a model, the model is flawed
you collect the data, you analyze it
and you decide what you need to do to fix it up
now
I want to talk a little bit about
Galileo's role
in this story
Galileo
was a telescope
some people claim he invented the telescope
there had been other
people
in the Netherlands
and in fact throughout Europe
people had been inventing spy glasses
and
Galileo was thinking about turning the spy glass
to the night sky
he was looking at
everything that you could look at
and seeing all sorts of amazing things
I need to sort of emphasize
for example the night sky was
that Galileo was seeing
this is now after Copernicus
people are still not quite clear
about what the deal is with
is the earth at the center
is the sky
filled with perfect celestial objects
or not
so
Galileo for instance looks at Jupiter
one of the planets
and he sees that Jupiter has little
moons
which are nearby and orbit it
that is to say every day
the moons change in their positions
and it's pretty clearly a lunar system
they change
and they're obviously centered around Jupiter
this is radical
it's amazing
we found another little mini solar system
in the middle of our solar system
so if you believe that the earth
should be at the center of everything
here is direct visible proof that that's not the case
there are moons going around another body
Galileo sees sunspots
imagine how heretical that is
the sun is not perfect
it's not a smooth perfect
round object it's got little black things
like clouds but they come
and go and they move across its surface
very disturbing
he finds moon
lunar mountains
shadows and craters on the moon
for the first time with his telescope
so the moon also is not perfect
nothing that he looks up
in the sky and sees seems to be
this sort of perfect mathematical ideal
and so Galileo's
observations are
leading him to a new philosophical
perspective in which it makes
perfect sense
that at least the question is open
we can ask the question
what's moving around what's the structure
of the solar system
so now we get to Tico Brahe
and Johannes Kepler
so Tico Brahe is a dain
he's the first
contemporary astrophysicist
and I say that sort of jokingly
but he went out and he got himself a federal grant
namely he got the king to give him
some money and an island
and build a place to do
astronomical observations
he spent 20 years hired a lot of people
it was big science
in the late 1500s
and Tico Brahe
this is pre-telescope
this is late 1500s
and Galileo is going to
invent the telescope
to look at astronomy just
some short time later
so Tico goes out and he has his
assistants make absolutely
meticulous measurements with
handheld devices so you look for instance
at Mars every night for 20 years
when there's no clouds
and you've got these spectacular high precision
data
which you can then analyze
now Tico had a
world view
remember this is post Copernicus
but not very long
and he had his own model
so he said look the church has to be right
the earth is at the center
that's obvious we're not moving
sun goes around us, moon goes around us
but how about letting the planets
go around the sun
you see how this is a different model
where planets go around the sun
and then the sun and all of them
rotate around us
there's no physical explanation
there's no...
it's not a mechanical model
it's just sort of a mathematical description
of how the solar system might be
and he wanted to prove this
so in these days
a scientific method
is not quite developed
to the extent that it was
100 years after Tico Baraje
he wants to use the data to prove
his idea correct
which is really not the way a scientist
would like to collect the data
to investigate
your idea and to decide
in what respects it's correct
in what respects it's broken
his assistant, Johannes Kepler
young Austrian, very brilliant mathematician
and astronomer
he didn't do the observations
he was in modern lingo a theorist
and so he would sit down
with pencil and paper
and try to
make sense of the data
and I would argue that
Kepler was
really the first modern
astronomer in the following sense
he was instructed
to try to show
that the data agreed with Tico's
model of the solar system
but instead he allowed the data to speak for itself
he allowed the data to modify
the hypothesis
and what he recognized was
that there's a much, much cleaner
and better description of the data
it's a tour de force
Kepler's
three laws of planetary motion
these are
really the data
which you can sort of now look backwards
and say ah the Copernican Revolution
was correct and happened
but it's now 50 years later
and it's because we now have
exquisite data
and indeed it turns out that the Copernican Revolution
wasn't quite right
so Copernicus had said
when it comes in the middle
all the planets go around in circles
Kepler says not according to my data
according to my data
the planets go around in an elliptical path
which is a squeezed circle
so that's some first
law of Kepler
which he writes down
planets go in elliptical orbits
and now that's also
it's heretical on several counts
the sun is still at the center of the ellipse
or to be technical at a focus of the ellipse
and the circle is
not a perfect circle anymore
and ellipse is not perfect
and that's very disturbing to a lot of people
because it's
celestial objects
they're supposed to be ideal
so what's with this funny elliptical shape
so that's Kepler's
idea number one
Kepler's second big law
which is just a description of the planetary motion
is
let's look carefully at the speed of the planets
and
remember it's not the speed as viewed by us
it's the speed in the model
in which you're sort of taking a bird's eye view
looking down on the entire solar system
we're also moving
planets are also moving
everybody's moving in ellipses
so this is Kepler's mathematical genius
is to be able to step
outside of his own
little reference frame stuck on planet earth
and imagine what the solar system
would look like
with this simple sun
centered viewpoint
and he observed that the planets speed up
and slow down
he quantified this he came up with a little mathematical
rule they go a little faster when they're closer to the sun
a little bit slower when they're farther from the sun
over and over in this elliptical path
it takes many many years of data
to
realize this
so that's Kepler's law number two
the mathematical statement of that law
Kepler's law number three
is that you can predict
the amount of time that takes a planet to go around the sun
that's what we would call our year
if you know how far away
from the sun it is
so Kepler
is describing the kinematics
of the planets
kinematics is just description of motions
not explaining it
and just as Galileo was describing
the kinematics of rolling marbles
these guys are working at the same time period
they even wrote letters to each other
so we're now rapidly approaching
a hundred year anniversary of this so-called
revolution
and still they're fighting, they're arguing
they're trying to convince themselves
whether this new model is an accurate and useful model
Galileo's insight
into the nature of acceleration
feeds back into Kepler's
observations of the planetary motion
because remember
acceleration as we've defined it
is the rate at which your velocity
changes it's the change
in your velocity divided by the time taken
and velocity has a direction
so if you're looking
at a planet which is working its way
around an ellipse
even if it was a perfect circle
and even if
it was moving at a constant speed
miles per hour
was the same all the time
it would still be accelerating
because our definition of acceleration
is the velocity is changing
and it is changing in
direction not in magnitude
so Galileo
is really helping set us up
to make this connection
between terrestrial
kinematics marbles
and our new definition
careful definition of this word
and Kepler's
astronomical observations
of the planets
now
Galileo's observations
of these radical things
are allowing
him to realize
that there's got to be this connection
between the celestial and the terrestrial
these celestial objects
seem to be like ordinary objects
the moon looks like a big rock
with bumps and mountains
and wiggles on it
Galileo looks at Venus
it's a planet which is
in our contemporary model
inside of the Earth's orbit
in fact Venus has phases
just like the moon does
if you look at Venus
you will see a crescent Venus
and then a full Venus over time
and nobody had ever seen that before
in Galileo's time
it's so small you can't see that with the naked eye
and Galileo's telescope
allowed him to observe
this crescent Venus
this changing phase of Venus
and all of these folks
are thinking about arguments
on this sun-centered model
and they realized
this is a clincher, this is very very powerful
because
the Ptolemaic model
we have absolutely nothing to say
about phases of Venus
it's a completely new phenomenon
that has nothing to do with the positions
of the planets per se
it's different from Kepler's laws
and yet it's entirely consistent
with Kepler's
and really Copernicus's
heliocentric model of the solar system
so we are making discoveries
that are tying in together
and really setting the stage
it's begging for an explanation now
we've got the kinematics
but it doesn't make sense
so this old objection
why don't we feel dizzy
why doesn't the Earth fly away from the sun
none of these questions
are being answered yet
it's still just description of motion
it's clear
in retrospect that we're right at the brink
of the big scientific revolution
Copernicus was
helping set up that revolution
Brahe and
his data and then Kepler and his analysis
of the data
Galileo and his terrestrial experiments
that allow us to
put it all together
and the character who is going to finally do this
for us
is just about to be born
and when Galileo dies
Isaac Newton is born
and Isaac Newton is the one
who is going to take Galileo's
story
and Kepler's data
and Copernicus's model
and create a coherent scientific framework
so we're going to have mathematics
we're going to have a couple of simple laws
we're going to explain
the motion
rather than just describing it
and that's what's coming up next
Thank you
The historical turning point
in the development of physics
the dawn of classical physics
belongs almost exclusively
to one man, Isaac Newton
Isaac Newton invented
the mathematics required to do
physics, the calculus
he developed laws of motion
the theory of gravity
he developed an understanding
of heat and light and motion
he was a spectacular
figure and absolutely
the most important single individual
in this story
and today I would like to take some time
first looking a little bit at his life
and
then trying to make some sense of the early
ideas that Isaac Newton generated
about
motion and how we
understand the
principles of physics
that are so essential
in our understanding of the world
Isaac Newton was born
in 1643
this is the same year
as I mentioned last time that Galileo died
and it's about a hundred years after Copernicus
has published his work
on the
theory that the sun is at the
center of the solar system
and he's born in England
small farm, it's not a rich family
not completely
poverty-stricken either
his father died before he was born
and his mother struggled
very early on in his life she remarried
and she moved away
leaving him to be raised
by other family members and then off to boarding school
and little Isaac
did okay in school he was not
a superstar right away
but he fairly quickly
began to develop and
by the time he was in what we would
now call his high school years
he was really shining
and it was obvious to a lot of people that this
guy really needed to be
intellectually developed
more than what you would expect for
an ordinary farmer in England
in that era and he was
sent off to Trinity College
in Cambridge
now you might think Cambridge that's
a great center of intellect
and academia in that era
but no it was still something of a backwater
it was really meant as a place
a little training ground
for clergy and
there was not a lot of
sort of active or
up-to-date
academic work going on there
but Newton found it so he studied philosophy
he studied natural philosophy
meaning the pre-scientific
ideas that were being developed
he studied mathematics
got very interested in it and discovered
that the texts were insufficient
so he had to go to the library and read
the original Euclid from the Greeks
and ultimately he began to
sit down and develop his own mathematics
he was a lonely character
not very likable
didn't have very many friends throughout his entire life
very curious character
he never married
it's a shame
when this sort of
iconic and essential human being
was also just not a very nice guy
so I find it fascinating
to learn about him and try to understand this character
when he was a kid he grew
very interested in the natural world
he would build toys
he built sundials
he built and flew kites
and he built little model windmills
anything that
had to do with mechanisms and understanding the world
he was fascinated in
story goes that as he grew older in life
he could tell what time of day it was
by looking at the shadows cast by buildings
because of these experiences as a kid
and
at some point early in his life
he was again in this sort of high school era
he was given a blank notebook
now that may not seem like a big deal today
but in the 1600s
having a blank notebook
is a fairly precious thing
and he put
chapter headings at the top of the pages
early on the pages were completely blank
he was just thinking about what he would like
to learn about
and the chapter headings are remarkable
it's as though this man had had a direct
insight into the future
development of classical physics for the next
300 years
astronomy, optics, heat
fluid flow
and he
realized right away just by thinking
about what it was that was interesting him
what were the deep
and fundamental physics problems
that human beings would be tackling
using indeed his methodologies
for many centuries to come
in 1665
he was nearly done with his
trinity college work
he returned back to the farm
because of an outbreak of the plague
now if you realize in this era
when the plague comes to England
people don't really know how to deal with it
there's no antibiotics
what you do know even in the 1600s
is you don't want a bunch of young people
all cramped together in small classrooms
because as soon as one of them gets the plague
everybody in your university is going to be gone
so they basically just called
off school for two years
and Isaac Newton went back to the farm
he was a lousy farmer
he really had no interest
and it was quickly recognized
just let this guy do his own thing
so there's this surly teenager
sitting on the farm for almost two years
just thinking and writing
he did experiments
he did optics experiments
he did mechanics experiments
physical experiments
and it was in this short period of time
in his life that his intellect really
blossomed
a vast fraction of his
ultimate physics creativity
was sort of
formed in this period of time
he came back to these ideas
he developed them further later in his life
but really this period
was where he
discovered or invented the calculus
and the laws of gravity
and the laws of mechanics
that we'll be talking about
the ideas about how things move
equations of motion
all of this was being developed
sitting on the farm
it's this period when people tell
this story probably apocryphal about the
apple falling in some versions
the apple falls and he
thinks about a universal theory of gravity
in other versions it falls on his head
and he has this moment of enlightenment
it's not at all clear
whether any of these things happened
he was just thinking about gravity
during this period of time
he was interested in Kepler's laws
what he was thinking about
remember Kepler had discovered
or described
in detail how the planets move
in the solar system
these three mathematical laws
these laws were very accurate
far more accurate than anything
anybody had worked out in previous years
but not understood
at a fundamental level
why did the planets move in an ellipse
how could we make sense of this
so Newton is thinking about that
he made some brilliant discoveries about
prisms and the colors of light
he was thinking about fluid flow
and heat and all of this stuff together
he discovered quickly
that the mathematics that he had
available to him was inadequate
so using geometry
using algebra these are very powerful tools
but it's limited
if you want to understand a planet
going around the sun
you realize that as it moves
it gets closer or farther
it speeds up or slows down
as it gets closer or farther
the change in its position
is affecting the rate
of the change in its position
it's a very complicated little math puzzle
and what Newton discovered was
that if you want to understand
changing quantities
you need to develop a whole new formalism
a new way of thinking about the mathematics
this is the calculus
and
it's impossible not to call
Isaac Newton a genius
he certainly was
I hesitate a little bit using that word
because the word genius
is a separator
so Isaac Newton is a genius
so I can't understand what he was thinking about
I would argue that we can all understand
what Isaac Newton was thinking about
that's part of his genius
was that ultimately the ideas were in fact
very accessible and very simple
what we might not be able to do
is recreate that sort of
period of one and a half years
where you do it all at once
that's really quite unprecedented
these ideas were developed
and then he sat on them
and they weren't published till 22 years later
and indeed the world is very lucky
that a fellow named Halley
famous for Halley's Comet
came to visit Newton later
in his life and convinced him
to publish this stuff
there was a conversation Halley was interested in the Comet
and asked Newton some astronomical questions
and Newton just knew the answer
and Halley was amazed
that somebody knew the answer to this deep
and difficult mathematical and physical question
and it turned out Newton said
oh I worked that out when I was a young man
20 years ago
and so Halley convinced him you gotta publish this stuff
and so Newton
basically shifted gears
at that later point in his life
and he sat down for another
absolutely intense focused
one and a half year period
and he wrote this book called The Principia
and the Principia is
surely the greatest
single physics book
or text ever ever crafted
it's got everything in there
it's got his old ideas
it has the development of those ideas
it's got many new ideas about gravity and optics
and in particular
in the Principia Isaac Newton wrote down
in a very clear way
his ideas about the scientific method itself
so you have to realize
the scientific method
this method of discovering physical truth
that we've been talking about
was still under development
and people were arguing and thinking about
how it is that you decide
the nature of the world around us
and Isaac Newton's scientific method
as articulated in the Principia
is still today the kind of model
that we teach to school children
about how you should go about learning
about how the world works
so this is Isaac Newton
the greatest character
very egotistical
very jealous
he's prone to erratic bouts
where he would turn on his own friends
he mistreated some of his contemporaries
Hooke is one of the characters
who he despised
and he really tried actively
to harm Hooke's career
similar story with Leidenitz
who developed the calculus in Germany
independently but later
and so Isaac Newton wanted to establish
even though he hadn't really published it yet
delightful stories
I would absolutely encourage you once again
this is a person where reading some biographies
about Isaac Newton are delightful
and a lot of fun and maybe just moving
a little bit beyond the scope
of this particular lecture series
but really fascinating to learn about
the era in which he lived
and the manners in which
he developed these ideas
but I would like to now focus on those ideas
and so I'd like to talk about
in particular the laws of motion
which Isaac Newton was developing
so this is going to be the basis
for much of classical physics
it sort of forms the core idea
on which we're going to be building in this course
we're going to spend quite a few lectures
talking about Newton's laws of motion
they look spectacularly simple
they are in a certain sense
very very simple ideas
but we really need to focus and think about them
because there are some slippery aspects to them
and this is part of
the brilliance of Isaac Newton's work
was his ability to really clearly articulate
what he meant by the words that he was using
and the ideas that he was developing
we're going to be talking about
three laws of motion
numbered one, two and three
and then his universal law of gravity
and I think today we'll just start
with the first two of those laws
and try to get a sense
of where they came from
Newton's first law
is now known as the law of inertia
and indeed it's really a restatement
a reformulation of what Galileo
had been discovering
this was the law that I phrase as
if there is no outside force
acting on an object
then if it starts at rest
it'll remain in rest forever
remain at rest
if it's moving it will remain in motion
the same motion
constant velocity that means the same speed
in the same direction forever
that's Newton's
reformulation of Galileo's ideas
and he's not stealing the idea
he's really clarifying it
and he's very open
and honest about attributing
the ideas that he developed from other people
there's this great quote from Isaac Newton
in a rare moment of modesty
this man said if I have seen farther
it's by standing on the shoulders of giants
and it's a lovely statement
which is often quoted
but I believe that Newton
wrote this statement in a letter
to or about Hooke who was a very short man
I think he was mocking him
and implying that yes I've stood on many great shoulders
but maybe not yours
so too bad
it's a lovely quote anyway
and really an important part of science
is to recognize what's come before
as you're weaving this tapestry that we've been talking about
you must
remember that the old ideas
are still there any experiment which has been done
you need to
understand how what you're doing fits in
with these old ideas
so
let me talk a little bit about Newton's first law
this law of inertia in a slightly different way
Galileo
was thinking about
frames of reference
and so was Isaac Newton
so a frame of reference
refers to your choice
of your laboratory
so I'm standing here in this room
and my frame of reference is centered on me
because physicists are egotists
which revolves around me
and what that really means
is that I can make measurements
and talk about physics with respect
to this point this is the origin
and so you might be
two meters in front of me
and you might be two meters in front
but one meter to the left
and so I can start to develop
this reference frame
in which I describe positions
and then velocities
and accelerations
this reference frame is my choice
and you have your own reference frame
and you can make measurements in your reference frame
and we will disagree about certain things
we will disagree about your position
so your position in your reference frame
is the origin
and so we'll disagree with the number
the specification
but when we start talking
about other things we will agree
so if a little marble is rolling across the table
you and I will both argue
that it is moving at
two meters per second
so we will both agree on that
however there might be another reference frame
where somebody would disagree even with that
picture somebody who is on a little rolling trolley cart
or a boat
or any moving steadily moving object
and supposing they are moving
parallel to that marble
so they are moving steadily
the marble is moving steadily
try to shift into their reference frame
for a moment visualize how the marble
would look if you were moving
along parallel to it
so you would look over and there's a marble next to you
and then you look over again
and the marble is still next to you
and every time you look the marble
is in exactly the same place
as far as you're concerned that marble is at rest
and it's remaining at rest
so now all of a sudden we realize
that in different reference frames
that reference frame the moving one
is perfectly legitimate nothing wrong
with making measurements from that
vantage point
we disagree now not just on the position
of the marble but the velocity of the marble
so what Galileo realized
and what Newton
was able to articulate even more carefully
was that yes
different observers in different reference frames
may disagree on
details of the description
but we will all agree on the laws of nature
so if I
watch this marble and do some experiments
and I recreate Galileo's
experiments with rolling marbles and I say
law of physics
and object in motion remains in motion
and object at rest remains at rest
as long as there's no net force on it
everybody agrees
even the person who's in the moving reference frame
agrees with that law of nature
this particular example they saw an object at rest
remaining at rest while I saw
an object in motion remaining in motion
but we agree on the fundamental law
this is a huge idea
this idea that some things are relative
but other things are absolute
is part of the principle of relativity
relativity doesn't say everything is relative
it says that the laws
of physics are going to be the same
in all these reference frames
now this is one of the rediscoveries
or redevelopments
of Galileo's work that
Newton did
there was something kind of fundamental
that was missing from Galileo's work
and this was one of Isaac Newton's
great insights one of the topics
we'll spend a lot of effort trying to make sense of
what is it that causes the change
in the motion of an object
so we just said if there's no force
then the object will remain at rest
but what do you need to do to make it move
well I've already used contemporary words
and I've clued you in on Newton's big idea
it's force
applying a force
a push or pull
is what would change the state of motion
of an object
if you apply a force then you don't change
the state of motion
if you do apply a force
Newton develops this law
it's the second law of motion
and it's abbreviated by a formula
F equals MA
one of the most famous formulas in all of physics
and although we avoid a lot of math
in this course I just can't resist
talking about F equals MA
it's a delightful little relationship
which connects F
the force on the one side
depends A, mass is M
A is acceleration
which we've been talking about
so
this idea is tougher than it looks
it looks like a simple little formula
and you've got two of the numbers in
you plug them in and you get the third one
if you were taking a kind of
a traditional mathematical physics course
you would probably spend upwards of
a month
focusing on this equation trying to understand
how it's used
where it's used the most
easily what all of these terms mean
solving math puzzles
and math problems involving these
terms
and what I want to do instead is to just look at this
as a relationship it tells a story
and it's a simple little story
and we're going to try to understand
what it's telling us so to begin
I want to look at all three of these words
force, mass and acceleration
because I told you that
physicists appropriate English language words
all three of these are common English words
and then
we define them very carefully
and
once we've defined them
you have to separate the physicists use of the word force
with the casual
English language use of the word force
so I could talk about
oh that hurricane was a spectacular force of nature
or
we have a strong military force
or if you like Star Wars may the force be with you
and these are all perfectly legitimate
uses of that word
in the English language
to a physicist force
means push or pull
that's it and it's a quantitative
measurement of push or pull
so imagine that you're
pushing on some object
and you can feel it right just push one hand
against the other you can feel
the physical force you could measure it
you could take a spring scale
and pull down on it and you'll see
the little needle move and the harder
you pull that's a greater force
that you're applying the farther
the needle will move and then it's
pegged and if you want it to move farther
you have to push or pull even harder
still so you can measure
forces lots of simple devices including
your own body which are good force
beaters and in
this course we're going to use the metric
system to measure forces
and in honor of Isaac Newton
we call the unit of force the Newton
so one Newton of force is a very
gentle little push just touch
your finger against your palm that is
one Newton
in the American system
the old British system we would measure force
in pounds and we're used to that
so one pound is
a few Newtons and
I'm going to try to
stick with Newton so we get used to
how big this force is
forces can be applied by anything
we normally think in the English
language of human beings applying force
but any material
object can apply a force it's just a
push or a pull your hands
can apply a force the table
can apply a force my hand
is pushing on the table and in fact
the table is pushing back on my hand
we'll talk about that later if you
put your coffee cup down on the table
these are there's no human beings involved
there's solid bodies and they are
applying forces on one another planet
earth is applying
a gravitational force downward
on the coffee cup and the table
is applying an upward force
preventing that coffee cup from
falling down to the ground accelerating
down to the ground
and this coffee cup example
is a good one we'll come
back to many examples because
when you think about forces
one of the tricks of the game is to
recognize all of the forces
that are acting so you got to think carefully
some of the forces are obvious
some of them are less obvious there are
frictional forces ropes can apply
forces springs can apply forces
when you squeeze them
so that's the force idea
and we'll keep coming back to it because it takes
a lot of practice to begin to recognize
what's a force how big is it
and what direction is it pushing that's
another ingredient of the force story
how about mass
mass is
part of newtons law of inertia
it's implicit
in the first law
and it was implicit in Galileo's
work and newton in the second
law is now saying we need to be
clear about what we mean by inertia
that word inertia
in the english language means sluggishness
resistance to change
if you have a lot of inertia you don't want to move
and that's a statement now
that we're going to attribute to material objects
all material objects have
a certain resistance not
to motion but to change in motion
nobody wants to change
and so if you have a massive object
it's much more difficult
to make it change its motion
and so mass
the quantity m in f equals m a
is a quantitative measure
of how much inertia you have
if you've got twice as much inertia
you've got twice as much mass
so we'll be able to measure mass
in the metric system
we will measure mass in kilograms
one kilogram is a certain
amount of mass
and when you hold
an object which is labeled one kilogram
you will feel the force
that it applies on you so it's a little bit
confusing especially in America
where we talk about pounds
sometimes we mean force at the grocery
store and sometimes we mean mass
and those two things are related
to one another but they're not the same thing
so we're going to have to keep mass
and force as separate ideas
in our head
about the piece of Newton's law
acceleration we've already talked about
I'll just remind you acceleration
is a description of motion
it's kinematics
so if you know the acceleration
what that's telling you is
the rate at which your velocity is changing
how rapidly
are you speeding up or slowing down
or changing the direction
that you're moving in
so once you know the acceleration
you directly know the change
over time of the quantities
of interest when you're measuring things
so you know where it is now
you know how its motion is changing
you can figure out where it is
in the future you can tell me
where it was in the past
and so this description of motion
is often what we're after
and F equals MA
Newton's second law
is telling us that
if you apply a force
that will tell you how much acceleration
there's this equal sign
so if you double the force
then you will be doubling the acceleration
assuming that you've got some fixed
object with a fixed mass
on the other hand
if you were to start to increase the mass
then you realize
when you think about that formula
the more mass you've got
for a given push or pull
for a given force
the less acceleration you're going to end up with
so this is the formula that tells us
again precisely how it is
that this vague idea of inertia
plays out in the real world
when you're trying to understand
why some things are sluggish
and some things are responsive
it's really useful to think about Newton's law
as cause and effect
because it gives you a sense of control
if you want a particular acceleration
you know exactly what kind of force
what direction how strong to apply it
it gives human beings
a sense that we can control nature
we can understand nature, predict
explain phenomenon
this is really part of the power of Newton's second law
you don't have to
understand this law completely yet
it's one of those things where on the one hand
it looks so simple and on the other hand
you'll discover that there's lots of subtleties here
and we're going to spend some time trying to make sense of this
force is not a material
thing
a gallon of gasoline doesn't have some force
in it
it's just sitting there
so the gasoline would only have a force
if the can was
leaning up against your hand
force refers to interactions
between objects
and this is the way we're going to be thinking about it
it tells you the strength
and the direction of the interaction
between the objects
that are involved
along with Newton's third law
which will come to
and the law of gravity which will come to
these deceptively simple little
relationships form the heart of classical physics
the force concept
is quite rich
and it's quite deep
and it's going to take us
some practice
so we're going to want to think about some specific examples
where we try to think about
the various forces involved
and how it is that they cause
the resulting motion
the trick of course arises when you've got more than one force
if there's only one force
life is simple you push
the brakes and F equals MA
when we have to
add up a bunch of forces then
life starts to get especially interesting
Newton's law
forms the basis for
a realistic
deterministic way of
thinking about the world
it's mechanical but not in a
not in a superficial sense
Newton isn't saying that everything is hooked into everything else
he's saying it's mechanical
in an abstract clockwork kind of sense
and one thing moves
it pushes on another
the other responds
so the world is
built on cause and effect
it's a very very novel way
of thinking about the world in the 1600s
which had enormous implications
far beyond just the direct science
that was being involved
Isaac Newton is clarifying Galileo
he's telling us
yes Galileo's idea about inertia
is correct
and now we can articulate them
in terms of the first law
the object in motion remains in motion law
and the second law
the force equals
mass times acceleration
which tells us precisely
how much the change in motion is
Isaac Newton
thought very hard about these ideas
he spent a year and a half
really focused on
this beginnings
of understanding motion
and I would say one of the amazing things
about Isaac Newton was his ability to concentrate
I can't think of another
scientist
in history who has been able to focus
for a year and a half
almost to the exclusion of everything else in his life
he barely ate
he barely slept
he just did experiments and wrote and wrote
and thought and calculated
absolutely spectacular concentration
and the benefit is
that we have these much much
clearer ideas after Newton
than before Newton
about what are the quantities that were
concerned with
what are the quantities that are going to be useful
in terms of describing the world
Isaac Newton has single-handedly changed everything
this one individual
and the publication of his Principia
you could argue that the start of the
industrial revolution can be pointed back
to this kind of
scientific development
you might even argue with a little bit of a stretch
like the American political
philosophical invention
was in part attributed
to Isaac Newton's ideas
about cause and effect and determinism
and control
and it's a fascinating idea
to think about the connections
of these early scientific
developments
and the future of the technical
and modern world as we know it
in the next couple of
lectures we're going to be
looking further and deeper at Newton's laws
trying to see first of all
how they work and then how they connect to
astronomy and to the rest of
the ordinary world
applause
lecture six
Newton quantified
force and acceleration
applause
Isaac Newton was in many respects
the first classical physicist
he formally introduces the scientific method
a new way of investigating
the nature of physical reality
and he recognizes what the central question
of motion is
so he's thinking now in very broad terms
any system, any material
any situation
and he recognizes that you shouldn't be asking
Aristotle's old question of
how things are going
that's just a misleading question that takes you down
a path that is less productive
than asking
why do things change
asking the question why and how do things change
which is answered by
F equals MA
force equals mass times acceleration
that's really the heart of classical physics
this idea it's very simple
and yet it has many many ramifications
force is about
push and pull
so if you're trying to quantify motion
if you're trying to understand
how things move
and why they behave the way they do
you recognize that F equals MA
tells you exactly how it goes
if you push
and you measure a certain amount of push
then you can calculate the acceleration
which tells you the change in motion
the change in velocity
and knowing velocity over time
tells you where the object is
so you really have this ability to
control material objects
to predict phenomenon
to describe phenomena in a new and deeper way
you're really talking about understanding
motion rather than
just the description of it alone
and so this leads to a new branch of physics
we call it dynamics
rather than kinematics
kinema was about
motion dynamics is really
about explaining motion
it's explaining
the underlying reason behind
why something behaves the way it does
dynamics forms
the core of classical physics
and once you understand the dynamics
then you can begin to apply it
for many different kinds of
specific forces
so if you understand dynamics in general
F equals MA for an arbitrary force
then you can start to ask
what about this specific force
what about that specific force
Newton's got two laws so far
the first and second laws
are about inertia and motion
and they really couple together
so the first law is telling you
that if you choose
an inertial reference frame
an inertial reference frame
is really defined as
one where an object at rest
remains at rest an object in motion
remains in motion
then you
are in a position
to watch the forces
and calculate the resulting accelerations
force does not
cause velocity
that's an Aristotelian way of thinking about things
so when you're pushing on a cart
and you push twice as hard on the cart
and you say how fast is it now going
that's an Aristotelian question
and Isaac Newton would say
well we need to think about this
we need to think not just about your push
but about all the pushes on the cart
and then the answer will be
not what causes
the velocity but what causes changes
in the velocity
you have to add some force to speed the cart up
you have to add some retarding
forces like friction
to slow the cart back down again
and Newton's law is going to tell us
not only this general fact
but the rate at which it occurs
these laws were developed
by Isaac Newton on the basis of
some experimental data
some created experiments
of his own
and a lot of clever thinking
now hundreds of years later
I would argue that Newton's laws
are among the best tested laws
in all of physics
so we'll be talking about other principles of physics
for instance having to do with energy
that are if anything
even better tested than Newton's laws
this fact that Newton's laws
are so well tested is manifest
in every situation that arises
every time you drive a car
or watch sports or
it's really Newton's laws in action
and so if you find
it difficult to make sense of Newton's laws
keep grounding yourself
in your own experiences and we'll be talking about this
so that we can make sense
of Newton's law in
somewhat more complicated situations
now I also have to admit right up front
that Newton's law is wrong
Albert Einstein has told us that
technically Albert Einstein's
theory of relativity
modifies the way
we have to think about what mass is
what inertia is
in fact what space and time are
and so f equals ma
does ultimately become one of the
laws of physics that are
tuned up, modified, rethought
and yet it has
essentially no relevance
to our practical everyday experience
so very few engineers
need to worry about relativity
only if you're dealing with objects
that are either subatomic in size
or moving near the speed of light
do you even fuss with the possibility
that Newton's laws are wrong
so I'm admitting right up front
that Newton's laws discovered in the
1600s are not
an exact statement of physical truth
but they are enormously powerful
and very practical still today
and they form a part of the way
physicists think about the world
even quantum physicists still turn back
to Newton's laws to develop our intuitions
often times about how things work
so
we're going to be trying to make sense
and develop these intuitions
so that when you think about situations
where Newton's law
seems to be in contradiction
you can recognize what's going on
so for instance let's think about that cart
that Aristotelian cart
it's traveling along and Aristotle
watches it and it grinds to a stop
and he says well that's the natural
order of things
that's what carts do
and he says no that's not what carts do
that's because of a force
there must be friction
and of course there is
lots of friction on an old cart
there's friction in the bearings
there's friction with the road
and those friction forces
are applying a force which is
accelerating the cart
in a direction which is making it slow down
acceleration means change
in your velocity
and so when you're
doing this you have to try to visualize
all the forces
if you want to think of Newton's law
sort of sweet and simple
you have to go to some idealized situation
like outer space there's a rock drifting along
it's not feeling any forces
it's far away from everything
and it's an object in motion
remaining in motion and then
if you tap it it will change its motion
that's the kind of situation where Newton's law
is the easiest and most obvious
to make sense of
yeah there's friction there's always friction
and it can make understanding
Newton's law difficult
I'd say this is really part of
Newton's genius and Aristotle's
failure was to see
that friction is not a part
of the cart it's just a force
it's another kind of pusher pull
it's present in all situations
air as you walk through it
can generate resistive forces
and so once you've begun to
understand what are the different forces
in the world you articulate them
you include them
in any physical realistic situation
and then you're ready to
make quantitative
detailed predictions of motion
Newton's law
F equals MA it tells a lot of stories
and I'd like to go through some
of the simpler ones first
let's think of some imaginary
experiments that you might be able to do
this would be on the scale of say
a good high school science fair project
to help make sense of what
F equals MA is telling us
so let's start with low friction
that's really helpful
if you can get rid of friction
then you can really look at a situation
with a single force or a force
that's well identified
and watch what happens
it's not so hard to get rid of friction
good bearings can reduce friction
you can build little air tracks
those air hockey tables
that kids play on
where there's a bunch of little pinholes
and air comes pouring up
out of those pinholes and the little hockey puck
almost floats
frictionlessly very very low friction
in such a situation
so you can build some sort of
one or two dimensional air track
and watch what happens as you
push or pull on objects and move them around
the simplest experiment you could do
would be to take an object
like a puck on this air hockey table
and tie a little string to it
and hang it over the edge of the table
hang a weight and pull
so you let gravity
pull the little weight and through the string
there's just the string
directly touching this little puck
and it starts to accelerate
and you could watch it
watch it carefully
there's a certain force being applied
and F will equal to MA
so you could measure how strong the force is
you could take that same string
and pull on a vegetable scale
a spring scale
so that you could know how much force you have in newtons
you could find out how many kilograms
the puck is
and it's an interesting question
to ask how you determine that number
it's really by comparison
with what somebody has arbitrarily
decided to define as one kilogram
there's this object
sitting in a vault
in various places in the world
and it's called the kilogram
and you take it out and you put it on a balanced scale
that other thing is also one kilogram
and you can now chop it in half
and now you've got a half a kilogram
so this is the way you can determine
mass independently
of newtons law
when you've got this string
pulling you watch the motion
it starts at rest
and now one second later
maybe it's going one meter per second
then you wait a second, now it's going two meters a second
and then what's next?
one, two, three
you have to identify a constant amount every second
one meter per second
every second
so that's an acceleration of one meter per second squared
one meter per second
each second
and this rate of change
is a constant
if you keep watching
it's zero, one, two, three, four
it's very steady
and that's newtons law in action
what if you push or pull
in this case twice as hard
you're pulling twice as hard
and now you start the thing over again
and you watch it and it starts at zero
one second later now it's going two meters a second
and then four meters a second
and then six, eight, ten
it's changing by two meters per second
every second
we've doubled the acceleration
because we've doubled the force
F equals MA is a relationship
so when you double one side
something on the other side has to double
you've got mass times acceleration
and the mass we're leaving fixed
so the only choice for nature
is to double the acceleration
what if you do change the mass
you can do that, you can just stack two hockey
air hockey pucks one on top of the other
go back to your original force
pull with that same original force
now you've got these double mass
hockey puck, what happens?
well it will accelerate less rapidly
zero and then one second later
it's going to be going a half a meter per second
and then one, one and a half
two
every second the speed will increase
by one half meter per second
so that's F equals MA
in the case of a single force
in a single direction
and it's not so hard to apply
kind of makes sense
all of the pieces of that story seem quite reasonable
when you just look at the thing
of course there is this tricky business
that we
we intuit
based on our experiences where there is friction
and so when there is friction
what you would normally see is a hockey puck
just sort of traveling with some constant speed
across the track
and so it's that elimination
of friction that helps us
to make sense of the law
and then we're going to have to put it back in again
when there's friction
part of the problem is
that you don't feel it
the puck is feeling it
and if you're the one who's tugging on the string
you're feeling the string force
but you're not feeling the friction force
because the friction is not acting on you
friction is acting on the puck
and so this is part of
most ordinary confusions
involving Newton's law
is that
if you're not aware
kinesthetically aware of all the forces
you tend to think about the ones that you're applying
and so you're thinking I know F equals MA
I know how hard I'm pushing
why doesn't that cause an acceleration
I'm pushing the box across the floor
filled with books and I'm pushing really hard
and it's not accelerating
so why is that not violating Newton's law
it's because I'm not aware of the fact
until I think about it
that there's this enormous frictional force of the ground
pushing backwards on the box
while I'm pushing forwards
there are two forces on that box
and they're canceling one another
if they cancel completely
then there is no net force on the object
two forces in equal
opposite amounts
pushing on an object will cancel
and if you've got no net force
no overall force
then there will be no acceleration
and the box will slide across the floor
with a constant velocity
in a straight line
so if you're imagining
okay I push twice as hard
the box is gonna go twice as fast
that's an Aristotelian idea
you gotta separate out all these other effects
that aren't just you
and then Isaac Newton
suddenly will make sense
and it's kinda nice when you make this realization
and you're pushing that box
you can develop this
kinesthetic awareness of other forces in the world
I really appreciate
the ability to sort of think about
the frictional force acting on the box
it helps me to make sense of the motion
and to predict what's gonna happen
indeed if I push twice as hard
it may or may not be going twice as fast
it depends on the friction force involved
so there are many people who argue
physics is very counterintuitive
even classical physics
not to speak of modern physics
as being counterintuitive
and I disagree
physics is extraordinarily intuitive
because our intuitions are built up
from interactions with the real
world, the world in which Newton's laws
are acting
and so really the challenge to us
is to make them intuitive
by opening our eyes to
the larger amount of
information and
mechanisms involved
in the situations that we're looking at
so
if you
have a frictionless surface
then
it will help you to understand the law of physics
and then you move to the situation
with real life
forces, all sorts of them acting
at the same time
and all of a sudden you can recognize
it's the same principle going on
so now
at the ice rink
or in a rocket ship
life is easy, f equals ma is easy to make sense of
and apply
and in our everyday lives
well, assuming that we are not
traveling near the speed of light
we're talking about a fundamental truth
of motion
so let me talk a little bit more
about this idea of net force
let's think back to that experiment of
Leo dropping two balls
whether he did this in reality or not
it's a lovely thought experiment
two cannonballs off the tower of Pisa
one is very, very heavy
one is relatively light
but they have a similar size and shape
one of them is hollow, one of them is made of lead
the result was
that these objects
accelerated downwards
and we're going to want to make sense of
various aspects of this experiment
the first thing that I want to do
is to just think about one of them
falling all by itself
let's not think about the competition
so I've got this object
and I'm holding it, I haven't let go yet
so let's think about Newton's law
f equals ma
there is definitely a force of gravity acting on that cannonball
every object
anywhere near planet earth is always being
pulled down by the force of gravity
and you can feel in your hand
that the cannonball
well, what you really feel is the force
of the cannonball on you
and you make this mental leap
that what you're feeling is the force of gravity
so we've got to think carefully about this
gravity is pulling the cannonball down
why isn't it accelerating down
f equals ma
if you have a downward force, why doesn't the object accelerate down
and you say, well hello, I'm holding it
there's an upward force
from my hand
now what is that upward force, well it's a contact force
solid bodies in contact with one another
can push
so my hand is pushing up
gravity is pushing down or pulling down
those are two equal and opposite forces
which are canceling
and so no net force
means no acceleration
no change in motion
the object at rest remains at rest
now I let go
and what happens, now there's only one force acting
there's just a force of gravity
f equals ma tells you that this
object will start to accelerate downwards
and as it goes downwards
at first it will accelerate
so it goes at first 0 meters a second
and then roughly 10 meters a second
one second later
and then 20 meters a second, 30 meters a second
it's accelerating, it's going faster and faster
at some point
most objects will stop
accelerating, if you jump out of an airplane
you will only accelerate for a few seconds
at which point you reach terminal velocity
so what's going on there
well, all of a sudden a new force
of nature has become important
at the beginning air resistance was unimportant
because air resistance gets larger
the faster you move
at slow speeds the air resistance
on the cannonball has no effect
or relatively little effect
but as it speeds up
this new force enters
into the story, it's an upward force
so you've got gravity pointing downwards
and this upward force of air resistance
and the two aren't yet exactly canceling
but they're partially canceling
so the acceleration is less
than what you might have naively expected
if you weren't thinking about that air resistance
at some point
the air resistance builds up until it's equal to the weight
and at that point
you've got equal up and down forces
does the object stop?
no, F equals MA
says if there's no net force
there's no acceleration
no acceleration doesn't mean you stop
it means there's no more change
so you were going down, you continue going down
an object in motion, remaining in motion
F equals MA
is a relationship
it's this cause and effect story
so force is the cause
and acceleration is the result
we are describing
motion and you have to keep coming back
to this funny feature of acceleration
that it doesn't directly tell you about
motion, it tells you indirectly
because it's about the rate of change
and this mass
that enters in, it's the deciding factor
it determines
how resistive the body is
to change
it's the inertia of the object
you should appreciate
that Newton's second law
is not a definition
F is not defined to be MA
F is measured independently
we have some operational definition
of force
you pull on a particular spring
which is going to be my calibrated force meter
and when I pull a certain distance
a little needle will point to one Newton
and I'll say okay that's one Newton of force
there's no acceleration going on
it's got nothing to do with F equals MA
it's a separate and independent measurement
of force
mass, we've talked a little bit about how you could imagine
quantitatively measuring
masses of objects
measuring them in kilograms
and
in the United States the unit of
mass is almost never used
it's the slug
and it's a unit of sluggishness
but a very old fashioned unit
we still do use
pounds for measuring forces
one Newton is about a fifth of a pound
it's about
the force that your hand would apply
to hold up a little apple
one Newton is a very
light human scale of force
and acceleration
as we've been talking about is measured in meters
per second
meters per second squared
kind of crazy units but remember what it's telling you
the change of speed
that's meters per second every second
Newton's law is not just
a good idea
it's not a crude approximation
which isn't valid if there's
forces like friction or air resistance
it's absolutely correct
and almost limitless
in its applicability
so when you're thinking about
motion of objects
when you're trying to decide
how to control the motion of objects
it's the law
that you sort of head down to
it's at the bottom of the chain
so engineers love it
rocket scientists love it
we are able to send rockets to Mars
with pinpoint accuracy and there's really nothing going on there
but F equals MA
you decide the path that you want to take
you think about the velocity
and rate of change of the velocity that you want
and need you apply rocket engines
apply the force and there's very little air resistance
once you get out of
its atmosphere so that makes Newton's law
especially easy to apply so rocket science is really easy
in this respect
when you have confusions
about Newton's law
I want you to think about it so if you're
going outside after class today
and you're walking and you're thinking about
are you accelerating
what makes you accelerate
if you're not accelerating why not
you will find that becoming aware
of forces in the real world
helps you to make sense of an awful lot of
things that are going on
now part of the story is direction
so we've alluded to this
with the fact that when you've got two forces
pointing in opposite directions they can cancel
in general
force does have some direction
mathematically we call it a vector
a vector just means
something that has not only how strong it is
how many newtons of force
but also which way are you pushing
if you push down it's a totally different force
than pushing up
and the resulting motion will be totally different
when I visualize forces
I have a little mental model
it's a trained model that physicists
learn in years
of practice you draw a picture
and I usually simplify the object
down to a little point or a dot
at least at the beginning I don't worry
about the shape of the object
and when I'm drawing forces I draw little arrows
I think of an arrow
the kind of mathematical representation
of something that has a length
and also a direction
so you can picture lots of things
in nature as arrows
velocity is an arrow
so if I'm walking forward and I point my fingers
I'm walking
and I'm imagining an arrow
leaving my body
it's a way of representing my velocity
and it points in the direction I'm going
and if I'm going faster
I imagine a longer arrow
I'm imagining a shorter arrow
that's a different arrow
the force arrow and the velocity arrow
represent very different things
they're measured in different units
one meter per second
the other newtons
and one doesn't immediately tell you the other
force definitely doesn't tell you
velocity
force tells you about the change in velocity
let's think about that for a second
if I'm going forward
and I'm picking up speed
there's a change
so my velocity was a small arrow forwards
and then it was a bigger arrow forwards
now this gets a little subtle
I can visualize that
change as itself
a new arrow
it would be in this case a forward arrow
the forward means the change is forward
so what if I'm walking forwards
but I'm slowing down
so I'm going
at a smaller and smaller
forward velocity
my velocity arrow is big
and then smaller and then smaller
and then smaller
and now think about the change
think about the change
the change is now backwards
I started big and forwards
now I'm small and forwards
the change is directed this way
towards me
and if the change is towards me
that's the acceleration
acceleration tells you the rate of change
of the velocity
make me do that
it would be a backwards force
F equals MA
a backwards force makes a backwards acceleration
recognize that I'm still moving
forward the whole time
force doesn't cause velocity
force causes the change in velocity
so that's really probably the subtlest
thing about Newton's law
sometimes it's easy to remember
and recognize and when objects are moving
in circles for example all of a sudden
we're going to have to think a little bit more carefully
what exactly is happening
what is the change
F has a direction
F equals MA
acceleration has a direction
and they're the same direction
that's part of Newton's law
the direction that you're pushing on something
tells you precisely which way
the velocity will be changing over time
mass has no direction
F equals MA is a relationship
between two arrows
and that little parameter the inertia
is just a number
well it's a number with units
like one kilogram
but one kilogram does not point downwards
it's got nothing to do with gravity
the force of gravity on a one kilogram
object points downwards
that's the force in Newton's law
so again we have to just keep straight
that force is one thing
and mass is a different
thing it's a different quantity
a much simpler quantity
when you put something on the scale
for most people
it's very intuitive
that if you apply more force
you accelerate more
and if you have more mass
you're not going to accelerate as much
Newton's law really is deeply intuitive
it's part of our experience in the world
and
if you get
confused about it
just remember that your force
the force that you apply to something
isn't always the only one
okay so we've got Newton's law
F equals MA and I've spent now
a lecture and a half trying
to make sense of it
and now let's see where is this going to take us
so we have a rule now
which is very general
it's at our fingertips as of the late 1600s
you can predict motion
you can describe motion
you can explain motion
very very powerful idea
you can use it in multiple directions
so for instance if you're an engineer
trying to design a roadway
you can design
the angle of bank
so that the cars accelerate
to a curve the way you want them to
and it's your choice
you pick the forces that would be the force
of the ground and the force of gravity
you combine them in such a way that an automobile
will accelerate as you wish
so you've chosen an acceleration that's desired
and then you manipulate
the circumstances to create the force
that's needed to do that
electrons in your computer monitor
you want to move them around
you want to make them hit the screen
in just the right way to form the image desired
so you know what motion you want
so you choose the electrical forces required
and that's the idea behind the design
of the circuitry
it's really just Newton's laws
applying forces to little electrons
making them accelerate in the direction
that you want to cause the motion that you desire
F equals MA
lots of applications in fact
applications everywhere
astronauts up in the space station
floating around
you might worry if they're up there for a month
whether they're getting sick
and one of the ways on earth that you can tell
whether somebody is getting sick is that they lose weight
how would you notice
up in the space station they're floating around
if they stand on the scale they just float right off of it
so that's useless
they have a little device it's very simple it just shakes the astronaut
F equals MA
you apply a known force
you measure the acceleration
and that tells you their mass
and so this is a way of using F equals MA
to determine mass
often the way we use that formula
sometimes we use the formula
when we have no idea what the force is
so for instance we watch a star
and we see that it's wobbling
and we know F equals MA
so we know that if the star is
moving back and forth
its motion is indicating it's accelerating
because its velocity is now forwards
now forwards now backwards
it's changing
what makes that happen there must be a force on it
we infer the existence of a planet
which we can't see with our telescope
we can determine how big that planet is
this is how we've discovered
planets outside of our solar system
is by using F equals MA
and just watching the acceleration
particle physicists who are doing quantum physics
you might think oh they've gone beyond Isaac Newton
but in fact when they look at their bubble chamber
images
there are tracks of a subatomic particle
and it's interacting with material
and we're deducing the subatomic forces
by the motion
the acceleration and the mass of those little particles
so F equals MA
is used everywhere and all the time
it's an extremely powerful idea
next time
we're going to see how Isaac Newton
was able to make the connection
from terrestrial motion
marbles and objects and carts
to astronomy
we're trying terrestrial physics
and celestial phenomenon
so we're going to finish the story that Galileo
and Kepler have been leading us up to
lecture 7
Newton and the connections to astronomy
applying Newton's second law
F equals MA
in real life situations
does require some finesse
but in the end it provides a framework
it's a way of making sense
of a huge variety of phenomena
when Isaac Newton
started thinking about planetary
astronomical and in particular
circular motion
this was the place where his law
of motion closed the loop
with Copernicus and his idea
of the heliocentric solar system
and Kepler with his data
and Galileo with his observations
all of this stuff got put together
and now made sense
so a sun-centered solar system
was connected to everyday motion
and this idea
that there's nothing unique going on
in outer space
that celestial objects are very much like
terrestrial objects
and everything can be understood
in terms of this one really underlying principle of motion
forever changed our sense
not only of how things move
but of course of our place in the universe
we are no longer the center
we are one of many planets
revolving around the center
Newton's ideas
his deep insights about motion
were really clinched
by his making the connection to astronomy
and these sort of big ticket ideas
and so today
and next time I want to focus a little bit more
on the connections to astronomy
and gravity in particular
let me begin with a little recap
of Newton's laws
Newton's first two laws
that's all we've talked about so far
the first is the law of inertia
which really Galileo had thought about
and Isaac Newton had articulated
that in the absence of an external
net force
if there's no overall force on an object
so that could either mean no force at all
or cancelling forces
then an object in motion will remain
same velocity forever
but if there is a force on an object
then the force will cause acceleration
F equals MA
so pushes and pulls will cause
a change in velocity
and these two together
have clarified
and articulated the need for
position, velocity
acceleration, mass and force
concepts
and the idea of reference frame
the idea that different observers are perfectly welcome
to look at the laws of nature
so you set a perspective
and so we're setting
a new perspective in astronomy
where we're going to try to take a bird's eye view
or the solar centered view
and watch as the Earth moves
and all the other planets move
that shift of reference frame
was a huge idea
a very difficult step
and this is part of
what F equals MA is helping us to do
so let's think about the connections
and let's go back
to the story of gravity
because gravity is so important
it's the one force
that you can never get away from in your life
and it's
everywhere it's so ubiquitous
we hardly even think about it
you don't even notice gravity anymore
and yet of course it's the key to understanding astronomy
when you have the force
of gravity on an object
that's the name for one particular force
and we usually call that force
the weight of the object
so my weight to a physicist
that refers to
the gravitational force
caused by planet Earth
on my body
so my weight is not my mass
they're intimately related
they're directly proportional
if I double my mass I double my weight
if I have twice as many atoms in my body
I will have twice the weight
but although they're directly related to one another
light objects
that is to say objects which have a smaller weight
have a smaller weight
because there's less stuff in them
there are fewer atoms
or the atoms themselves
have less material in them in some sense
the details of
how atoms have mass
goes beyond Newton
and classical physics
but the basic idea of light and heavy
is just obvious and intuitive to everybody
and we're going to have to keep coming back
to the distinction
between the force of gravity
and the mass of the object
if you take a massive object
anything, an anvil
and it's incredibly difficult to pick up
because it's got so much weight
it's got such a large force of gravity
and now you put that up in the space shuttle
and you bring it up to the space station
and it's floating around in the cabin
I could ask you the question
does it still have mass
and does it still have weight
and does it still have mass
question is unambiguous and absolutely
has exactly the same mass as it always had
there are still all the same atoms in there
it's the same object
it's got the same inertia
it's just as hard to accelerate that anvil
in the space station
if you push on it and you're an astronaut
probably you'll fly backwards and the anvil will mostly sit still
and it doesn't want to change its state of motion
its weight is another question
and we'll leave that
it's
somewhat semantics
about whether we say that
the anvil is weightless or not
it's in freefall
like all objects in outer space
it is falling towards the earth
so we're going to have to make sense of all this
making sense of the anvil is really the same question
as making sense of planetary motion
if you're near the earth
then the force of gravity
is just going to be proportional to the mass
plain and simple
and it's only when you get far away
from the earth that the story will get more complicated
and that we'll want to talk about
in the upcoming lecture
for right now
we're going to define or measure
mass experimentally just by putting things on scales
so there's going to be a connection
here on earth between the mass
of the object and the force of gravity on it
but as long as they're
proportional to one another that's okay
you just have a little needle and if you put something with twice the mass on it
it points to twice the dial
reading and we know what the mass is
before we talk about planets
I want to think about
Galileo's experiment
we started talking about it last time
I had two objects
a heavy one and a light one falling off of the
tower of Pisa
and we forgot about the race
in the last lecture and just focused our attention
on f equals ma for one individual object
but now I'd like to go back to that race
why is it that the heavy
and the light objects
land at the same time
or very roughly the same time
this arises from Newton's law
Newton's law allows us to make
sense of this
Galileo was describing it he observed it from his
experiments but he couldn't tell you why
and now Isaac Newton is giving us a
lovely simple explanation
so here's the basic argument
you have a massive ball
and the force
of gravity on that massive ball will be very large
the more mass you have
the more you weigh
you've got a lot of gravitational
force acting on the more massive
object but f equals
ma
so let's rewrite that equation
if you can do a step of mental algebra
solve for acceleration
acceleration would be
isolated by itself if I just divided both sides
of the equation by mass
acceleration is force divided by
mass
for a second it's the same idea
how much do you accelerate
it's force divided by mass
the more force the more you accelerate
the more mass that's in the denominator
so the more mass you have
the less you accelerate
so now think about the heavy object
being dropped off the leaning tower
maybe it has 10 times the mass
so you've got 10 times the mass
in the denominator
but it's also 10 times as heavy
so the force of gravity on that
is 10 times greater so the
force is bigger and the mass is bigger
and they exactly cancel
if you double the weight of something
you've doubled the mass and you've doubled the force of gravity
if it's 10 times for one
it's 10 times for the other
and the acceleration from Newton's law is just the ratio
so this is
this is spectacular f equals ma
is telling us something
about Galileo's experiment
no matter what
if gravity is the only force
important so we've got a neglect friction
for the moment to make sense of this experiment
if there's only gravity
then all objects will have
the exact same acceleration
if you let go of them
one second later they'll have the same speed
it'll be different than how it started
and the value
of that universal
acceleration due to gravity
can be measured so you can drop
objects and it doesn't matter what you drop
as long as air resistance isn't a big factor
as long as gravity dominates the story
you will find that all objects
accelerate at about
9.8 meters per second
every second which I usually
for convenience round to about 10
10 meters per second
that's a reasonable clip
that's a little bit faster than I can walk
after one second
the object is moving a little bit faster
than I can walk and one second later
it's going another 10 meters a second
so it's going 0
10 meters a second, 20 meters a second, 30 meters a second
it's accelerating on the way down
it's in free fall
and free fall means nothing more than
only gravity acting
if there's only gravity acting then
if you doubled the mass
and you also doubled the weight
that just happens all by itself
the resulting acceleration when you let go
is the same
so Isaac Newton is explaining
to us why Galileo's
observation makes sense
you can think about this in lots of ways
so let me imagine that I've got
two identical objects
and I drop them both simultaneously
I think if they're identical
everybody would agree with me that they fall at the same rate
now let me hold them close together
and I drop them
well what difference would that make
they still accelerate at the same rate
now imagine that they're touching one another
again they still accelerate at the same rate
why would they care whether they're
touching or not touching
of course if they're touching and then I glue them
again it's still the same story
so by walking through this little chain of logic
you can easily convince yourself that
hey yeah it doesn't make any difference
if you have one object or another object with twice the mass
or three times the mass
they're all going to fall at the same rate
because that's the way gravity is working
that's the way Newton's law
is insisting that nature should behave
it's a slightly tricky story
sometimes people just buy it right away
and sometimes it takes a while to wrap your head around this
and I keep reiterating
this is the world that we live in
dog on it, physics is about our lives
and it's not some abstraction
and it is true
in all circumstances
so if you do now say
well wait a minute what about air resistance
then we can go back and say alright
air resistance is real
it's small
there'll be this big downward force of gravity
a little upward force of air resistance
so gravity will still dominate the story
so to an excellent approximation
real objects
dropped as long as
they're not a feather or something that has huge air resistance
they'll still accelerate
at the same rate
when you have
thought about the motion of an object falling
straight down
then you sort of have put together
part of the f equals ma story
but there's another part which is needed
to move on to the astronomical story
which is objects that are already
moving
so instead of dropping something from rest
what happens
if I throw the object
so I can take
the keys out of my pocket and toss them
forwards
and of course we know what's gonna happen
they're gonna follow an arc
they're gonna follow some path
as they move forwards and downwards
Galileo recognized
something profound
and Isaac Newton's formula has made it
mathematically rigorous
and some people call this a principle of superposition
what's happening
is that there are two motions now
a sideways motion
and a downwards motion
and these two motions are completely independent
so what happens in the sideways world
and what happens in the up and down world
are each happening on their own
and then they just superpose
because they're both happening at the same time
so if I throw my keys
and there's no gravity
what would happen? well I'm in the space
station and I throw my keys
and they start moving away from me in a straight line
with a constant speed
all the way until they hit the wall
or if there's no wall forever
so they would have
this is the Galileo story in Ursa
what happens now
when I add gravity to that story
I'm adding a force
to that motion
it's not sideways
if you throw your keys the force of gravity is always
straight down
so the fact that they had this initial
sideways motion is completely
unaffected and unperturbed by
gravity and the keys
will continue in motion
in the horizontal direction forever
until something stops them
like the floor or a wall
or maybe air resistance
in the absence of air resistance
you have to visualize two motions simultaneously
the accelerated motion downward
that's the Galileo cannonball
going down first
10 meters a second then 20 meters a second
then 30 meters a second
if you're going faster and faster
then each second you're going to go farther and farther
so if you imagine some sort of
freeze frame picture of this motion
you take a snapshot
take another snapshot once per second
you'll see the cannonball getting farther and farther
apart on its way down
but sideways it keeps
moving the same distance every second
so if you superpose those two motions
uniform motion sideways
and accelerated motion downwards
you get a lovely arc it's called a parabola
and Galileo recognized this
but he couldn't explain it
and Newton has explained it
with force equals mass times acceleration
because the force is downwards
and that means the change in motion
the acceleration is downwards
a downwards change
means a change in your downwards
motion and in particular it means
no change in your horizontal motion
so if you try to think
of this in the pictorial way
that I was talking about last time
my keys have a little forward velocity
arrow and then
a little moment later they have a little
forward and downward velocity
arrow and then forward
and even more downward
so if you were to draw this on a piece of paper
and I encourage you to try it sort of a fun sketch
if you try to draw these
arrows you'll find that you draw the
horizontal or sideways
piece of that velocity the same every single
time and it just gets
more and more and more of a vertical
piece to it and that means it's going to be
steeper and steeper it's following
the parabola angling its way downwards
making this lovely arc
so
this idea that sideways
motion and
is independent well the motion in the two
different perpendicular directions
are independent of one another is a big deal
it's suspected
and described by Galileo it's
understood now by Isaac Newton
and all of a sudden he realizes
holy smokes we can
we can control motion in two
or three dimensions f equals
ma is far more powerful than
just dropping things or objects
rolling in a straight line down a track
we can we can describe
the most complicated trajectory
that you imagine
so let's move one step beyond
straight down or
a parabolic arc and let's think
about the planets now
so I'm going to ask you the following
question if you're walking in a circle
what does it take
what do you need in order to walk in a circle
so I'm going to pick
a spot on the corner of my desk here
that's going to be the center of the circle
I'm going to walk around it at a steady speed
I'm not speeding up I'm not
slowing down I'm walking around at a
steady speed and yet
I claim that I'm accelerating
right that's this funny
business about our definition of the word
acceleration it's not the English language
use where acceleration is synonymous
with speeding up
acceleration is defined as my velocity
is changing so now I'm
moving forward and then I take
a step forward but I also have to
a little take a small step to one
side in order to follow the circular
path so think about
the velocity vector which was
forwards and now it's forwards
but a little bit to my left
if I'm walking in a counterclockwise circle
try it out yourself
take this walk around a circle
and think carefully about how you're
moving you do take a step
what I'm calling
forwards which is really tangent
to the circle if you were to draw on
the ground the circle that you're walking
you would see that every step you walk
one step tangent to the circle
and one step sideways
to bring yourself back into
the circle if you didn't
if you didn't take the sideways step
then you'd be walking in a straight line
and you'd leave the center and you'd run
away so in order
to walk in a circle you must accelerate
there's no way around it
I don't mean speeding up and slowing down
I just mean changing the direction
Newton's law says F equals MA
so how do I make sense of this
if I'm accelerating there must be
a reverse
so if you're walking
again just be aware
of what you're doing as you take that step forward
if you want to move sideways
you must push yourself sideways
you use the force of friction with the ground
to apply the sideways force
to move you back towards the middle of the circle
every step you take
you could just glide forwards
you could be on ice and continue in a straight line forever
but if you're on the ice rink
and you want to go in a circle
it's a lot tougher if you've got shoes on
and it's slippery you can't do it
you'll just go in a straight line
you won't go in a circle
so you must have some center-seeking force
something pushing you towards the middle
in order to go in this circular motion
so you need a
centripetal force
centripetal is the technical word for center-seeking
and
people often mix it up with centrifugal
centrifugal
is the name that people give to the feeling
that you have
when you're in your car and you're going in a circle
you might feel like you're being thrown
outwards
but that's a funny thing
because you're not in an inertial
reference frame
you are in an accelerating reference frame
if you're running around in a circle
and Newton's laws only hold
for inertial observers
so what you have to do is you have to be Isaac Newton
and step back
and view the scene from above
and then you'll recognize that
yes the person in the car
going in a tight circle
they feel forces
think carefully about the force that you feel
if you're going in a counter-clockwise circle
and you're in the passenger seat
and you feel like you're being thrown outwards
what you really physically feel
is your shoulder
and the edge of the car
pushing one against the other
indeed the force on you
is the force of the car towards the middle
and you go in the circle
if the car wasn't there
you would go in a straight line
not in the circle
so now let's move to planets
let's think about
how it is that a planet is moving
and this of course is part of Newton's grand insight
he is
thinking about motion
and he recognizes that the earth going around the sun
is following a nearly circular path
Kepler has told us it's an ellipse
we'll worry about that little detail later
but for the moment let's
Kepler's ellipses
they're really darn close to circles
if you look in a textbook we always exaggerate
the stretch of the ellipse
to make it obvious to the eye that it's an ellipse
but if you really drew a
scale picture of the earth's orbit
you would see what looks to the eye like a beautiful circle
so Newton is thinking about this
he's trying to make sense of it
and he's already made good sense of
the fall of an apple
the fall of a tossed apple
and then there's this story
this maybe apocryphal story
of Isaac Newton sitting in
the orchard
and he sees the apple fall and he's thinking
okay I know why it's falling
it's falling because the earth is pulling on it
there's a force therefore it accelerates
and how high does that force reach?
this is a great question
if you go to the top of the apple tree
those apples accelerate at 9.8 meters
per second every second too
indeed you can climb to the top of Mount Everest
and drop your ice axe
hopefully that's probably a bad idea
but if you did drop your ice axe
it would accelerate towards the ground
at 9.8 meters per second per second
you would not be able to notice the difference
so gravity reaches all the way up to the top of Mount Everest
how high does it go?
this is the aha moment
that Isaac Newton had sitting in the orchard
at least if that story is true
where he realized
hey if gravity can reach
up to the top of Mount Everest
why not up to the moon?
that is the physical force
which is pulling the moon
downwards
and causing it not to travel in a straight line
like Galileo says it should
you see Newton is asking the right question
he's not asking
why does the moon
continue moving
he's asking why is it always
changing its motion
sometimes it's got
two pieces to its motion
it's moving in a circle
so it's moving sideways with respect to us
but it's also
constantly accelerating
straight towards planet earth
and that's a remarkable
idea to be thinking about
and it's connecting
the motion of the moon
to the motion of terrestrial objects
so this
is leading Isaac Newton to recognize
what Galileo had already been suspecting
so Galileo had been looking at the moon
and seeing mountains and shadows and craters
he'd been looking at the sun
and seeing sunspots
and the phases of Venus
and the moons of Jupiter and recognizing
these things don't seem so mystical
they seem like ordinary objects
and now Isaac Newton is saying
why yes indeed
everything in the universe is obeying f equals m a
including the moon
and the sun and Jupiter
you name it everybody's doing the same thing
these are universal laws
and nowadays we kind of
shrug our shoulders and say big deal
but imagine what that means
when you're considering your place in the universe
and you recognize that we're just part
of a big commonality
so you can make sense
of everything and anything
and all of a sudden the world is open
to you you can control
anything that you like this is part of the
world view that Isaac Newton
is helping to generate and
foster
so let's go back to the moon
the moon is being pulled at all
times towards the earth by the force of gravity
the exact same force that's pulling an
apple is pulling on the moon
now the apple accelerates at
9.8 meters per second per second
towards the earth and then it strikes
the earth and stops
all of a sudden you get a little bit nervous and you think
now wait a minute the moon is very big
it's accelerating towards us
why isn't it going to crash into us
and the answer is again
because
it doesn't
it's a simplistic answer
but why do the keys move sideways
as they're falling
well because they already had some sideways
motion and that sideways motion continues
the moon fortunately for us
also already has some sideways
motion when the solar system was formed
it arose with some
sideways motion and that
sideways motion is going to continue
so the force of gravity is always
pulling it back towards us
but the sideways motion continues
unabated and so it follows
its lovely circular path
now you realize how special a circle is
it's very finely tuned
if the moon was going
faster sideways
it wouldn't go in a perfect circle
it would be going faster sideways
and every second it would move farther
away from us then it moved towards us
and it would follow some elongated path
an ellipse
if it was moving even faster still
it might never come back
that would be a hyperbolic orbit
and at some extreme velocity
it would move in a straight line away from us
because at that point the force of gravity
would be an irrelevantly
small perturbation in its
motion
so what you need
for a circular orbit or
elliptical orbit in general
is this center-seeking force
the force of gravity
and you need to have some starting
sideways motion which just continues
so it's Newton's two laws
inertia, an object in motion
remains in motion, and f equals mA
the attractive force is what's
changing the velocity vector
so that it always goes around in this arc
so let me wrap this story up
Newton has
made some spectacular unifications
here
and it's a unification at many levels
he has explained
and described planetary orbits
using this, well, there's another equation
which we need to talk about
which is the detailed equation of gravity
I've been arguing that
gravity is the same here
and at the top of Mount Everest
it's not quite the same at the moon
and so that we'll have to talk about
that was part of Newton's
gravitational story
but his laws of motion really
were the central idea
to explain
Kepler's laws
so recognize what he's done
Kepler had these three laws
planets moving in ellipse
they speed up and slow down
and the distance of the planet
tells you the average speed of the planet
or the amount of time it takes
for them to go around
those were Kepler's observations
he said, oh, these aren't just made up
they're not just coming from data
they arise mathematically
from F equals MA
so
this, of course, changed the way people
think about the universe
and it connected Galileo's marble
on a ramp
to an apple falling straight down
you might think totally different motion
in fact exactly the same motion
just subtle details that are different
and the
apple falling down
it's really the same thing
as the moon going around in orbit
I have this toy that I love to play with
with my dog it's a rope
and then there's this heavy object at the end
and you swing it around your head a few times
and you let go and it goes flying
and if you have one of these things
and you're playing with your dog
watch carefully and you'll see that this
motion too is exactly the same thing
if Newton had one with his dog
diamond
he might have figured out the law of gravity
in a different way not needing an apple
the story is
this massive object is going in a circle
and why is it going in a circle
it doesn't want to
Galileo says it wants
to go in a straight line but the rope
is pulling it that's all a rope can do
ropes can't push they can only pull
the rope is moving from
the object towards you so it's very obvious
that the object is being
pulled towards you
just like Isaac Newton is thinking
gravity is pulling the object straight
towards the sun or the moon
straight towards the earth
and as it moves in the circle
the sideways motion that you gave it initially
continues and when you let go
so all of a sudden there is no more
rope force
what do you got well for
a brief moment in time
an instant in time that object
is at the edge of a circle moving in a circular path
it's got some velocity direction
and it's just going to keep on going now
in that direction well except for gravity
which will pull it down to the ground
but if you watch from above you'll see it moving
forwards tangent to the circle
in a straight line
so again no matter what situation you think
of all situations Isaac
Newton's laws are quantitative
you can derive the acceleration
with numbers if you're interested
in that you can check astronomical
data which of course was what Isaac
Newton was doing to verify
this story and so now
we have a
scientific world view that is
already in a certain sense
philosophically complete
we should be able to describe
microscopic phenomenon, macroscopic phenomenon
gravitational phenomena, astronomy
you name it
in the next lecture I do want to
continue with the gravity story
because there's one key piece here
which we haven't talked about how does gravity
depend on exactly how far away
you are and that was a really important
part of the story will help us
to understand the motion in even
better detail but at that point
we're all set to apply Newton's laws
wherever you like start thinking
about other forces or perhaps other
ways of thinking about motion
so we're going to evolve beyond
just thinking about forces
but it's the critical starting point
for us and historically to understand
motion
music
lecture 8 universal
gravitation
applause
today I want to continue
the story of Newton's law of gravity
we remind you from last time
Isaac Newton has postulated a force of nature
it's the universal law
of gravity which states that
planet earth is attracting
massive objects towards it and they
as a result accelerate because
of Newton's law of motion force
equals mass times acceleration
so this idea
that there is a force it's
universal it's pulling the planets
towards the sun it's pulling the moon
towards the earth this is what you needed
and in order to
understand planetary motion and
astronomy
it's not all you need because you need
to be able to say with some
degree of concreteness
how strong is the force of gravity
and it is universal
but it's not
universally the same value everywhere
that would be kind of crazy
to think that the earth pulls just as hard
on an apple right here
as it does an apple
on the moon or an apple
off in the farthest galaxy
so Newton is thinking
about this law of gravity and today
we want to talk some more about
how he put together
his law of motion with a more
detailed
story about how gravity really works
and
it began with the apple which
may or may not have hit him on the head
you know
ideas like this I don't think
they just come from the data
there is some insight
involved you're not
making a curve and coming up with a formula
instead you're thinking about
how phenomena fit together
and so this metaphor
or the story
of the apple hitting
as a nice one
it's really representative of
this change in world view
that forces here on earth are the same
as the forces in outer space
today let's
first review about circular motion
and think about how the planets behave
and then look in a little bit more
quantitative detail at how
the moon in particular is behaving
so that we can see how Newton
built up his universal law of gravity
in detail
I remind you that if I'm walking
in a circle around some fixed
point I'm walking forwards
and at the same time I'm constantly
turning I'm always changing
my velocity vector and
if you think carefully about it
it's a little bit subtle you can convince yourself
that at every step
that you take continuing in motion
remaining in motion that's tangent
to the circle you take a step
directly towards the center of the circle
now each step that you take
towards the center of the circle
is a new direction
and so your change
in velocity is constantly
itself changing
this is not a constant acceleration
and it's certainly not zero
acceleration you really
are changing your velocity all the time
when you
work out the details by drawing
a picture so draw the velocity at one time
draw the velocity
a moment later think of these arrows
and then ask okay which is
the direction of change and how big
is it because acceleration tells
you two things acceleration tells you
which way is your velocity changing
and also how rapidly is it changing
now that's a little bizarre
when you think about uniform circular
motion me just walking steadily
around in a circle you might think
yourself now come on you're not speeding up
you're not slowing down so
yeah maybe you can argue with some
twist of semantics that you're accelerating
towards the center but how could
we measure that in meters per second
per second and the answer is
well my velocity is changing
I've taken a certain number of meters towards
the middle and I did that over a certain
amount of time so you really can
work out the
numerical value of the acceleration
let's think about that for a second
what does it depend on when I was a little
kid there was a game that
my dad would play that I just loved
and back in those days
all the stores were closed on Sunday so the parking
lots were completely empty and he would take
the kids we get in the car and he would
drive in circles around the lamp posts
in the parking lot and we love
that we love the feeling associated
with going in a tight circle and
if everything went really well the tires
would squeal and
what we recognized the physics
that we knew just in our bones
was faster faster
and that's what we would yell to dad
because we knew that the faster you go
in this circle the more you will accelerate
and that's what we're feeling
we are feeling well we're
feeling the force that causes our acceleration
your body is very good at noticing
when you're accelerating get on a motorcycle
crank on the acceleration
you feel it when you
go to an amusement park and you all of a sudden
accelerate rapidly it's very noticeable
so when we were yelling
faster faster that's because
the acceleration towards
the center depends on how
rapidly you're going around
the circle and it's not
even linear the faster you go
if you go twice as fast
around the circle your acceleration
is four times as big it grows like the
square of the velocity
so somehow that's
intuitive kids know about it
and Isaac Newton was able to work out the details
there's another thing that matters
it's not just how fast you're going
it's also how tight the circle is
that's again obvious to the kids
you don't want dad to go in a circle
that's a mile wide you wouldn't even notice
you were going in the circle you want
that circle to be as tight as possible
and the smaller the radius
of the circle the more rapidly
you're accelerating the stronger
you feel the acceleration
the more the tires squeal
so Isaac Newton works out the details
and
at that time in the 1600s
people had a lot of detailed astronomical
information people can watch
the moon and observe its motion
now here's a puzzle for you
how far away is the moon
think about that for a second
how far you look out in the night sky
see the moon how could you judge
that distance you can't take a ruler
certainly not in the 1600s
and the remarkable fact is that
the ancient Greeks had figured out
how far away the moon is
it's a little spectacular puzzle
and I'll leave that to you as a homework
challenge to think about how ancient
Greek technology could tell you
the distance to the moon certainly
by Newton's time in the 1600s
we have a pretty accurate measurement
of how far away the moon is from the earth
now we also know
long it takes the moon to go in its
circular orbit that's about a month
that's the time it takes for the moon
to go through all of its phases
come back to where it started
so one month roughly
and if you know the radius of that
motion then you know the distance
traveled if you know distance
traveled and time taken
distance divided by time is speed
that would be the average speed
of the moon in its orbit
and so Newton has figured out what is
acceleration if you know the speed
and you know the radius
that's all you need and you can work out
the numbers so Newton's
scratching away on his parchment
doesn't have a pocket calculator
so the arithmetic is a little bit difficult
and he comes up with the acceleration
of the moon towards the earth
now what would you expect
what would Newton expect
if he's thinking universal gravity
and apple here, apple on Mount Everest
apple anywhere always has the same
acceleration and we know what that is
Galileo helped us to figure out what that is
it's 9.8 meters per second
per second roughly
10 meters per second squared
is that what you would expect for the acceleration
of the moon remember
we argued from Newton's laws
himself he understands
that any object whether
light or heavy as long as air resistance
is not important as long as gravity is
the only force acting any
and every object released from
Everest will accelerate at 9.8
meters per second squared
even if you throw it it still accelerates
at 9.8 meters per second squared
how about the moon
and the answer is nope not even close
it's
3600 times smaller acceleration
towards planet earth
than an apple
so you're Isaac Newton and you're kind of puzzling
over this 3600
factor of error
or confusion well
it actually makes sense
we were arguing that maybe gravity doesn't have to be the same
when you step that far away
from planet earth
the moon's orbit is roughly
60 earth radii
if you think of the earth as a ball
it's got its own radius
and that's all roughly speaking 6000 kilometers
rounding
so the earth is a ball
roughly 6000 kilometers in radius
and the moon is
60 times farther away
from us than that
size of planet earth
since you know the size of the planet earth
as well that's what Eratosthenes
was able
to measure in ancient Greece as well
then you know
in whatever units you like the distance
to the moon
so you're thinking about this it's
60 times farther away
from the surface of the earth
than the surface of the earth is from the center
so if you're thinking about an apple
that you're holding in your hands
that's a certain distance from the center
it's the earth's radius away from the center of the earth
and the moon is
60 times farther away
and its acceleration is
3600 times
weaker or smaller
so you can do some
numerology here
and say well let's see
60 squared is 3600
it's exactly the numerical factor
that we're worrying about
60 times farther away gravity gets
3600 times weaker
60 squared
times weaker
and that is the
amazing insight of Isaac Newton
he says
gravity is not a constant everywhere in the universe
it is
universal that is to say it applies
for all objects and it applies to all objects
but the strength
of gravity will weaken the farther
away from the object you get
so now we have an explanation
and Newton immediately grabbed on to it
and
he realized okay now I can work out the details
so let's think
about this universal law of gravity
all objects will be affected that's my hypothesis
the force of gravity
will point from center to center
so if you have a planet like earth
the force of gravity will be acting
from the center of the sun
to the center of planet earth attracting them
it will lie on a line
gravity points and it points on the line
between the centers of the objects
this is a hypothesis it makes sense
it seems reasonable
and as we will discover
as Newton will discover it describes
all the data that he had at his hands
and it continues to work today
it's a spectacular law of gravity
the force has to be
directed towards the middle
because that's what you need for an object to go in a circle
it's like that toy
that you're swinging around your head
you're moving it towards you
at all times you need to accelerate the object
therefore apply a force on the object
towards the center
and so
we've got most of the components of the law of gravity
Newton is also thinking about
the dependence on mass
now he knows from
his experience on planet earth
that if you increase your mass
you increase your weight
if you put two times as many objects on the scale
the weight reading on the scale
will double
so the force of gravity
is proportional to the mass
and what Newton realizes is
well there's always two objects involved
and it's got to be symmetrical
we'll talk more about this in future lectures
but if the sun is pulling on the earth
then the earth should be pulling on the sun
if the earth pulls on the moon
the moon pulls on the earth
and so the law of gravity should depend on the mass
of both objects
so if you're thinking about the moon
the formula for the force of gravity
on the moon
it's going to have to involve the mass of the moon
and also the mass of the earth in the same way
so we're going to multiply them
mass of the earth times the mass of the moon
it's directly proportional
and it seems to be linear
if you double one you double the force
if you double both of the masses
then you'd have two times two is four times
the gravitational pull
the moon is extraordinarily
massive and so the force
of gravity on the moon must be extraordinarily huge
you've got this gigantic planet earth
and this gigantic moon
and the force on the moon is humongous
big force
does that mean big acceleration?
well no, f equals ma
and the m would be the mass
of the object under study
in this case the moon
so the big force on the moon
is exactly canceling out with the big mass
or inertia of the moon
and so the acceleration is a perfectly ordinary
small number
smaller even than an apple here on earth
because it's farther away
so the farther away part
is described as mathematically
one over the distance squared
this is the new idea
that Isaac Newton has come up with
the force is getting weaker and weaker
the farther things get
when you're looking at objects
here on planet earth
and you're asking okay I'm going to use this universal law
how strong is the force of gravity
I want to compute it
if I care about the number
then I will need to know the distance
from the object to the center of the earth
so that's about 6000 kilometers
now what if you climb the tree
so now in your formula
instead of using 6000 kilometers
well you're at 6000 kilometers
plus the height of a tree
which might be a couple of meters
so that would be 6000.003 meters
so imagine
does it make any difference
if you square 6000
or 6000.00 something
and the answer is no
try it on your calculator
to practical purposes it's exactly the same
what about if you go to the top of Mount Everest
okay so now you're getting
up somewhere relatively high
if Mount Everest is
oh let's just say
very roughly 10,000 meters
rounding
that's 10 kilometers
so now the force of gravity
you would be dividing not by 6000
but by 6000.10
squared
so again try that on your calculator
and you'll see that yeah
if you go far enough out in the decimal places
you might with a sensitive apparatus
be able to notice that gravity is indeed
a tiny bit weaker up at the top of Mount Everest
but it's not noticeable to ordinary human life
you would never notice it when you drop something
they're not bouncing around up there
at the top of Mount Everest like the astronauts on the moon
if you're on the moon
the gravitational force
of the moon on you is much much less
than the gravitational force of the earth
on you the moon is much smaller
than the planet earth of course
if you want to notice
that the force of gravity
is getting weaker you have to move
way far away you have to move out to
astronomical distances
so for instance
supposing that you were to go up 6000 kilometers
above the surface of the earth
now that's huge
the space shuttle flies at only 200 kilometers
I don't know if you realize how close
the space shuttle and the space station
are to planet earth
200 kilometers that's just the
nearby city you could drive
to the space station if only there was a road that went there
if you go up to 6000 kilometers
you are as far above the earth
as you are from the center of the earth
so you would have doubled your distance
from the center first 6000
out to the surface and then another 6000
if you double the distance
2 squared is 4 there would be
4 times weaker gravity
so if you built a platform up there
a gigantic pole from the earth
6000 kilometers tall
and you stood on the top of that platform
now you would weigh
or feel 4 times
less than what you feel down here on earth
you would bounce around a little bit like an astronaut
this law of gravity is
fairly simple although it has added
a slight complexity of the
distance dependence
and everything that Newton is
thinking about is consistent with this
law everything you name it
the motion of the earth
the motion of the moons of Jupiter
the motion of the moon around earth
the motion of the other planets around the sun
it's one law
combining Newton's law of gravity
with Newton's law of motion
allows you to explain just about any
open question at that time
as we were to discover over the many
hundreds of years
after Isaac Newton
almost any questions that you can think
about having to do with
NASA, planetary motion
satellites, putting satellites into orbit
you can really answer these
questions just by these two simple laws
of nature
I want to make a philosophical point here
because
you can get all excited about universal laws
of physics and I want you to appreciate
that physics doesn't do everything
in fact
if you really want to get picky on me
I'm not explaining gravity to you
think about this for a second
so ask a child
you take an object, take a pen and you drop it
and you ask, I don't really care how old the child is
I think a five year old can often
explain to you
why that object fell, they'll say because of gravity
I know little kids learn this
and they're sort of proud of this
knowledge that they have
but now I'm going to argue as a philosopher
and say that's not explaining
anything at all
calling it gravity is just giving a name
to the fact that things
fall to the ground, but why
why does the object fall down, why doesn't it fall up
I know this is crazy
but think about it, you've got two objects in space
why should they attract
why should they attract along the line
between them, I am not explaining this
Isaac Newton is not explaining this
this is not what classical
physics does
so it's kind of an important
meta point in this course
physics is describing
phenomena
and it is explaining things but always
in terms of some fundamental assumptions
so I'm explaining a huge
variety of what seem to be
unrelated things
throwing my keys, dropping an apple
planet going around the sun
all of those things are being explained
by this one common idea
but I haven't explained that idea
the force of gravity
is proportional to the mass
of one object times the mass of the other
divided by the square of the distance
that's just the way nature seems to be
and it really wasn't until
Albert Einstein that we had some
deeper insight into the origin
and the nature of that formula
and it goes beyond the reach
of classical physics so we'll leave
it at that for this course
and I think you have to appreciate that there
is a great satisfaction in understanding
a huge variety of phenomena
in terms of some simple thing
and so you mustn't be too frustrated by the fact
that you can always get down
to the bottom idea and say
well where did that come from
and we can still do that with Albert Einstein
we can say well where does the theory of general relativity come from
and so on
when you want to understand gravity
this formula is all you're going to need
and
Isaac Newton was recognizing
so he had his own philosophical problems with it
it was a little bit different
but maybe related to this point
so Isaac Newton is recognizing
the fact that
there's this force law
but he asked himself the why question as well
how could the sun
reach out through empty space
and pull on the earth
how can the earth reach out through empty space
and pull on an apple
it's remarkable and it's a little bit mystical
it's action at a distance
some people call this spooky action at a distance
and we're so used to it
you just let go of the apple and it falls
you don't even have to think about it anymore
but if you do think about it you realize
it's wonderfully mysterious
and Isaac Newton is just describing it for us
so he was
throughout his life quite unsatisfied with this
and many contemporaries
of his were quite unsatisfied with this
indeed they were concerned
that Newton was a mystic
and that he was postulating
some kind of spiritual thing
this action at a distance is not
mechanical people at that time
were looking for physical links
some material connection
between the planet earth and the apple
that's like a bungee cord that's pulling on it
and that was not
found and ultimately over time
people just accepted that yes, Newton's laws are
descriptive and powerful
and general and universal
and we really stopped
asking those questions
again until the era of modern
physics where we revisit some of these things
so I'm going to
set aside these philosophical objections
because as a classical physicist
the game that we're playing is one of
practice we would like to understand
the underlying basic assumptions
what are the rules of the game
and how do we put them together
so in this respect gravity is one of
the great success stories in history
because you can use it to make
quantitative predictions and it goes well beyond
just the orbits of the planets
you can predict
other things like the tides
the shape
of planet earth the bulge
at the equator many many applications
it's one piece to this story
that's still missing in Isaac Newton's time
and he recognized it
but couldn't do anything about it
so let me remind you that the acceleration
of an apple 9.8 meters per second
squared is the same as the acceleration
of an anvil
9.8 meters per second squared is the
universal acceleration of any
object the reason it's universal is that
the force of gravity depends on the mass
but f equals m a
there's also a mass on the other side of the equation
and they cancel leaving you with
always the same numerical value of acceleration
no matter what the object is
so the earth is accelerating
towards the sun
and the moon
is also accelerating towards the sun
that's a funny idea
even though it's going around us
it's also going around the sun
as long as you're at the same distance from the sun
all objects accelerate
at the same rate
so if you had another planet
much much denser than planet earth
that weighed much more
I shouldn't use that word
that had much more mass than the planet earth
according to Newton's laws
the force from the sun
would be proportional to the mass
but the acceleration would be inversely proportional
to the mass it would cancel
and you wouldn't be able to tell the difference
so planet earth doesn't have
to be the mass that it is
it could have been any old mass
and our orbit would have been exactly the same
so what that means is both good news
and bad news in the Newtonian era
the bad news is
that you can't tell me
what the earth's mass is
by looking at its orbital motion
so we can explain
the orbit of Jupiter and the orbit of the moon
without knowing how massive they are
but people were curious about the masses of the planets
how massive is the planet earth
if you're interested in geophysics
all of a sudden
you're frustrated with Newton's laws
because they're not telling you the answer to this question
and you might really care
if you want to know what the structure of the earth is
what are we made of
are we made of dirt
all the way down to the middle
are we made of dandelion seeds
what is the planet earth
of course we teach our children that there's an iron core
but how would you know that
nobody's ever been down to look at the iron core
one powerful way of finding that out
would be to know the mass of the earth
because we know how big it is
and if you know the mass of an object
and you know how big it is
then you know how dense it is
and you can start looking at other objects with similar densities
and rule some of them out
the density of the earth and the density of iron
are basically the same thing
so how are we going to figure out the mass of the earth
Newton's law of gravity
almost does it for us
the magnitude of the force of gravity
is proportional to the mass of one object
and the mass of the other object
divided by the distance squared
and the proportional to
means that there's one number
a constant of proportionality
and you only need to learn that number once
in one experiment and then you know it forever
in all experiments over all time
so measuring the universal
constant of gravity
became a big intellectual
and experimental task
and Newton wasn't remotely capable
of doing this with the technology that had
available to him
it took a hundred years
it was basically 1798
when Henry Cavendish in England
was finally able to build a device
and the idea is very simple
you take two known masses
one hundred kilograms here
and one hundred kilograms there
and you just directly measure the force
with which they attract one another
Newton's law of gravity is universal
I am attracting you gravitationally
it's just a very very small force
so small that you would never notice it
but the closer we get
the stronger that force gets
and the bigger our mass
the stronger that force gets
and so what Cavendish was able to do
was to get very large masses
and really the trick was to have
an exquisitely sensitive device
that was sensitive to
tiny tiny forces
because you have to realize
almost any other force of nature
is going to swamp out gravity
if there's a breeze in the room
the air resistance from the breeze
will be pushing harder on those objects
than their force of gravitational attraction
if there's a little bit of magnetic material
in one and you walk by with a little
weak magnet or even the fact that
you're just on planet earth which has a magnetic field
could be a stronger force
than the force of gravity
Cavendish's experiment was remarkable
it was indeed well ahead of its own time
if Cavendish hadn't done this
it could have been another hundred years
before people were able to really eliminate
all those difficult experimental
issues and measure directly
the force the trick that he discovered
was you put
the objects on an object that can twist
it's called a torsion
and so as they
attract one another they twist
very delicate fibers
and the amount of twist
is proportional to the amount of force
he really had to work out an awful lot of
challenging experimental details
and in the end
he found the force in newtons
between two known objects at a known distance
so now you know
the proportionality constant
because you've got the force
the two masses and the distance
the only unknown in that experiment
is this universal constant
once you know the universal constant
then you can look at the acceleration
of the moon
and argue that well
I don't care about the mass of the moon
but I do care about the mass of the earth
and now that I know my universal constant
I can now figure out the mass of the earth
so when Henry Cavendish published his paper
in the late 1700s
he didn't say
I've found the universal constant
of gravity he said I've weighed the earth
it was kind of a
euphemism for he has figured out
mass of planet earth
and indeed it's denser than
dirt and
this kind of ability
to measure masses of astronomical objects
has led to enormous
lots of useful
fruitful ideas for
measuring masses of planets
anything that has a moon around it
measuring masses of other stars
anything that has something in orbit around it
you can figure out its mass
in an absolute sense
gravity is the weakest force we know about
this constant that Cavendish measured
is an extraordinarily tiny number
it's so tiny
that no human being
would have ever noticed the force of gravity
if we had been born and lived in outer space
where the force of gravity
was just our forces with one another
you really need to be living next
to a humongous gigantic planet
in order to notice the force of gravity
because the force of gravity is
proportional to the mass of both objects
and it's the giant mass of the earth
that really does it
and it's why we notice gravity
in fact we notice it so much
that we stop noticing it
which made Isaac Newton's insights
so spectacular to notice something
that's simple and around all of us
and every day
is not easy it's in fact one of those
huge challenges of
science
at this point
we can sort of wrap up a little bit
the story of Isaac Newton and gravity
and his first two laws of motion
and what I'd like to do
is to start moving beyond
these simple applications
and to start to think about other places
so we're going to try to
first of all extend Newton's
laws of motion there's a third law
which we need to talk about
and the third law will
end our basic introductory
story of the rules of the game
once we've got all of Newton's laws
and the law of gravity
then we can start to think
about other ways of
framing questions
instead of thinking about force
we might think about energy which we'll talk about
or momentum which we'll talk about
Newton's laws are really not the ending
of any story they are the beginning
of the story of classical physics
this is where we're headed now
Newton's laws are a huge step forward
because they show us that motion
can be understood from
universal principles rather than
thinking about the details or specifics
of the objects involved
it doesn't matter what the character of the object is
all we really care about is
the interaction between the
objects and this
way of thinking about
force as an interaction
between objects
and that's what causes their subsequent
motion this is the
brilliant insight of Isaac Newton
now interestingly Newton never wrote
F equals MA in the Principia
he really was thinking about force
in terms of another
quantity of motion rather than
acceleration so today
I want to think some more about interactions
I want to think more about the pair
of objects involved when you have forces
and this is going to lead us
first of all to a new law of physics
Newton's third law of motion
and it will also tell us
or lead us to a new idea
a new concept, a way of thinking about
motion which is the concept of
momentum Newton's third law
is commonly referred to
is for every action there is an equal
and opposite reaction
and those are kind of old fashioned words
we don't, well, action has
been redefined to physicists today
so it means something different
so I want to focus on
what the idea
behind Newton's third law is
and the way you do that is
think about some situation
where two objects are interacting and there's a force
involved well really
if there's two objects
there must be two forces involved
there's the pusher and the pushee
and that's always the case
anytime you have a force there's something
that's doing the pushing and something that's being pushed
except Newton thought very carefully
about this and realized that it's
really quite symmetrical
so I want you to imagine
standing on an ice rink
you're on friction you're on slippery shoes
and you push against the wall
so you don't have to go
to an ice rink to do this you could just sit next to
a table and
be sitting on a chair with rollers or
on roller skates or a skateboard
or something if you push
on the wall I claim
that the wall is also pushing on you
there's no way to avoid that
if you think about it
you're on the ice rink and you're pushing
forward on the wall and what happens
to you you go flying backwards
and you go the other direction
now why would you do that
if F equals MA
and you're accelerating backwards
Newton's second law insist
that there must be a force on you
pushing you backwards
so when I think about the
interaction between you and the wall
I think of you pushing the wall
and you're pushing it in one direction
and the wall is pushing
backwards on you
there's really two forces in the universe
and those two forces
comprise the interaction
and this really is Newton's
way of thinking about
forces
the way he phrased the third law
it has implications really
everywhere it's an idea
it's not a formula
it's an idea that has
applications in rocket science and particle physics
you name it even in the most
simple things like how you walk
when you think about this
and we'll talk about it today
you'll realize that it's critical
to think about the interaction
and the pair of objects
so that's where we're headed today
I'm going to state Newton's third law formally
if you have two objects
and I'll give them the boring names of A and B
it could be any two objects
it could be me and the wall
it could be the earth and the moon
any two objects that are applying forces
Newton's third law says the following
if object A pushes
on object B if it applies a force
then
object B will always
apply a force
of equal magnitude same size
but opposite in direction back on A
so if A pushes on B
B pushes back on A
and here's the remarkable part
those two forces are exactly
equal and opposite
you can't touch without being touched
it's a law of nature
and so we get and talk about these
two forces as a force pair
and one of our challenges now
when we're
living and thinking about the real world
and thinking about forces is to recognize
where is the partner force
because
the partner force is always on another body
and so you won't find
that two forces acting on me
are Newton's third law partners
you'll always find for instance
the force of gravity
that's the force of the planet earth on me
and there is another force in the universe
one way never think about
but I am applying an upward force
to planet earth
the force of earth on me
the force of me on the earth
these are partner forces
when you apply Newton's
second law F equals MA
you're thinking very specifically about one object
F
it's the force on that object
or perhaps you have to add up all the forces
on that specific object
then there's M it's the mass of that object
and A the acceleration
of that object you are zoomed in
on one particular object
and because of that it's very easy
for us to sort of get
a little bit confused
about the partner force
so if you just look superficially at Newton's third law
you sort of think well
if there's one force and there's a counter acting
force don't they cancel
and the answer is well no
they don't cancel because they're not acting
on the same body
so if you're going to be applying Newton's third law
it'll always be
a sort of a subtler application
where you're dealing with two separate objects
and thinking about the connection
between their emotions so Newton's third law
is really about relationships
between different objects
rather than Newton's second law
which focuses in on one object
Newton's third law
it's a law of nature it's fundamental
it's absolutely true there's no approximations
involved and
in many ways it's going to work
like Newton's second law
it's something that you have to test experimentally
you have to go out and check
you apply a force on one object
and you measure the force between them
and you see that the force of A on B
really is equal and opposite to the force
of B back on A
and it doesn't matter big objects, little objects
moving objects, accelerating objects
if you interpret this law properly
you'll see it's everywhere
there's no way around it
and what you'll also discover is
that it's easy to get confused about it
so today I want to talk about a few examples
so that we can see
how Newton's third law really works
and how it is that it leads us to some new ways
of thinking about the world
so let's start with a very simple application
supposing I want to walk
and I want to walk forwards
so how do I do that
just visualize
kinesthetically visualize
the forces involved
so I push off the ground
I'm accelerating forward
now think carefully, why did I accelerate
in that direction
I'm pushing backwards
just feel what you're doing on the ground
you push backwards
you can watch, you'll see little pieces of dirt
moving backwards
and yet I am moving forwards
well that's Newton's third law in action
I push backwards on the ground
the ground pushes forwards on me
and that's exactly how it is
that a force ends up acting on me
and I accelerate forwards
now the ground is being pushed
backwards but the ground is part of planet earth
it's part of a gigantic object
with a gigantic mass
so why am I the one doing the acceleration
F equals MA
if it's equal forces
on me and on the earth
that same force on my small mass
will give me a big acceleration
that same force on the giant earth mass
will give it a tiny
unmeasurably tiny backwards acceleration
every time I step forward
the earth does accelerate backwards
but you never notice it
because the mass of the earth is so humongous
you can carefully
measure these kinds of force pairs
and when the masses of the objects
are a little bit more matched
when you're moving in planet earth
it's very easy to see these things
what if there was no friction
what if I was standing on a patch of ice
so you might wonder well I could push backwards
but really I couldn't
my foot would be slipping
if there's no friction
then there's no mechanism for me to apply
a backwards force on planet earth
my foot would be scrabbling
and I wouldn't be going anywhere
I wouldn't be feeling a force forward
if I wanted to apply a force backwards
and these two forces remember are equal and opposite
so if I want to accelerate more rapidly
if I want a bigger acceleration
so I need a bigward forward force
I apply a bigward backwards force on the earth
I push backwards harder
and I move forwards more rapidly
I accelerate more rapidly
because of Newton's third law
so you can see it's a little bit subtle
you have to think carefully about the two objects involved
and you have to think about what are the forces on you
or on the object of interest
and so I want to work some more examples
so that we can begin to see how this is used
let's consider a car crash
so we're going to make it a horrible one
there's a big truck going down the highway
60 miles per hour straight line
and there's a compact car
which is stationary it's sitting there
and the truck piles into it
and the car gets scrunched up
it's now stuck to the front of the truck
if you think about this
you may recoil yourself
so we'll make it a crash test dummy in that car
so we don't have to worry about anybody getting hurt
but still
the recoil is...
Newton's third law can't make sense
how could it possibly be that the force of the car on the truck
is equal to the force of the truck
on the car
how could those be equal and opposite?
it seems crazy because it's obvious to everybody
that the truck driver is going to be shaken
and the crash test dummy
is completely mutilated
in that little car that got crumpled up
so we need to make sense of this
because I'm telling you about a law nature
and so let's walk through the steps
so that we can see how it is that Newton's third law
really is absolutely correct
to get concrete let me assume that the truck weighs
11 times what the car weighs
the car is 2,000 pounds
the truck is 22,000 pounds
and
think about the time of collision
so the car is getting squished
and there is some finite amount of time
required for that to happen
that's the time of collision
and I would argue that the time that the truck
is crashing into the car
is the same amount of time
as the time that the car is being
crashed into by the truck
it's just the crash time
and it's the same for both truck and car
that's the time during which
there is a big interaction between the two of them
there are forces involved
so your intuition is quite correct
something very very different
happens to the truck
well let's think about this
the truck is going at 60 miles an hour
wax into this little dinky car
and it's going to slow down
but because of the crash alone
it might not, in fact it certainly won't come
to a dead halt
you'll only come to a dead halt
if you crash into something which is moving
you and it's moving equal and opposite to you
that's what would cause you to come to a dead halt
this truck is going to pile right on through
so maybe it's going at 55 miles an hour now
instead of 60 miles an hour
so the truck has slowed down
of course at this point the truck driver will hit the brakes
adding a new force to the story
the friction with the ground
and it'll probably come to a halt
but that's a different thing than the interaction
due to the crash itself
so the truck has slowed
from 60 to 55
what happened to the car?
well the car started at rest
and now it's pinned to the front of a truck
so it must be going at 55 also
because it's in front of that truck
so the car accelerated
from 0 to 55
during the same crash period
when the truck slowed
from 60 to 55
so let's think about
the relative accelerations
acceleration is change in velocity
divided by change in time
and in the one case
for the car the change in velocity is 55
in some given time
and for the truck
what's the change in velocity?
well you went from 60 down to 55
that's a change of 5
negative 5 if you want to be precise
it's slowed down by 5 miles per hour
so we've got
a 5 mile per hour change in velocity
divided by that same time
compared to 55 divided by the same time
that's an 11 to 1 ratio
the car does indeed
accelerate 11 times more
than that truck
there's a very big difference
between what happens to the car
and what happens to the truck
your intuition is absolutely correct
the car accelerates 11 times more
than the truck
because remember the car's mass
was 11 times smaller
than the truck
so if you think of f equals ma
and you multiply an 11 times smaller mass
with an 11 times greater acceleration
you get the same answer
the same force
of the car on the truck
and of the truck on the car
so the problem with our intuition is
we know something is much much worse
for the car
and much less bad for the truck
and we then associate bad with
force
but force remember is defined by a physicist
as the measurable pusher pole
and what we're learning here is that we need to reconcile
the conditions about what happens in the accident
with the words that we're using
and the concepts that we're developing in physics
so what is harming you
is your acceleration
this rapid acceleration is what the driver
cares about
and indeed if you think about the driver alone
the driver
has the same acceleration as the car
that the driver is in
and the driver's mass
of both vehicles is the same
so the driver
and the car will experience a personal force
on them
not the force on the car
but the force on the driver
which will indeed be much greater than the force
on the truck driver
who has a much smaller acceleration
so really you have to just sort of sit
and put all the pieces together
and ultimately you can have that aha moment
where you go okay
the forces are equal and opposite
and force is not the same thing as
what happens to you
is a complex mix of
your acceleration
the force on you
and we just have to keep these things straight
I should also point out
that the car slowed down
sorry the car speeded up
it's the truck that slowed down
the forces were equal and opposite
opposite in direction so the slowing down
of the truck and the speeding up
of the car are both consistent
with Newton's third law
let me
think about another example
in 1920
the New York Times wrote an editorial
it was a very scathing editorial
about a great American Robert Goddard
who was working on rockets
Robert Goddard is the father of American rocketry
and he was building
what look nowadays like little toy rockets
but they were getting bigger and bigger
and ultimately led to what we now
are able to do sending human beings to
the moon and sending robotic
missions to Mars
Robert Goddard very definitely
had a vision
and he wrote about it, he talked about it
he wanted to send people to Mars
and the New York Times at some point ridiculed him
and they claimed
that he didn't understand Newton's third law
he didn't know the physics being ladled out in high schools
well it turns out it was the New York Times
that didn't quite get the physics
and Robert Goddard was
really right on top of it
here was the argument of the New York Times
and it's good to think about because it will help us
maybe to make more sense of Newton's third law
New York Times said
it's fine if you have a rocket down here
on planet Earth because the
exhaust fuel is pushing against a solid body
and you need something solid
to push against
so that you will move forward
they were thinking about my example of being on the ice rink
you have to have that solid wall
to push against
if you want to recoil in the other direction
if you're sitting in the middle of the ice rink
and there's no wall, how are you going to move
there's nothing solid to push against
well that was their argument
but what they didn't appreciate was
that there's something else going on
so imagine now you're in the middle of that ice rink
and you've got a heavy object in your pocket
pull out these heavy keys
and you throw them as hard as you can
that's what the rocket is doing
it's taking fuel
and it's throwing it as hard as it can at the back
so what would happen to you on that ice rink
if you take your keys out and you throw them
well you apply a force to the keys
F equals MA
the keys will accelerate in the direction
that you pushed them
but Newton's third law says
for every force in the universe
there will always be an equal and opposite force
the force of you on the keys
will be equal and opposite to the force of the keys
back on you
so think about that, that means there's a physical
push, a force, of the keys
back on you
opposite to the direction that the keys are being accelerated
which means there's a force on you in the other way
and so you will recoil
now you have a much bigger mass
than the keys
so your corresponding acceleration will be much smaller
so the keys go flying
and you recoil a little bit
but if you're on a frictionless ice surface
or if you're in a rocket ship in outer space
that recoil is enough
because an object in motion will remain in motion
so you'll just keep on going
and that's the way you can escape from the slippery ice rink
by throwing things in one direction
and you recoil in the other
and that's what's happening in the rocket
the rocket takes a piece of fuel
and it throws it out the back
the force of the rocket on the fuel
is equal and opposite to the force of the fuel
forwards on the rocket
and so rockets certainly
can propel themselves
in deep empty space
and they have
the New York Times apology to Robert Goddard came
in the
late 1960s when Apollo 11
was on its way to the moon too late for Robert Goddard
who was unfortunately quite devastated
by this mockery
and humiliation, sort of a sad story
for him
but fortunately he persisted with his understanding
of Newton's third law
Newton's third law
helps us
to think about
physics in a new way
so this is where I want to head now
because Newton wasn't thinking about F
equals MA
he was thinking very much
about interactions
between particles and the properties
of those particles
he was thinking about a quantity of motion
which every object
that's moving has
so if I'm moving forward I've got some mass
I've got some velocity
and if you think about it
my body has, it's got some inertia
and I'd like to make up a new word
for something a little bit different than inertia
inertia is resistance to change
but I've also got some
some oomph
it's my word, it's not a physicist's word
but you know when an object
is moving it's carrying something
when it hits an object
it transfers something
and Newton was thinking about that
something, that oomph
and it involves your mass
and it involves your velocity
if you have a bowling ball which runs into you
at the same speed as a tennis ball
it's clear that the bowling ball
carries more oomph
so mass must be part of this idea
and also if an object
is coming at you very fast
it must carry more oomph
so if a pebble is tossed at me
or if it's thrown at me from a slingshot
it's clear, ouch, the slingshot
is going to hurt more
there's something different going on
there's more oomph being transferred
so I've got to stop using this made up word
the physicist's word for oomph is momentum
Isaac Newton was thinking about momentum
we find momentum to be
mass times velocity
we arbitrarily define it in this way
and physicists do this all the time
we construct
some mathematical formula
momentum equals mass times
velocity is very different than
f equals ma
because that formula
Newton's second law wasn't a definition
it was an experimentally verifiable
relationship between three different things
momentum equals m times v
is a definition
that's how I'm going to define momentum
so it's my operational definition
is you measure the
mass of the object, you measure the distance
with rulers and the time with clocks
and you can now measure the momentum
of an object
we use this word momentum
and it's the typical story
in physics we take a word that's commonly
used in the English language
and we've got to be careful now not to use
all of our ordinary intuitions
we talk about the momentum that a politician
has in the election or the momentum
of a football team and
yes those have a lot to do with
inertia and so
there's certainly it's not a terrible choice
of words but we have to be
careful when we're thinking about the physics
momentum that we think exactly about
mass times velocity
a velocity has a direction
if I'm walking I point my finger
that's the direction of my velocity
vector and so momentum
must be also pointing
momentum points in the direction of your
velocity and so
Newton who's thinking about
forces is not thinking
F equals MA
what he's thinking is when you apply a
force to an object you
change its momentum
and you change it at a particular rate
if you push hard
you change somebody's momentum very
quickly there would be a very big
change in momentum in a very small
amount of time so Newton's
way of thinking about his second law instead
of F equals MA would be
F is change in momentum
divided by the amount of time
taken momentum change
per second and
this rate of change of momentum
is different from momentum
right force is different
from momentum force
is the rate at which momentum changes
this distinction between a thing
and the rate at which that thing changes
keeps coming back in physics
the two different quantities that are
intimately related to one another
if you push
an object that's at rest you will change
its momentum it will start to move
F equals MA is one way of thinking about it
F is change in momentum over
change in time is another way of thinking about it
it's the same law of physics
you can derive one from the other
it's a one step proof if you think about
what acceleration is it's
change in velocity over change in time
and if you multiply change in velocity
with mass you've got change
in mass times velocity
which is change in momentum
so if you like to think mathematically
you can see the connection
and so it doesn't really matter
formally whether you think of Newton's
law second law F equals MA
in terms of acceleration
or in terms of change in momentum
this alternative formulation
though leads us to think about
momentum as a possibly interesting
important quantity all by itself
and indeed thinking about
momentum helps to think
about objects in a new way
so instead of thinking about the interaction
between objects which is
what Newton is starting
us to think about we can also
think about the property of the
object itself you have
some momentum you
own that momentum you don't
have a certain force as I mentioned
before a can of gasoline it doesn't
make any sense to say the gasoline has
some force but we could say
the can has some momentum
well those are two totally
unrelated things the momentum is just
mass times velocity so in fact
that can of gasoline sitting on the ground
has no momentum whatsoever
if you pick the can up and you throw it
now it has some momentum and there's
something else that the can contains
and that's going to be a topic
of a future lecture where we think about
all the stored energy
we want to keep all these topics
separate right now
force, mass, acceleration
and momentum are the ones that we need
to think about concrete examples of
let me combine
Newton's second law and Newton's third law
for a second we're going to recognize
something essential about the world
if you have
an object and it's
moving and it's isolated
so there's no external force
acting on it then
f equals
rate of change of momentum over time
if there's no external force
if you're isolated then there's no
rate of change of momentum
think about what that means if there's no rate of
change it means there is no
change over time it means
that this quantity momentum
is staying the same over time
physicists say
momentum is conserved
conservation laws are a huge
idea because when you
have a quantity that you can measure
that the material object
owns and then you say well it's not
changing then
all of a sudden when complicated
things happen you've got an anchor
you've got something simple to hold on to
so imagine that you've got
a body like a human body
that's built up out of a bunch of pieces
the organs or the cells
or microscopically the atoms of your body
and they're all hooked together in complicated
ways with internal forces
that bind things together
now imagine that I'm
drifting along on an ice rink
so there's no important external force
on me I'm just an object in motion
remaining in motion I can
move my hands backwards and forwards
there can be all sorts of complicated
stuff going on inside of me
but this new way of
thinking about Newton's law
f is equal to the rate of change of momentum
of your entire object
over time tells me that
I'm just going to continue in motion
even complex moving objects
will still obey Newton's law
it's very powerful
it allows us to simplify complicated situations
and think about them
as just as though
my body was
a point like object
it doesn't matter there could be
you know a machine
with a Rube Goldberg device inside of it
you could have levers and gears
and hammers and all sorts of crazy stuff
going on inside
but as long as there's no outside force
then overall momentum
will be conserved now momentum
might shift around there might be one
piece that's moving and it bangs into another
one and the first one stops and the second one
starts moving you could transfer
momentum inside of this
object but when you step back
when you look at the big picture
then you realize that life is really very
simple you just add up all the
momentum you get a grand total
remember the total momentum of the system
and that will never change
will never change as time goes by
the only way to change the momentum
would be to add an external force
and then that external force
by Newton's second law will tell you
exactly quantitatively how much the
momentum of the system will change
so what we have now
is a property of systems
it's a new thing momentum
and you can
you can measure it
allows you to take a step back
we're moving up in scale from the micro
to the macro now
and when you've measured the momentum
of a system you can now
rethink how you are
understanding motion and change
in motion instead of watching positions
all the time and asking
what's the change in position
what's the change in velocity
now you can think about a property of the
object itself it's momentum
which really doesn't depend on where it is
it depends on how fast it's moving
and this is a new way
of thinking about material objects
and it will lead us
in turn to thinking about
the power of conservation laws
and so that we can ultimately move
beyond Isaac Newton's
direct formulation and thinking about
other ways of characterizing objects
lecture ten
conservation of momentum
if you think of Newton's second law
the way we introduced it
f equals ma you tend to focus on one object
you're thinking about the mass of that object
the motion of that object
the forces on that object
and that's perfectly legitimate
but if you think instead
in terms of momentum
what you tend to do is
step back look at the bigger picture
you tend to think of systems then
you tend to look at larger
or more complex systems
and thinking now about Newton's law
as the rate of
change of momentum
it's not a new law of physics
it's still Newton's second law
it's just a new way of thinking about this physics
that's applicable in other situations
if you have a simple object
that's actually isolated
then you probably want to think f equals ma
if you've got a more complex system
you might want to think about momentum
and perhaps conservation of momentum
conservation laws are
cherished in physics
because basically what happens
is that you've got some complex system
there's chaotic behavior
going on and lots of change
and yet there's a quantity
a measurable simple
quantity that never changes over time
and it gives you something
to hold on to it tells you something
about the complex system
that allows you to
understand some of the physics that's going on
without worrying about
necessarily all of the microscopic details
forces always come in pairs
that's Newton's third law
if you have the force of a on b
you will always have a force of b back on a
that's equal and opposite
and what that means is that if you step back
the object together as your system
so you now have a larger more complex system
those two forces
are now cancelling one another
if you only focused on one object
you'd have the force on it
and you wouldn't pay any attention to the force
on the other object
but once you've built the bigger system
then you have both of those forces inside your system
you add them up because Newton's law
is always about the total
sum of all forces involved
and now they've cancelled out
or simplified the story
so this is one of the nice things
about thinking about Newton's third law
and its connection to momentum
and momentum conservation
so let's think of a concrete example
you're in your automobile
and there's a crash
why does the airbag help?
now everybody has a pretty good intuition
and part of the intuition is that it's spreading
the force of the crash out over
a bigger body area
and that is part of the story
which is just pure and simple
f equals ma
or if you prefer
f is rate of change of momentum
with time
so let's think about that for a second
you're sitting in the car and let's suppose
that you don't have your seatbelt on
and there's no airbag
and you get into a crash
this is a terrible situation
because you had some momentum
you were in the car, you have a mass
and you have the velocity of the car
so the car stops
but an object in motion
tends to remain in motion
and so you will tend to remain in motion
so now you're flying through the cabin of the car
and you won't feel a force
at all
until your body strikes something
that you can interact with
so until you reach the dashboard
you feel nothing and then you reach the dashboard
which is basically already stopped
and so you're going to stop
in a very very small amount of time
basically the amount of time of contact
with the dashboard
what the airbag does is it increases
the amount of time of the crash
a little bit sick to think that you would want
the crash to last longer but that's exactly
what you want because force
is the change in momentum
divided by the amount of time taken
so if you can increase the amount
of time taken, that's in the denominator
that's going to give you a lower rate
of change and that means less force
on you
but change in your momentum is determined
by, well you started off with an initial
momentum and you're going to end up with zero
after the crash you're not moving
so the change in momentum is fixed
and what the airbag can do
is to spread out the amount of time
over which you will come to a halt
so it's the
distance
of the width of the airbag
that gives you that extra time
and the seat belt is doing something similar
the seat belt is connecting you to the
frame of the car and so instead
of waiting to start
applying the force until you reach the dashboard
you've got the entire
period of time as your body is moving
forward through the car that you are
feeling the force of the seat belt
slowing you down so either way
you can understand
the forces on you by thinking
about momentum and
Newton's law in terms of momentum
it's kind of a nice way of thinking about it
conservation laws
do not say
momentum is always the same
if you have an object moving along
it would be nonsense to say the momentum of that object
never changes because if the momentum
never changed then nothing would ever happen in the universe
so obviously momentum can change
conservation of momentum
isn't about a specific object
it's about the sum total
when you're looking at a collection
of objects that are interacting with one another
so for instance
a billiard ball that's moving forwards
it's got some forward momentum
there's another billiard ball, the target ball
which is just sitting still
so your system of two objects
definitely has some total momentum
and it's being carried
by the cue ball
now it's not true that the cue ball's momentum stays the same forever
it interacts
it stops and the target ball starts
moving you have transferred
momentum from the cue ball
to the target ball
but the overall momentum of the system has been conserved
you started with some forward motion
you end with some forward motion
if you hit two balls
they might fly apart
and now you have to start thinking about this
fact that momentum
has a direction associated with it
so let's go there
let me think
of a simpler example
suppose you go to an ice rink
I love the ice rink just because we're trying to get rid of
external forces
now it is true there's still gravity
and there's still the upward force of the ground
those cancel out and anyway
we're not paying attention to up and down motion right now
let's just focus on sideways motion
and if it's a really slippery rink
then we don't have to worry about friction
so let's take a
a firework and lay it down on
the ice rink
and it's sitting there
so it's got zero momentum
it's got mass but no velocity
so the initial momentum of my system
and the system here is a firework
you might think of it as a single object
or you might think of it as built up out of
a bunch of little pieces
now you light the fuse and you step back
and it explodes
and let's assume for
our first case that it's a dud
a sort of a dud so it just pops in half
so there's two pieces flying apart
now
it's not a total dud
there wasn't a little explosion and the front half
and the back half are flying apart
so something has definitely happened
and there are definitely forces involved
right
there's an explosion
there's gas which is pushing on the two
sides of the object
and yet if I think of the system
it started with
zero momentum
and there is no external force on it
all of the forces that we're talking about
are inside, they're part of the firework
and internal forces
this is the beautiful thing about our
formulation of Newton's laws
internal forces don't matter
because when you add them up all you care about
is the outside forces
so the momentum of the system must still be
zero
now does that make sense, you've got one piece flying one way
and another piece flying
in the opposite direction
one piece has a mass and a velocity
and the other piece has its own mass
and its own velocity
so how could you add up two
things that each have momentum
and claim to be getting zero
and the answer is, remember momentum
has a direction, it's back to back
so what I'm arguing is that the momentum
of piece number one
must be exactly equal and opposite to the momentum
of piece number two
so that when you add them up they cancel
we've talked about this idea before
when you have two forces acting on an object
and they're equal and opposite
like for instance the downward
force of gravity
and the upward force of the floor
on an object, those two forces
can add up to zero and cancel
even though they're really both there
and it's the same story with momentum
you can have two different momenta
and you have to consider the direction
as well as how big they are when you add them up
it's a little bit of a subtle idea
and you might have to think about this to convince yourself
that it's reasonable that two back-to-back objects
would end up having
in this case zero total momentum
thinking about momentum and conservation of momentum
is very helpful in lots of situations
it's most helpful as we move
from simplicity to complexity
so in particular
when there's a system that has all
sorts of inside forces
and you don't want to worry about them
you'd rather not fuss with all the details
so often times when people are dealing
with crashes or explosions
things that involve very very complex
forces acting for a very short amount of time
you tend to step back
try to look at the system as a whole
in terms of conservation laws
like the firework example
in the case of a real firework
which is launched
you see this object and if it didn't explode
it would follow a simple parabolic
arc
it's just gravity acting on an object
but at the very top or somewhere along its path
it explodes
and it explodes into a bunch of pieces
not just two
and so what do you see?
well you know what the pattern is
the symmetry of all the pieces flying out
in all sorts of different directions
and that symmetry is a direct result
of conservation of momentum
this object had a small
sideways momentum
or if it's at the
very top of its arc it's just moving sideways
just before it exploded
then it exploded and now
all the pieces added up together
will have exactly the same total
momentum as what you started with
so if a piece is going forward
if a piece goes backwards
if a piece is going up another piece goes down
and that's what forms that lovely
elegant symmetrical pattern
although if you watch it there's a couple of things
first of all there's a little bit of a
net motion in the direction
that the original firework was moving
and also gravity acts
and so each of those little pieces
follows its own little parabolic arc
and so you see the characteristic shape
first a star
and then the sort of flopping star
the firework falls to the ground
no designer of a firework
knows up front exactly
how each piece is going to move
and yet they know what the pattern will look like
by thinking about conservation of momentum
and Newton's laws
now you can get tricked
you can get tricked for instance
supposing that we have this firework
again the little dud that just splits
into two pieces sitting on the ice rink
and imagine that it wasn't
symmetrical in mass
so supposing that one piece was very
massive and the other piece was not
so massive what would you see
when you look down
well momentum must be conserved
so the momentum of the very
massive piece must be the same
equal and opposite to the momentum
of the less massive piece
so how can that work
momentum is mass times velocity
so if you've got a big mass
but you want to have the same momentum
you'd better have a small velocity
piece will be moving slowly
and the little piece will be moving more
rapidly so when you look down
if you can't tell with your eyeball
which one is heavy and which one is light
you see one piece moving quickly
and one piece moving slowly and you might say
huh doesn't look like momentum is being
conserved but if you measure
you'll discover that mass times velocity
of one is equal and opposite to mass
times velocity of the other
the oomph is conserved
uh yeah let's not
use that word anymore
if you're playing soccer and you're
small like I am you really have to
learn about momentum conservation
intuitively very quickly
cause a small object needs to have
a very high speed in order to impart
considerable speed
velocity to a more massive player
so there's many many situations
in life where you're thinking about
conservation of momentum
and uh the police
think about it in many
situations car crashes especially
this is another situation
where you got something enormously complicated
happening and there's no chance
that the police could use Newton's law
f equals ma for individual
pieces of the crash
because they don't have enough information
they don't know exactly when
and where the crash began
there's all sorts of little internal
details that they don't have access to
what can they see
let's imagine the simplest
kind of crash and also the most
terrible kind
a car is coming into an intersection
crashes into a stop vehicle
and they stick together and the
crash mess slides out into
the intersection
there are sort of two things going on here
there's the crash and then there's
the slide which happens afterwards
now the slide involves a big
hulk of twisted metals
scraping across the highway and there's
definitely an external force
that's important that's friction
friction is slowing down
the crash object
to a halt
but the police know a lot about friction
and they understand the frictional force
and how it acts over time
and how it depends on the objects
that are scraping so by looking at the
scrape marks they can deduce
pretty easily
the initial velocity
of the crash
of the hulk that's starting to scrape
so now think about the crash itself
you had a car coming in from the back
and it has some unknown velocity
you didn't watch the crash
the police would like to know
was the car coming in from the back end
speeding or not
you don't know that you ask the driver
they don't remember and of course
so if you know the velocity
of the crash afterwards
from the skid marks
you use conservation of momentum
you say the momentum just before the crash
to the momentum just after the crash
if you know the total mass
and total velocity just after the collision
and before the scraping began
that you get from the scrape information
then you deduce
the velocity of the incoming car
just before the crash
so it's a slightly complicated story
but it's pretty mechanical
and the police have a simple set of
formulas that they use
and it really is mechanical
you can derive these things
with great confidence because it's laws of nature
that you're dealing with
one of the big themes here
is that when you have complex systems
we now have a tool this idea of momentum
is letting us think
about complex systems in a
simpler way
and I want to go even further in this direction
I want to introduce a new idea called the center of mass
so imagine a complex object
like a human body
I would love to consider this
to be a point like object
and I'm watching an Olympic high diver
I would like as a physicist to first
be able to think about the simple story
which is think about
the complex object as just a dot
moving and of course then it would just be
gravity acting and the Olympic
diving sport would become very
boring because everybody does exactly the same thing
they go up and follow
a parabolic arc and fall back down again
but that's okay we would like
to start with a complex system
think about what elements of it are simple
and the center of mass
is the key
if you focus your attention on the center of mass
of a complex object and watch it move
it is going to behave
according to Newton's laws in this very simple way
so what is the center of mass
well for a symmetrical object
it's just the center of the object
so if you have a ruler
the center of mass of the ruler would be
right smack in the middle of the ruler
if you have a more complicated object
like a human body you need to take
the weighted average
of where all the masses are located
so I've got this big heavy head
so that's going to shift my center of mass up a little bit
but then right now I've got some heavy shoes on
so that's going to shift my center of mass down a little bit
in the end for the average human being
the center of mass is somewhere
right behind your belly button inside your body
and it will depend on your particular body shape
and the details
of how you're standing
so if you stick your hands forward
then I've now moved
some of my mass in front of me
and my center of mass will shift forward
the center of mass of my body
could be outside of my
body if I
lean forward into some sort of an arc
I can move the center of mass
outside of my body
and
if you follow the center of mass
of my body over time
you will see that it behaves
just exactly the way
Isaac Newton's laws tell me it must
F will equal to MA
or I can think about my momentum
so let me think about a system
that is a little bit
simpler than the human body
think of a canoe out in open water
I want to neglect the friction of the water
with the canoe
that's probably a fairly small force
we can always add it back in later
but if you had this frictionless water surface
and let's suppose you're sitting
in the front end of the canoe
so you have a mass
and then you have a center of mass
and then there's this canoe
and it has its own center of mass
which was probably right smack in the middle
of the canoe because it's
symmetrical
but now let's view you and the canoe
as a system
so we're going to consider both of you
to be one object together
so where's the center of mass
well it's not at you
and it's not where the center of mass of the canoe
it's somewhere in between
but you probably weigh a lot more than the canoe
so the center of mass
is much closer to you
than it is to the center of the canoe
so I'm visualizing this spot in the system
that's shifted just
a little bit towards the middle of the boat from me
and that is the center of mass of the system
we're starting at rest
and so we'll remain at rest
that's what Newton's first law says
center of mass will sit still
I'm sitting still everybody's not moving
and now I decide to crawl
from the front of the canoe
to the back of the canoe
so visualize it there's no problem with doing that
I grab the side of the canoe
and I walk carefully so I don't tip it over
and now I'm at the back end of the canoe
now
of course I needed friction to do that
but it wasn't friction with the water
it was friction with the canoe
I just grabbed the sides of the boat
and so I am pulling
on the canoe
and therefore the canoe is pushing
that's Newton's third law
so I am moving forward
the reason I'm moving forward
is because the canoe is pushing me forward
and the canoe must be moving backwards underneath me
because I'm pushing backwards on the canoe
F equals MA
applied to each of those objects
separately
now what's happening to the center of mass of the system
well when I'm in the back
end of the canoe
the center of mass would have to be
again it's close to me it's not quite in me
because there's this massive canoe
beside me
so it'll be off to my side
again somewhere towards the middle of the boat
and here's the important thing
there was
internal forces
me on canoe and canoe on me
but there was never any external force on the system
so if there's
never any external force on the system
then the momentum of the system
will be conserved it started at rest
it remained at rest
all times it was at rest
so that means that the center of mass
of the system never budged
with respect to the world
and I have to think carefully about what this means
I moved in one direction
the canoe moved in the other direction
and the center of mass of the pair of us
was always fixed
at one point in space the whole time
there was a point in time when I just passed
the middle of the boat
and at that point in time my center of mass
was located at basically the same place
as the center of mass of the boat
so the center of mass of the system is obvious
at that instant in time it's right where I am
and that is exactly the same
point in space
where originally
the center of mass had been sitting
and where at the end the center of mass
will be sitting
it's easiest if you draw yourself a set of pictures
or try to visualize this
because two things are moving
and yet the center of mass is not moving at all
so to a physicist
nothing happened
there's this internal complexity
but if you step back and squint your eyes a little bit
and you just look at the system
nothing happened whatsoever
the center of mass was at rest
remained at rest absolutely nothing
whatsoever was going on
so this complicated system can be thought of
in a simpler way
and what a nice idea that is
very empowering when you realize
that confronted with complex physical systems
there's always some way
of thinking about what's going on
that will be a little bit easier
another example consider a high jumper
in the Olympics so in the old days
they just jumped as high as they could
they tried to make their center of mass go over the bar
obviously until the 1968 Olympics
when some clever gymnastic
high jumper
realized that if they arched
their body aggressively
remember if you arch your body you can move
the center of mass out of inside
of your body and if you arch
backwards over the bar
you can make the center of mass pass below
the bar while the parts of
your body one by one are passing over
the bar this is called the Fosbury flop
it's just a simple application of physics
you don't have to move the center of mass up
quite as high and yet
you can get over a higher bar
this way of thinking about the system
is nice
but obviously it's not the whole story
so if you
think about that Olympic high diver
yes I can focus on the center of mass
and it's just parabolic arch
every single time and the sport
gets boring so now as a physicist
I would say alright let's look at the interesting
thing which is the spins and
twists and flips that the
person the Olympic diver is
making so here's
the idea remember when we were talking about Galileo
and we talked about superposition
we said that
if you think about keys flying through the air
you can think about the sideways motion
that's one thing that's going on
and the up and down motion that's another thing
that's going on and then real
life is the superposition
of these two simple things
and what you get when you superpose
those two simple things is a slightly more
complicated motion which is the arc
now I'm going to take that arc
and superpose yet another
complicated thing which is somebody rotating
around their center of
mass so in the end
when you have
complex motion you can always break it down
into various pieces sideways motion
forward and backwards up and down
each separately you can think
about and now we'll add in
rotation around
the center of mass
if you think about rotation
you might get uncomfortable you might say
oh gosh there's a lot of pieces to the body
and they're moving in very complicated
ways but let's start with simple
rotational motion
like a bicycle wheel rotating around its
axle
if the bicycle wheel is on a regular
bicycle then you've got two motions
there's the bicycle moving and the wheel
spinning and what I'm arguing is
you can separate your thinking
think about the center of mass
in fact we could move to a reference
frame that was moving along
with the center of mass of the bicycle
in order to investigate the motion more
simply and now what would we see
we would just see a bicycle wheel sitting
still maybe pegged at its axle
and rotating around the axle
if you think about the motion
you say gosh there's lots of pieces
there's a piece of the bike wheel going down
there's a piece of the bike wheel going up
there's a piece going left, there's a piece going right
there's all sorts of motion going on
and yet if I just look at it
holistically I simply see
rotational motion
and rotational motion is not all that complicated
in fact if you look at the bicycle wheel
you realize that there's really only
one thing you need to say about it
how fast is it spinning
it's like characterizing a moving
object with how fast is it
moving and that's really
all you often care about
how would you describe that
what would be the kinematics of a rotating
object well you might say
it's moving through 90 degrees of rotation
every second that would be a particular
speed of rotation that means
it takes four seconds to go all the way
around one circular motion
it'll be a slowly moving bicycle wheel
if you take the
center of mass story
seriously the spinning bicycle
wheel has a center of mass at its
middle and nothing is happening so it's
very very boring if you want
you can add the complexity
the real life complexity of the spinning wheel
it's not all that hard you just recognize
that there's one new number
and I guess you have to tell whether it's moving clockwise
or counterclockwise
and so you can see how we can
take Newton's laws we've never
introduced anything but Newton's laws
here and we just describe progressively
more and more realistic and
complex motion
if you have a spinning
high diver
yes you can break down their
motion into rotations in
three different spatial dimensions
and in the end each one of those is
nothing particularly different than a bicycle
wheel spinning around
there are some new ways of thinking
about it so when you're thinking about
angular motion
we've described the velocity we might describe
the angular momentum
I'm not going to give you a formula for that
it's a little bit more complicated than the linear
momentum but this spinning bicycle
wheel has momentum
it's a number or
a property of that
spinning wheel which is useful
to think about it too will be
conserved over time unless
there's an external
twist if you have a spinning bicycle
wheel and there's no friction it will continue
spinning there is no momentum
because the center of mass of the object
isn't budging but there is angular
momentum it's rotating
and that angular momentum will
continue forever
until you put the brakes on or grab it
or apply some external
outside twisting force
so what I'm
suggesting is that once you start
thinking about the center of mass and
Newton's laws either in terms of f
equals ma where now
you're thinking m of the
object as a whole and
a as the acceleration of
the center of mass
now you're able to take a
complex system and reduce it back to
something point like and simple
justifying our long
introduction to
point like simple objects because
all objects behave this way
and when you want to add the complexity
that's fine you just super pose
these other kinds of motion
there's one other piece to this
story of going
from simplicity to complexity that I just
want to mention very briefly
and that's the question of stability
when you have complex
objects like a human body and I'm standing
here I don't want to tip over
I don't want to tip forward and I don't want to tip
backwards and how do I
prevent that well it's really just Newton's
laws f equals ma
what I want to do is to make
sure that I apply forces
to my body such that
my center of mass doesn't accelerate in
any direction I don't want
any twisting forces and I don't
want any sideways
or up and down forces and
nature does the up and down business
for me the tipping part
I'm using my muscles I'm pushing on
the front of my toes and then on the
back of my heels constantly adjusting
so that the overall
force the overall
twist as well will be zero
and if you have zero force
then there will be zero change in motion
so if I'm at rest I will remain
at rest if you're
building a building you really care about
this you want it to be stable when the wind
blows if you're adding a porch to your house
you want to make sure that you still have
the buzzword is static equilibrium
static meaning nothing
moves it's staying still
and equilibrium meaning if it does
move a little bit it wants to go back to
where it started
all of this that we've introduced today
rotational motion static equilibrium
these are just moving us from
the simple naive
world of point like objects to the
realistic world that has all sorts of
complicated forces and twists
and friction and you name it
and yet we can still think
back to Newton's laws
introducing these new ideas
leads us to the
realization that first of all
conservation
is useful conserving momentum
in the face of complexity
helps us to simplify
and perhaps we can go further
now we introduced momentum
mass times velocity and discovered
that it was fruitful and
what we're going to discover next is that
there are other combinations
of mechanical quantities
which lead us to
other concepts different
from but similar to momentum
in particular I'm thinking energy
which is going to help us to think about
ever more complex situations
and still work our way back
down to Newton's laws
applause
music
applause
Isaac Newton thought of the world
in terms of momentum flow of momentum
but there's another way of thinking
about the world which we want to talk about today
it rose in popularity
about 100 years after Newton
so we're moving beyond his
originating ideas
and it became clear very
quickly especially with the
experimental verification of these ideas
that this new concept was
practically enormously beneficial
it's a way of thinking about
phenomena it's a way of thinking about
real life events
and it's the concept of energy
today and next lecture I want
to focus on energy
it's a slightly more abstract
concept than force if you touch
your hand you can feel the force
it's something that your body is
designed to measure
and you can't feel
energy in quite the same way
you just have to think about it a little bit more
abstractly on the other hand I think
your intuitions about energy
are probably extremely good
so when you think about the word
the English language word
you're thinking about energy
it comes from the sun
it comes from fossil fuels
so in this lecture we're going to introduce
the idea we're going to try to make it a little bit more rigorous
and see how it is that energy
has become perhaps the most
central idea of classical physics
it moves us beyond Isaac Newton's
way of thinking
which is very useful but useful
in particular in a certain limited set
of physical situations
today energy
and the conservation of energy has become
really the cornerstone of physics
even modern physics moving beyond
these classical ideas
energy conservation is still maintained
as one of the central
important ideas
everybody uses the idea of energy
scientists use it, non-scientists
biologists think about
cells in terms of flow of energy
chemists, geologists think about
earth in terms of flow of energy
environmentalists and environmental engineers
even politicians are thinking
about energy and the transfer of energy
as a homeowner
you think about energy when you pay the electric bill
you're not thinking about force
we might use words sloppily
like electric force but really what you
pay for is energy
and uh
what we're going to talk about today is
what it is, how you measure it
how you might use it
energy is a number
you can calculate it for a system
and you have
some energy, it's a property of the system
just like momentum, you have a certain amount
of momentum, you also have
a certain amount of energy
and that's nice, in fact
it's not an arrow, it's not
a vector, it's just a number
it's even easier to think about than
momentum, it's a little
bit closer to thinking about money
you have a certain amount, you can transfer
it to somebody else, it's a nice metaphor
that we'll be coming back to
when you think about energy
it's like an organizing tool
momentum is one way of thinking
forces is another way of thinking
energy is yet another way of thinking
and it becomes especially beneficial
just like momentum
as you move to progressively larger more
complex systems
if you have a system of a dozen pieces
you can maybe still deal with individual forces
when you're dealing with something that has
billions of pieces like a human body
or countless billions
then you probably want
to start thinking about energy concepts
your intuitions about the word
will serve us well but in order
to define it, it's a little bit awkward
I can't give you a simple definition
like it's a pusher pole
for force or it's mass
times velocity for momentum
and so we're going to come at energy
from a little angle, I want to introduce
another word another concept
of physics first
and that's the word work
so work is very
very closely related to energy
and work I can define for you
in a pretty rigorous way
and so that's how we're going to access this concept
of energy
let's think about work
now that's
not one of the best choices for a physics word
when you think about
I'm working hard right now to understand this
I go to work every day
that's not what a physicist means by work
so we've defined the word
in the physics class
the word work means the following
if you apply a force to an object
and something happens
then you're doing work
so work will involve
pushing on things and
the response of that thing
so we're going to define it
so that it matches that
intuition and so
my example would be pushing the lawnmower
so I am applying a force
I am doing work on the lawnmower
I'm doing work because
something is happening
maybe if work is going beyond just simple force
I could be pushing on the lawnmower
but it's stuck
and then I'm not doing any work
because nothing is happening
something has to respond, there has to be motion
so I'm going to define work
technically to be force
times the distance traveled
now it's one of those physicist games
you multiply two things and you say
is this a useful combination
if I'm pushing on the lawnmower
it seems perfectly reasonable
that if I push twice as hard
if the force is twice as big
that I'm probably doing twice as much work
it certainly feels like a good
sensible definition
of that word
and it also makes sense that you would multiply by distance
if the lawn is twice as big
then I'm sure going to feel
that I did twice as much work to mow it
so force times distance
is certainly consistent
with our everyday usage of the word
it's just that we've now limited
our usage of the word as well
because it's all we mean by it
if you were to hold a stack of books
in your hand
you hold them up and
in the casual English language sense
you might say oh this is a lot of work
I'm getting tired and yet
the physics definition says
you are not doing any work on the books
because you are applying a force
but they're not moving
you're not lifting them up, you're not lowering them
they're just sitting still
so force times distance
you're multiplying by zero distance traveled
and so you're not doing any work
that's a little frustrating
when your physics definition doesn't match
with your kinesthetic intuitions
but we can make sense of this
because what's really happening inside your body
microscopically is that
your muscles are twitching
so your muscles really are doing a little bit of work
but it's microscopic work
it's not work on the books
it's work on each other
as they stretch and then contract
they apply a force over a distance
over and over again
and so we don't see the effect
of that work but we feel it
and that's part of this
difficulty that people have at first
when they're thinking about the formal definition of the word
if you're going to measure a physical quantity
we need to have some convention
about units
now force has the units of newtons
remember one newton is about
the force required to hold a very small little apple
in your hand
and one meter, that's the human distance scale
just stretch out your hands
so if you take an apple and you lift it up
by one meter, about three feet
that's one newton times one meter
worth of work being done
and one newton meter
is called a jewel
it's not jewel like the little precious stone
it's jewel like Jane's jewel
the physicist in the 1800s
who was doing lots of experiments
trying to understand this new idea
at that time of energy
so we haven't gotten to energy yet
we're still thinking about work
if you lift this small
apple up and you do one
jewel of work
you can think of that
a transfer of something
there's a number
associated with
the amount of work done
and what I want to do now is to define energy
and energy is going to be
how much work I can do
so if I have one jewel
of energy in me
then I'm capable of doing one jewel
of work and then I'm done
I've used up all my energy, I've got nothing left
so energy will be
defined as, it's very simple
there's a number
and that number tells you how much work
can you do in principle
the maximum possible work
that you can do
so I'm now thinking of work
as transferring energy
when I mow the lawn
I am applying a force over a distance
so I'm doing work
and what that means to me now
in terms of energy is I have energy in my body
I got it by eating breakfast
and now the work is transferring
and then it's turning into heat
of the lawn and the lawnmower
and
that's all that energy is
it's the ability to do work
since you can measure work
in principle you've defined energy
it's just a slightly roundabout way
if I toss
an apple up into the air
and it goes up one meter
then I have put one
jewel's worth of energy into it
so energy is about doing something
with the force
it goes a little bit beyond Isaac Newton
who is just thinking about the force itself
it's turning a motor
turning a crank, it's doing something
pushing that lawnmower
and of course you can imagine how much more useful this might be
in real life situations
where what you care about is what's happening
the results of the force
if you're moving an object
like for instance you take a golf club
and you swing it
that swinging club has energy
which contains a certain amount of energy
and we could figure out how much energy it has
it's a Newtonian physics problem
so let's imagine
that this golf club is swinging
and just before it hits the golf ball
I'm going to let go of it
so I'm out of the picture
you got nothing but a heavy club
which is moving towards the ball
and the club is going to whack into the ball
that's just Newton's law
F equals MA
or you can think about it as momentum being transferred
and you could work out
there I used that
English language word, you could calculate
how much work the golf club
is doing on the golf ball
if you knew the force
and you knew the distance traveled
so it's a little physics problem
and we're not going to work out the details
but I'll tell you the answer
if you have a massive object
and it collides into another object
it certainly can do work
you know that right up front
if it's got a velocity as soon as it hits
there's going to be a force
they're touching and it's going to push
they're going to move through a distance
so you know for sure that the moving object
can do some work
and the only question is how much can it do
so you think to yourself
well the more massive that golf club is
seems reasonable that it's going to be able to do more work
because it's going to apply a bigger force
over a bigger distance
and if it's moving faster
it's also surely going to be able to do more work
because again a fast moving object
striking another one
is going to be able to apply a bigger force
for a larger distance
so somehow the mass
of the moving club
and the velocity of the moving club
must be involved
in the amount of energy that it contains
the subtle business here
is it may not be obvious that it's a definite
absolute number
and you could imagine that you could take that same golf club
and hit two different golf balls
and you might be able to imagine
that you could do different amounts of work
and so if you could
do different amounts of work
with the same starting object
then it would be ill-defined how much energy you started with
so this is part of
the Newtonian
Calculational Challenge
to prove and it is mathematically
provable that there is a certain
definite maximum possible
so when you hit
the golf club on the golf ball you might do less work
and what that would mean is
that the golf club might still be moving
so it retains some
of its energy of motion
and the golf ball would get a little bit
less energy of motion
when we talk about the original
energy of the golf club
we're talking about the total
maximum amount of work that it could do
and there is a formula associated with this
I'm now talking about the energy of motion
and remember when we
talked about motion before we were talking
about the Greek word kinema
kinematics was the description
of motion so now we're talking about
kinetic energy
kinetic energy refers to the energy
that an object contains
just by virtue of the fact that it's moving
so you work it out you figure out from f
equals ma you think about the force
and you think about the acceleration
and therefore the change in velocity
over time which means
the change in position and you can multiply
the force times that distance
and it's a little calculus puzzle
and in the end the answer is quite
simple and the formula
for kinetic energy is
one half mv squared
the one half out front is just the number
one half m is mass
one half the mass of the object
times the velocity
squared so you multiply the velocity
by itself
now the formula itself is not so important
I guess the big idea
of the formula is just as I said
the more mass you have
the more kinetic energy you have
the more velocity you have
the more kinetic energy you have
and it's especially important
how much velocity you have
because it's squared
so if you have twice the speed
on that golf club you will get
two squared or four times
the possible work out of it
the maximum work you can get
and that probably shouldn't be obvious to you
it really requires solving
this little f equals ma calculus problem
to figure out the fact that
high speed
means yes bigger force
and bigger distance
and the two of those conspire
so that the velocity really matters a lot
energy looks like
momentum, momentum was mv
energy is one half mv squared
so other than that silly
one half out front
they look very very similar
and that v squared is all the difference in the world
so you'll get a different number
and it will end up having
different consequences
you'll think about energy differently
than momentum
one of the immediate things to notice
is that there's no direction
associated with energy
if you're moving forward
your momentum is forward
but your energy is just a pure number
one of the immediate physical consequences of this
you might be familiar with
many years ago
the United States federal government
decided to lower the speed limit
on interstate highways
from 75 to 55
and there were a couple of reasons for that
one of the immediate consequences
of that reduction in speed
people noticed a change in the pattern
of highway fatalities, accident fatalities
what's the reason for that
if you go from 75 to 55
it doesn't seem like all that big
of a difference
it's a small difference in speed
but after class today
take out a calculator and square 55
write it down
and look at those two numbers
and you will find that 75 squared
is nearly double
55 squared
so the kinetic energy of a car
going 75 is nearly double
the kinetic energy of a car
going 55
available energy to do work
and work can be manifest
in forces acting over distances
like a force crushing a car
over the size of the car
or the force damaging a human body
breaking bones
having twice as much energy available
means you can do twice as much damage
and so this small change in speed
had a big impact
the reason why they switched from 75 to 55
interestingly enough was not to save lives
but to save gasoline
this was during the first
American energy crisis
and think about the logic in reverse
if you start with a car at rest
it's got no velocity
no kinetic energy
no energy of motion
and now you push down on the gas pedal
you are taking energy from somewhere else
from the gasoline
and turning it into energy of motion
and to go from 0 to 55 miles an hour
requires a certain amount of energy
one half mv squared
you need at least that much
you might need more
because you might be wasting some energy
doing work on the air and friction
and air resistance and so on
but at the very minimum
you must have one half mv squared's worth
of energy
and so going from 0 to 55
requires half the energy
of going from 0 to 75
and so you use half as much gasoline
to just speed that car up
to that highway speed
when we changed the speed limit
it was really about energy and energy principles
let's think about other ways
to store energy
because kinetic energy is not the only one
so take an object
like your keys
and toss them up into the air
first of all let's think about the process in terms of energy
you are applying a large upward force
for a brief time
and your hand is moving upwards
during that period of time
your hand is pushing on the keys
and depending they are going up
you apply a force
multiply it by that small distance that your hand moves
you did force times distance
you did work on the keys
and if you do work on something
you are transferring energy to it
so the energy came out of you
and now it's in the keys
the keys have the energy
it's kinetic energy
one half mv squared pointing
they are moving upwards
but they have a certain amount of energy
if you threw them straight up
they are instantaneously at rest
and where did the energy go
they had kinetic energy
and now it looks like they have got nothing
but you know
that they do have energy
because energy is just the ability to do work
and those keys up in the air
have a real ability to do work
if you let them go
they are going to fall back down again
they could strike a nail
and drive it into a piece of wood
or another object
apply a force
move it through a distance
those keys do have energy up there
but it's no longer kinetic energy
it's not energy of motion
so we need a new name
and I don't really like the name
but it's what physicists call it
it's potential energy
to be technical it's gravitational
potential energy
because the energy is there
because the keys are up
and it's absolutely essential
if Earth wasn't there
they would just hover
and so it's really gravitational potential energy
that we're thinking about now
and all of it is there
so the kinetic energy
that you started with
tells you how much energy you had to begin with
as they go up and up and up
they are converting energy
from one form, kinetic
to a new form, gravitational potential energy
and it's the same amount
so you could measure how much energy something has
and again it's a little problem
with f equals ma
to figure out how high up would an object go
if it starts off
with some initial
given kinetic energy
and the answer is gravitational potential energy
depends on how high you are
and how massive you are
and that's it
it's directly proportional to your mass
and directly proportional to how high you are
so if you lift a bowling ball
a meter
you're going to have a lot more gravitational potential energy
than if you lift your keys up
by that same distance
and if you move those bowling balls up
into the attic
they're going to have even more gravitational potential energy
they're going to have the ability to do more work
if you let them fall again
there are many different kinds of energy
so we've now
listed kinetic energy
and gravitational potential energy
if you take a spring
and squeeze it
you are doing work
because you're applying a force
to squeeze it and you're moving the object
you're squeezing it over a distance
so you've done some work on the spring
that means you've transferred some energy
into the spring
but where did it go?
the spring is not moving
you could latch it and just leave it sitting there
that would be like a little child's toy
that's been wound up
you did some work on the child's toy
and now it's sitting there
it has the energy
and the formula is not going to be
one half mv squared because that's for energy of motion
and it's not going to be the formula for
gravitational potential energy
there's yet another formula for the spring
potential energy
and so many many different systems
have a potential energy associated with them
a can of gasoline
has energy in it
and how much does it have?
well it depends on the microscopic
chemical bonding of the
gasoline molecules
you could in a rather simplistic way
think about those molecules as little springs
and they're all coiled up
ready to be released
and do some physical mechanical work
they could convert that energy
into another form
by pushing on a piston
or boiling some water
or doing any of a number of things
where you would be converting the stored
chemical potential energy of the gasoline
into some other form
if you have hot water
that's got some energy stored in it
we call it thermal energy
and the hotter the water is
the more thermal energy it has
how is that stored?
well if you think about it microscopically
there's molecules of water and they're jiggling
jiggling means motion
each little molecule has its own little
one half mv squared
there's a bunch of little numbers that all add up
to a big number
some total amount of energy
now you don't want to call it
kinetic energy even though
microscopically it really is energy of motion
because the water
pot is just sitting there
you don't see the motion with your eyes
so we give it this different name
and we'll come back because thermal energy is pretty subtle
and we'll want to devote some lectures later on
to thermal energy all by itself
energy flows
and as you do work
on really the transfer of energy
from one object to another
energy can flow from a body to another body
like when I push on my keys
or when I hit the golf club
it can also change from form to form
so a single body
can have energy
and then transfer that energy
for instance from the upward kinetic energy
of the keys
to later gravitational potential energy
and then later back
into kinetic energy again
energy can flow
it can flow from body to body
it can flow from form to form
but here's the big idea
the central and most critical idea of energy
is energy is conserved
total energy is conserved
so what I start with
it may transfer
but the amount
the number measured in joules
is going to always be
constant
now I should be a little bit careful
and things are going on inside of it
and it's got a total amount of energy
the energy might flow from one part to another part
the energy might flow from one form to another form
but if I keep track
the total will be the same
now if the body is not isolated
if there are external forces acting on it
then you might be able to do
some work on it
and add some energy to it
but once again it's just like momentum
when you're thinking about conservation
you can always step back
to your system
and think about the flow
and recognize that in the grand scheme of things
energy is always conserved
very very useful idea
a biologist who's looking at a cell
will probably most of the time
not think about
the pushes and pulls
on the DNA molecules and the mitochondria
instead they think about the flow of energy
the cell eats
some fuel, gets some sugar
it's got some stored chemical potential energy
which gets converted into some other form
maybe some motion
of the cell itself
if thinking about the flow of energy
you could always boil it back down
to forces energy can be
thought of in terms of Newton's laws
but you don't have to
and that's the lovely thing about energy
instead there's this little number that's moving around
it's like I've got some money in my pocket
I know how much it is
I can transfer it to you now you've got that money
and we can keep track
of that keeping tool
and we can have arbitrarily complex interactions
and yet there's this anchor
just like momentum was an anchor
so is energy and energy conservation
if you're a power station engineer
and you're designing the system
and you're thinking about the system
you could think about forces
you're running a steam turbine
and you're pushing on mechanical devices
and ultimately you're pushing electrons
into people's houses
it's a legitimate way of thinking
and you might think that way
but the power station engineer
is probably thinking about energy
she knows how much energy
is being purchased in the form of coal
there's a certain stored chemical potential energy
that comes into the plant
and then that's how much energy you've got to work with
the energy could be converted
into the mechanical
or kinetic energy of the turbine
turning that's motion
of course some of it might be thrown away
but it's not really thrown away
it's just converted into a form
that's less useful to us
like heat
and then the energy might be converted
into yet another form that we haven't talked about
electrical energy that goes through the wires
to your house
it might get converted into various other forms
in a toaster oven
it could turn into thermal energy
into the light bulb
into the energy of electromagnetic radiation
or visible light
that's a really way of thinking
about processes
especially complex processes
I have seen
scams on the internet where people are trying to sell devices
they're called free energy machines
and they are truly scams
don't waste your money
because a free energy machine would be a device
that for instance you can plug your toaster oven
into it and run the toaster oven
but you don't have to add any fuel to this device
that clearly
violates conservation of energy
you're not putting any energy out
but you're not putting any energy in
now I suppose there could be a coiled up spring in there
but that means that it would run dry at a certain point
and that wouldn't be all that useful
you can buy a battery
it has some stored energy in it
but again that's not free energy
you put it in in the first place
I would argue that the conservation of energy
is the best tested law of physics
of any I can think of
there is no better experimentally verified law
than the law of conservation of energy
I've already apologized
that Newton's law isn't exactly correct
Einstein and special relativity
has taught us
that it's not exactly correct
in all circumstances
Einstein's general theory of relativity says
that the theory of gravity is not exactly as I've stated
these are excellent approximations
they work very well in the ordinary world
but energy is a different story
there is no modern physics
corrections or asterisks
energy conservation is still maintained today
as one of the key central ideas
of our understanding of the world
we really shifted
in about a hundred year period after Isaac Newton
we were thinking about forces
and we still do
they're very very useful in engineering
and everyday life applications
to think about force, to think about momentum
but when you get to
this idea of energy
all of a sudden just about every situation
where you could have used
principles of force and momentum
now you can think about energy
I'll give you one quick example
take a roller coaster
it starts at the top of the hill
and you would like to know how fast it's going
at the bottom of the hill
because you don't want people flying out or getting hurt
so how would you do this calculation
using Newton's laws
F equals MA
in principle you figure out the force of gravity
and the force of the track
and you have to think about how that evolves over time
and you need to know the shape of the track
you could do it, but it would be hard work
but if you think of conservation of energy
all of a sudden you go hey, it's simple
the roller coaster starts at the top
it's got no kinetic energy
but it has some gravitational potential energy
then it rolls down and at the bottom of the track
it's got the same energy
but now it's all kinetic energy
so I know it's speed
simple, we're done
when I think about Newton's laws
I'm thinking about individual objects
I'm thinking about the forces on them
when I think about momentum
and even more so when I think about energy
I'm stepping back, I'm taking a more
holistic view of the situation
I'm trying to stop
worrying about all the microscopic details
and look at the big picture
energy is lovely because there's just one number
and that one number
is just shifting around from place to place
from object to object
from form to form
but it's always there
it's just shifting around
and it provides me with a lovely tool
to think about arbitrarily
complex systems
applause
lecture 12
power and the Newtonian
synthesis
applause
applause
you know like any
lecture in this course
the story of energy
could take up an entire course all by itself
it's difficult, it's deep
and we're just trying to get a sense
of what the ideas are
in the last class
we were talking about energy and the conservation
of energy and I really
need to spend a little bit more time talking about energy
so today I want to add
some more details, in particular
I want to think about what happens
as energy flows
I want to talk about the rate of change
of energy of systems
as we've seen many times
the rate at which something changes
is an important story
and I also would like to take some time today
to try to pull together everything that we've been
talking about so far
I'd like to understand what we said
what the big picture is and where we could head
with these core ideas
but first let's go back to this energy story
when you have a system
it has a certain amount of energy in it
you can transfer that energy
to another system and I'd like to ask
about how rapidly that happens
the difference between energy
being transferred slowly
and energy being transferred quickly
can be a tremendous practical
difference
if you think about a healthy biological cell
it's transferring energy at some particular rate
if the energy transfer is too slow
you have a dead cell
if the energy transfer is too fast
you have an unhealthy or sick cell
and so the rate at which energy is flowing
can matter
we once talked about the Volkswagen van
and the sports car
trying to get onto the highway
they both started at rest
they both ended up at 60 miles an hour
that means that the change in kinetic energy
of both vehicles was exactly the same
they started at zero
they ended at the same number
assuming that they're roughly equal mass automobiles
it's not the change in energy
that was different
it was the rate of change of the energy
that was so different
the sports car got onto the highway
after three seconds
and the VW micro bus
took a full minute
the same energy flow
or transfer happening over a much, much longer time
is going to be
different
and I'd like to give that something a name
the rate at which energy is flowing
is called power
power is defined to be
amount of energy transferred
divided by the amount of time taken
that's what we mean by the rate of
flow of energy
and power is very easy
to mix up power with energy
just like it's always easy to mix up a thing
and the rate of a change of that thing
we've talked about this many times
we've thought about the position of a particle
and then we've asked well
how rapidly does your position change over time
that's your velocity
position and velocity they're related
but very different things
same with velocity and acceleration
acceleration is the rate at which your velocity is changing
force is the rate
at which momentum is changing
and now power is the rate
at which energy is flowing
let me give a concrete example
just so that we can
appreciate how
you might care about one or the other
and how they're related to each other
let's think of instead of energy
let's think about water in a bucket
so the amount of water
would be a quantity that you could measure
it's well-defined and you might
care about the amount of water in the bucket
you might care whether it's full or half full
or empty
now imagine there's a hole in the bottom of the bucket
so there is a rate of change
of the amount of water in the bucket
could be high, could be low
it depends on the size of the hole
in the bottom of the bucket
and you might care about the flow rate
if you're using this to put out a fire
then what you really care about
at the moment is how rapidly
is water flowing out the bottom of the bucket
if you know the flow rate
you know nothing about
how much water there is in the bucket
if I take a snapshot in time
and I say wow there is one gallon
per minute flowing out of this bucket
you have no way of knowing
whether the bucket is still
mostly full and it just started to pour out
or whether it's nearly empty
and it's almost done pouring out
there's no way you can tell
from the flow rate alone
at one instant in time
how much stuff you've got
and vice versa if you just look in the bucket
and you take a snapshot
and you say oh look it's half full
well is it flowing out rapidly
or is it flowing out slowly
if you just take that quick look
it could be that it's
flowing out very rapidly and it was just full
a moment ago or it could be
that it's been taking forever
for it to leak out
so when we're thinking about
energy and power
we want to distinguish between how much
energy something takes and then the rate
let's think of an example
I climb up the staircase
to my office it's a certain number
of floors and
I have a certain mass and so the
change in my gravitational potential
energy depends on my mass
and how high I go
so if I walk from the ground floor up to my office
that's a certain amount
of energy required
now it might take a little bit more energy
in a practical sense because I might waste
some converting it into heat in my kneecaps
and so on but
roughly speaking the amount of energy required
be a fixed number
and now recognize that it's that
certain number of joules
whether I run up the stairs
or walk up the stairs
or walk up one floor
and then sit and wait and then walk up
another floor it's the same
total amount of energy required
what's different
is the power required
power is energy divided by time taken
so if you go up that same
distance and
one day you go up very very quickly
that means a very small
amount of time you divide by
a very small time you get a very
large power requirement
it takes a lot of power to run up the stairs
doesn't take so much power to walk
slowly up the stairs but it takes the
same total amount of energy
now of course
if you know the rate of something
and you know how much time
you've taken then you can pull the whole
story together if you know
how rapidly you're transferring energy
and you know for how many seconds
you've been doing that
then you can figure out the total amount of energy
that was required or that was
transferred
we measure power just like any physical
quantity and it's going to be energy
divided by time that would be joules
per second
joule measures energy
joules per second is power
and I'm not sure if it's a good thing
or a bad thing but many physicists have a
tendency when they have a frequently used
conceptual
idea like power to give
the unit its own name
so the unit of power is called the watt
one watt
of power is one joule
flowing every second it's named after
James Watt who was the inventor
or one of the inventors of the steam engine
back in the 1700s
James Watt was thinking about
steam engines and he realized that
what you really care about
is how rapidly can you
transfer energy from the coal or the wood
into the train you'd like to get it up to the
top of the hill quickly
and so it was the power
that he was especially interested in
one watt
is one joule every second now remember
a joule is a kind of
a small human scale
of energy one joule is the
amount of energy it takes to lift a small
apple up by a couple of feet
it's a very reasonable
and little amount of energy
so one joule per second
would be a kind of a human scale
a relatively small human
scale of power
if you have a 100 watt light bulb
that means it's consuming
100 joules every second
second after second
the light bulb is converting electrical
energy into heat
and light energy
and it's doing so at a rate of 100
joules of energy every second
in the end
what do you pay for
energy or do you pay for power
well
I would argue that what you pay for is energy
that's so
if you have an electric company and they call themselves
the power company
they really should change their name they're really an electric company
because that's what you in the end
care about it takes a certain amount of coal
every month
that you are personally responsible for
or oil or whatever the original source of energy
was
now supposing in your house you've got a 100 watt
light bulb and a 20 watt light bulb
you can now buy these compact fluorescent
bulbs which are rated at
20 watts and yet they're just as bright
as the 100 watt bulb how can that be
well the answer is quite
simple the 100 watt
conventional bulb is putting out
most of its energy in the form of
heat which you don't care about
and you don't notice it's just
wasted energy it's still
coming from the electric
company but you're
caring about it the 20 watt bulb is
simply more efficient in this case it's
just as bright there's just as much light
coming out of it but it's a more
efficient conversion of the energy that came
in to the energy in the form that you want
it now let's think about the numbers
you've got a 100 watt bulb
and you've got a 20 watt bulb
that means that this first bulb
is consuming 100 joules every
second so there's a couple ways
to think about it you could think
ah
for a fixed amount of time so
in one hour the 100 watt
bulb has consumed 5
times as much energy as the 20
watt bulb because 100 is 5
times more power than 20
it's 5 times as many joules
every second so if they both
run for the same number of seconds
then it's going to be the same
ah
sorry then the high power bulb
is going to use more energy
another way of looking at it
would be to look at different amounts of time
so you could say I could run
my 100 watt bulb for one hour
or I could run my 20
watt bulb for 5 hours
and again that would be the same
total energy required from the
electric company 100
watts for one hour is the same total
energy as 20 watts run
5 times longer for 5 hours
so again you can start to
think about energy efficiency
and ah it's easy to mix up
energy and ah power
and I
I encourage you to sort of work out these
numbers just enough
so that you recognize the difference between the two quantities
it will be very useful
for you when you're thinking about making your house
more energy efficient
just in terms of
these energy scales so you get a sense
for how big is big a
sports car speeding up to highway speeds
with the gas pedal down all
the way really accelerating hard
is probably consuming
on the order of 100,000 joules
every second
100,000 joules
of stored gasoline potential
chemical energy is being transferred
into kinetic energy of motion
every second
that's enormous right 100,000
joules
is a lot more than human scale
and that's happening every second in your automobile
we tend
in America to use the old
system and with energy
we would talk about
with power we would talk about horsepower
it's obviously an archaic unit
one horsepower is roughly the amount
of energy that a typical
horse could transfer every second
so one horsepower
is still a power
and it's quite
a lot of power because horses are pretty powerful animals
now it's kind of a curious
thing to think about how long
can a horse
put out a horsepower's worth of power
not forever
the horse will get tired it will get hungry
it will need to eat
and consume some energy
so that it can put out more energy every second
I don't know it depends on the horse
maybe an hour maybe half a day
horsepower is
just an artificial human definition
at this point
150 horsepower engine
powerful automobile engine
would be about 100,000 watts
these are just different units it's like
meters and inches
and I'm going to prefer to stick with
watts because I sort of have a better
intuition about them but it's nice to be able to
convert from one to the other
there are many many units for energy
and for power and if somebody talks
about energy in terms of barrels of
oil or calories
well you just have to go and look up
how many joules is a calorie
how many joules in a barrel of oil
it's just a number and then you're all set
convert back to a system that you understand
gasoline
has an enormous
spectacular storage
capacity for
is it energy or power? energy
gasoline stores energy
you can use that energy quickly or
slowly you can run it in a high
power engine or a low power engine
but the gasoline has energy in it
in one gallon
of gasoline there might be about 100
million joules
remember the automobile engine was using
100,000 every second
so you could run your car
for a thousand seconds that's roughly
15 minutes on this one gallon
of gasoline now I'm not worrying about
questions of efficiency and how much
of the gasoline energy is going into
kinetic energy and how much
might be going into heat or
other places
just some rough numbers here so
gasoline
stores an enormous amount of energy
and when you start thinking about
issues of energy in the environment
when you start to ask questions
about conservation of energy
you recognize that
all you need is to think about energy
and think about the rate
at which energy is being transferred
and that's really all there is to that story
beyond that it's really just a question
of arithmetic and making sure you've got your
units straight
I would argue that this is perhaps one of
the most important issues
in terms of your personal life
and possibly the life of our nation
of all the particular physics topics
that we're talking about in this course
energy issues are clearly
absolutely essential for us to all understand
you need to decide
should I buy those compact fluorescent bulbs
what difference does it make
turns out it makes a very big difference
would we be able to run
our society off of windmills
well you would need to know a few simple facts
how much power
does a windmill generate
how many joules per second does it put out
how does that compare
with the energy per second that a coal plant
can put out how many windmills would you need
do they run all the time
what happens
if you're running a high power
windmill
for a very short amount of time and then the wind stops
you have to think about the total energy
and it's really not that hard
in the end because
energy is just power
four times time
power is just energy divided by time
those are the two ways
of thinking about the connection between energy and power
as a physicist
I use the phrase conservation of energy all the time
and what I mean is total energy
is preserved
from beginning of some interaction
to the end of the interaction
if you're looking at the entire system
you can shift energy around
but there's a definite amount that you're shifting around
to a
energy
environmentalist
energy conservation means something a little bit different
energy conservation in that practical
sense refers to
how efficiently are you taking a certain
number of joules in your fossil fuel
and converting it into
the form of energy that you're interested in
so if you want to move a vehicle
how much of the stored
chemical potential energy
can you turn into kinetic energy
and how much do you waste in forms
that you don't care about usually thermal
when you're thinking about energy
right energy is stored in many different ways
chemical energy, gravitational energy
kinetic energy
and when you have a particular
situation that you're interested in
you ask how much do we have to start with
how much is being converted into
the form we're interested in
that's what energy conservation in the everyday
human sense means
it's clearly connected to
energy conservation
as a physics principle
energy has
a quality to it
which we're going to talk about much later in this course
there's high quality energy
like the energy of the
gasoline in your car or even higher quality
still would be electrical energy
and high quality means
that you can easily convert
a large fraction of that energy
into a mechanical form
like turning a turbine, moving a car
doing something, doing something that you want to do
and
so we're going to have to come back and talk about this
extra element
that's associated with energy
to talk about how useful are the various
forms of energy
also critical when you're thinking about
environmental issues as you leave this course
and start applying this stuff
is to recognize that planet earth is not
an isolated system
so the total energy available to us human beings
is not a fixed number
because we've got energy flowing in from the sun
there is power from the sun
energy per second coming in
and it's a lot
if you look at the total solar energy flux
on the planet earth
there is a lot of joules coming in every second
even to every square meter
on the planet earth there's a reasonable amount
and it's partly a question of
efficiency, can we use that
how much of it can we convert into the forms
that we want to convert it into
pretty easy to turn it into thermal energy
it's fairly difficult to convert it into
energy of motion which is what
we tend to want in our society
at this point I would like to
leave the energy story for a little while
we'll be using the energy concept throughout the rest of the course
but I'd like to sort of step back
and try to take the broad
view of what we've covered so far
summarize some of the key ideas
the great ideas of classical physics
that we've looked at so far
and try to think a little bit about
where we might head with this
I would argue that what we've
done in this first half of the course
is trying to look at the rules
of the game the rules
of classical physics
and from those rules
we're going to be able to start applying them
to practical situations we've already done that
or talked about how you might do that
in specific instances
and indeed I could
list the fundamental ideas
that we've talked about
we started off with
microscopic ideas we were looking at
little point like particles
and we talked in a very strictly
Newtonian fashion about
how do you understand the motion
of this object that's really
what Newton is trying to do
we begin with kinematics pure description
you have an object
you measure where it is you measure how
its position is changing over time
we talked about reference frames
you can choose to look at the
object from any vantage point you like
as long as that is an
inertial vantage point
as long as Newton's first law holds
then you are free
to describe the kinematics
and understand what's going on in this way
we've been
pretty careful about words so we've been
defining velocity
acceleration and then we moved
to Newton's dynamical laws
his explanatory laws
dynamics is the explanation
of kinematics so Newton's law
in particular f equals m a
is allowing us to understand
the causes of motion why
does something change its motion
because you apply a force to it
pushes and pulls are the center
piece you're still focusing in the
micro in this world view
then we took a little
step back and we started thinking about
momentum momentum is now
not about the interaction
it's about the particle itself
you have some momentum it's a property
that you can measure
and when you start thinking about that property
and its flow and transfer
you tend to step back
you tend to think more about Newton's second law
and third law together
that the force of a on b is equal
and opposite to the force of b on a
so that you can
look at systems as a whole
and stop worrying about those internal forces
so this is going macro
moving out to
really more abstract concepts
you can't touch or feel
momentum like you can touch or feel
a force but on the other hand
it allows you to deal with progressively
more complex systems
Newton's laws
of course
defined and
explained this momentum story momentum
wasn't a new idea of physics
it was just a re
description or a rethinking
of Newton's laws
but instead of thinking about conservation
conservation of momentum
is a principle
it tells us something useful about complex systems
again so that we don't have to worry about
all the details if there's
explosions and crashes going on inside
we can use this principle of physics
derived from Newton's laws
but thought about in terms of momentum
to simplify our life
momentum conservation
also led us
to think about systems
as easily as possible
so as we moved to complexity
we realized that yes
complex systems are real in the practical world
you have to worry about them
but you can zoom your attention on the center of mass
and the center of mass
now allows you to think about
an arbitrary system
in terms of its motion
as a simple particle
that's nice it's justifying our
think simple approach to physics
and yet also simultaneously allowing us
a microscopic and complex phenomenon
the last stage of this
was the concept of work
and then the
concept of and conservation
of energy
so energy is this new idea
it's the transfer of work
work was defined in terms
of force
and distance so we went back
to our old Newtonian ideas
to define this concept of energy
and now we're beginning to see
that energy itself is a lovely way
of explaining things
oh energy is flowing
objects go from high to low because they want
to convert their gravitational potential energy
into kinetic energy
just another way of thinking about why things happen
and it's nice and easy because there's just a number
energy is the easiest
mathematically of everything we've talked about so far
it's one of the reasons why engineers love it
every scientist loves
to think about energy
when we began this course
I said
we're thinking about
space and time
and indeed that's really
where we began with kinematics
space is position and time is
how things evolve
we thought about space and time
matter and energy
force and motion
well we've been talking about mass and inertia
the properties of matter
matter and energy
motion all of these in the beginning of the course
may have looked like
disconnected separate ideas
and one of the big ideas
that I'd like to
emphasize today
is that really it's all about a very small
number of things it really boils down
to Newton's laws of motion
and yes it's nice to think about
things in terms of mass times velocity
in some circumstances
or one half mass times velocity squared
and another we're just combining
basic ideas in different ways
at this point
we're well equipped we can really
tackle arbitrary problems
so just look around the world
and think about things that you might be interested in
questions that you might have
questions could go into other fields
like biology or chemistry or geophysics
but there's plenty more physics
to be tackled there's other forces
of nature like electricity
and magnetism there's heat
and there's
thermal properties of materials
when they expand when you heat them
and how does all that work
you could think about light and optics
and sound and as the course
goes on we're going to be tackling all of these things
we're going to be
trying to move in a systematic way
from our building blocks we're always
going to be thinking about force
and motion and
energy and then when we talk
about a new force like electricity
well we'll connect it back to forces
that we've already talked about like gravity
it's just another one and once
we understand the nature of the electrical force
then Newton's laws
take over or conservation
laws and we can understand
what's going on and how to make
sense of
the world that we live in
I'd like to also take a kind of a
philosophical step back so that
was the topics that we've covered
but what's the idea
of classical physics
classical physics is a viewpoint
it's built on a philosophy
there's a bunch of elements
to this philosophy and I've tried to articulate
them as we go along
classical physics
treats the world as something real
the world is outside of us
and you can abstract
away from your own personal experiences
and think about the objects and the forces
and you don't need to think about
our interactions or our measurements
there's stuff going on out there
that we are measuring and making sense of
that's part of the classical physics
world view which modern
physics might disagree with
to a certain extent in quantum
mechanics there are circumstances
where what happens depends on
what you choose to measure
so I'm not arguing that classical physics
is the way the world is I'm just describing
this very very productive
way of thinking about the world
it's a deterministic
and mechanical world view
as well so these are parts of the philosophy
of classical mechanics
deterministic and
mechanical so mechanical you think of
a clock there are pieces to the
world they interact with one another
in well-defined ways and we can
understand those interactions
it's deterministic if you know
the starting conditions then you know
what's going to happen in the future
you could imagine measuring
the position and velocity of every particle
in this room right now and then
it's just Newton's laws or conservation laws
will tell you exactly where they're going to be
how they're going to interact, what they're going to do
for all future times so
this is a very powerful idea
if you believe in this it motivates
you to try to design machinery
and think about controlling
designing technology
it's part of the world view that Newton
helped to create this classical
world view
Determinism also works backwards
to deduce how things were
before you measured them again because
the rules are mechanical the universe
is in this classical viewpoint like a giant
clock and not only
can you predict how it's going to be in the future
but you know where it started at some earlier
time very very useful
it is intrinsically
reductionist classical
physics well is it intrinsic
maybe not there are
elements of classical
physics where you could just sort of
despair and say
it's just too complicated for me to try
to understand what's going on in terms
of Newton's laws think about human consciousness
even Isaac
Newton probably would have
conceded that that might be
an awfully hard physical problem
to understand in terms of pushes and pulls
but still it's kind of built
into the philosophy that maybe we can
maybe the world is
reductionist that is to say
complex things can be completely
understood if you know the building blocks
and the rules of the game
you look at some wonderful magical
phenomenon I love rainbows
and I really appreciate their beauty
it inspires me at many
levels and yet I also
appreciate the idea that the rainbow
is a physical system made of little
drops of water and the light is
moving through the raindrops in a way
that's understandable I can
understand arbitrarily complex
systems in principle
by looking at the smaller
simpler constituents
and that world view has been
extraordinarily fruitful
everything that you can think of
in terms of modern technology is probably
come about
because we believe that we could
understand complex things and by
and large it's been a very very successful
program
as we move on in this course we'll be
looking at as I mentioned some of these
specific new physical
discoveries electricity and magnetism are a big
deal in our world
and we need to spend some time thinking about them
and moving on both
to larger scale phenomenon
like light and smaller scale phenomenon
like atoms and the way the atoms move
the way they wave and oscillate
these are going to be the specific topics
but all of this
is built from this synthesis
this classical physics
set of ideas
Newton's laws, conservation principles
that in the end
are not really all that complicated at all
there's not a whole lot to this story
it's very tightly unified
this is part of the theme of classical physics
and we're going to be able to understand
this broad variety of phenomenon
just by using the principles
of classical physics
these lectures are part
of the great courses series
they are produced by the teaching company
these lectures are titled
great ideas of classical physics
part 2
lecture 13
further developments static electricity
Isaac Newton started something very big
and it wasn't just
F equals MA or the law of gravity
it was really a way
of thinking about doing science
he was starting a new field
of investigation
it was partly philosophical
it was partly that he was using mathematics
to so powerful an effect
it was partly that he was
constantly grounding what he was doing
with experiment
these new ideas were always
connected with some sort of direct
experimental verification
it was really a framing of how
you do science, how you investigate
the world
and for 200 years at least
continuing today after Isaac Newton
after the publication of the Principia
a growing number of scientists
and you can definitely call them
scientists at this point
are following this path
and the field of classical physics
is growing it's certainly not defined
just by the content that Isaac Newton
was investigating we will go far
beyond that content
it's really the
task now for the rest of the course
to try to lay some sort of path
in the ever expanding
classical physics domain
that was being developed
so we're going to try to find
the minimal subset
of ideas and
concepts to follow
which
try to span the space of classical physics
it's not entirely possible
there's some compromises you have to make
there will always be some topics of classical physics
that we won't be able to get to
but in the end we're going to cover
those core ideas
that allow us to explain the broadest
array of physical phenomena
and measurable quantities
in the world
so let's lay out a little road map
for where we're headed
I want to start with Newton's
ideas all the time
every time we're talking about some new concept
in the back of our mind we're thinking about
Newton's momentum
and energy in particular
his conservation laws
and the laws of motion
will allow us to make sense of
anything that we want to investigate
if we want to study for instance
electricity and magnetism
which are really important
forces in our lives
we'll be talking about new ideas
very new ideas that Isaac Newton
would have found quite alien
and yet at the same time
objects move and why they move that way
we will also
be talking about
the fundamental constituents of the world
so we want to think about atoms
and the motion
not just of atoms but the motion of
any particle that's vibrating
or wiggling and we'll see that this
is connected to the theories of electricity
and magnetism and also connected
to theories of light and optics
and so in the end
we'll try to put this all together
so at thermodynamics
thermodynamics would be the
explanation of an understanding
of heat and temperature
and in the end
when we've put all that together
we'll really have a framing for the kinds
of questions that people continue to
investigate today and which were
studied and understood
over this period of time following
Isaac Newton when classical physics
was in its real heyday
we'll discover a new hero in this
part of the course
who is James Clerk Maxwell
Maxwell and his equations
define
the theory of electricity and magnetism
for us today he is
to electricity and magnetism what Isaac Newton
was to the fundamental
underlying laws of mechanics
and that's going to be the
first topic
that we'll want to build up to
we'll discover that electricity
and magnetism is everywhere
in life there are applications
of course when you think about our technological lives
you can see the role of
electricity in particular
magnetism a little bit more hidden
but we'll talk about it because you'll discover that magnetism
is also everywhere in the technology
that we use just not quite so obvious
or visible as the electrical
phenomenon that we're studying
and
it's not just about the technology
in the world we live in it's also about
the structure of the world we live in
the material objects and how hard
they are what color they are
if you look at
the phenomenon of light
the phenomenon of light
you will understand the connections
between electricity, magnetism
and all these other aspects
of the world we live in
back in Newton's day
electricity and magnetism
were little curiosities
he was surely aware of the fact that
in the winter time when he brushed
or combed his hair it might stand on its end
or crackle a little bit
this static electrical phenomenon
have always been observed
but people didn't really pay much attention to it
seemed like a little laboratory curiosity
some sort of funny thing
that people didn't really understand
this obscure little force of nature
began to
attract people's attention
and in the hundred years
post-Newton more and more scientists
were trying to figure this story out
what is going on
it seems to be a new force of nature
it's very different from gravity
although it has a few commonalities
and as we begin
to develop our understanding of this
phenomenon historically
people realize that yes indeed we can investigate
this in the way that Isaac Newton would have
we can investigate it making
use of his concepts
of force and acceleration
and momentum conservation
and energy conservation
so today's lecture we're going to start
with static electricity
static electricity is
just what you think of you walk across the carpet
and you build up some static charge
and you touch that doorknob and you get a shock
we'd like to understand what's the physical
underpinning phenomenon here
it's you take the clothes out of the dryer
and you pull them apart and they crackle
and they stick together
anything that sticks together that implies a force
of nature and you could just
sort of lump it together with friction
but it becomes pretty quickly obvious
that there's something different about static electricity
if you rub the comb
through your hair
and your hair is standing up a little bit
this especially works on a dry day
or in a dry climate
it's clear that's not just friction
because now there's something left behind
in the hair and furthermore
the comb has some new property
it's charged
it's statically charged and if you
hold it down next to some little bits of paper
or something they'll dance around a little bit
you can see some curious phenomenon
in order to investigate this
I would like to kind of start at what might
seem like an elementary school level
I only want to go back to the basics
and really the goal here is for you
to ask yourself
if I lived a couple hundred years ago
and I was trying to make sense of static electricity
what would I do
what kind of experiments could I do
in my kitchen
to teach me something about how the world works
so I recognize that
most people have learned a lot of the buzzwords
and big ideas
about electricity and static electricity
probably back when
in grade school
and yet many times we don't ask
how do we know why do we believe these things
so I want to leave you a little bit through a path
and it's an oversimplified path
but very productive in thinking
about how might you go about investigating
some new
and ultimately extraordinarily rich
branch of
science, physics
so let's think
about static electricity
one of the Americans who is most famous
for this investigation is Benjamin Franklin
there were a lot of people who were doing this
Ben Franklin was one of a whole crowd
of scientists
I didn't really think so much of Benjamin Franklin
as a scientist, I think of him more
in his political role in the early United States
but then there's this famous experiment we all know about
where he flew a kite during a lightning storm
and
surely one of the most dangerous
and stupid physics experiments
in all of history
Benjamin Franklin could certainly have killed himself
by flying that kite out in the electrical storm
he did learn something useful about lightning
and
mostly what Ben Franklin was doing
was working inside of his laboratory
inside of his house
and he would rub cat fur on amber rods
or glass rods with wool
and he was just rubbing
material objects and noticing that they
would get somehow
statically charged and he was trying to figure out
what the story was
so here's a simple experiment that you can do
and I can't encourage you enough
after class to go and try this out
for yourself take some scotch tape
and you're going to waste some tape
so take about a foot of scotch tape
and fold over the ends
so that they're taped onto themselves
you have little tabs so that when you stick it
onto something you can pull it off more easily
take a second piece of tape
make the tabs and lay it down
on top of the first piece of tape
so now you've got two pieces of scotch tape
stuck together and then take
the two of them and lay them down on a flat
smooth table hopefully a clean
table that doesn't have a whole lot of grease or something on it
so there's two pieces of tape
and then do it again so now you've got
two duplicate experiments
and it's important that we duplicate the experiment
you'll see why
I'm telling you some steps to follow
but really what I want you to do is play
I want you to think about other experiments
that you could do what if you took a third
piece of tape what if you
tried it on a different material
I want you to muck around a little bit
so that you can investigate the phenomenon
that arises because otherwise
I'm just telling you the answer
which is really established by people playing
little simple games like this Ben Franklin
fundamentally was playing
little games like this except he didn't have some scotch tape
scotch tape is nice because
it does tend to exhibit
this static electric phenomenon
pretty easily you're doomed if you live
in a very very moist climate
if the humidity in the room is
too high you will find that
static electricity experiments don't
work so well you might wait
till the winter time and it's often
drier then and there's a reason
why dry air makes static
electricity experiments work better
which we'll get to later
so what
what you want to do is to investigate
the phenomenon the phenomenon occurs
when you rip the pair
off the table and then you
rip the two pieces of tape apart
and it'll be immediately obvious that these things are charged
they will act like the
clothes coming out of the dryer but they'll stay that way
just be sure that they don't
curl up and stick to your arm or something
you want to make sure they're dangling
and you'll see that they're attracted to you
and they're attracted to each other
it's helpful
when you're doing this experiment if you take a pen
and you just mark the top tape
T and the bottom tape B
so that you can remember which tape was on the
top and which tape was on the bottom
when they were lying on the table
the reason you want to do that is that you're going to discover
that different things happen
with the top tape and with the bottom tape
at first it may not be obvious
at first either one of them is attracted
to you and they're attracted to each other
so it seems like you've discovered a new
attractive force of nature
kind of like gravity is an attractive force
between masses
and now we've got a different kind of attractive force
but the interesting thing
the really surprising thing about electricity
is that if you take two
identical pieces of tape
that's why you need the identical
setup if you take two top pieces
and you hold them together
they will bend apart from one another
it's a repulsive force
rather than an attractive force
and now you've got to scratch your head
because something different is going on
and you have to play around a little bit
to try to see if you can realize
what are the systematic underpinning
ingredients in this story
how can we make predictions about
who's going to attract
and who's going to repel
in what circumstances
so what I want to do is to think about
crafting a model
now in the 1700s
there was a tremendous amount of intellectual effort
that was working with static electricity
was trying to construct their own
model it might have been a mental model
or a mathematical model
to explain and understand what's going on
remember what I mean by models
in the old
Greek astronomy days
people were looking at the sky
and they created a model of how the solar system worked
and one of the models
was Earth is at the center
everybody goes around us
a different model was Sun is at the center
everything goes around it
there was a third model
in which the Earth is at the center
Sun goes around us
but everybody else goes around the Sun
and you could imagine very different kinds of models
these are all very mechanical
you could imagine
other kinds of ways
of thinking about the solar system
and then the question is alright
you've got your model, I've got mine
let's think of some experiments
let's look at some data
your model continues to describe the data accurately
and if it stops working
because we've either come up with a clever experiment
or we've just made more careful measurements
then we have to toss your model
and we'll keep refining until we've got one that's robust
this is really the history
of electricity and magnetism as well
and in the end the model that I'm going to tell you about
is the familiar one that we all learn
and what I'm suggesting now
is that you could come up with this model
and if you question it
or you wonder why does he say
that there are electric charges
for instance on this piece of tape
which is exactly what I'm going to say
you can ask yourself let me think of some experiments
where maybe an alternative model
could be contradicted
or verified by the experiment
maybe you'll come up with an alternative model
of electricity and magnetism
it would be fairly remarkable
since there's now been about two or three hundred years
of steady progressive
experimentation and verification
of the model that
the world is made of
objects we call them atoms
that have electric charge in them
so electric charge is a new word
I'm making up
and electric charge is the quantity
it's the thing
it's a material thing
which exhibits this new force of static electricity
so somehow when you rip
pieces of tape apart
they are becoming electrically charged
and at first you might say
okay maybe there's one kind of charge
in the universe and you can have more of it
or you can have less of it
that's a hypothesis it's a model
and you could test that model
and discover that it doesn't work very well
because you can't explain
why the top and bottom tape
attract but two top pieces
repel one another
and two bottom pieces repel one another
and yet either top
or bottom attracts to your shirt
there's a variety of evidence already
in this super simple little experiment
where I claim that you need
to hypothesize two types
of electric charge
you have to give them two different names
we could call them the top type and the bottom type
if we were just doing the scotch tape experiment
Benjamin Franklin came up with
the names positive and negative
so one of the tapes will become
positively charged
the other will become negatively charged
and these are just names
you could have called them chocolate and vanilla charges
or X and Y charges
and
it's kind of nice
that he chose the names positive and negative
we'll talk a little bit about why
that's such a productive
choice of naming
you might also ask
well see positive and negative
already carries with it the sense of
there's two there's two kinds of charge
and you might ask
how does Benjamin Franklin know
there's not a third different flavor
a third type of charge
and if there was
what would be the experimental
ramifications so let's try another experiment
we could take a third piece of tape
and rip them apart one at a time
and we could start messing around
I claim
that there's no intrinsic reason
why you couldn't
hypothesize a third charge
you just don't bother because you don't need to
there's a principle
of physics called Occam's razor
there was a medieval philosopher
William of Occam
and William of Occam suggested that
when you're trying to understand the world
and you have multiple
possible explanations
go with the simplest one
at least go with it at first
if it works, it works
don't go for the complex theory
unless you absolutely have to
so if you can explain the data of the Scotch tape
and you only need to hypothesize
plus and minus charges
well great then let's just hypothesize
two different flavors
you'll find that you can't explain
the attraction and repulsion
if you only hypothesize one flavor
so we gotta move up in complexity
but Occam's razor says
keep it as simple as possible that's probably
the right theory
it's an old medieval idea and it's really become
part and parcel of
classical physics and really all of science
Occam's razor is often appealed
to by scientists and it really is a
philosophical idea rather than
a provable
philosophical or scientific idea
plus and minus I said were good names
one reason they're good name is that
when you think of plus and minus
you think of adding numbers
and you think of adding plus and minus
and you get nothing and that's exactly
what happens with electrical charges
if you have some positive charges
and some negative charges
and you bring them close together
as though there was no electric charge there
they no longer attract or repel
they no longer exhibit static electricity
so part of the model that we're building
is that these charges are out there
in the world we're not creating them
that's a different model
a different model would be as you rip things apart
you are making electric charges
but the model that we're gonna work with
is they're there they're already
in the atoms a contemporary
language would say the atoms
have little negatively charged electrons
in them it's a part
of the atoms and you can separate
the negative particles
from the positive particles
so this is a kind of a modern interpretation
of the old ideas
of positive and negative charges
but this model says it's everywhere
the world is filled with
positives and negatives
if you rub or rip things apart
you can separate them and notice their effects
but by and large you don't notice it
because positives and negatives
attract to one another
the top tape
and the bottom tape attract one another
they're the different kinds of charge
like charges repel one another
two tops will repel one another
two bottom tapes will repel one another
so the working hypothesis is
that similar charges
the same sign run away from one another
and opposite charges run towards one another
and when they get close together
if you are charged
but you're some distance away
then you're both attracted and repelled
from the pluses and minuses
and that's why you feel on average
nothing when an object becomes neutral
there's another nice thing
about the plus and minus naming convention
which we'll talk more about next time
which is
when I think about forces
I tend to think in the Newtonian way
Newton was arguing that the
gravitational force
between two masses
arises because of the mass
the electrical force is going to arise
because of the charge
and Isaac Newton says
how strong is the force?
well you multiply how much mass you have here
by how much mass you have there
and we're going to discover the same thing
with electrical charges
you're going to multiply how much charge you have here
with how much charge you have there
and discover that the sign convention
also neatly summarizes this
picture that opposite charges
attract
and like charges repel
so this is a model
it's predictive
you can use this model to guess
what's going to happen if you have a third piece of tape
you can explain what happens
if you use different materials
and yet just like
with gravity there's also this element
of frustration involved
because I haven't told you what charge
is
but I never told you what gravity is
I just said there is a force between masses
and it's there
it's part of nature
we're going to describe it
and from that description we can then describe
an enormous number of phenomenon
anything else
other than why is the gravity there in the first place
can be explained
it's going to be the same story with electricity
classical physics cannot tell you
what charge is
it just postulates that charge exists
like charges repel
and opposite charges attract
and from that very simple hypothesis
and making
it quantitative
we will be able to predict
and understand just about any
electrostatic
phenomenon and ultimately any electrical
phenomenon at all
so for instance you comb your hair
and it stands up a little bit
what's the deal there
apparently when you rub things
we're separating charges
so the comb is becoming one electrical charge
and your hair is becoming
the other electrical charge
we're not creating or destroying charges
this is one of the parts of the model
we're just separating them
and that means that if the comb gets more and more
it depends on the type of comb
but if it gets more and more negative
then your hair is getting more and more positive
and now think about
what happens when you've got a bunch of hairs
which are very light objects
they're pinned at one end
but free at the other end
and they're all electrically charged
the same charge
so our model says like charges repel
so all the ends of the hairs
are trying to get away from each other
now if you're free to move
and there's a whole bunch of you all packed together
and you want to get away
everybody spreads out
and if you've got a third dimension
you'll spread up into that third dimension
so that's what happens with your hairs
and that's this phenomenon of the hair
standing up
how about at the children's party
you take a balloon, you rub it on your shirt
it's better if you have a wool sweater
you will discover and then it sticks to the wall
that seems to be an electrostatic phenomenon
what's the deal there
because the wall is not charged
it totally makes sense to me now
when I rub the balloon
that it would stick back to my shirt
and it does, it sticks very, you can let go
party trick for the little kids
and what's happening is
the balloon is becoming one charge
quite probably negative
although again it depends on the type of balloon
and the type of sweater you've got
the balloon would be becoming negative
your shirt would be becoming positive
and now you've got a highly
charged balloon
which you carry over to the wall
and when you hold it up next to the wall
why would it stick if the wall is neutral
well remember our working hypothesis
is that everything is made
of atoms that have electric charges
in them even the wall
so there's little negatives and positives
in equal numbers very close to one another
in the wall and you hold this balloon
which is highly negatively charged
up near the wall what's going to happen
our hypothesis is that
any negative charges in the wall that are free to move
will move away
and any positive charges in the wall
that are free to move will move towards
will be attracted to
the negative balloon
will be a separation of charges
even if they can't move very far
and they really can't move very easily
in the wall but it only takes a small
separation because as we will see
if the charges get farther away
the force gets weaker
and if they get closer
the force gets stronger just like gravity does
it makes total sense that if something's
closer to you the force will be stronger
you can see it with the balloon near you
if it's close to you it sticks
if it's far from you it falls to the ground
so that means that the opposite charges
are closer and therefore stronger
and so the attraction
which comes from opposite charges is a little bit
stronger than the repulsion
that comes from the like charges
and so the attraction wins
and you get a weak attractive force
and it is weak you'll notice you have to rub
really hard it sticks really strongly
to your shirt and it just barely
sticks to the wall so we're explaining
lots and lots of simple
physical phenomena
by this model
and what we'll discover is anything you can think of
that has to do with electricity
and or magnetism well
magnetism is a separate story but any electrical
phenomenon can be understood in terms of
ultimately this basic idea
I've been
waffling a little bit about which is negative
and which is positive it's partly
a human naming convention
the first experiment
Benjamin Franklin rubbing
amber with some cloth
and it's clear that there's charges involved
and it's clear that some things attract
and some things repel
Benjamin Franklin had to make a choice
which one am I going to call positive
which one am I going to call negative
he had no idea at that time about electrons
so he had no
reason to decide and today
it's a little frustrating we think he chose
wrong in the sense that
it's the things
which move the most easily
which you would have preferred
which called the positive charges so it's the
positives that run around
in electrical circuits but alas
his choice was that it's the
negative things that ended up being
the objects that tend to move more easily
in nature so it doesn't really matter
some things are plus some things are minus
if you rub the balloon and you want to
know is this positive or negative
the real way to decide is to walk over
to Benjamin Franklin's house
recreate his experiment rubbing
his materials amber and whatever
cat fur that he rubbed them with
look at his convention about which one is negative
and then see does your balloon attract
or repel that object
once you've named one object in the world
all other charged objects will now
be perfectly well defined
so of course ultimately we can come up with
rules about if you rub material A
and material B
A will become negative B will become positive
again it doesn't really matter so much
it's the idea of separation of charge
that's the more important thing
this story I understand
it's very familiar it's a
kind of a simple story
and yet what I
really want you to think about is
how does one go about pursuing
understanding some new phenomenon of
nature in the end this phenomenon
is going to be spectacularly
useful and this is
this is where we build motors from
this is where our electricity comes from
this is where multi-million dollar
experiments originate from
and so it's nice to think
about the basic underlying principles
and how you would figure it out
let me briefly talk about magnets
today we'll come back and talk much more
about magnets in upcoming
lectures
once again I really want to
encourage you to play with magnets it will be
a lot of fun if you haven't played with magnets
since you were a kid you will discover that
there are remarkable little things
and I prefer that you get
a better magnet than the kitchen magnets
kitchen magnets are it turns out kind of
complicated it's hard to do experiments
with them what you want to do is go to a kids
toy store and buy the little
plastic rods that have strong
magnets at either end they probably come
with some ball bearings to help connect them together
they're awesome and what
you'll discover is that magnetic
force looks
a lot like electric force
so you'll find that these little rods
have apparently two kinds of
magnetic yeah what shall we call
it I don't want to call it magnetic charge
because the word charge is
reserved for electrical phenomenon
so we call it magnetic poles
just so we have a different distinguishing word
and we can't call them plus
and minus poles because we've used those words
too bad because they're good words
so we call them north and south poles
and again you ask how do I know
there aren't three magnetic poles maybe
there's four north south
east and west but you do
some experiments you muck around with magnets
you discover you only need to
to explain all the magnetic
phenomenon that you can see
in some respects magnets
are similar to electricity
in some respects you'll find they are
totally different one of the ways
that they're different is that magnets seem
to be permanent stick this magnet on the
fridge you can walk away for the rest
of your life you come back and that magnet
is still sticking on there if you rub the balloon
on your shirt and you stick it to the wall
10 minutes later it's probably
fallen to the ground
there's an explanation
for that falling to the ground
in terms of our model of electricity
namely I've told you that plus and minus charges
are everywhere including
the molecules of air
and the molecules of water
that's in the air drifting around
if it's moist
water molecules often pick up
excess charges sometimes a little
extra negative sometimes a little extra
positive and as they drift around
if you are highly charged like a balloon
the little water molecules are
pretty good at picking up some of the excess
charge and drifting around and carrying
it back to your sweater
basically re-equilibrating
the universe and
this happens the more moisture there is
the more easily and quickly it happens
and in general the electrical
separation of charge
will work itself out so magnets are
somehow different and we're going to want to
investigate in upcoming lectures
how is it that magnets are different
and what's the story
behind them
let me conclude this lecture
with the statement that
you now have a grounding
in static electricity
and once we start to put
this story together we'll see that
the lightning bolt that Ben Franklin
was investigating forces of nature
like friction, pushes and pulls
the push of a solid body
the light from a light bulb
all of the high technology in your house
it's all arising
from simply the postulation
of positive and negative charges
and the force ultimately Newton's law
possibly conservation of momentum
and energy it's what we need
and that's where we're headed
lecture 14
electricity, magnetism and force fields
we introduced static electricity
last time
electricity is referring to
a new kind of force that you observe
in nature you rub things together
and some things will attract
some things will repel
attracting or repelling that's a push or a pull
it's a force
an ordinary force like Newton is
helping us to understand
we can understand the consequences
of this force by going back to Isaac Newton
but what we'd like to do is to investigate
the force itself
what does it look like, what does it originate from
how does it behave
we always start with experimental observations
and
what we've seen from our simple
experiments is that there seem to be
this is our model
there seem to be two different kinds
material objects
two quantities in the world
we call it electric charge
and electric charge is just a name we made up
to describe how much
of this source of this new force
is there
so the more electric charge you have
the stronger a source of this static
electrical force of nature you have
we discovered that there seem to be two kinds
of electrical charge
positives and negatives were the names that we gave them
those are just human names
which describe
to us in a qualitative sense
the fact that
some charges attract one another
but other charges repel one another
and what we've discovered is that
if you have the same charge
if you prepare two identical objects
that are charged they'll always repel one another
no matter what
two identically prepared objects
will repel one another so like charges
repel one another and in some
circumstances you can prepare things
such that you have both a positive and a negative
in general when you rub
there is a conservation
of electric charge
and one of the objects will become more
positive and one will become more negative
and then they will attract one another
so today we want to quantify
this idea and we want to
move a little bit
away from this
action at a distance idea
this force between two objects
and think about electrical
forces in a new way
we're going to talk about electric fields
it's really a kind of force field
we can talk about gravitational
force fields or electrical force fields
and in doing so
it's going to help us to understand
electricity better it'll help us
to reformulate the way we think about
gravity it's moving beyond Isaac Newton
in a way and yet still
retaining those classical
philosophical ideas of
understanding the world in a very simple
pictorial way
based on some
underlying hypotheses
so I'm not explaining what charge is
or why charges attract
or repel I'm describing them
and describing every electrical phenomena
that you can think of because of that
the key player
in the
origination of the mathematical
theory of static electricity was Charles Coulomb
a French scientist
he's an engineer
and he did a lot of laboratory experiments
with static electricity
so he's working, building up from Benjamin Franklin
who was looking qualitatively
Ben Franklin was thinking about
the signs of the charges and
whether they attract a repel
and Coulomb was trying to measure
well how strongly do they attract
and what seems to be the nature of these charges
this is happening in the late
1700's so it's after
Ben Franklin
by the way it's just before
Henry Cavendish and his experiment
on gravitational force
and the experiment that Coulomb
did to measure the force of electricity
is very similar
in some respects to the force that Henry Cavendish
did to measure the force
of gravity between two masses
so once again we've got
large objects
in this case instead of being massive
and attracting each other because of gravity
Coulomb's objects become statically
charged and attract or repel
one another because of static electricity
but they're sitting on a similar apparatus
a torsion rod that can twist
the more force you have
the more it twists it's very sensitive
to relatively small forces
now charging things up can produce
relatively large forces much
much much larger than the force of gravity
between two ordinary
sized objects so Coulomb's experiment
is relatively easy
compared to Cavendish's
and the idea would be the following
let's imagine first that you rub a balloon
on your shirt and you get it all charged up
what you discover is
that the charges on the balloon
tend to stay put
so if you rub one side of the balloon
that side of the balloon will be highly charged
the back side of the balloon
will not be any more charged than it was
to begin with and you can test this
by holding it close to a piece of charged scotch tape
hold the tape near various spots
you can think of lots of simple experiments
to verify that the electrical charges
tend to be stuck in one place
and if you think microscopically
you've just got some atoms on the rubber balloon
that either have a few extra electrons
or a few electrons have been yanked off
and
they're stuck there by chemical bonds
and
so we call the balloon an
insulator
an insulator just refers to an object
where charges can't migrate easily
but if you take metals
what you'll discover is that charges
can migrate relatively easily
so you take that balloon
and you touch the balloon maybe rub it a little bit
on an ordinary
metal sphere
what you'll discover is that you'll rub off
some of those excess charges
so the metal sphere will become charged
and the charges will spread out
as fast as you can tell it's nearly instant
remember
like charges repel one another
so if you're free to move
and you can repel
you're going to spread out uniformly
so this sphere will tend to become
uniformly charged
and now you have to figure out a way of holding that sphere
but if you just have a wooden handle
or a little fiber of some kind
that's an insulator
then you can hold it and the charges won't run
off of the metal sphere
they'll just run around it and spread themselves out
so Mr. Coulomb is playing this game
you can think now of some simple tricks
like take two identical metal spheres
charge one of them up
and it's got some
static charge on it
and now just touch it to another
identical metal sphere
so think about what's happening you've got two
identical metal objects
the electrical charges
the charges
that were on one of them are free to roam around
they can now roam over to the other one
they want to spread out
so now they're going to evenly spread out over two spheres
now you separate them
you've got two metal spheres now
each with precisely half
the charge that you started with
so you can start to make measurements
how much charge do I have
you can divide by two, you can divide by four
you can change the size of the rods
of the spheres
and you can start to make some measurements now
so you take two spheres
and you measure the force between them
look and see how
the distance between them affects
the force
and look and see how much
charge on them affects the force
Coulomb did these experiments
and in honor of his work
we now measure charge
in units, we say if you have a certain amount of charge
we call it one Coulomb
of electrical charge
one Coulomb
is a huge amount of electrical charge
if you rub a balloon on your shirt
it will have all perhaps one one
millionth of a Coulomb of electrical charge
built up on it
so one Coulomb would be tremendous
if you rub a balloon with one Coulomb
of electric charge on it
it would explode because
of course all those charges are trying to run apart
and they would pop the balloon
so by hanging these
metal spheres next to one another
Coulomb began to investigate the story of the force
and now you have to realize
this is a hundred years after the Principia
more than a hundred years after the Principia
and so this is deeply influencing
Coulomb's thinking
I'll remind you of the force of gravity
two masses
masses cause a gravitational attraction
and the force of gravity is
a constant of nature
which Cavendish ended up measuring
multiplied by the mass of the first object
times the mass of the second object
divided by the square of the distance between them
and so Coulomb
is probably thinking by analogy
maybe electricity is similar
does his experiments and he discovers yes
except it has nothing to do with the mass
now it has to do with the charge
so if you have a charge on object one
measured in Coulomb's
and a charge on object two measured in Coulomb's
and you multiply those two charges
that will tell you how strong
the force is
so if you double the charge on one sphere
and you quadruple the charge on another sphere
you would have two times
four is eight times the force
between them
that's one of his observations
and of course gravity declines
like the square of the distance between them
and so Coulomb tested this out
and discovered sure enough
that the electrical static electrical
attraction or repulsion
either way also goes
like the inverse square law
so if you're twice as far apart
two squared is four
it's four times weaker force
so that's why as you
first pull that balloon off of your chest
it sticks a little bit
but as soon as it's gotten a small distance away
the force has declined very rapidly
because the square of something
gets big very fast
and so now you can just carry that balloon away
so we're seeing some similarities
between the force of electricity
and the force of gravity
but of course recognize they are definitely not the same thing
you can't say that electricity
is somehow also like gravity
for instance you can have lots of mass
but no charge
and you can have an arbitrary amount of charge
without noticeably changing the mass
these quantities seem to be
very different
here's a huge difference
all masses attract
like masses attract
but like charges
repel and there's this other kind of charge
so you can have both attraction
and repulsion with electricity
and because of that
you can cancel electricity
if you have pluses and minuses close together
an object even a highly charged object
far away will not notice anything
because it's equally attracted and repelled
you can't hide gravity in this way
because there's only positive
mass so it just builds up
and builds up
so Coulomb has made
some discoveries
and he's quantified the rules
of static electricity
and it turns out
that all the kind of exotic
and unusual
laboratory phenomenon
are now explained not just qualitatively
but quantitatively
and so this is clearly the beginning of
electrical science
and everybody's jumping on the bandwagon
lots of laboratories are trying to study this
people begin to make spectacular
strides very quickly
they discover that you can move charges around
once you realize the charges are free
to flow through electricity
through conductors
then you can start connecting
different objects with conductors
and make the electricity flow in the ways that you want
so we're at the beginning
of a revolution in technology
and in science
and where I want to go
so I will want to talk about that some more
I want to talk about how we design electrical circuits
but before we do that
I want to think a little bit more carefully
about the nature of electric forces
because you have to appreciate
that Coulomb's law
just like Isaac Newton's law
looks like mysterious action at a distance
but a charge here and a charge there
they're separated through space
and yet
they feel one another
so how can they do that?
how can a charge somehow
reach out through empty space
and affect another charge?
there's no material connection
and there's still this desire
back throughout history
to be able to think a little bit more
mechanically about the universe
it's part of the classical world view
that people are striving towards
to be able to make sense
of this action at a distance thing
and the resolution
the way that people today
think about electric forces
and gravitational forces
it's a delightful revolution
in the way we think
it's relatively simple
and it's going to move us away
from action at a distance
it's going to allow us to restore
the idea of locality
what happens here
the far away objects are important
they create a condition
where I am
space itself
we will discover is modified
over here
so if I have an electric charge
it notices the character of the space it's living in
and feels forces
this crazy abstract idea
we're going to try to make it very concrete
it's the idea of a force field
and once we can think about force fields
it will help us to visualize
electric forces and magnetic forces
and it will allow us to move beyond
these particular forces
we can think about any forces
in terms of force fields
very very powerful
and even today moving beyond
purely classical ideas
the force field or the field concept
is extraordinarily fruitful
the person to whom we
pretty much owe this idea
was Michael Faraday
Michael Faraday was a British
physicist in the 1800s
he wasn't always a physicist
kind of an interesting story
he grew up in the English lower class
he became a book binder
but he was very bright guy
and he was reading the books that he was binding
and he got curious about some of the stuff
he was reading about
he was reading about some science and some physics
and ultimately as a young adult
he went over to a physics laboratory
and said can I work with you
I'm really interested in this stuff
there was a technician doing odd jobs
but it quickly became apparent
this guy was smart
and he was catching up
he did a lot of self-study
and he began to do experiments
and it was his experiments
and his theoretical ideas
which led us to many of the greatest discoveries
in electricity
Michael Faraday was certainly a very influential character
one of the lovely things though
ultimately about Michael Faraday
was the fact that he didn't have this
classical mathematical training
the rigorous formal mathematics
that almost all physicists
before and after have had
led him, it forced him
to think about these phenomena
in terms of pictures
he had to have some way of visualizing
and what a great thing for us
to have this simple visual tool
to simplify
or think about
to represent this formidable mathematics
that electricity and magnetism
ultimately ended up involving
there are many situations
in the history of physics where coming up
with a good picture has been enormously valuable
Albert Einstein did this a couple of times
in his picture
of space-time
a fellow you may not have heard of
Minkowski came up with a diagram
of space and time which allows us to think
about the mathematics of relativity
in a lovely way
Richard Feynman is famous for his Feynman diagrams
which helped us to think about particle physics
and really Faraday was
one of the early leaders
although he wasn't the first
this idea that we've been talking about
in Newtonian physics of drawing an arrow
to represent a force
that's a simple picture that helps me enormously
when I think of a force
I'm visualizing a little arrow
I can draw it on a piece of paper
a bigger arrow means a bigger force
having a simple picture can often be enormously productive
in terms of thinking about the physics
so let's think about Faraday's
image
and I'm going to take a couple of steps back
because it's a slightly abstract
story that we're talking about today
we'll start concrete
imagine a mattress
it's absolutely flat
there's nothing going on
and now I'm going to create a source
of force
on the mattress by taking a big heavy bowling ball
and plunking it down right in the middle of the mattress
so visualize what happens
the mattress sags
it's a very very heavy bowling ball
so the mattress is curving down and inwards
towards that bowling ball
it's curving down and inwards in all dimensions
now there's something going on
here even though nothing is moving
and if I were to look at a spot
on the mattress that's not right
on top of the bowling ball
it's a curved surface
and there's some
potentiality or possibility of force
I could verify this by pulling
a little marble out of my pocket
because as an experimental physicist
I have to have my test mass with me
so I put my little test mass
down on the mattress
and watch it, I let go
and of course it's going to start to roll down a hill
towards the big bowling ball
so I might put a little mark on the mattress
a little arrow which indicates
which way was the force on my test mass
now I go somewhere else on the mattress
and I draw another arrow with a magic marker
and I start walking all around the mattress
drawing arrows everywhere
if you're close to the bowling ball
the arrows will be big
because the force is very big when you're close
it's much more curved
as you get farther and farther away from that bowling ball
the mattress is less noticeably curved
and the test mass will
move, it will respond less rapidly
so now
take that marble
put it back in your pocket and look down
there's no force
there's nothing going on
and yet we've got all these arrows
and the arrows represent
a force field
that's what I think of when I think of a force field
it's just a bunch of arrows in space
there's no object there
there's nothing happening there
but something would happen
if I put an object down, it would feel a force
if there was an object there
that's the basic idea of a force field
let's think about a gravitational field
now
think of the sun
sitting in the middle of our solar system
you could imagine playing the same game
you pull a small object out of your pocket
you put it in some place
like near the earth's orbit
and you let go of it
and it'll be attracted straight towards the sun
so you draw a little arrow
and now you've got this three-dimensional space
filled with arrows
the arrows are pointing everywhere towards the sun
and they're very big when you're close to the sun
and they're very small when you're far away from the sun
and now I want you to take away all the planets
from the solar system
all the objects, all the masses, just leave the sun
the source of the
gravitational field is still there
but there's no other objects
so I ask you, is there gravity?
it's an ambiguous question
is there a force of gravity?
it's an ambiguous question
but there is a force field
the force field is still there
whether you put something down or not
the field is present
and the space itself contains this force field
and yes it's an abstract thing
it's not...
you can't touch it
but you can certainly notice its effect
I'm going to argue more and more strongly
that the field is a real thing
it's just a slightly more abstract thing
than a particle or an object
there is one step further
in abstraction
that we need to make to go from a force field
to a general field
so first of all let's think about electric force fields
if I...
if I have instead of the sun
if I have a balloon that I've rubbed on my shirt
and I put it at the center of the room
and now I step back
so I've got a source of electric
field
the balloon is a source of electric field
what do I mean?
I mean that I have to pull out of my pocket
a little test charge
not a test mass now
a mass won't notice a balloon
a balloon hardly weighs anything
so I pull the presence of the electrically
charged balloon
and if my test charge is positive
and the balloon is positive
the little test charge will be repelled
so I would draw a little outwards arrow
so a positively charged balloon
would create an electric force field
that points everywhere outwards
okay now the remaining
level of abstraction that I need to go to
has to do with the fact that
the force felt by a test charge
depends on how big
the test charge is or how strong it is
if I put one coulomb down
it will feel a certain force
from the balloon
but according to Mr. Coulomb's law
if I put two coulombs worth of charge
down at that same point
it will feel twice the force
from the same
source
so the amount of force
depends on the particular test object
that I put down
and that's a little frustrating
but the next field
is that we want an arrow
that's kind of just a generic arrow
that represents the strength of the field
we don't want that to care about
what I pull out of my pocket later
to test it out
I have another metaphor for you
which some people find productive
let's think about going to a grocery store
and there's a
price field in the grocery store
so I suppose I'm interested in beans
this store has a certain price field
it's going to be $2 a pound
$2 a pound is
somehow abstractly present throughout the store
I wander around the shelves
and some person, you know how annoying this is
they picked up the beans and then
they decided they didn't want them so they put them down on a shelf
it doesn't matter where you find the beans in the store
they're $2 a pound
it's a field
that's present throughout the region of space
that tells you some information
does it tell you how much money you're going to pay?
not quite
you go to the front counter
and it depends on the size of the bag
of beans that you bring up there
if you have a one pound bag
you'll pay $2
if you have a 10 pound bag you'll pay $20
right?
it's $2 per pound
so the actual price that you pay
it's like the actual force
that an object feels in a force field
will depend on how much
it is that you put down there
but the field itself is like the unit price
it's just a generic number
that tells you information
right up front
and it allows you to know exactly what's going to happen
at the end when you pay the bill
or put the charge down
or put the mass down
so the electric field
refers to
these abstract arrows
and if you take the size of the arrow
and you multiply it by how much charge you put down
that's going to tell you the force felt
if you put down one
one coulomb that's the standard
charge
then the electric field magnitude
will be the same thing in numerical value
as the force that you feel
it's like buying one pound of beans
that's how you figure out that the price is $2
per pound
okay
so I'm now visualizing force fields
and
you can think of them in a variety of ways
Faraday looked at this picture
and said it's a little complicated
on a piece of paper
and I got arrows everywhere
if I try to draw too many arrows they start overlapping
and it gets hard to look at the picture
so he simplified the picture
and this was really the beautiful thing about his representation
you just start
at some point and you begin to draw a line
you start drawing a line in the direction
of the local arrow
and then every time you get to a new arrow
you just keep on drawing the line in the direction
of the arrows that you're hitting
so let's think about what this field line
diagram would look like for
a point positive charge at the middle
at the origin
so you start
at the origin there's a big arrow pointing
outwards so you start drawing a line
outwards and you just keep on going
every time you hit an arrow it's running straight away
so what you'll end up with is lines
running straight away
from the center like the spokes of a wheel
we call it a radial
field because all the lines that we draw
look like the radius of a circle
now how many lines should you draw
well that's really up to you
you typically start with an evenly spaced set
of points and you just run them outwards
and you see where they go
and now you've got a nice picture
and you can look at the picture
and get a kind of an intuitive sense
of the physics that's going on
so for instance if you look at this point charge
and you think of the spokes of the wheel
heading outward from it
spokes of the wheel are very close together
near the charge
and you get out as you get farther from the charge
so apparently the strength
of the field is represented
in this picture by how closely
spaced the lines are
if the lines are close the field is strong
as the lines spread out
the field is weaker
now what if you were to pick a spot on your diagram
where you didn't happen to have a line
well that's okay you just sort of interpolate
if everything looks nice and smooth
if there's line, line, line
and they're sort of evenly spaced
then you say okay the field is uniform
in there and it's the same
you don't really have to draw a line
to recognize that there's force field
there
you can do this with electric fields
if you were to have a positive charge
at one point and a negative charge
at another point
the field line diagram would immediately start
to get more complicated
if you think about how do you figure out
the field lines just put little test charges
down and see which way they want to go
if they're close to the positive charge
they want to run away from it
but if they're close to the negative charge
they want to run towards it
and so when you think of your picture
you'll see lines leaving the positive charge
arcing around and heading back in
towards the negative charge
you look at that picture and you can just see
where is the field strong
where is the field weak
which way would a charge want to go
if you put it there
it's the possibility of force
that you're feeling you about
and yet there it is on the piece of paper
and you can see it throughout all of space
and recognize that there is something there
in the empty space
even before you start laying out your test charges
I used the word test charges
because I want to distinguish them from the source charges
the sources are
big and they're fixed
and the test charges are so small
that they don't perturb the field
as soon as I put down a test charge
if you're getting picky on me
you'll realize that well that's another charge
and it's got its own field
and fields will add up
with the existing field
so that's why we want to keep our test charges as small
as possible so they don't really muck up
the existing field that we're interested in
we're just testing it, we're feeling it up
if you have a magnet
you can draw a magnetic field
and you can think about the magnetic field lines
now you need some sort of
tester and the tester for magnets
would not be an electric charge
because electric charges don't respond
to a stationary magnet
what you would need is another little magnet
a little compass needle would be perfect
because compass needles are really just little magnets
so if you have a big magnet
and you want to know what does the field look like
take a little compass
and just start laying it down and draw an arrow
which way is the needle pointing?
you draw your arrow
is it jerking there really quickly?
draw a big arrow
and you'll see the magnetic field pattern
when you can see the magnetic field pattern
like seeing an electric field pattern
it just gives you a sense
even though nothing is happening yet
of what's going to happen
and that is really the powerful idea
of fields
it's a fresh way of thinking about force
so think about how different this is
than Newton's way of thinking about it
if I'm in a room
where there's a strong
electric charge at the origin
and I'm 20 feet away
one way of thinking
would be to say
I put down a charge
it's Coulomb's law and Newton's law
there's a formula for the force
it's the charge of the source
times the charge of the test
divided by the distance squared
and it either attracts or repels
depending on the relative signs
it's action at a distance
I've got two objects and I need to know
about how far apart they are
and all that stuff
if I'm thinking instead about fields
I can now completely
ignore that source
here I am with my test charge
I put it down
I only need to know what the field is
right there where I am
of course the field was created by the source
so the source still matters
but I no longer pay any attention to it
I can live locally
once I've drawn my field lines
I know what's going on
it doesn't seem like action at a distance anymore
it seems to me
like the charge is responding to the field
here
rather than thinking about it as responding
to the source over there
so it's just a shift in the way we think
about things all the rules are the same
it's still Newtonian classical physics
we're just thinking about
forces in terms of
how they affect the space around them
this is a lovely new picture
it's relatively
non-mathematical although
Faraday and
the hero of our electricity and magnetism
story who we're about to get to
James Clerk Maxwell we're working together
Maxwell was the mathematician
he put together the
rigorous mathematical formulas that
explained exactly how these fields were
configured but the picture remains
as a nice way which we'll continue to
think about of telling us
about the pushes and pulls
and it could be of electric charges
electric objects
or for that matter gravitational objects
lecture 15
electrical currents and voltage
so far we've been thinking about
static electricity
a little bit about static magnetism
we've been talking about
the field
the electric field is a new
and very abstract concept
if you take a charge
some object that applies
electrical forces on other objects
that are charged
what we think about is
that that source
that charge is creating
an electric field around it
space is filled
with an electric field
and other charges elsewhere
respond locally to that field
so we've shifted
our idea about thinking about force
from action at a distance
to creating a field
and then responding to a field
it's a nice idea
it's an abstract and somewhat formal idea
it's happening in the 19th century
in the 1800s people are
rapidly developing this formalism
they're beginning to understand
the ideas of electricity
and magnetism
and something very important happened
a big change in the way
physics was evolving
applied physics began to appear
this electricity stuff
it was obvious to just about everybody
working in the field that
it's going to be useful
there's going to be all sorts of things you can do
with this electricity thing
with this electricity
and then a laboratory experiment
and laboratory idea
but very quickly
it evolved into something practical
something of course that now is
part of our lives
in almost every aspect of our lives
the flow of electricity is critical
today I want to think a little bit
about the applications
of these abstract ideas of electricity
and think about these practical
applications
of the light bulb
you could imagine going further and talking about
microwave ovens or computers
and that's just adding some levels of complexity
but today I want to focus on the more
simple electrical circuits
and try to think about them
and make sense of them
I'd like to have a mental model of what's going on
in these ordinary everyday
electrical applications
that connect back
to the laws of physics
to Newtonian ideas
and energy
and now to fields
we're going to introduce a few new words
we're going to talk about electric circuits
we're going to talk about electrical current
we're going to talk about electrical voltage
these are
new ideas in a sense
although you'll find that all of them go back
and really refer ultimately
to the ideas that we've been talking about
electric voltage for example
is really just a way of talking about
energy questions
when you're dealing with electricity
at some level
at some underpinning level
Newton's laws are telling this whole story
even though Newton never thought much
about electricity or magnetism
he didn't develop this theory
nonetheless it's really Newtonian physics
that we're still doing it's just
the consequences of Newtonian physics
the question that you might ask
thinking like a Newtonian scientist
is what is electricity
how do you guide it, how do you control it
what does it mean when you observe
certain physical
manifestations of electricity
like a glowing light bulb
in terms of our simple underlying picture
now after one
lecture can you go and fix
an electrical appliance
probably depends on how much background you have
you might have some sense about what's dangerous
and what's not
I guess I would warn you that a little physics knowledge
can be a dangerous thing
so think about safety issues
go and try to fix the toaster oven
like unplug it first
but at least I would like to talk
about the underlying story
and so let's begin with a couple of words
that we've already introduced
kind of casually
which was insulating or insulator
and conducting or conductor
so the idea here is
that electric charges
live, they're a property of material objects
material objects
have charge on them
a piece of tape
ripped apart from another piece of tape
it's got some electric charge on it
and what we learned is that
some materials
make that charge
stick in one place and other materials
like metals allow it to flow
if the charge can flow
then we have a conductor
if the charge is stuck
we call it an insulator
and these are decent words
I think they lead you to the correct
intuitions about what's going on
you could ask
what determines this
let's think about air for example
air is a material substance
it's composed of molecules
largely nitrogen
and it's not all that dense
it's certainly not a metal and it's certainly not a solid
so what is it?
is it an electrical conductor or an electrical insulator?
it's a slightly tricky story
by and large air is a decent insulator
if you start building up
electric charges on a piece of tape
for example
they will tend not to drift through the air
it takes quite a lot of time
and it's a very, very slow process
for the humidity in the air
to take those charges away
and if the air is very dry
the air is a pretty darn good insulator
charges won't spontaneously flow
through the air
but they can if you build up
enough static charge in one spot
the Coulomb repulsion
electrical force between the charges
will push them harder and harder
and at some point one of them is just going to get pushed hard enough
that it will start flying through the air
now what happens next?
well if it doesn't have a whole lot
of initial energy it will probably bump
into an air molecule
and come to a halt
and it still won't be able to travel very easily
but if it's got enough energy
if you've got enough static charge built up
so that you can give it a good shove
then your little electric charge
is flying through the air
it's going to knock into the air molecules
as it goes
and it's going to impart some energy
to those air molecules
and what happens if you've got an air molecule
and you throw some energy into it
well it's composed of charged particles
you are attracting
some of those charged particles
if it's an electron that's flying by
the positive part of the atom is attracted
the negative part of the atom is repelled
and so you're ripping apart the atom
and the energy to rip it apart
is coming out of
the original electron
and now this atom is ripped apart
and now there's some positives
and negatives floating around and they want to get back together
so they fall back together
and they will release energy
so it took energy to pull them apart
conservation of energy says they will release
energy as they fall back together again
and that release of energy
can come in various forms
one form of which might be light
this is the phenomenon of sparks
lightning bolts are nothing more
than a very huge charge being developed
up in the cloud
and then at some point it builds up so much
that you get a path
for the electric charges to flow
all the way down to planet earth
and along the way they're whacking into the air molecules
splitting them apart
they recombine, they glow
and you see this bolt which is really the path
of the electric charges
so you've made the air into a conductor
in this sort of aggressive and violent way
the charges flowed to the ground
and the word ground
means planet earth but in the world
of electricity it means
any place where charges want to go to
so remember electric charges are
repelling one another
they want to spread out as much as possible
and so the word ground
in the electrical sense
refers to a large place
where charges can spread out
so if I may am to pre-morphize
and I do this all the time with electric charges
they want to get apart from one another
they want to go to the ground
so that they can spread out and get away from each other
so when you're walking on the carpet
in the winter time the air is very dry
you are picking up static electric charge
from the carpet it's on your body
it can flow a little bit
your body is not a perfect insulator
in particular
if you're sweating a little bit
salt water tends to conduct electricity
better than dry skin
and so you'll build up some charge
on your skin and at some point
it may discharge it wants to get
as far apart as possible
it would prefer to get to the ground
and one way to get to the ground would be
through something that conducts electricity easily
like a metal object a doorknob
so that's why you tend to get the shock
the little spark you can see
the visible trail of the electrons
traveling through the air
as you are discharging
from your body to this ground
and so the word ground
doesn't necessarily have to mean planet earth
the doorknob can serve as the ground
as far as electrons are concerned
it's a big space for them to spread out
so what are we going to do
with this static electricity
it doesn't really help us all that much
in a practical sense if we can just build up charges
what we really want to do
is to create some sort of device
where charges will flow
because if they're flowing
then the electrical force
that they apply can push on something
and do something for us
so if you want to apply this physics
you got to think about a mechanism of some kind
which will create
a flow of electric charge
and
so you could think of a crude
and simple mechanical way of doing this
you could rub the balloon on your shirt
get it all charged up
move it over somewhere
touch it onto a metal object
you do this for a while
the metal object will get more and more charged up
each time you touch it
but of course the more charged it gets
the harder it is to push that balloon towards it
because like charges repel
and at some point you would just give up
the metal object is all charged up
as much as you can
and so you would stop
we had this pumping mechanism
and if there's no mechanism for the charges
to return
then we're kind of stopped
so what you need now is to connect
that metal sphere or object
whatever it was you were charging up
back down to the ground
or in this case to the source of electrical charges
you can think of ground
as the sink for electrical charges
but you can also think of it as a source
for electrical charges
if they're free to run away
they're also just free to run
they can run towards you just as easily
so what you would like if you wanted to create this circuit
you need some sort of a pump
and that's a metaphor
you need some sort of mechanism
to separate charges
move them to a place
and then you need a return conducting path
usually some kind of metal wire
will do it
so now we have an electric circuit
if you've got the pump going
it's got some little Rube Goldberg device
where I rub the balloon
I touch the metal sphere
the metal sphere is connected back to me with a wire
so the charges will go through this circular path
the balloons are the pump
and then the wire completes the circuit
and
if I keep
the pump going
then we can keep this electric flow going
and now you can imagine
that you might be able to use this for some purpose
because you've got flowing electricity
through a wire
if you want to make this practical
you're not going to be able to do it with rubbing balloons
you need some device that does this for you
some electrical pump
and we discovered this was Alessandro Volta
in 1800 in Italy
Alessandro Volta was
mucking around with different materials
and he discovered some remarkable chemistry
it was just fortunate
nature does this for you
there are certain materials
which you put together
different kinds of metal and materials
that you stack up
and internally
some chemistry is happening
and the chemistry is microscopic
molecules and charged objects
it physically moves electrons
over preferentially to one side
of this material object
so we're not going to worry about the microscopic details
of this battery
that's what you call this kind of electrical pump
this battery is just driving electrons
to one side
if you buy a little desail now
it's just got some materials inside of it that separate charges
one side will be labeled plus
one side will be labeled minus
and what the plus and minus mean is
charged electrons are getting pumped
towards that minus side
and the positive ions
the positively charged particles
are being driven towards the positive side
if the battery is just sitting there
on the shelf
it's like the original story
with the balloons you do separate some charges
there's a little bit of excess negative
on the negative side
but at a certain point it stops pumping
it's no longer possible
to keep on adding more and more negatives
the thing isn't going to spontaneously explode
and
what you want in order to use that battery
is now to take a wire
and connect the wire from the negative to the positive
it doesn't really matter
which way you think about it
charges will flow
and now you can keep this going forever
the battery inside
drives the charges to the negative side
the negative charges run away from each other
they go back to the positive side
and now you've got this lovely circuit
let me think of a metaphor
because I want to think about this
in a variety of ways
I want to think about pushes and pulls
like Newton's forces
but I really want to think about energy
and the flow of energy
so let me think
about a mechanism
and this mechanism
is going to be mechanical
I'm going to have a pump that lifts
oh it could be water
or it could be just to exaggerate a little bit
so the bowling balls are going to get lifted up
like at the bowling alley there's this
belt that lifts them up in the air
up to a higher point
and it's lifting them up in energy
so in space
lifting some object, some massive object up
a distance
is also lifting it up in gravitational potential
energy
and if you lift something up
in energy
we're going to want to be thinking about this
in electric circuits
the word
and the word that we're going to use
in the electrical circuits is voltage
so voltage is a reference to energy
it's how high you're lifting up
the bowling ball
but voltage is a little bit subtle
so we're going to have to come back
and really be careful about our definition of the word
it's not a synonym to energy
it's just related to energy
take these bowling balls and you lift them up
and
how high you lift them
it tells you how much work they're going to be able to do
when you let them fall back
down again
so if you lift the bowling balls up into the attic
they can do more work for you when you let them
flow back down again
than if you only lifted them up to tabletop height
so in order to do something useful
you need the pump
and then you need a channel, you need a mechanism
for them to flow back down again
just like in the electric circuit you need the battery
and then you also need the conducting wire
to bring them back down to where they started
so let me define voltage for you now
if you take
an electric charge and you pump it up
you have added some energy to that electric charge
and I'm going to define
voltage as the energy
per charge
so think about that for a second
it's not exactly the same as energy
it's the energy per coulomb
so if I lift one coulomb up
I will have put a certain amount
of work into it
I've given it a certain amount of energy
so if I lift up another coulomb
I've done the same amount of work again
so overall it took me twice as much work
so if I've got twice as much charge
up in the attic
I've done twice as much work
but the height of the attic is a fixed constant number
the voltage
is the energy per unit charge
it's like the height of the attic
so no matter how many bowling balls
you put up in the attic
the height is just a fixed number
once again it's like a unit price
so no matter how many pounds of beans you buy
the unit price is still
$2 per pound
whatever that number might be
in the store you're at
and so as you lift more and more electric charges
up to the end of the battery
they all have the same unit energy
energy per charge
and that's the voltage
so one volt
one volt
refers to
specifically one joules worth of energy
for every coulomb that you put up there
so if you lift one coulomb
of charge up
and you put one joule of energy
into it you have one volt
battery
and now if you put another coulomb up there
it's still a one volt battery
but now you've got two joules of energy
the more charges you put up there
the more energy you have
even though the unit price is still staying fixed
if you have a car battery
it's 12 volt battery
it means that every time you move
a coulomb of charge
from one side one pole of the battery
to the other side of the battery
which happens by chemistry inside
every coulomb that you move over
took 12 joules of energy
and you'll get it back
when you connect some wire
from the positive to the negative
on the car battery
every coulomb that flows through that wire
is going to give up 12 joules of energy
if you've got two coulombs
that go through you'll get 24 joules
if you've got
10 coulombs that go through
you'll get 120 joules
so the more charge that flows
the more energy you'll get out of that battery
but it's always still just a 12 volt battery
so
voltage is very important
because energy is very important
it tells you how much work
these charges are going to do
but it's not the entire story
if you think back to the bowling ball metaphor
how much work can I do
you certainly need to know
how high up you're storing those bowling balls
the higher you store them
the more work each bowling ball will do
when it falls back down again
but on the other hand
it also matters how many bowling balls
you lift up and then let fall down
every second
if you lift 10 bowling balls per second
you're going to get a lot more work done
than if you only lift one per second
even though they're all going to the same height
so what we're now talking about
is how many per second
and that we call the electrical current
so the word current
refers to the flow rate
how many charges flow every second
I like the name current
it makes me think of water
so instead of bowling balls
I can think of a water pump
it's pumping water up into a reservoir
the height of the reservoir certainly matters
if you can pump it up higher
you're going to store more energy per gallon
that's one of the things that definitely matters
but the other thing that matters
if you're trying to run a water mill
is how many gallons per second are flowing
and the two things are separate and independent
you can have a little pump
that pumps one gallon per hour
up to the particular height
you can have a big pump
that pumps a thousand gallons an hour
up to that same height
and those will be different situations
even though the height is the same
or vice versa you could have one gallon
per hour going up ten times as high
and that's again
the situation will be different
so we need to keep track of both current
and voltage
if you want to measure volts
one volt is one joule per coulomb
if you want to measure amps
that's the measure unit that we use
for current named after a fellow named
Andre Ampere who I haven't talked about yet
we'll come back to Mr. Ampere
who did a lot of work studying
electric current flow
in particular its connection with magnetism
so we haven't quite gotten there yet
one ampere of current flow
is defined to be
one coulomb of electric charge
flowing past you every second
now think about that for a second
one coulomb of electric charge
is a lot
if you put a coulomb of charge on a balloon
it would explode
so one coulomb per second
which is one amp of current flow
or one ampere is a huge current
and yet we use
amps in our houses every day
there's a lot of current flowing through our houses
so
when I'm thinking about this
sometimes in fact almost always
when I think about electricity I've got this very
mechanical metaphor in my mind
of pumping water up to a certain height
that's like the voltage
and then I ask how many gallons are flowing each second
that's the current
now
in real life with water pumps
how much water will flow
each second will depend on the pipes that you use
if you've got a big fat pipe
you can have lots of water flowing back down
if you have a little skinny pipe
there'll be lots of friction
there'll be lots of resistance
and then you won't have so much flow
and the same thing happens with electricity
if you have a big thick wire
you can get relatively easy flow
of electricity and so
when you look at the wires coming into your house
where all the electricity has to come in at one point
you'll probably use large gauge
big fat metal wires
but going out to an individual light bulb
you can get away with skinnier wires
and save some money
and it has to do in part with how much
current you need to flow
every second for the particular application
when I have a metal conductor
that's a good name I think of a metal as
allowing electricity to flow
alas the name that we
typically give to pieces of metal is not
conductors we call them resistors
resistor is a generic name
it can refer to a beautiful
piece of metal that is hardly resisting at all
so it's got a very small resistance
or it could be some
material that's been contaminated
with all sorts of other
atomic
ingredients, molecular ingredients
that are resisting the flow of electricity
so you can have a resistor
that's very resistive
or a resistor that's not so resistive
that pipe or little skinny pipe
and you can choose, you can
design materials to have
some amount of resistance
and indeed in many applications
it's precisely what you want
so you might think why don't you just go and find
things that are the best conductors possible
you could in principle
there are materials called superconductors
that have zero electrical resistance
current just flows
infinitely easily through them
but we don't use those in our everyday lives
we always use real resistors
and one of the nice
things about a resistor is that it does have friction
it's just friction
only for electrical charges
instead of for mechanical
bowling balls or flowing water
and resistance always ends up meaning
heat and many of the
applications of electricity in our ordinary life
are simply heat, you have an electric heater
you have
a toaster oven, even the
light bulb is really glowing
because it's so darn hot
it's glowing first red hot
and then yellow and white hot
and that's the problem with regular incandescent
bulbs is that most of the energy
is leaving in the form of heat
and not in the form of light
but it's certainly an enormously
practical application of this idea
of having some sort of battery
and some sort of circuit
so that the water or the electricity
can go up the pump
and down the conducting path
some of its energy, the resistor
allows it to give up its energy
if you've got a 12 volt car battery
in principle
what you can do is you can get
12 joules out of every
coulomb that flows by and use
those joules any way you like
it's energy, so whatever energy
can do for you
it can turn a crank
we haven't talked about how we could use electricity
to physically move an object
that's going to be the topic of a future lecture
obviously that's the most exciting
and practical application you can think of
of electricity but also heating
things up, lighting things
very, very useful idea
in general
when you're working with electricity
you always need some kind of a pump
and the battery is a great thing
but we don't always use batteries, sometimes you plug
something into the wall
if you look at the wall socket
there's the old fashioned kind that only has two plugs
and that's the kind I want to think about
the more modern plugs
have a third socket
it's called the ground and it's really a safety device
it's not really an integral part
of the circuit, so you can think about
the two main prongs
and it's just like the two poles of a battery
battery has a plus and minus
the electric wall socket has a plus
and a minus side
the big difference between the wall plug
and the battery is that somebody
far away is reversing
the battery behind the wall plug 60 times
a second, so one side's plus
and the other side's minus and then they switch them
minus plus, plus minus, minus plus
so the electric current
first flows one way, then it flows the other way
then it flows one way, then it flows the other way
so there's really
it's a subtle difference and we don't really
have to worry about it so much
all of the physics microscopically
really boils down to the same thing
so when I think about the wall plug
I pretend in my mind that it's a battery
and for many, many purposes that's perfectly fine
if you plug something into
an appliance take a look
there's two prongs
because of course you have to have a flow
so the electricity has to come in one side
do something, go through the resistor
and go back out the other side
if you don't have a circuit
then think about the water pump analogy
if you don't have a path for the water to flow
back down again it just builds up
and finally the pump shuts down
and you've got this
tank filled with water
or you've got an attic filled with bowling balls
and they just sit there waiting
you have to have the closed circuit
in order to have something interesting happen
if you're thinking about
electrical safety
you ask what is dangerous about electricity
well there is energy
available so if you stick
your fingers across the plug
in the wall socket
that's a bad thing to do because it's
120 volts in the United States
so it's like having 10 car batteries
all stacked together
and touching both ends simultaneously
if you're at all sweaty
then there will be a nice conducting path
through your fingers
and of course if the electricity flows through you
you're a big resistor
because your body is not made of metal
you're not a great conductor
and so all of the energy
of those charges is going to be given up in your body
it's going to heat you up
and that's that horrible feeling
that shock that you feel
is visited
and the less resistance that you have
the more charges will flow
every second
and so you can get a really nasty shock
if you're for instance immersed in water
because the water allows more
electricity to flow
more current flowing
so I want to think about this a little bit more detail
if you want to think about damage
or danger of electricity
some people think it's just the voltage
high voltage means high danger
well not exactly sort of
you know
if you've got an attic full of bowling balls
it's maybe dangerous
but not if you have a good strong floor
if there's a good insulator
preventing the flow of those bowling balls
then there's no danger whatsoever
you can have as many of them up there as you want
if a bird lands on a high voltage
power line
it's in no danger
because the bird lands on the high voltage power line
and it's like the bird
standing up in the attic it's just walking around
amongst all those bowling balls it's perfectly happy
the danger
would be if the bird was to stretch its wings
and connect the high voltage power line
with the ground
because now you've got a conducting path
through the bird
and charges will flow it's like you've opened up a pathway
for all the bowling balls to fall out of the attic
and now you can really cause some damage
how much damage
well we can be very quantitative about this
voltage tells you energy
per charge
that's not all you need to know
because you also need to know
how many charges
if you have a certain energy per charge
that's the voltage and you multiply it
by how many charges flow
every second
remember that's what current was
multiply voltage times current
that's energy per charge times charge
per second
you get energy per second
remember what energy per second is
the energy flowing through something
is the product
of voltage times current
they both matter
so high voltage is definitely
possibly dangerous because
multiplying a big number
times just about any other number gives you a big answer
unless you multiply by zero
so high voltage is not dangerous
if there's no mechanism for current to flow
as soon as you create the path
sticking your fingers in the plug
now all of a sudden
both the voltage it's always
120 volts with the wall plug
multiplied by however much current you can draw
and that's going to depend
on how resistive you are
and that's going to tell you the power
every electrical device
in your house is designed around these basic
simple ideas there's voltage supplied
that's an energy per charge
some current will flow you always need
a loop you always have a circuit
and you can look at any device
you can see the wire coming in
you can see the wire going out
people are often very clever about putting
those two wires close together and packaging them
so it looks like a single wire coming from the wall
look carefully
if the toaster is totally broken
rip it open and you'll see there's always two wires
because you've got to have that circuit
and what we're talking about now
voltage and current sounds like a whole new
story you might think it's totally
disconnected but in fact
really we're just talking about pushing and pulling charges
it's Mr. Coulomb's law in action
we're thinking about energy
that's all voltages it's just a fancy word
for energy per unit charge
and so we always
when we think about these
novel things in the 1800's
the 1900's the
even today we're always
ultimately going back to Isaac Newton
and his concepts
and the principles of energy and energy
conservation as well
and this is the way I tend to think
electricity
lecture 16
the origin of electric and magnetic fields
despite all the wonderful technologies
that we live with that use electricity
and magnetism in our everyday lives
we tend not to have a lot of personal
or direct experience with these
forces of nature
we have a lot of experience with gravity
a lot of deep intuitions about how the
gravitational force works
but electricity and magnetism are
inevitably more abstract
and so in order to make sense of them
we tell stories we come up with metaphors
and analogies and representations
and today I want to continue
thinking about electricity and magnetism
these two forces of nature
and try to make
some more sense about what do they have
in common with each other and with gravity
and what's different about them
and in particular I want to start leading us
towards the question of where do they come
from once we begin to see
this we will see that electricity and magnetism
are connected to one another
it's going to lead us down
a path where we're headed for the next couple
of lectures in which we understand
the unification
of electricity and magnetism
and many more pieces of physics together
I'd like to begin today
by talking a little bit more about magnets
we introduced them a couple of lectures ago
and I hope you've gone
and looked for some magnets to play with
just to muck around with
magnets can be found in nature
the ancient Greeks found
lodestones which were
magnetic they would attract one another
and in a different orientation
repel one another just like the toy magnets
you can buy at a store today
the Chinese discovered magnets
many thousands of years ago
the Chinese had compasses
before the western world
had to develop this technology
and
you'll discover when you start
looking and playing with magnets
that magnets have some unique properties
so first of all you have to go find one
once you've found one
then you can create a new one
the easiest way to do it
is with iron
you go to the hardware store
and you buy an iron nail
and you can rub it with a magnet
and as you rub it you'll find that the iron nail becomes
magnetized
it becomes a magnet
so let's think a little bit about
magnets and how they work
and I'd like to do the compare
and contrast thing of magnets with static electricity
I already did this a little bit
I'd like to think a little bit more deeply
about their differences
so that then when we see the commonalities
we'll recognize how remarkable it is
that electricity and magnetism
have anything to do with one another
whatsoever
if you look at a magnet
you will find
in general that it has two poles
now if you look at a kitchen magnet
you may be hard pressed
to figure out where the north pole is
and where the south pole is
that's why I encourage you to buy the rod magnets
if you look carefully
there are north and south poles on the kitchen magnet
it's just that they come in strips
north south north south
and so it's a little bit more difficult to notice
easily
if you buy a bar magnet it'll usually be labeled
there'll be a north end and a south end
and you'll find that like
magnetic poles repel
just like like charges repel
and opposite magnetic poles attract
just like opposite electric charges
attract
once again it looks like action at a distance
and this is the beautiful part about buying those toys
you hold two magnets together
in the repulsion
orientation
and oh you can just visualize that magnetic field
it's the most
kinesthetic experience of an action
at a distance force that I can think of
very nice feeling
you sort of touch them in you
and you can really visualize that force field
in between them
and uh
if you start investigating magnets
the only thing that responds to magnets
is other magnets or iron
which indeed is becoming a magnet
when you hold the magnet close to it
a compass needle is just a little magnet
and compass needles will swing around
and point so that you can use
compass needles to detect
magnetic fields just like we use little
charged up test
objects like a balloon
to measure electric fields
you could map out
the magnetic field
boom and the easiest way to do this
it's kind of fun
would be to take a magnet
and lay a piece of paper on top of it
and then you'd need to go to a hardware store
or maybe a scientific supply store
and get some iron filings
maybe if you've got somebody who works in a metals shop
you can get some metal iron filings
you want them to be very small and light
and iron
so that when they're in the presence of a magnetic field
they become little compass needles
and you just sprinkle them on the paper
before your eyes the magnetic field lines appear
because each little iron filing
lines up with the field lines
field, remember, represents
the force right there
on the object
and so all the little filings line up
and because they're so light you jiggle the paper a little bit
they'll form these beautiful field line patterns
just like the field line patterns
that Faraday was drawing
in the abstract
you can see them right there in front of your eyes
it's very manifestly physical
and that's a nice thing
it's a little bit tougher to do this with electric fields
because there's not a simple object
that will line itself up
like iron filings do with the magnetic field
although if you get clever you can
you can come up with
various materials that will visualize electric fields
magnetic fields can be very strong
and that also helps in this story
because you buy a bar magnet
and there's a really intense field right next to it
so there are some of these commonalities
between electric fields
and magnetic fields
but also some very clear differences
you cannot create a magnet
by rubbing anything with anything
most materials are not magnetic
it's only very special materials
and
once you've got a magnet
it tends to stay magnetic
for an arbitrarily long period of time
kitchen magnets don't wear out
compass needles
do not deflect
in the presence of electric charge
you have a balloon on your sweater
and you hold it near that compass needle
no impact
the compass needle is not...
the magnet is neither attracted
nor repelled to the electric charge
now you can stop right here
we have just proven without doubt
that electricity and magnetism are completely different
unrelated forces of nature
because if magnets
were doing their thing
if they were attracting and repelling
because of some little build up
of static charge inside of them
you could convince yourself
with this one simple experiment
that it's not static charge
inside of a magnet
some different physical thing
now I encourage you to think about lots of experiments
because there's lots of different ways
that you could convince yourself of this idea
here's another one
the earth is a giant magnet
and you can tell
because compass needles always point in the same direction
but balloons don't all float
in the same direction
there is no attraction of electric charges
to magnets
just as there are no attraction of magnets
to static electric charges
it doesn't work either way
here's another big difference
in fact it's a huge difference between electricity and magnetism
you take that balloon
you charge it up
it's all negative now
and I can hand it to you
and you can walk away with that balloon
we have separated charges in the universe
one isolated negative charge
you could imagine at least in principle
holding a single electron between your fingers
one isolated electric charge
you cannot do this with magnets
you might say
why not I'll just buy a bar magnet
you could try this experiment
and take a hacksaw and split it in half
wouldn't that
I pull the two pieces apart
and wouldn't I have a north magnetic pole
and a south magnetic pole
well I encourage you to try it
if you have a north pole and a south pole
you've got two smaller magnets
you've got a north south
and a north south
and when you separate them
you've still got two little smaller magnets
so you didn't isolate a north pole
you simply created a new north south pair
if you could
isolate a magnetic pole
all by itself
physicists have given this a name
even though we've never found it in nature
it would be called a magnetic monopole
single magnetic pole
a magnetic monopole would be just like
a single isolated electrical charge
and we haven't found it
which means that there's a big difference
between electricity and magnetism
right electricity
you generate electric fields
from an isolated electric charge
but you don't generate
magnetism from an isolated magnetic
charge
or monopole so there's something
quite different about them
here's the bottom line
if you've got electric charges
they interact with other electric charges
they attract a repel
if you've got a magnet it interacts with other magnets
they attract or repel
if you've got a mass it interacts with other masses
that's gravity it only attracts
so these three forces seem to be
living in their own little worlds
they deal with their own special materials
they seem to be completely
distinct and unrelated
except for the slight mathematical
similarities like the fact
that electricity and gravity both
decrease like one over distance squared
magnets it turns out
decrease at a different rate and we'll have to come
back and think
a little bit about the origin of magnetic fields
to make sense of that
in the early 1800s this was the
state of physics knowledge about
electricity and magnetism and gravity
we understand the basic principles
they seem to be separate and distinct
these things
and then in the early 1800s
a scientist named Hans Ursted
in Denmark
was preparing for one of his classes
when he was lecturing to the students
about these new
esoteric
laboratory phenomenon of electricity
and batteries and
compass needles
and he was going to do everything all at once
up on the stage
so he had a battery and some wires
to close a switch so that electric current
would flow through the wires
so he could talk about electrical phenomena
and he also had a compass needle up there
and what he discovered
by accident preparing for class
was that when he closed the electrical switch
so that electrical current was flowing
the little compass needle
twitched
this was a huge surprise to Ursted
apparently he showed it to his students
and they were relatively uninterested
because it wasn't going to be on the test
but he recognized that this was a fantastically
interesting phenomenon
because remember up to this point
electricity is electricity
charges talk to other charges
magnets talk to other magnets
and there's no interconnection
now we see an interconnection
we see that flowing electric charges
in the circuit
do make a magnetic field
they attract a magnetic compass needle
this is a big change
in the way people are thinking about
electricity and magnetism
all of a sudden you have this very simple experiment
totally easy to reproduce
in other laboratories
and it starts generating an enormous amount of interest
lots of scientists were
excited by electricity
seemed like it had a lot of promise in the early 1800s
there's this famous quote
which may be apocryphal
in which
a government minister spoke to Faraday
and said of what use is this electricity
phenomenon
and Faraday said
I'm not sure sir but someday you will tax it
very insightful if it is a true story
so
people are experimenting
they're thinking about how to use
this electricity thing
and how to use this magnetism thing
and now you see this connection
so you can close a switch over here
that's very easy
mechanically it's very easy to close a switch
current flows
and a solid metal object like an iron bar
rotate
so you can cause motion
with electrical and magnetic phenomena
and once you can make motion
now you're thinking engines
and dynamos
and all these practical applications
so what a wonderful idea
you've got at your fingertips
and we really need to make sense of this
because if you want to manipulate it
you really need to have some underlying picture
of what's going on
and one of the reasons why I love playing with magic
with magnets
is because they feel like magic
I love that
kinesthetic feeling
and making sense
of this feeling
and controlling it
is part of the sort of philosophical
drive I think at this period of time
it's partly practical
and partly just this curiosity
about what the heck is going on here
Andre Ampere
we've named the unit of electrical current
after him
he's a French mathematician
and he gets interested in this experimental science
and he begins to do some experiments
but largely he's doing theory
he's looking at data
and he begins to formulate a law
of nature
which explains magnetic fields
very much like Coulomb created a
mathematical law of nature
which explains static electricity
so here's the bottom line
of Mr. Ampere's law
static electric charges
charges sitting still
create electric fields
if you think of the pattern
the field lines
the field lines emanate from electric charges
they start at positive electric charges
they run away
and they end at negative electric charges
or else they run off to infinity
but Ampere discovers that magnets are quite
different
you can look at the magnetic field lines
think about Ursted's experiment
the one where you have a wire with current running through it
so let's have a long wire
that goes from the floor
up into the roof
this is a big experiment
and now let's have the wire run through a table
there's a hole in the table
and you take your piece of paper
and you sprinkle some iron filings on it
and you ask what will be the pattern
of magnetic field produced
when the current is running straight up the wire
and you've got this piece of paper around the wire
and you might think by analogy
to electricity
that you would see radial magnetic field lines
pointing away from the wire
that would be a natural reasonable guess
and it's completely not what you see
what you would see
in the laboratory would be
circles running
around the wire
the little iron filings
show you the magnetic field
little compass needle would verify
that this is the direction of the magnetic force
and it runs in a circle around the wire
it doesn't begin
or end anywhere
a circle has no starting point
and no ending point
so this is a huge difference between electricity and magnetism
electric field lines begin and end on electric charges
but there is no
physical analogy
for electric charge in the world of magnets
there is no magnetic monopole
so
magnetic field lines are different
and when I look at a magnetic field line
sometimes I think of it as arrows
and arrows carry
with them a little risk
because you think of something flowing
fields aren't flowing
the field is static
the charge is flowing
but it just creates a pattern in space
the magnetic field is just sitting there
and when you draw it
the shape of the field is circular
and as you get farther and farther away
from the wire
the magnetic field gets weaker and weaker
the lamp here again wrote down the mathematics
so that we could predict
the magnetic field generated from any current
going in any direction of any strength
this effect is very real
it's not that hard to reproduce
I would put it at the level of a good hard
high school
science fair project
so if you try to go in the basement
and see this for yourself
you have to realize there's a couple of difficulties
one is you need pretty hefty currents
and hefty currents can be dangerous
if you don't have wires you might set things on fire
you'd probably need car batteries
in order to generate the kind of current
that you're interested in
so you'd want to use some care
there's another element of this experiment
that makes it a little bit difficult
and that is that
there's always the earth's magnetic field
so if you're creating your own magnetic field
you're always
superposing the one you're making
with the one that's already there
and what's the result
if you take two magnetic fields
and you put them on top of each other
well it's back to Galileo's
superposition principle
it's just like if you have two forces acting
if the
two force arrows act in opposite directions
they cancel out
if they act in the same direction
they add up and you get twice as big of a force
the same thing with magnetic fields
if you've got a magnetic field from your current
in the wire
and you've got the earth's magnetic field
if you've aligned things so that they're both pointing
in the same direction at some given point in space
then you'll get a doubly big magnetic field
but if you've aligned things
so that they're in opposite directions
you won't have any magnetic field at all
at that point in space
and so this is the other difficult thing about that experiment
is making sure that you're separating
the natural field that's already there
in the room from the
created field that you're trying to study
one of the
deep and crazy things
that Orsted has discovered that Ampere
is mathematically
making rigorous
it seems weird to people
is that static
electric charges don't make
magnetic fields
they don't interact with compass needles
but moving electric charges do
as soon as you've got a current flowing
then you've got magnetism in the room
so this is very weird
let's think about a very mechanical
analogy
that you've got a balloon
and you've rubbed it on your shirt so it's highly charged
it's creating an electric field
other electric charges will respond
but magnets will not notice it
it's completely
there's nothing magnetic about it
there's no magnetic field in the room
so I'm sitting in the room
and there's the balloon and I'm insisting
I'm quite confident
I've got experimental evidence with my compass needle
that there is no magnetic field
in this room
so I want you to enter the room
in a slightly different reference frame
remember we've argued
it's basic Newtonian idea
that you can observe the world
in any inertial reference frame you like
you can be sitting away from me
and make your measurements
you can even be moving with a constant speed
in a straight line with respect to me
so you're on a little cart
and you're cruising into the room
you go past me, you cruise out of the room
you're moving let's say at a steady
you're in this little cart
now of course in your reference frame
you consider yourself to be at rest
this is a critical idea about reference frames
you're in the cart, everybody thinks they're at rest
what you see is
you're at rest in a cart
and you see a room slide by you at 2 meters per second
you see me slide
beside you holding a compass needle
you see a balloon slide by you
think about that balloon
you see an electric charge moving
past you in your reference frame
moving charge, that's an electric current
electric current is nothing more than
moving charges
so you see a current in the room
and you say huh
according to Mr. Ampere and Mr. Oerstead
if there is a current there will be a magnetic field
so you pull out your compass needle
and sure enough the compass needle
changes its orientation as the balloon goes by
because that's
direct evidence that there is
a magnetic field in the room
so you and I are standing right next to each other
and that's right by me
and you and I disagree about
this fundamental statement
is there or is there not a magnetic field
in the room
this is a kind of a wild idea
it's leading us to a much deeper understanding
of the principle of relativity
first Galileo's relativity
and later Einstein's relativity
what we're saying is that
yes electric fields are very real
you can see them by
well electric fields are a little bit tougher to see
grass seeds that are electrically polarized
and see them
you can see magnetic fields with
a piece of paper and iron filings
they're definitely there in the room
and yet
you and I can disagree
about the strength
or magnitude of the fields
that's a kind of a wild idea
and then you just say okay
I guess that's right
you and I disagree about lots of things
we're in different reference frames
we disagree about positions
we disagree about velocities
we apparently disagree about the strength
of magnetic field
just like we disagree about the strength
of meters per second
these are just numbers describing physics
what we agree on are the rules
we all agree that moving charges
create magnetic fields
stationary charges create electric static fields
every law of physics
that you and I come up with
is in complete and total agreement
we discover that's the mathematics
that ampere and further
beyond him physicists are developing
is how do you connect
the values in the two different reference frames
it's pretty simple and straightforward
and
so this is a connection
between electricity and magnetism
that's really profound
I think about this for a second
I'm in a room that only has electric fields
you're in a room that has magnetic fields
and yet we're both in the same room
it's the same space
so electricity and magnetism
seem to be connected to one another
in an intimate way
it just depends on the observer
whether you call it electricity
or the call it magnetism
that is really the cool deep idea
that people are developing here
electromagnetism is the name we're going to ultimately give
to this one force of nature
that just has two sides to it
let's go back to applications
the magnetic fields that are produced
by an electric current
are ordinary magnetic fields
they're exactly the same as the magnetic field
from a kitchen magnet or one of those toy magnets
and it's really a universal
law of nature that we're discovering here
if you have a certain current
you will create a certain magnetic field strength
a compass needle will twitch
with a certain strength
and if you double the current
think of the superposition principle
it's just like having two charges flowing
per second instead of one
and that's going to make two times as big
of a magnetic field
that's part of what Mr. Ampere is writing down
in his mathematical formulas
if you double the current
you double the magnetic field
and now you're starting to think applications
what if I want a really strong magnet
what if I want to be able to lift a car
up at a junk yard
a car that's got some iron in it
I'm never going to be able to go to the beach
in Greece and find a load stone
enough to do that
what I'm going to do instead is I'm just going to flip
a little switch that makes electricity flow
and the flowing electricity is going to create
this magnetic field
and the magnetic field is a magnetic field
it's going to lift up the iron car
and I can turn it on, I can turn it off
I think of the technological power of this
because manipulating electric circuits
is quite easy and then you can do
these mechanical things with it
so you get in your car
and you take the metal key
and you insert it into a slot
and you turn that metal key
and what's going on?
well you've now reoriented the metal
so that it's touching some other pieces of metal
inside the
jacket there
and you've completed a circuit
so now electricity is flowing
and the electricity flows through a coil of wire
it's called a solenoid
and that makes a magnetic field
which is strong enough to pull a little iron rod
and this is how you start your car
in the old days you had to physically
mechanically turn a crank
and now you're letting the electricity
turn on a magnet and the magnet does the pulling
so great manipulative power
of these basic laws of physics
if you want to understand magnetism
now you ask the question
what about the kitchen magnet?
so I was just arguing
that magnets arise because of electric currents
you can turn them on, you can turn them off
so what's the deal with that kitchen magnet
and what's the toy magnet?
well that's a nice story too
we can make sense of this
to really completely make sense of it
accurately requires some quantum physics
but the classical story
is good enough
it's a nice simple explanation
so let's think microscopically
we've got some material object
it's made of atoms
atoms have a positive heavy nucleus
and a little negative electron
running around on the outside
running in a circle
that's a current
and the current has a definite direction to it
it's going around in a circle
and that's going to create
according to Mr. Ampere's law
it's going to create a little teeny magnetic field
so it's not a battery that's making it happen
any time you have a moving charge
in nature, anywhere
it's universal, any moving charge
creates a magnetic field
in a very well defined way
so little atoms create little magnetic fields
which means that atoms are little teeny magnets
now imagine that you've got
one atom here and another atom right next to it
and
maybe the electron is going clockwise
in one of them and counterclockwise in the other
and it's three dimensional so
the little magnets are totally randomly aligned
and they're very close together
so if you have an up magnetic field
from one atom and a down magnetic field
from a nearby atom
up and down cancel
it's the superposition principle
applied to magnetic forces
just like any other force
it's just Newtonian or Galilean superposition
so ordinary materials
aren't magnetic
because the atoms are randomly aligned
all the little micro magnets are randomly aligned
it requires a very special material
one in which
the electrical current
of one atom
couples or connect to its neighbor
in such a way that the two magnets
tend to line up
iron, crystals
microscopically
are just so
that the atoms tend to like to line up
their magnetic fields
so now how is it that you can create
a magnet out of iron
well you rub a magnet
an existing magnet against an iron bar
and as you do so you're creating
a strong magnetic field
that begins to line up all the atoms
because after all magnets like to line up
with other magnets
happens you get a cascade
because each atom's magnet talks to its neighbor
talks to its neighbor
and there's this sweep through the iron
as everybody lines up
and now you step back you look macroscopically
and you see a whole bunch of little
itsy bitsy microscopic magnets
that are all pointing the same way
you've got a magnet in the laboratory
and once they're lined up
they tend to stay lined up
and so there's no electricity required
you don't have to have a battery
to make a kitchen magnet
stick to the
refrigerator
so there's this natural
or automatic way of creating a magnet
or this artificial way of driving
electric charges through electric circuits
you use electric fields
to push the charges
to make them go in a path
so there's these sort of multiple ways of thinking
about magnets that are really ultimately
all the same story it's just moving charges
now
we've argued that
static charges do not
make magnetic fields
but moving charges do
we've also argued that static magnets
do not make electric
fields
but what about moving magnets
it's a natural question to ask
it seems like gosh if the universe was symmetrical
moving magnets should make
electric fields
and this is what Mr. Faraday investigated
Michael Faraday one of the many wonderful experiments
that he did was to take a magnet
and to move it rapidly
to jiggle it any kind of motion
will work and by the way
you should appreciate that these
effects are fairly subtle so
when I told the story about a moving
balloon
making a magnetic field that would be an extraordinarily
weak magnetic field
but if you move a very very
powerful magnet and you move it rapidly
you might just be able
to notice this effect in the laboratory
and this is Faraday's discovery
it's perhaps the most
practically important
applied physics discovery in the history
of modern science because
if you can wiggle a magnet
and create an electric field
think about what you can do
you can make electric fields
that means you can move charges around
that's what we want in our houses
where is the electric field
coming from that pushes the electrons
through your toaster oven
or through the lamp or through your computer
well somewhere out of town
there's a power station
and it's got a big giant magnet
a physical giant magnet
and somebody's turning it
might be a windmill turning it
it might be a steam engine turning it
but there's this big magnet
that's turning near a metal coil
and the changing magnetic field is driving electrons
pushing them all the way to your house
it's a direct physical connection
all this symmetrical story
that electric and magnetic fields
are indeed after all
intimately connected to one another
one of them can create the other
not statically you have to have motion
but as soon as you have motion
moving charges make magnetic fields
moving magnets
make electric fields
beautiful symmetry
we're going to want to come back and tackle this symmetry
it was the work of James Clerk Maxwell
to really recognize
how elegant and beautiful this story ultimately is
we've been talking about electricity and magnetism
these are two fundamental forces of nature
definitely distinct from one another
and distinct from gravity
and yet what we've seen in the last
couple of lectures is that
although they are different from one another
they're also connected to one another
somehow electricity
and magnetism seems to be
related in ways that we need to understand
more deeply
if you create
an electric field by just holding up a charge
then it affects only other charges
and if you create a magnetic field
by holding up a magnet
it affects only other magnets
not charges
but if you wiggle the magnet
then you can affect the charge
and if the charges are flowing
then you can affect the magnet
so there's some connections
some cross talk between these two
in the end what we'll be talking about today
and in the next lecture
is the
synthesis of the ideas
of fundamental underpinning rules
of electricity and magnetism
we'll see indeed how they connect together
how they weave together
and
we will synthesize
the theory of electromagnetism
to form one of the most
delicious, satisfying
and enormously practically important
frameworks in all of classical physics
and the person to whom we attribute this work
this intellectual work is James Clerk Maxwell
Maxwell was a Scottish physicist
he was working in the mid-1800s
this is the time
of the American Civil War
he's a contemporary of Michael Faraday
and
he's not a Newton
he's not coming up with radical new ideas
about the universe from scratch
much more in the
contemporary sense of
standing on the shoulders of giants
Mr. Maxwell
knows about the work of Coulomb
and his laws of static electricity
he knows about the work of Ampere
and his formulas
that explain how moving charges
make magnetic fields
he knows about Faraday's work
and how moving
magnets can create electric fields
and Maxwell
was able to take the work of these other people
organize it
think about it in a new mathematical way
and write down
a very simple set of equations
the fundamental equations of electricity and magnetism
which today
in his honor are called Maxwell's equations
there are four of them
and that might be a little bit of a surprise to you
because after all there's only two forces
we have
one law of gravity
that Isaac Newton came up with that we've been using
so why not one law for electricity
and one law for magnets
and that's a nice idea
and people tried to do that
Coulomb was coming up with a single formula
for static electricity
but it is the interconnectedness
of the two forces
that requires us in the end
to have four equations
four relationships
two of them dealing with static situations
a charge sitting still
a magnet sitting still
and the other two for time varying situations
moving charges
moving magnets
together with Newton's laws
these relationships
are quantifying
every electric and magnetic phenomenon
phenomenon that you can think of
they predict
they describe
they explain
it's just perfect classical physics
it fits in exactly with Newton's laws
and we're really zooming in
on electric and magnetic forces
but once you know about
electric and magnetic forces
then Newton takes over
and says f equals ma
how things respond
and this how things respond
is really the practical side
of electricity and magnetism
where these classical equations
are the bread and butter
of contemporary physicists
and engineers and scientists
of all disciplines
Mr. Maxwell was a theorist
in the old days
back in the Newtonian era
people were usually both
they would do experiments
they would work on both parts together
as our knowledge deepened
there was a split
and some people focused more on the experimental work
Maxwell pretty much
just sat in his office
and did mathematical calculations
he was a remarkable mathematician
and part of the difficulty of this story
is that if you just look
at the original mathematics of Maxwell
it's really dense, it's hard stuff
and so what I want to do
is to think about the essence
of the experimental ideas
that these mathematical relationships
are telling us
so we're going to go through Maxwell's equations today
look at what they say
try to make sense of them
see how they're telling us
about electric and magnetic fields
and recognize that fields
are now the critical player in this story
when we started we were thinking about forces
there's an object over here
there's another object over there
and they interact by some
at a distance
and Mr. Maxwell is asking us
to think in a new way
he's building on Faraday's work
remember Faraday drew pictures
of these field lines
fields, you can draw a sketch of them
a charge has field lines
emanating from it
a magnet has magnetic field lines
surrounding it
and when you look at the field
you're thinking about forces in a new way
you're thinking about forces
as something local
so for instance
if I've got a big charge
it's the source of an electric field
and then I move far away
there's an electric field everywhere in space
and whether or not
I put down a test charge
there is an E field out there
if I put down my little test charge
I know immediately what force it will feel
that's what electric field tells me
tells me what force you would feel
as soon as you put something there
so Maxwell is
focusing our attention on the fields
and he says these are the central players
of physics if we could understand
where fields come from
how they interact one with the other
then we will really understand
everything we need to know about electricity and magnetism
because at this point it would just be
Newton's Law is plunked down a charge
there's a force on it, it starts to accelerate
so this is a shift
of attention that's going to turn out
to be extraordinarily productive nowadays
physicists pretty much always think
about fields and field theories
because that's really where the action is
let's walk through the four
Maxwell's equations and we'll discover
that we know most of them already
they were developed
historically and Maxwell is just
reformulating them, rethinking about them
the first one
is sort of Coulomb's law
it's the formula that tells us
about how electric charges produce
electric fields
it's sometimes called Maxwell's
first equation and sometimes we call it Coulomb's law
but I'm going to call it Gauss's law
Carl Friedrich Gauss was a German
mathematician, did a little bit of physics
but mostly thinking about the mathematics
of
fields in a way that
turned out to be very very applicable
to electric charges so Maxwell
pulled together Coulomb's experimental ideas
with Gauss's
mathematical ideas to formulate
Gauss's law
Gauss's law is telling us
the following
well in essence it's just saying
if you have an electric charge
then there will be electric field lines emanating
from it that's really the content of Gauss's law
but the way it's formulated
is in a kind of a clever and
interesting way
so Gauss's law
as thought up by Maxwell
suggests the following crazy idea
draw
a sphere or a bubble
doesn't have to be a perfect sphere it just has to be
some closed surface
it's imaginary you don't really have
to build this but just imagine
that you've got some bubble in space
and start walking around
and just look at the surface of the bubble
don't look inside
just look right where you are stay local
this is one of the important ideas of
field theories
and look at the electric field
right there on the surface
if it's pointing out here
then you walk a little further
and it's also pointing out there
and you keep walking around and around this sphere
and it's pointing out everywhere
Gauss's law concludes
there must be a charge inside
makes sense if you picture
the electric field emanating from a charge
it points out in all directions
it's a radial field
and so if you were to walk around it
everywhere you go
the point is that you don't have to
look inside if you don't want to
you can deduce what's inside
by just noticing the pattern
around this sphere in space
this is a novel idea
it's a way of formulating
the mathematics that's rather different
and
it tells us a couple of things
if you work out the mathematics
you discover that it
conclusively derives
what the electric field
from a point charge would be
positive or negative
or if you have a bunch of charges
or if you have some charges floating around
moving Gauss's law works
in all of these cases so it's a little bit deeper
a little bit more robust
than Coulomb's law
it's a universal law
so if you want to make a measurement
of the strength of the electric field
caused by a charge
somebody has to tell you
a constant of nature
in fact it's Coulomb who tells us this constant of nature
we need to know for a given
quantitative amount of charge
inside how strong
is the electric field going to be at some point
outside
and that constant of nature was derived
in an experiment by Mr. Coulomb
and you only need to do it once
if you do it again you're just trying to measure it more accurately
but that one
constant of nature will describe
electric fields in any circumstance
at any place or time
in the universe
no matter what's going on
it's a very robust universal idea
Gauss's law
tells you about the pattern
of electric fields
it says that they radiate away
from positive charges
they radiate towards negative charges
now I use that word radiate
in a very informal sense
there's no motion here
it's just a static electric field
it's just when you look at the picture
it says that it radiate away from the sun
Gauss's law
can be mathematically formidable
but I would argue that it's also deeply intuitive
I think my dog knows Gauss's law
and
as evidence of this
I've got this barbecue on the back porch
and I put some stinky hot dogs in there
and then I close the barbecue up
so you can't see the source of stink
so my dog is walking
she's a few feet away from the barbecue
and she smells this stink
that's emanating away from the barbecue
then she walks a little bit further
in a circle around the barbecue
and it's still flowing outwards
and she keeps going all the way
around the barbecue and everywhere around the barbecue
the flow of smell is always outwards
so what would my dog conclude
she's quite smart
there's got to be a source of stink in the middle
and that's really Gauss's law
if you see electric field flowing outwards
there must be a source in the middle
if you see electric field coming in
and then going out on the other side
then you know there's not a source
of electric charge
inside your sphere
so that's Gauss's law
it's the first of Maxwell's four equations
the second of Maxwell's four equations
doesn't really have a good name
some people call it Gauss's law for magnetism
so it's sort of an equivalent law
but there's a funny deal with magnetism
remember we argued last time
there is no such thing
as a magnetic charge
as a magnetic charge
or a magnetic monopole
so Gauss's law for magnetism
is a kind of a negative law
it basically says that if you walk
around in this imaginary sphere
around any point in space
you will never ever
find a magnetic field configuration
that always points outwards
or always points inwards
because if it did it would have to end
inside the sphere on a charge
but there are no magnetic monopoles
so this is a kind of a negative law
but it's still quite productive
it tells us something about the pattern
of magnetic fields in the universe
if you look at them they always form circles
or loops
they never start or stop
at any particular point in space
and that's a very important idea
if you want to visualize fields
these equations are telling us both
quantitatively and qualitatively
what fields look like
and how they behave
because we've got a zero here
so you don't need to know how strong
would the magnetic field be
if there was a magnetic monopole
because there are no magnetic monopoles
this law of nature
is like all good laws of physics
easily and deliciously
falsifiable
all you gotta do is find one magnetic monopole
and Maxwell is wrong
and you've got a Nobel Prize
it's a big deal
and physicists are always looking for cracks
in the existing theoretical framework
even something as cherished as Maxwell's equations
something as profoundly useful
we're always looking for
could this break down
is there something else going on in the universe
did we misunderstand
and for 150 years people have been looking
for magnetic monopoles
we've never found one
and there's good reason to suspect
that we might not
the equations that I'm in the process of describing
are quite complete
every phenomenon
many many consequences
by combining these equations together
many observable
experimentally verifiable consequences
that flow from the equations
that flow from the postulate
that there are no magnetic monopoles
so you never know
but at the moment the laws of nature seem to be
they're just not there
the third
of the four Maxwell's equations
goes by the name Ampere's law
we talked about Mr. Ampere
and his careful analysis
of the accidental discovery
of Mr. Oersted
remember Oersted was doing electric demo for his students
and noticed that if you run
electric current through a wire
you generate a magnetic field
and Ampere really worked hard
to try to make this rigorous and mathematical
how much of a magnetic field
how strong of a magnetic field is it
so we need a new constant
of nature for this law
if you go out and measure it
if you have one amp flowing
one coulomb every second in the wire
and you go oh one meter away
how strong would that magnetic field be
if to do one experiment
just like coulomb had to do one experiment
this is a new thing because you're measuring magnetism
rather than electricity
it's the second fundamental constant
to appear in Maxwell's equations
and it turns out that's the only other constant
that you need in Maxwell's equations
so these two constants of nature
you're not
bringing them out from the theory
they have to be obtained from experiment
but once you've got them they're absolutely universal
and you can predict any other phenomenon
in the world
you use your cat fur
and iron balls
and compass needles
and batteries
and in principle that's all you need
once again
a deliciously falsifiable law of nature
I am telling you exactly
in direction and magnitude
how the magnetic field is going to look
no matter what the current does
you can bend the wire
make it go in a circle
any shape you like
this equation will tell you what the magnetic field looks like
every time you turn on your car
every time you turn on an appliance
you are testing Ampere's law
because if there's a little magnet involved
and you're producing a little electromagnet
the engineer who designed that circuit
is counting quantitatively
on Ampere's law working exactly
as it was stated
back by Maxwell in the 1860s
so all of these laws
have been verified time and time again
and by now
they are so
intimately involved in all of our technology
that these are really deeply established
laws of nature
the fourth and last
of Maxwell's four equations
is usually called Faraday's law
Faraday, remember, was doing lots of investigations
he's the fellow
who gets us thinking about fields
but he's also investigating
the properties of these fields
and remember he's the one who noticed
that if you take a magnet and you wiggle it
you will produce an electric field
think about what that means
you're moving a magnet
it's just like a kitchen magnet
or a bar magnet, any kind of magnet
and if the magnet is wiggling
that means the magnetic field
that it produces is changing
with time
then you produce an electric field
it's pretty wacky
because that means that if you put a charge there
a charge which doesn't
notice or care about the static
magnet now does react
because electric field means
electric charges are getting pushed around
that's what electric field says
if you put a charge there
it will be accelerated
so this is a way of accelerating
electric charges
it's surely the most
practically important of all
of the four Maxwell's equations
this is the equation which tells us
how to generate electricity at the
power plant
you go out there and you take some big magnet
a physical magnet and you rotate it
it might be rotated because of a windmill
that's turning or because of a steam
turbine that's running
this thing in a big circle
but you just move the magnet
and you move it nearby some metal
and if you're moving the magnet
that you're creating electric fields
if you put an electric field
on a wire
there's electric charges in that wire
and they're free to move and so they will
and that wire just connects
right all the way to your house
so the electrons that are being moved in your house
are being pushed by this spinning magnet
using Faraday's law
Faraday's law is sometimes called
the law of electrical induction
because we're inducing electrical
flow by using
magnets and when you take one of those
little black boxes and plug it in the wall
and connect it to your laptop
or you connect it to your cell phone
you're also using Faraday's law of induction
what's happening there is that you've got
high voltage 120 volts
at the wall but your laptop
or your phone only wants a few volts
to change the voltage
you can make use of Faraday's law
the idea here is
remember this magnet at the power station
is turning in a circle
so the magnetic field is getting stronger
and then weaker
which means that the electric current
that flows goes one way and then the other
one way and then the other it's alternating current
which means that at your house
this 120 volts
causes current to flow first one way
and then the other and if you make that go through a wire
in your house you can create
a little magnetic field
that's Ampere's law
the magnetic field is changing with time
and Faraday's law says that
that is going to produce a little electric field
which will drive the electrons into your cell
phone or your laptop
it's all a simple interconnected
story
although it takes a lot of practice
to really work out the details and understand
the
practical workings of these equations
but the big idea is just
what we've been talking about
now Maxwell
writes down these four equations
and he's staring at them
he's able to write them down
in a spectacularly compact form
they fit on a t-shirt
and that's a good sign that you've got a fundamental
theory of nature
and he's
he's staring at the equations
and he realizes there's a problem
there's something
aesthetically unappealing
it's Ampere's law
it's sort of bugging him
because Ampere's law says
if you've got flowing
physical electric charges
then you create a magnetic field
and he says okay that's one way
to create a magnetic field
but now look at Faraday's law
Faraday's law says that if you wiggle the magnetic field
you can produce an electric field
you don't need any charges
you don't need any magnets
you just need to change the magnetic field
itself
and it changes or produces
an electric field
so there's
seems like if a changing magnetic field
can produce an electric field
then it should work the other way around
there's this symmetry argument
that a changing electric field
should be able to produce a magnetic field
if it works one way
why doesn't it work the other way
so Maxwell takes a leap
he looks at the equations
he thinks about their mathematical form
to Ampere's law
it's Maxwell's addition to Ampere's law
and it's a new term
that says okay
one way to make a magnetic field
is to have flowing physical electric charges
the other way, the new way
to make a magnetic field
is to have changing
electric fields
it's a fundamentally different kind of way
of producing a field
this is a risky business
you sort of get uncomfortable
when somebody makes up an equation
out of thin air
it's not based on direct experiment
this is not something
that happens all that often
although you could argue that many of the
great, great discoveries
in physics have been of this nature
now I've criticized the Greek philosophers
for just making up ideas
about nature they sit around
they think about symmetry or beauty
and they say I believe the world should be
this way and then they argue with one another
about how the world should be
Maxwell is really not acting
in that way, Maxwell has come up with
a scientific hypothesis
is this new term physically
correct, is it describing nature
and he behaves just as a contemporary
physicist should
he starts calculating
he asks himself does this new
equation first of all
agree with every experiment
ever done in all of history
it's essential you have to be
scientifically honest to make sure
that your new idea doesn't violate
any knowledge that you already
have about the world
and you have to ask what further
consequences would it have
how could we falsify this new idea
what real life experiment
could we do to test
my new
essentially crazy idea
that there's this extra piece
this extra way of creating fields
Maxwell worked very hard
on the mathematics he spent many many years
investigating the consequences
thinking about experiments
thinking about practical consequences
and he really took it on
as his responsibility
because he recognized
he was already living in a world of classical
physics which had started
with Isaac Newton and
indeed Galileo before him
and Copernicus before him
and by this point with the work of
all of these other physicists we've been talking about
Coulomb and Faraday
and Ampere
you can't just arbitrarily
make stuff up or tweak
you've got this tapestry in front of you
and everything is fitting together beautifully
and what he did was he just discovered
a missing thread
and when he put the new thread in
it just matched and fit perfectly
and elegantly and beautifully
it's a little bit hard to describe
without looking at the mathematics
just how you could look at an equation
so lovely but the idea
that we're discussing really I think carries this
with it
the applications
of this new added law
turn out to
take a while it took many years
before Maxwell's
addition could be directly
experimentally tested and we'll talk about that
in the next lecture but
it came and once it came
they began to come in droves
and ultimately
Maxwell's equations became
the fundamental equations of classical
electromagnetism which we still
use today
you might have one
question if you look back
at the story that we've told so far
and it's a slight
puzzle but we can resolve it
Faraday's law says
that if you change the magnetic field
then you produce
an electric field that's Faraday's law
that's this practical way that we produce electricity
in the laboratory
and you might say
I'm going to play the Maxwell game
and look at symmetry and say
there should be another way to produce
electric fields
another way besides changing magnetic fields
and besides having static electric charges
and that would be to have
flowing magnetic charges
after all flowing electric charges
make a magnetic field
why shouldn't flowing magnetic charges
make an electric field
if there were any but remember
the second law of Maxwell is
there are no magnetic charges
there are no magnetic monopoles in the universe
so there's no need to add this
new piece to Faraday's law
because we've already argued that there are
no magnetic monopoles
so the story is really very elegant
and very complete
the four formulas
all tie in one with the other
and they tell you
about electric and magnetic fields
and their patterns in space
let me remind you the four stories
static charges
create electric fields that emanate
outwards from them
there is no analogous
magnetic pattern there are no magnetic monopoles
to create radial
magnetic fields they just don't exist
the third of the four
said that if you have flowing
electric charges physical
objects you will get magnetic
fields that run in circles around it
that's one way to make a magnetic field
and the other way this is Maxwell's
addition is to have
any mechanism that changes
the electric field any other
way you can think of to make
electric fields change at some
point in space will also produce
a magnetic field
and the fourth and last one says
if you want to create an electric field
there's another way besides having static charges
it's Faraday's way
of wiggling the magnetic field
wiggle real life magnets if you like
anything you can think of
that can make the magnetic field change over time
that will produce a particular
pattern it's a very well-defined
pattern and a very well-defined
strength
Maxwell's equations
we call them this even though
he really didn't discover any of them
except that one extra term
but James Clerk Maxwell did something
really spectacular for us
he pulled it all together
it was worth of hard work
and if you look at the old papers
the mathematics was complicated
hard to write down people hadn't
thought of elegant simple ways
of writing these ideas down
and Maxwell this is one of his grand
accomplishments
he's also forcing us
or encouraging us to think
about electricity and magnetism
as a field theory
rather than action at a distance
so he's helping to evolve Newtonian physics
it's still definitely classical physics
and it's enormously
practical if you want to design
a cell phone antenna
you go to Maxwell's equations
Maxwell's equations will tell you how the electrons
will respond to an electric field
want to build a better microwave oven
it's Maxwell's equations
Maxwell's equations tell you how the electrons
will move in the oven as you wiggle them here
what will they do to the electrons
in the water molecules
in the food that you're trying to heat up
in any situation of any kind
high tech, low tech
a light bulb, a toaster oven
it's all Maxwell's equations
and ultimately it's Maxwell's equations
and Newton's laws
because Maxwell's equations tell you about the fields
the fields are these
abstract quantities
which then tell you about how real life objects
little magnets and little electric charges
will respond
how will they move
F equals MA
in the usual way
Maxwell is making us think
about electricity and magnetism
as belonging to the Newtonian picture
so
if you think about energy
energy and energy conservation
better continue to hold
it's part of the framework
the tapestry that he's working with
he thinks explicitly about this
and he realizes that the mathematics
tells him how it is that an electric field
could in principle carry
energy or momentum
yet another way that we
really begin to think of these electric fields
as something real
these magnetic fields are out there
they're a property of space
they live out there
you can't see them directly
you only notice them if you put a charge there
or if you put a magnet there
but they're there anyway
and they allow us to think of physics in a local way
it's completely deterministic
it's sort of the
epitome of classical physics
Maxwell's equations synthesize
and describe
every aspect of classical
electromagnetism
any phenomenon that you can think about
lightning bolts
electric circuits
magnets
just keep on thinking about electric or magnetic
things
and they're all described by this simple set
of four equations
we use them all the time
but Maxwell went beyond these equations
he went
and it's one of those delicious situations
where you've
created these equations to describe
a certain set of experiments
and then you realize that there's something new
something that you hadn't even thought about
or imagined
and yet these equations describe it beautifully
Maxwell
found this
by thinking about the most common
motion in the universe
so ask yourself this question
objects, random
anywhere in the universe, what are they doing?
there's a couple of different
kinds of motion that you might find
objects moving straight lines
objects bounce and continue to move in straight lines
but the most common
is an oscillation
something going in a circle like the earth around the sun
if you looked at the earth going around the sun from the side
you'd just see it wiggling back and forth
back and forth
an atom in a crystal
it just wiggles back and forth
a pendulum wiggles back and forth
and that's the way the most common motion
of objects in the world
it always happens
if an object has a home spot
an equilibrium point
and you perturb it and so it goes back
and then it drifts on through
and it oscillates back and forth
it's a natural thing for Maxwell
to ask what would an electric charge do
if it was moving
in this most common kind of motion in the universe
what would an electric charge do
if it's wiggling back and forth
Maxwell's equations should tell you the answer
because they describe
electric and magnetic fields in any situation
so let's think about it
if the electric charge
let's think of an electron to be specific
was sitting still
then there would be this electric field pattern
that's just nice straight lines
radiating in this case in
towards the electric charge
and you could think of them as kind of like the
gravitational field lines pointing towards a star
nice simple pattern
and now you move that charge
forwards and backwards
at any point in time
the electric field lines
are going to be described by Gauss's law
they have to point towards the charge
charges are the source of electric field lines
so as the charge moves back and forth
the electric field lines
are going to have to wiggle
in the space near
and around the electric charge
so now you've got a wiggling
electric field
and Maxwell says okay
I know about this
that was my extra term
that I added for other reasons
just for symmetry reasons
to the set of equations
but the extra term very explicitly says
if an electric field at some point in space
is changing with time
it will produce a magnetic field
a magnetic field will appear out of nowhere
and it will appear
in very specific places
and in a very specific pattern
of equations
and he realizes that as the electric charge
goes up and down
so the electric fields go first up
and then down and then up and then down
the magnetic field that you produce
goes first in and then out
and then in and then out
that's what the equations tell you
so you've created this magnetic field
it's somewhere nearby
but not located at the charge
and now you say wait a minute
I've got a magnetic field
and it's over here and it's getting bigger
and then smaller and bigger and smaller
it's changing all the time
and Faraday's law
the fourth of Maxwell's equation says
any time for any reason
if the magnetic field changes with time
you're going to produce a new
electric field
so there's this crazy thing going on
we started with the charge
that was the original source
but then it made an electric field
which created a magnetic field
electric which created a new magnetic
it's this dance
of electric and magnetic fields
each one is produced
and because it's wiggling
it produces a new one
and so the dance doesn't stop
it keeps on going
it's some kind of self-propagating
wiggle of electric
and magnetic fields
it's some sort of disturbance
of electric and magnetic fields
and remember this is an empty space
what's cool here is we're creating magnetic fields
and there's no magnets around
there's only one starting object
and no other objects anywhere else
I could visualize this a little bit
like
thinking of a
pebble dropping into a pond
so imagine that you drop the pebble
that's the source, that's like our moving charge
and what does it do?
well it disturbs the water
so it pushes water down
the water goes back up again
so the water starts to wiggle
but if the water at one place is wiggling up and down
water molecules
feel the presence of nearby water molecules
if this one's going up
it pulls its neighbor up
so its neighbor starts wiggling up and down
which makes its neighbor wiggle up and down
and so that's what you get
when you drop the pebble into the pond
you see this ripple that spreads outward
in a nice elegant circular path
heading outwards
the disturbance that is self-propagating
it's some sort of wave
that heads out
and this is exactly what Maxwell
is seeing
it's a self-propagating ripple
except there's no medium there
there's no water
or material objects
there's no other charges
it's quite remarkable
I've been arguing that fields
have a kind of a separate reality
they exist in the world
you can't think of them as
existing at this point in space
but they're also abstract
you can't touch them exactly
you just have to think about them mathematically
this electric field
and this magnetic field
that we're producing is definitely real
there should be some evidence of it
it's going to carry energy
because Maxwell has been thinking about
the propagation of energy
now he's getting a little bit worried probably
because you better not violate conservation
of energy
you might worry that this dance
is spreading out and out
and creating energy out of nothing
but no, the equations are very clear about this
it's just like the ripple on the pond
it gets weaker and weaker
as you get farther away
but it doesn't ever stop
there's no friction
in the electromagnetic case
so although it gets weaker and weaker
it never completely dies away
in deep empty space
when you charge and wiggle it
Maxwell has realized that a new
thing
a new kind of physical event
would be occurring
and he has to be wondering is this real
have I discovered a new thing in nature
is it a novel
undreamed of
kind of activity that electric charges do
and if so
could I really make it happen
and could I detect it, how would I know that this was happening
well think about that, it's not so hard
if there is such a ripple in space
if the electric field
somewhere far away from the original
charge is first pointing up and then pointing down
well you know how to detect an electric field
electric fields just mean
that if there was a charge there
then the charge would feel a force
that's what electric fields are
so this electric charge
that you put somewhere else
is going to go up and down
it's going to bob up and down
and that would be very easy to see
if there was any electrical response
somewhere physically disconnected
what would you call this
it's some kind of electric
and magnetic phenomenon
it's an electromagnetic wave
and Maxwell
he's sitting at his desk
I can just visualize this and he's doing calculations
what would it look like
what would the pattern be
how fast would the ripple propagate
that's an important question
and the equations tell you
electric field that's changing with time
and the equations tell you
precisely how that time evolution
will create a magnetic field
and vice versa it's all there
in the mathematics
and it turns out
that the wave
that you create will travel at a speed
that depends on those
two constants of nature
that appeared in Maxwell's equations
remember the ones that we got
by rubbing cat fur
using compass needles
little simple laboratory experiments
tell us these constants of nature
and they combine together
in a fairly simple way
you multiply them and take the square root
this tells you the speed
at which this electromagnetic
disturbance is wave is propagating
and I can just visualize
Maxwell sitting with his
well he doesn't have a pocket calculator
he's got some slide rule
and he multiplies out the numbers
and it turns out to be
in the contemporary metric system
300 million meters per second
that's really fast
300 million meters
that's 186,000 miles
in one second
this wave goes from the earth
all the way out to the moon distance
in one second
so this is kind of crazy
I wonder now
if we could ever observe such a thing
and Maxwell must have been thinking
about this number
and realized wait a minute
every physicist in the 1800s
knows this number
300 million meters a second
that's the speed of light
is that a coincidence
could that possibly be a spectacular
numerical coincidence
it's this amazing revelation
I can't even imagine how it would have felt
to recognize that this
electromagnetic disturbance
it is light
that's what light is
it's just a traveling electromagnetic wave
all of a sudden in one flash
Maxwell has realized that
everything that we've known and fought
and understood about light
now is connected, it totally makes sense
light is
it's not a new thing, it's not some exotic
phenomenon that we have to go
and study and check out
we already know everything about this thing
we know about electromagnetic waves
it's just light
all of a sudden, not only have we
unified electricity with magnetism
and made it very simple and workable
but also we've unified
with light and optics
and the study of
everything that has to do with those things
think about a light bulb
you heat it up
and when you heat things up
the little pieces inside start to jiggle fast
and the electrons inside
the filament are jiggling back and forth
and if they jiggle fast enough
they're going to produce
this electromagnetic wave
doesn't even matter how fast they're jiggling
they're always going to produce an electromagnetic wave
but at some point
the electromagnetic wave that you produce
which is traveling
outwards in a spherically
expanding path according to these equations
just like the light from a light bulb
expanding out in an expanding
spherical path
at some point this electromagnetic wave
will reach your eyeball
and at the back of your eyeball
there are electrons
and if there's this wiggling electric field
pushing on the electrons in your retina
then they're going to go up and down
and that makes an electrical signal that goes to your brain
and you go, aha, I see light
now your brain only responds
to a very narrow range
of wiggling frequency
in the retina
so you only see a certain range
of frequencies of oscillation
and that's why the light bulb
has to get up to a certain temperature
before you can see it
but even before you can see it
these exotic
electromagnetic waves, they're not exotic at all
they're emanating from the light bulb
there are other electromagnetic
waves coming out
all simultaneously just different
wiggle rates
that's the only difference between the different waves
that are coming out
at this point
we really understand the nature of light
and all the optics
start to think about all the consequences
all the things that you can now
tackle quantitatively
rigorously by going back
to Maxwell's equations
has just expanded exponentially
it seems
like a profound philosophical revolution
that you've got this
new unification going on
but really it's got nothing to do
with philosophy because it's just
practical, painstaking
calculations at this point
Maxwell's equations are not
easy to solve
but they are always solvable
and when you do, you can make quantitative
predictions about anything that's
involved
Maxwell published this work in around
1860, there was a couple of works
over a few year period
and it took 20 years
for the community
to really begin to understand
and believe that this
was a revolution
kind of interesting that it does take time
even when there's something that when I look back
I say oh it must have been
an eye-opener for everybody right away
but the math was difficult
and it took time for people to learn it
and don't forget that in that
era optics
and electric studies
and magnetic studies were three
distinct branches of physics
and optics and that's your specialty
somebody else learns electricity, that's their specialty
and these people have to learn to talk to
one another, speak the same mathematical
language before they can realize that there's
an awful lot that this other field
now can help you with
the experimental
verification happened about
20 years after the publication
and it was Heinrich Hertz
he was a German experiment
very young fellow who had
looked at Maxwell's
publications and realized
we should be able to build an apparatus
it's not really all that hard
to
directly test this hypothesis
I mean it's one thing to say
it's obvious that light is
an electromagnetic wave but how do you know
how do you know, how do you prove
that there's a little electric field
in the light, it's all
making sense, it's all fitting together
but it's not yet a direct
observational experimental proof
Heinrich Hertz did a much simpler experiment
he built a circuit
and in this circuit he had a few
components that would make electric charge
slosh back and forth
it's called an oscillator charges go one way
then they go the other way
you have a little power supply, you can drive
the current, you can choose the frequency
at which it oscillates back and forth
and now according to Maxwell
any time you have oscillating charges
you should be creating this electromagnetic
wave radiating
outwards at the speed of light
and it's not necessarily
visible light this is very
low frequency in Heinrich Hertz's
laboratory so your eyeball wouldn't
respond so he built another
electric circuit which was very
very similar to the first one
the new electric circuit is also an oscillator
but this one has no power supply
whatsoever it's just
the oscillator with no
source to make charges move
around according to Maxwell
this electromagnetic wave
should spread across the room
at the speed of light and when it reaches
the second one
there's this oscillating electric field
it points up, it points down, up, down
it's going to drive the electrons
and as soon as you have electrons in an oscillator
it's easy to tell because moving electrons
they heat wire up, they make light bulbs
glow would be very easy
to detect the motion of electrons
inside of an electric circuit
that's what Heinrich Hertz did
worked like a champ exactly
as Maxwell had predicted
think about what
Hertz has just done this is an application
of this crazy abstract
mathematical formalism and he's
just built a radio
you've got a radio here because
on the one side of the room
you've got an antenna that's broadcasting a signal
and on the other side of the room you've got a receiver
that's receiving the signal
if you just modulate the signal on one side
it's going to get modulated on the other
Maxwell's equations tell us
that if you jiggle the first charge
twice as rapidly
then the other charge will jiggle
twice as rapidly
and you're picturing what's going on here
a moving charge at one
point in space
is creating this ripple of electric
and magnetic fields which
allows other charges somewhere
else to move
you're pushing it, you could think of it
as action at a distance again
a novel, a new kind of action
at a distance where a motion of one thing
makes motion of another thing
rather than just this simple
push or pull like gravity
but that's really just not the way
Maxwell is thinking about it, he's thinking about it
in terms of the traveling electric
and magnetic fields in between
this
this revolution
in thinking about the world
this revolutionary unification
and synthesis
it took at least 20 years
when Heinrich Hertz did his experiment
I think that was for most physicists
pretty much the clincher
and at that point people felt compelled
to make sense of the mathematics, to learn it
and to recognize this
revolution just like Copernicus
remember Copernicus had published
his heliocentric theory
and it was probably very obvious to him
it was a flash of insight
of course the sun is at the center
and the planets go around it
then everything makes sense
all the observations, all the astronomy
it all makes sense
if you just make this wild revolutionary
postulate
and yet all it did was it was a seed
for other scientists like Galileo
Kepler
ultimately Isaac Newton
to really in retrospect
recognize that that was the moment of revolution
it was really the same story with Maxwell
the amount of time
was much less instead of 100 years
it was only 20 years
this kind of unification
it is in a certain sense
every theoretical physicist's dream
it's your goal
as a physicist to try to take
disparate phenomena
bring them together and realize it's all
just one basic set of ideas
Newton did this
in perhaps the most profound way
he said what's happening here on Earth
with marbles rolling down ramps
it's really the same fundamental physics
as the Earth going around the sun
or the moon going around the Earth
it's all the same
it's all F equals MA
and now Maxwell has done this again
everything that's electrical
everything that's magnetic
everything that's optical
it's all really ultimately just these
Maxwell's equations
so he's not only done this wonderful
service to the field of physics
it's also opening up new branches
of physics because now you can think about
what might be called physical optics
you can think about optics
in a new way
instead of thinking about the path of rays of light
through a prism or how a telescope
might focus the light
you can also think about the interaction
of light with matter
it's just electric and magnetic fields
interacting with charges in the matter
it's really all explainable
by Maxwell's equations
light
had been studied forever
the Greeks were thinking about light
Isaac Newton was thinking about light
many many physicists had been curious
about light
I would argue that Newton's career
as a physicist began with his
experiments on prisms
and the colors of light
Newton recognized that white light
was really composed of all the colors
in the rainbow
and Newton had a kind of a background
working theory of light
because he would call it corpuscular
it was made of little light particles
if you have a light bulb
Newton was thinking that the light bulb
is spewing out a bunch of little light particles
in all directions
and they travel outwards
at the speed of light
and so Newton would think
that when they hit your eye
it's some sort of physical F equals MA thing
where they're bumping into the retina
in the back of your eyeball
he's just got this different mechanism
that doesn't really matter so much
because he wasn't paying much attention
to the wave-like nature
or the particle-like nature
it was just his belief
but the experiments that he was doing
had to do with other aspects of light
like the color of it
at the time the technology
didn't really exist for Isaac Newton
to convincingly prove to anybody
including himself whether or not
light was a bunch of little particles
or light was some sort of undulation
some oscillating phenomenon
there were lots of theories
people were arguing with Newton
back in his era
and it took until
1800
when a physicist named Thomas Young
finally did an experiment
directly with light
to convincingly prove to the world
that light is a wave phenomenon
we'll talk about that in a later lecture
because Young's experiment
is a little bit complicated
it's part of a broader story
that we need a little bit more time to go into
but Young showed that light was a wave
this is 1801
Maxwell is not going to
do his theory for another 60 years
so for 60 years
the whole physics community
is wondering what the heck is waving
light is a wave
but what's waving?
when we think of waves we think of water
we think of some material object moving up and down
and nobody had any clue
what could be waving?
and Maxwell answers the question
it's a new thing
it's the electric field that's waving
electric and magnetic fields are moving
they're changing in strength
and in direction
there's no material object moving at all
the wave is a wave
of the electric and magnetic fields themselves
it's a wild idea
a little bit abstract
again you can recognize why it would be difficult
for people to just accept this instantly
it turns out to be so enormously practical
when you think about lenses
and you think about how they focus light
when you think about rainbows
and you think about the colors that you see from the light
you think about a prism
you think about the diffraction of light
as it goes through a very narrow hole
and it spreads out
all of these can be described
in the Newtonian era
they can be described but they can't be
fundamentally explained
when we get to Maxwell and Maxwell's equations
Maxwell is telling us
that light is carrying energy
with it
it's part of the equations
when you wiggle the electric charge here
you are doing work on it
you're applying a force
you're accelerating it
it's moving over some distance
force times distance is work
you're doing work on the charge
whenever you do work
that means you're transferring energy
it's spreading out
in this electromagnetic wave
so electromagnetic waves can carry energy
we know that light can carry energy
light from the sunshine carries solar energy
with it
and so all of a sudden there's a whole new bunch of technology
that's available to us
electric light sources
and electric photovoltaic panels
although there is a little bit
more quantum physics involved there
fundamentally the source of energy is pure
classical
in physics
you're thinking about Maxwell's equations
and he derived, remember the speed
of this wave
the speed that he came up with
186,000 miles per second
the speed of light
it turns out is a number
which is independent
of any details of the motion
Maxwell thought really hard about this
what if you jiggle faster
what if you jiggle in a circle
what if you jiggle faster and then slower
in a pattern
you will produce different ripples
in the electric and magnetic fields
they themselves will wiggle
at the frequency that you wiggle
the electric charge
if you wiggle twice as fast
the electric field will respond twice as fast
and the receiver
if you've got one the electric charge far away
will wiggle matching the original one
but the speed
at which this traveling wave
spreads is always
186,000 miles per second
the speed of light
so that's a fundamental property of light
and so what is the difference
between different kinds of light
what's the difference between blue light
and red light
all of a sudden Maxwell says
red light and blue light
don't differ in their fundamental properties
they're basically the same exact thing
just that blue light
arises when your retina wiggles faster
and red light is what you perceive
when your retina
has electrons in it that are wiggling
a little bit more slowly
there's this range of
wiggle frequencies
where your human brain
can detect this electromagnetic wave
what if you wiggle a little bit faster
than what makes a blue signal
to your brain
there's still an electromagnetic wave
it's still traveling in exactly the same way
it's the same physical thing
but you won't perceive it anymore
it's beyond the violet
it's ultraviolet and you would need some
new detector that could detect
this ultraviolet radiation
sometimes I call ultraviolet radiation
ultraviolet light
because even though I can't see it
I think of it as the same thing as light
it's gonna go through lenses
it's gonna do all sorts of things that light does
if you go even faster still
if you wiggle your original charge
faster than the ultraviolet
you move up into
other kinds of electromagnetic radiation
like x-rays
x-radiation is just
electrons wiggling even faster still
producing a wave that's wiggling
even faster still
beyond the x-rays are gamma rays
x-rays are what the
dentists use to
image your teeth
the idea is it's just light coming out of the x-ray machine
it's x-ray light
it's a different frequency of light
and when that light strikes your body
it turns out that it's wiggling
fast enough that it can travel
through much of your body
most of the watery parts of your body
are transparent like glass
to this particular frequency
this particular color of electromagnetic radiation
your bones are dense enough
that they'll absorb this light
and so the picture that you see is a shadow picture
it's just like any shadow picture
of light except that
you need a different detector
to detect the x-radiation
if you go in the other direction
what if you wiggle slower than the red
you get the infrared
infrared radiation
arises from warm objects
because warm objects have wiggling
electrons in them and they're producing
this electromagnetic radiation
it again is another form of light
and we can build cameras
these are night vision cameras
that detect that radiation
you simply need some electric circuit
in the range
in honor of Heinrich Hertz
we've named the unit of frequency
the Hertz
one Hertz means one wiggle per second
the electric wall plug in your house
is 60 Hertz it means that the electricity
is sloshing back and forth
60 times a second
the light that your eyeball is sensitive to
visible light would be about
a million billion Hertz
that's how many times per second
electrons have to wiggle
biological retinal cells
to produce an electrical signal
to your brain
if you go beyond the infrared
you get to the
microwave radiation range
these are just names that people have given
to different frequency bands
microwaves in your oven are nothing more than another kind of light
it's just electromagnetic radiation
at a much lower frequency
happens to be the frequency at which
water molecules like to jiggle
and so this radiation
tends to make water molecules wiggle back
and forth and that heats up your food
if you go even lower
frequency still
you get down to what we call radio waves
the radio waves that are being broadcast
that's just a big antenna somewhere
with an electron that goes up and down that antenna
electromagnetic wave travels out
reaches your antenna
the electrons at your house are going up and down
it's just Heinrich Hertz's experiment all over again
the only reason you need
to plug in your radio is to
amplify the signal
you take your speakers
and you make that oscillating signal
push the speakers in and out
at some frequency
you need to change the frequency so that it's even lower
still so that it produces a wave
that your ears can detect
we'll talk about that in the next lecture
in the end
you can see that
Maxwell's equations are not only leading us
to new physics also leading us to
many many new applications
Maxwell has helped create
the field of applied physics
and he has also opened up
a whole new way of studying
optics and light
think about television sets, you think about cell phones
garage door openers
it's all Maxwell's equations
and what I want to do now
is to think more about waves
in general now we see how important
waves are in the
electromagnetic world we'll realize
that waves are important everywhere
in the world
I'd like to step back briefly
from the story of electromagnetism
to think about a broader kind of physics
the description
and the understanding of objects
that vibrate
think of a pendulum
think of a guitar string vibrating back and forth
anything that's vibrating
and the associated phenomenon
of waves
vibrations and waves are
everywhere that you look
just think about it
it's happening at a macroscopic level
it's happening at a microscopic level
many many objects in the world
and when we start to think
about how waves work
and how oscillations work
we'll discover that we've got a new language
for thinking about things and events
in the world that's a nice counterpoint
to the language that we've been kind of stuck
with which is the language of particles
we've been so
focused on particles because that's where
Isaac Newton started us off
we were thinking about the world as made of
objects and that's a good
constructive productive way of thinking
about things
but the study of electricity and magnetism has maybe
led us to think
about nature as having this
field aspect
and fields are more continuous
and then you've got these wiggles in the fields
and all of a sudden you realize
that understanding waves might be
useful to be able to describe
what's going on in a broader sense
it's really a collective
thing
if you look at one object
well there you've got your point-like object
it's when you have a collection of objects
that you start to think about
the wave that's where waves arise
they always arise when you
have a bunch of connected
things
and then you've got some disturbance
some disturbance that can
propagate, can spread
people had been studying waves forever
certainly ancient Greeks
were interested you know it's natural
human curiosity to look at the waves
on the beach and to wonder
about them and boy it looks
like physics seems like
you should be able to describe this thing
you should be able to understand how it works
they seem to be very repeatable
and regular and you could draw pictures
of them it just feels like
this should be good physics
by Maxwell's time
waves were extremely
well studied it was part
and parcel of what it meant to be a physicist
you knew about Newton's laws
you knew about waves how they behave
what they look like how you make them
they're definitely physical
things you can see them with your eyes
you can measure their properties
and so we ought to be able
to make sense of this story
I'll always
go back to my canonical wave
which is dropping the pebble into the pond
I like that one it's easy to visualize
you can see
in your mind this little ripple spreading out
and you can start
to think about the ways that we might
like to describe this
physics begins always
with description kinematics was
the beginning of classical physics
so I'd like to kind of do the kinematics
of waves what do we need
to just describe this
thing and then once we can describe it
we'll start moving to deeper
understanding and explanations
if you look at the water
and you think carefully about what's
happening there is a medium
there is this material that's the
that's the water itself
and then the water
molecules are moving up and down
they are being displaced and they have
they have an equilibrium point
it's the flat level of the pond
that they want to be at
if you push the water down
water pressure lifts them back up again
if you pull them up gravity pulls them down
the ripples that you see
are arising from the displacement
of the particles
ordinary position
and that's really all we're going to need
to describe
but when we step back and we see the wave
we don't have to think about the water
you can squint your eyes a little bit
and not worry about what the water is made of
and just watch the wave how big is it
where is it located how wide is it
these would be the kinds of things
that we would want to do to describe it
in the end I will
define a wave as a
self-propagating disturbance of
anything self-propagating
it has to
create the next
piece of itself so the water molecule
here wiggles its neighbor
which wiggles its neighbor and that's the
self-propagating disturbance
and the wave isn't a thing
it's not a piece of water
or a bunch of pieces of water
the wave is the disturbance
of the water so it's like one
step removed and
we're going to wrestle with this a little bit
whether we want to wave a thing or not
when I have a classical
wave
an ideal wave
I almost always
think about the medium
although we've already got this one example
of an electromagnetic wave
where there's no physical
thing there's no material object
that's wiggling it's the electric field
which is an abstract
entity
which is just getting bigger
and weaker stronger and weaker
over and over again
when I say it's not a
thing what would the mass
of a wave be it doesn't make any sense
the wave doesn't have a mass
the water molecules have mass but the wave
the disturbance is it's just what it is
it
does it have a position well that one's a little
bit touchier if you think about
my water wave that's expanding
I'm seeing this little ripple that's
heading outwards it does have
a distance from the origin at any given
moment in time I could take a snapshot
and I could say here's the wave
and I would point to
a big circle so I would know
what the radius was but I wouldn't know
exactly where the wave is the waves are
always spread out it's sort of a
feature of waves that they tend to be
spread out if you go to the
ocean you can see a wave
and as they come towards the beach they're
spread out parallel to the beach
but then behind them there's another wave
and if you kind of take
the grand picture of
the ocean you'll see this
undulation traveling across
the surface of the water and it's not
localized at all
the entire ocean is one
gigantic traveling wave
so the location of a wave
may or may not be well defined
kind of depends on the situation
and
if you think about the
motion of the wave
there's a really important and subtle thing going on
picture a
water wave traveling by
and it's moving from left
to right so you're out in the ocean
and you see this big wave it's very clearly
identified and it's traveling
along now think about the
medium the water
the water is going up and down
now you might think
that the water is also moving from
left to right if you've surfed
at the beach
you might imagine that the water
is flowing sideways
right along with the wave but it's not
I want to convince you of this
because it's kind of an important idea about the waves
water waves near the beach
unfortunately become non-linear
they are no longer ideal waves
and there is some throwing
around of water at the beach
which really mucks up with our intuitions
because we think of waves
most of us by our experiences at the beach
if you just go a little bit
away from the break
if you get to the region of the ocean
where they're just big waves
but they're not breaking
you're sitting a little rubber dingy
when the wave goes by you go up
and then you go back down again
you don't start surfing you just bob
and if you're not convinced of this
I've got another example
that convinced me I remember
I used to struggle with this one a lot
think of a field of wheat
and it's completely smooth and flat
and then over at one edge
of the field there's a rustle
maybe a little puff of wind
or a person walks by and shakes the wheat
and now you're standing up above
on a platform and you're watching
and you can just visualize this wave
of wheat it's just a ripple
in the wheat that's going to spread
from one side to the other
very clear very visible you could take pictures of it
you could say ah there it is now
and now it's moved over here
so you could see the wave
moving from one side of the field to the other
and now I ask you is the wheat
moving from one side of the field to the other
is there a flow of wheat
just because of this wave
and now it's completely obvious
every stock is stuck right where it is
it just wiggles back and forth
and ends up right exactly where it started
water is really doing the same thing
out in the deep ocean
most waves are ideal
in this sense that the motion of the medium
is in one direction
and the motion of the wave is in a totally
different direction
here's another example
and one which many people have personal experience
with the waves at the stadium
so somebody stands up and a whole row
of people all stand up and then they sit down
and then their neighbors stand up
and sit down and then their neighbors
it's a wave it's a self propagating disturbance
you wait until your neighbor moves
there's an interaction it's a
it's a kind of a social interaction
it's an agreement between you and your neighbor
that now you will stand up
and people are going up
and down no human being
is moving in the direction of the wave
the wave is rippling sideways through the
stadium but nobody makes
one micron of movement in that direction
that's a property
of waves that the medium
is doing one thing and the disturbance is
doing another
and I want to
I want to sort of recognize again
that the wave is
it's an abstract thing
it's our description of what's going on
it's not a physical entity
it's not a particle
now if you watch a wave
and you look at it
you might think that it's
behaving in some respects
like a particle
let's think about the differences
between these things
a particle has a mass, has a position
it has an existence
independent of any other material
object
none of these are characteristics of waves
waves require
a bunch of objects that are connected
together and the waves are
spread out and they can have all sorts
of different ways of being spread out
and
it is nice to think
about a wave that is localized
this is going to help me to visualize what's going on
my favorite example for this one
is a slinky, remember those toys
I had lots of slinkies when I was a kid
if you stretch out a big long slinky
on a flat floor
at first it's motionless, that's the medium
the medium is the metal of the slinky
and now you go to one end
the other end is held fixed
and you at your end you start wiggling
the slinky
so first of all just wiggle it up and back
and stop wiggling
can you visualize what's going to happen
there'll be this little blip on the slinkiest
sideways blip and that blip will start propagating
because of course the sideways pulled
metal is going to pull on its neighbor
which pulls on its neighbor
and of course those neighbors are pulling the blip back
so you've got a restoring force
and also this propagation
and this is a beautiful little wave
it's a little pulse and it travels
from one side of the slinky to the other
and if you squinted your eyes
you might say well that looks
like a part, it looks like a little toy
something, a little toy truck
that's moving from one side to the other
if I wasn't looking too carefully
I might fool myself into thinking
that this little blip was a material physical object
it does things
that material objects do
it gets to the end of the slinky little recoil
come on back
and it does other things that aren't
common for material objects
like it will fade away over time
that's because of internal friction
so you can see that there are both connections
and distinctions
but you can fool yourself
into thinking that a wave
is somehow particle like
and we'll keep coming back to this
because in nature many wave phenomena
we've argued
people have argued is that a wave
or is that a bunch of little particles
like Isaac Newton trying to decide
whether light was a wave
or a bunch of little light particles flowing outwards
when you're looking at a wave and you want to describe it
one of the things that you might
describe is
you go down to the level of the medium
itself
and you see the medium wiggling up and down
and you say okay that has a frequency
I can measure that in hertz
cycles or wiggles per second
so the frequency
would be a description
is that a description of the medium or the wave
well they're both intimately connected with one another
when we're talking about a particular wave
it will have a definite frequency associated with it
it will also have
usually a characteristic
length
waves on the ocean
as long as you've got one and then another
there's going to be a typical distance
from one peak to the next peak
and we call that the length of the wave
so be careful
it's not the sideways length
of the wave running towards the beach
it's the distance from one peak
back to the next one
that's the wave length
and then you can talk about the velocity
of the wave
and now we're going to be very careful
about the wave, not the medium
so if you go to the stadium
and you watch the ripple
it's the speed at which the ripple moves
sideways through the stadium
that's what I mean when I talk about the speed of the wave
I do not mean the speed
of the people who stand up
and sit down again
that is more closely associated with the frequency
of the wave
so we keep these ideas separate
and the speed is the thing that really belongs
to the wave itself
the speed arises because of interactions
the more tightly coupled the pieces
of the medium are, generally speaking
the faster the wave is going to ripple
because when you jerk on one piece
if it's tightly coupled to its neighbor
the neighbor is going to respond very quickly
and so that's how you make a fast wave
is that you make things that are more
tightly connected
if you take that slinky
and you jiggle it and you get a wave
that's traveling down it
and you want to make that wave travel faster
what do you have to do?
the one thing that you might imagine
is just jiggle your hand faster
just jerk it forwards and backwards
in half the time
but that won't do it
what you'll get is a wave
that has the medium jerking
up and down faster
but the pulse will continue to travel
at the exact same speed as it did before
you may believe that
you may not believe that
that's why it's slinky and check it out
I've got a computer simulation of this
it's on a website from Colorado
www.fet.colorado.edu
P-H-E-T
and you can look at lots of simulations
of physical events
and one of them is a wave on a string
and you can convince yourself
at least with the simulation
that jiggling your hand more rapidly
that will change the frequency
it might change the wave length
because if you jiggle up and down really quick
over and over again
then there's not that much time
for the first pulse to run away from you
before the second pulse
starts running away from you
and so the two pulses are going to be close together
you're going to get a small wave length
if you've got a rapid frequency
but it has no impact
on the speed at which those ripples
are traveling away from you
a little bit counter-intuitive
but a fact of nature which you can verify
for yourself if you want
if you stand up and sit down at the stadium
very very quickly
it won't help make the wave
go faster
what would make the wave go faster
is if your neighbor's reaction time was shorter
your neighbor has to react to you more quickly
they have to be more tightly coupled
so if you want the slinky wave to go faster
what you do is you tighten the slinky
you pull, you stretch it out
now all the pieces of metal are under more tension
and when you jerk one piece
now those little pulses will travel more quickly
we also saw this with light
Mr. Maxwell proved that
no matter how you jiggle the electric charge
the traveling electromagnetic wave
is always traveling at the speed of light
here there are no material objects involved
so there's no mechanism
to speed up the speed of light
we're stuck, it is what it is
and you can't make it go any faster
waves are very very closely related
to this oscillatory
motion of the medium
the one is really
part of the other
and physicists love to look
at this kind of simple oscillation
we call it simple harmonic
motion
because it's just something going back and forth
back and forth
and harmonic, well because that makes us think about music
and musical strings
something that just moves in a nice
simple back and forth
pattern
the mathematics of simple harmonic motion
is described by a mathematical function
called the sine function
or the sine wave
if you were to make a graph
of the sideways position
of a spot of water
or a spot of slinky
or one of the people in the stadium
I really need a continuous wave
so I need
to keep wiggling the end of the slinky
I need to have a whole bunch of waves going by
in the stadium we don't usually do that
but you can imagine somebody raises up
and sits down and they raise up and they sit down
now you'd have
more like a water wave, a continuous wave
and now if you plotted the position
of any one individual piece of the medium
and you grafted on a
on a graph you'd see it goes up and down
and up and down
in a nice smooth sine wave
simple harmonic
motion is the name that we give
for this ideal oscillatory motion
and you might ask
well are real things behaving
in this ideal way
and the answer is it's a darn good approximation
in a huge number of circumstances
it's remarkable
how many things have motion
which is practically indistinguishable
from simple harmonic
motion
the slinky is a pretty darn good
simple harmonic motion for the individual
pieces the water waves
it works really well until you get right next
to the beach
in electromagnetic waves
really ideal, electromagnetic waves
are the perfect wave
and the motion
if you graph the strength of the electric field
at some point it will be this beautiful
sinusoidal waves
what makes
such motion, why is it that it's so common
any time
any material object has a
place where it belongs
where it's got an equilibrium point
and you disturb it and it gets pulled back there
no matter which way you disturb it
and it gets pulled back home
that's going to make simple harmonic motion
it's the guitar string that you pull away
from equilibrium
there's now tension in the string
that's trying to restore every piece of metal
back to that flat position
of course once they get there
they've been pulled all the way
now they're moving
so inertia keeps them going
and object in motion remains in motion
that's true for little pieces of metal
they're all connected one to the other
so they keep on going, they go past the equilibrium position
but as soon as they go past
now they're getting pulled backwards
so they get pulled forwards
and then they get pulled backwards
and they get pulled backwards
and it goes over and over again
if there's no damping
if there's no friction in the rubbing
of these metal molecules
one with the other, metal atoms
then this will keep on going
for an arbitrarily long period of time
this oscillation can keep on going
real simple harmonic motion never stops
in real life it tends to fade away
in amplitude
if there's friction involved
a pendulum would do the same thing
you lift it up, it gets pulled back
down to the origin
and then it's got some inertia that swings on through
you can start to think about all sorts of
circumstances in life
atoms in any crystal
microscopically if you pull them aside
there's all the rest of the crystal is sitting there
and so they get pushed back
where they're as far away from everybody as they can be
of course they'll overshoot
so they also will undergo simple harmonic motion
you will get a wave
any time you have simple harmonic
motion and
one object that's doing that
is coupled in some way
to another object that can do exactly the same thing
so these two
things in nature, simple harmonic
motion or oscillations
and waves, they just come
together and you see it all the time
if you move
your neighbor moves and that's all you need
to make a wave start
and you can think about
all sorts of physical situations where this might
happen and
in the next lecture we're going to talk about some situations
where it happens where it's not so completely
obvious
and so I want to
in this lecture think carefully
about how we would know
for sure that we've got
a wave happening
so when you have a wave
you can look
deep or you can step back
if you zoom in
what you see is the motion of the medium
and it's simple harmonic motion
if you step back
you see a traveling wave
with some speed
and you no longer think about the medium
you no longer pay any attention to the medium
you just notice the disturbance itself
and all of a sudden it feels
really different
so in this harmonic motion
I'm watching this little blip
like the top of one particular wave crest
and it seems to be moving in a straight line
like a particle
so you can see how this particle
like aspect is there
in the collective motion
what is it about a wave
that's particularly unique
well I would argue that one of the most
remarkable things
one of the most spectacular things about the fact
that it isn't a particle
that waves come together
let's start by thinking about the slinky
because that's a nice clean example
you don't have to worry about things spreading out
in multiple dimensions
a slinky is a one dimensional wave
it's just a pulse that travels down
a nice beautiful straight line
so imagine this long, long slinky
and you're at one end
and you make a blip, a pulse
and it starts traveling let's say from
right to left
and I'm at the other end
and I make a blip and that makes a pulse
that's going the other way
so we've got these two pulses
and they're heading towards one another
at first they can't possibly
know about one another
the blip over here and the blip over there
there's no mechanism yet for them to communicate
but as they get closer and closer together
you realize that at a certain point they're going to touch
there's going to be some kind of interaction
and what is that interaction
well once again this is a question for experiment
you can imagine what might happen
you could imagine lots of things
if you're thinking like Newton
you're thinking like
these are particles
you might imagine that they will bounce
one off of the other
and the incoming pulse will turn around
and the other incoming pulse will turn around
and that's not at all what happens
so you've got to watch carefully
what you'll see is they just pass right on
through one another
and after they've passed by
there is no sign of the interaction
they just slipped right through one another
that's spectacularly not
particle like right particles coming together
head on they crash
they'll either stop or they'll break
or they'll go flying in some other direction
but
whatever it is that particles do
it's definitely not just passing
through one another
and you might be wondering how do I know
that they pass through one another
maybe it was the case
that they bounced
after all I see
a blip coming in
and I see a blip going out
how do I know which is which
well think about an experiment
you could convince yourself quickly
when you make your blip make yours twice as big as mine
so you've got a doubly big pulse
coming in one way
and I've got a singly big pulse coming in the other way
they pass through
one another and the little one just keeps on going
and the big one just keeps on going
it's clear as day
so you can really convince yourself
that this is the way waves behave
and now comes
the most interesting part of wave behavior
this is the part that's the most
distinguishing characteristic of waves
very very different from particles even more
than passing through one another
is what happens at that moment
when they pass by one another
not afterwards but at the moment
of interaction
we have some fancy names for this
I've often been using the word super position
when you've got two separate motions
or two separate things
like two forces or two
fields and they happen to be
both at the same place and the same time
they add up
and waves superpose in this way also
so if you send in
a one centimeter tall up wave
and I send in
a one centimeter tall up wave
at the moment at the place
and time where they pass through one another
if you take a snapshot
what will you see
well you'll see a slinky
and the slinky has to be somewhere
at every point it has to be located somewhere
and you'll see the peak of the slinky
is two centimeters tall
the blips have added
one plus one is two
now what would happen if I added
an up pulse coming from one direction
to a down pulse
coming from the other direction
you can jerk the slinky either way
and you don't have to make a full
bend you can just make a little jerk down and back
start at the equilibrium
and that makes a little blip which just goes down
on one side
and just up on the other side
these two pulses are coming towards one another
after they pass through one another
we know what's going to happen they're just going to keep on going
the down one keeps on going
the up one keeps on going
but what happens at that moment of intersection
you take a snapshot
what happens when you add positive and negative
you get zero
it's like the wave just disappeared
for an instant in time
if you took a snapshot you would see
a completely flat slinky
now that might seem paradoxical
have we lost conservation of energy here
I mean the waves are carrying
some energy and some information
oh it's still there
it's kind of like taking the snapshot of a pendulum
that just happens to be passing through the origin
if you took the picture
you'd say oh it appears to be
at its equilibrium rest position
and it is at the equilibrium rest
position
but the pendulum is still moving
and the slinky is really still moving
parts of the slinky are moving down
parts of the slinky are moving up
you just happen to catch them at this lovely moment
where the two waves interfered with one another
and apparently
cancelled one another out
so superposition is one name we give
to this adding up of waves
interference is another name that we give
I don't know if I like the word interference
interference as much although everybody uses it
because interference makes me think
like afterwards they'll be different
they interfered with one another
interference makes me think of things being stopped
but it's just a word
and what it means is
superposition
and you can have constructive interference
that's the two up pulses
adding up to a bigger one
or you can have destructive interference
that's where one is up and one is down
and they cancel out
of course you could have anything in between
you could have partial cancellation with waves
but the really dramatic thing
and the way you can tell a wave is a wave
is you could never
conceivably imagine
of two particles coming together
and then for one instant in time
they completely disappear from the universe
and then they reappear and continue on their way
just doesn't happen
and so this is going to be our defining character
of what makes a wave a wave
and when we're thinking
about things like
electricity and magnetism
or sound waves or other kinds of waves
we're going to look for this
destructive interference
and that's going to be our signal that we've got waves
to summarize
we talked in a kind of an abstract way
about waves and simple harmonic motion
today it's just a description of nature
it's a very very common motion
every atom in your body is behaving this way
when you drive the speaker
the speaker heads are moving back and forth
and then your eardrums
are moving back and forth
and then when you look at me
your eyeballs have
electrons in the retina that are jiggling back and forth
no matter where you look
no matter what you think about in nature
you start noticing oscillatory motion
it's obviously important
to describe it and it turns out
physicists love this because the sine function
is such a relatively
easy mathematical description
that applies to all these different things
it's easy to manipulate them
it's easy to understand them
and we'll continue on this story next time
as we talk about some more specific examples
of waves
