Welcome. You are about to embark on a unique learning adventure from the Great Courses.
Our courses are crafted to be entertaining journeys, both comprehensive and fascinating.
They're designed to expand horizons, deepen understanding, and foster epiphanies in a
broad array of subjects and university-level disciplines. The lectures are university
professors and subject matter experts carefully selected by the Great Courses and its customers
for their intellectual distinction and exceptional abilities to teach.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalogs or visit our website at thegreatcourses.com and imagine how
much you can learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the company of some
of the greatest minds in the world.
These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. These lectures are titled
How the World Learns Comparative Educational Systems.
Your lecture is Dr. Alexander W. Wiseman. Dr. Wiseman is an associate professor of comparative
and international education at Lehigh University. He received his PhD in both comparative and
international education and educational theory and policy from the Pennsylvania State University.
Dr. Wiseman's scholarship focuses on internationally comparative educational research
and he is the author of many research or practice articles and books. He has more than 19 years of
professional experience working worldwide with government education departments,
university-based teacher education programs and community-based professional development
programs for teachers. He also has been a classroom teacher in both the United States and East Asia.
Lecture 1 The Global Challenge to Educate
I began my career in education in the 1990s. First as an English teacher in Japanese junior
high schools and then as a high school teacher in Aztec, New Mexico. That was a great way to
start I think because in the 1990s much of the world still thought that Japanese schools and
students had an advantage. The Japanese economy was growing faster than most other economies
worldwide at that time and on internationally comparative tests Japanese students in schools
outperformed the students in schools in the most developed countries in the world,
often by very large margins. Later when I came back from Japan to work in an American high school
this experience gave me unique insights into what some significant differences were between
the two systems. Several in particular stand out. First Japanese classrooms were students stable,
meaning that students remained in the same classroom all day and the teachers moved around from
class to class. That's the opposite of what I was used to in American classrooms. In the United
States the teachers work out of their room all day long while the students circulate into different
classrooms for different subjects. It means that American students base at school is their hallway
locker but for Japanese students the classroom itself is their anchor. Second Japanese students
were organized by groups within their classrooms and did most of their assignments working
cooperatively. Now that contrasts with the individually focused approach that's more
typical in school settings in the United States and elsewhere around the world. Of course in
American classrooms students sometimes work together in teams but more typically students
are responsible for their own work. And third while Japanese students were excellent at repeating
the facts they struggled with unscripted situations and problems. Now perhaps this seems a little
stereotypical but it is a key characteristic of educational systems like Japan's which
use high stakes tests to determine whether and how students move through one school to another
or one level to the next. Now this is in contrast to the American students I worked with in the
United States who seemed to perform better with unscripted problems than did my Japanese students
and preferred exercises compared to standardized testing. So let me stop for a moment and lay
out my basic thesis for this course and I'll set it up in three parts. The first idea I want to
share with you is that context matters. Hopefully this is clearly expressed in the examples I've
just highlighted to reflect the differences between American and Japanese classroom practices.
The Japanese method works for the Japanese but in my experience it isn't the American way.
The second idea is not as obvious and so it requires a little more work to grasp
particularly when applied to comparing school systems around the world. It concerns what I call
school and non-school factors. What are non-school factors and school factors you might ask?
Well think of it this way. The Japanese cultural custom of consensus and the countervailing American
tradition of individuality are large and external influences on the classroom or in other words
they are non-school factors that still influence what goes on inside of the classroom.
In turn for the moment let's understand school factors themselves more narrowly as school
resources such as funding or textbooks or facilities or even a classroom curriculum
or a national education policy and of course among school factors are the teachers themselves.
So when you and I try to compare how the world learns we have to first understand how cultural
customs and practices outside of the classroom and beyond the confines of school grounds influence
what goes on inside the school. We also have to try to understand the strictly school factors
phenomenon inside of every school and classroom even though typically school factors are not
as different around the world as our non-school customs and practices and this brings me to my
third point and my central thesis which is quite simply that the key to learning from
international comparisons is to understand which school and non-school factors align
to make good things happen in any particular context and why is that important? Well the
research I've conducted suggests that borrowing or benchmarking one national education system
against another is not necessarily a remedy nor even a useful analytical tool within the
educational system that seeks to make the comparison and yet borrowing and benchmarking
are among the most common approaches to educational reform out there.
It might be natural to compare what works in one classroom school or educational system with another
but taking what works in one place and implementing it in another is a much less successful approach
than most people think. Instead experience and the evidence clearly shows that systems which
focus on internal comparisons across what we call content and cognitive domains are the most
effective at achieving solutions when we're working on educational reform. Now cognitive domains
or cognition generally refer to the mental processes of acquiring knowledge and understanding
through thought experience and the senses and let me explain what I mean. School curricula can be
categorized broadly into domains such as math or science or history literacy and so on. We can
further define this content according to subdomains like algebra or geometry or statistics or even
simple arithmetic but cognitive domains are a little different. If content is what we know and
learn then cognitive domains refer to how we think when we're learning and among teachers the most
famous example of cognitive domains is known as Bloom's Taxonomy. Bloom's Taxonomy is named for
the 20th century American educator and psychologist Benjamin Bloom who published a framework for
categorizing educational goals known as the taxonomy of educational objectives. Bloom's Taxonomy is a
way of understanding different levels of thinking starting with plain knowledge or memorization
at the most basic level and moving up through several different cognitive levels until we get to
what is called synthesis and evaluation at the most complex levels of thinking.
So now that we have some of the core ideas under our belt we're in a better position to look more
closely at the example of the Japanese classroom that I introduced right at the start. Perhaps we
can even draw some basic conclusions. I mentioned that the Japanese classroom is arranged to value
teams and group consensus about actions, knowledge and even social interaction and even junior high
classrooms in Japan are organized in this way. Students stay in their classrooms while teachers
move from class to class. In this system the class is valued as a unit and within the classroom the
students are divided into smaller groups with deaths arranged to emphasize the subdivision into
smaller teams. Now we can make some inferential conclusions and we can identify the following
benefits. The social organization and the cultural expectations of young Japanese students are being
reinforced by both school and non-school factors to act and react in highly scripted ways.
For example, learning is supported by the fixed classroom structure. No roaming the halls so that
distractions and interference with learning are minimized. But there's a possible downside too.
The downside for the Japanese is that unscripted learning or situations where knowledge and skill
needs to be applied may be less manageable by Japanese youth than perhaps by young American
students because American students learn a different set of norms through more individualized U.S.
classroom instruction. So here we have the start of our path towards understanding that the key to
learning from international comparisons is to understand which school and non-school factors
align to make good things happen in any particular context. But before we start delving into more
examples along with some new ideas and interpretations let me tell you a little more about myself.
In Japan I taught English conversation skills mostly to students in their first or second
year of English learning. Our days together often began with 30 to 40 Japanese junior high
school students singing Beatles songs along with me. Now the Beatles are a great tool for
learning simple conversational English. Consider the song Hello Goodbye. It repeats the basic
greeting hello hello over and over again which makes it a great instructional tool for students
trying to learn English and pronunciation. I also practiced interactive pronunciation and basic
sentence structure with students using examples like I like to play tennis what do you like to play
and when I came back to the United States I taught high school English at all levels from
freshmen to seniors and I coached basketball which was a little frustrating in a rural mostly
lower income school in New Mexico. This school was very diverse in terms of social and ethnic
background but like most schools had a middle class and a predominantly female teaching force.
It was a great experience because I could start to see what U.S. schools looked like to an outsider
rather than from my former insiders perspective and then later as a university professor I became
part of a teacher training program in Oklahoma where I taught the foundations of American education
and supervised free service teachers as well as first year teachers out in the field.
Now I work in comparative and international education which deals mostly with system wide
evaluation research planning and strategic policymaking and as part of my professional
consultations I've worked with schools in South Africa and the Middle East on educational
reform strategies as well as on teacher professional development. I've served as a member of a
questionnaire expert team developing background survey questions for one of the world's largest
and most influential international assessments of educational achievement and I've been part of
a team that proposed and established a national education evaluation commission in Saudi Arabia
which was the first of its kind. I've been inside schools and talked to educators on
five different continents and at every level of schooling from poor and public to elite and
private and even in institutions from ministries of education to international think tanks.
I've also served my professional community by establishing and now editing the annual review
of comparative and international education which gives me broad access to and perspectives on
education around the world. This has been a long and interesting professional journey for me in
the world of education and my motivation for it is complex. I think the motivation for being an
educator is really complex for most of us. Educators usually aren't motivated very much by money since
education typically doesn't pay well and even at the highest levels it doesn't pay very well compared
to other fields I'm sorry to say but educators aren't necessarily motivated by status either
although in some countries teachers enjoy highly respected status in the community.
My principal motivations are twofold. I have a love of learning and I have an interest in creating
a chain of success. I truly do love learning across a broad spectrum of subjects but the
fascination with creating chains of success is what keeps me doing what I do. If educational
systems work well the positive benefits seem to find their way into schools classrooms and
to individual students. My experience has been that these benefits ultimately travel with young
students out into their communities and eventually improve living conditions, economic stability
and the general quality of life. Likewise if students learn to their highest capacity and
if teachers teach to their greatest stability in the classrooms then the positive benefits work
their way into schools districts and national education systems and that again benefits people's
living conditions economic stability and the general quality of life. So education when done right
is a win-win in my point of view. And as the father of a high school student and a middle
school student I have a personal interest in how schools work as well. Knowing how the world learns
is a stepping stone to understanding how students learn, how teachers teach and how educational
systems function in both the best and the worst ways. I got my sights set on helping parents,
educators and policy makers make the best decisions and implement the best education
in each unique context and classroom in the United States and around the world.
So now you know a little about where I'm coming from. So let's move on to the rest
of this discussion about what the world learns and how the world learns it.
We can start by asking why do we want to know how the world learns? Well we might just be curious
and really interested in knowing how the rest of the world learns and reads and interacts and forms
its own culture or we might want to know because we want to fix something. Let's say we've got a
problem so we want to study it and fix it. The latter explanation fits the reason I most often
hear. In fact the number one question I get asked whenever someone finds out what I do
is how can we fix our failing education system? Now this question is always presented
as if there was a crisis looming over our shoulders at that very moment and if we don't think of a way
to fix education immediately then our whole economy our whole society or life as we know it will
collapse and I think the people who ask me this always do so out of a sincere interest in finding
an answer and they really do expect to hear some sort of plan for fixing education. Maybe that's
why you're participating in this course right now. So I understand that this is an important question
to ask and to answer and it would probably be a lot easier if I could just list five off-the-shelf
fixes that would make immediate improvement. But after 20 years of working in education
I like many of you know that there are no simple solutions or easy fixes to complicated issues
and quite frankly there are much more fundamental and productive questions about why we learn and
how we teach that we should be asking rather than what's wrong with our schools. Realistically my
first reaction whenever I'm asked the question about fixing education is to wonder why is this
person asking this question? What is his or her agenda or what's at stake for this person?
Or if I'm feeling a little more philosophical I might start to think about why is the baseline
expectation for education literally wherever I go the baseline expectation is that it's failing
somehow. How do we move beyond the rhetoric of crisis and really ask questions and make changes
that matter? In this course we're going to learn that some of the factors that influence education
are more important than others and if we really want to learn not just how the world learns
but what that means for the improvement of education in our own or other communities and
countries then we're going to have to learn which factors matter the most and focus on them.
Returning to my thesis the first factor in comparison is that context is key.
Context is the environment in which education takes place and there are two kinds of context
that we're going to focus on school and non-school. Context is multi-layered both inside and outside
of schools. Inside schools there are students teachers classrooms departments administration
central administration and on and on throughout the organizational hierarchy. There's an
organizational culture that permeates most schools and is partly a product of leadership
partly a product of the legacy of schooling in a particular system and partly a product of outside
influence from the community around the school. Outside of schools the context gets much larger
and it gets larger very quickly. The first level is the school itself and the social
political and economic norms that are unique to that school. For example in some schools there's
an atmosphere of healthy competitive achievement among the students and teachers. While in other
schools the attitude is more about just getting by or the competition has become unhealthy in
ways that can lead to cheating and in the worst cases even lead to corruption. The next level
of context is the local community and in the United States this includes the school district
and it means that the schools norms are nested within the community's norms
but school contexts are often without clear borders. This means that each school presents
unique challenges because the blending of context both inside and outside of school creates unique
conditions for teaching and learning. What may work perfectly for an urban American school might
fail at a suburban European school for example. So let's talk for a second about what school
factors are and what non-school factors are. School factors have to do with the factors within
the school that influence how teaching and learning takes place. Some of those that we talked about
already or at least mentioned are the resources and the facilities or the content of the curriculum
or the training of the teachers or the professional development that teachers
engage in or it could be how many years a student is in school or how many days in a year or how
many hours in a day. In other words school factors are anything that we can manipulate or change
in order to adjust the way that school operates. These are the kinds of things that we usually
focus on when we do educational reform. Non-school factors are those things that we cannot manipulate
or change especially as educational reformers. For example as a high school teacher I couldn't
change what went on at my students' families or in their homes. I couldn't change the conditions in
the community. I couldn't make it so that their families had higher salaries or more vacation
time or whatever else we might think of that would be outside of the school itself and the
authority and responsibility of the school itself. So there are key distinctions between what a
school factor is and what a non-school factor is and we tend to focus more on school factors
because those are the things that we can change more readily. Now there's no formula, at least
none discovered yet, that works for fixing education every time given a certain mixture of school
and non-school factors or contexts. But we do know that it is much easier to change or manipulate
school factors than it is to change or manipulate non-school factors and the context that they
live in. For example school factors that we can influence include curriculum, both the official
curriculum that's usually built off of standards for education and how that curriculum is implemented
that has to do with teaching a lot. We can manipulate, we can influence school resources like
funding or the kinds of textbooks that students use or the school facilities themselves. We can
influence teachers in terms of how they're prepared or what their education is like or what experiences
they bring to the classroom or how we engage them in professional development or help them
learn to be better teachers. We can influence policy which has to do with the requirements for
teaching and learning or for discipline. How do we keep a manageable classroom or for policies
related to resources or decision making? How do we decide what education will involve?
Non-school factors are things typically residing in the environment or the context outside of the
school or outside of education as this the sort of formal institution. They are not things that
can be changed by education policy or legislated by administrators or policymakers. And these
non-school factors include the culture of the community, the socioeconomic status of families
and students, the religion of a student or his or her family. He cannot change anything related
to inequality of wealth or status at least not immediately. We can't very well influence family
relationships and there are a whole host of individual characteristics that are way beyond
the control of the school or the teachers or the administrators like whether a student gets enough
sleep at night. So let me give a quick example of the complexity of context before we go further.
Research shows that socioeconomic status is the single most significant factor when it comes to
predicting student learning and performance outcomes. Students from wealthy families and wealthy
communities consistently outperform students from poor families and poor communities. Period.
That's absolute. This is because families that are relatively well to do are also more aligned
with school expectations and content. It also means that those students have advantages that
that other students might not have related to when they read how they see their role models
engaging in education, all sorts of things. And those who do well in life tend to either mimic
or reproduce that culture of schooling that persists in national education systems worldwide.
They also tend to understand the importance of education and manage their children's education
throughout their school years. I'll give you an example of a situation that highlights this.
Back when I was a high school teacher in New Mexico, the first parent teacher night that I ever
experienced was a slow night. My class consisted of students who were mostly from poorer families
or were Navajo families from the nearby Navajo Reservation. And most of my students' parents,
quite frankly, didn't or couldn't come to meet me during the parent teacher conference.
So I sat in my classroom waiting for someone to show up for the first full hour. Then,
all of a sudden, a father of one of my Navajo students walked in. I was elated. I introduced
myself. I asked him his name. He told me, and he sat down at the desk. And I told him what we
were doing in class, how his daughter was performing, and I gave him some ideas about my
expectations for the class and for her. And he sat there in silence the whole time, barely
even blinking. His face was literally expressionless. And I stopped and I asked him if he had any
questions. And he just stared at me for what seemed like five minutes, even though it was probably
only about 30 seconds. Then he simply said, thank you. He got up and he walked out. And he ended
up being one of only three parents who came to see me that night. But what really bothered me was
that I couldn't understand why he was so unengaged. He barely said a word and then just left. And I
was telling another teacher at my school about this experience when she asked me if the family
were Navajo. And when I said yes, her face broke into this broad smile. And she said, well, that's
why. I shook my head to let her know that I didn't understand. And she said, he probably never
finished school himself and probably didn't fully see why his daughter needed to be in school. But
he knew that it was important to get ahead outside of the Navajo community. And he knew that when
parents are involved, their children tend to do better. She said, he was simply trying to play
the game. In other words, this Navajo father had learned that by presenting himself as an involved
parent, by simply showing up to parent teacher night, his daughter had a better chance of doing
well in school. He also knew that relationships are important to educational success. But how did
he know that? Well, because at some point, he'd made the connection between his own culture
and school culture. And that is how he decided to play the game of education for his daughter.
Research and experiences like these make a much larger point. And this point is that education
reform doesn't reform society. And this gets back to why it is so important to distinguish
school from non-school factors. Society and education each have their own cultures.
Non-school factors embody social and cultural norms and conditions outside of school. But
school factors don't reform society. This means we need to first understand that a gap exists
between school and non-school factors. And it is important to understand in order to navigate the
gap. Second, we literally need to navigate the gap by understanding how school and non-school
factors interact to produce the quality of education and the impact or outcomes of education
that they result in. Teachers are at the forefront of this and that they work right where school
and non-school factors meet. They're in the classroom, which embodies school factors,
and they're constantly with students who are shaped and influenced by non-school factors.
So we're left thinking about how to reform education in a way that it accounts for the
interaction effects of school and non-school factors, such as socioeconomic status.
Research shows that teacher education and a teacher's experience can have a significant
impact on student learning and performance outcomes. But we also know that the effect of
school factors, such as teacher quality, is less about how well teachers know a subject area
or can have every student in their seats doing some sort of learning activity and much more about
how teachers manage the interaction of a student's, for example, socioeconomic status
with the school and with the classroom environment. In other words, teachers have to finesse instruction
and learning on behalf of their students in order to accommodate the different combinations of school
and non-school factors at work at any given moment. This means that in low status communities in
schools, teachers have to do much, much more to deliver a positive impact on their students
than do teachers in high status and high income schools and communities. And it's plain as day
that two teachers with the exact same education and experience, two of the exact same defining
characteristics of teacher quality when it comes to evaluating them, these teachers are going to
have very different experiences at a high socioeconomic status school on the one hand
and a low socioeconomic status school on the other. At the high status school, one of these
teachers is going to have high performing students and is probably going to receive support from
parents, school principals and peers for the great work that she or he is doing. And at a low
status school, the other teacher is likely to have academically struggling and low performing
students and is going to be questioned and monitored to find out why she or he is struggling with
teaching students to perform even at the minimum competency levels. So why is there such a big
difference between these two communities? Is it because there really is a difference in the school
factor, in other words teacher quality, or is it because teacher quality aligns differently
with the non-school factor, which is that community or that family's social and economic status?
I hope it's clear that in this simple example, the difference is context. And yet in most
countries around the world, an understanding of socioeconomic status and the implications of
socioeconomic status for learning are not part of the public discourse about education.
Parents often understand the implications all too well, but policymakers don't have the means
or sometimes they don't have the will to push those levers. I find it it's much more common to
encounter pundits or policymakers who push for across-the-board teacher reform or for implementing
you know five-step or ten-step policy prescriptions that address only school factors without
acknowledging that non-school factors are at least as important in the equation.
For example, Andreas Schleicher, the director of education and skills and an international
spokesman for the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, which we simply call
the OECD, argues that high-performing education systems have implemented particular policies
and educational reforms that low-performing educational systems do not. That's an important
comment because what he's saying is that there is something different about the education in
high-performing schools than in low-performing schools. The problem is that the school factors
are often the same. What Andreas Schleicher misses in his comment is discussing what those
non-school factor differences are. Now it's important to note that the self-described mission
of the OECD, which is headquartered in Paris, is to promote policies that will improve the economic
and social well-being of people around the world by working with member governments to foster
economic growth and financial stability. The OECD's work is based on ongoing monitoring and
data collection in member countries as well as outside of the OECD. In other words,
the OECD collects and analyzes data that has perceived economic relevance, like education data.
Then OECD committees discuss policy regarding the data and they make recommendations to member
countries, which are often implemented by those countries. Now using this process, the OECD has
produced a report and a video series that looks at strong performers and successful reformers
in education. That's what it's called. It examined systems in Belgium, Brazil, Canada,
China, Finland, Germany, Japan, Korea, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Singapore and others
and includes and concludes that some improvements in student learning and in student performance
can be made without any added expense or budget increase. It comes from benchmarking performance,
increasing teacher quality, emphasizing performance accountability and implementing policies
that promote equity and access to education and opportunities to learn while in school.
But the OECD's comparison formula has a fatal flaw, which I already mentioned.
Context changes in every one of those countries and cultures and while every country and culture
has somewhat similar school factors, they must contend with remarkably unique non-school factors.
And so as we ask and answer the question about how the world learns, we need to keep remembering
this one point. The key to learning from international comparisons is understanding
which of those school and non-school factors align to make good things happen in any particular
context. And it's also the answer to the number one question I get about how to fix education.
That is, it's not about providing a five-step plan that works everywhere.
It's about knowing which of those school and non-school factors are important and how they interact.
