Let me start with a simple quiz. I'm going to read you three headlines, and I want you
to guess what they're about. First, consider this headline. It reads, Dumbest Generation
Getting Dumber with Time and Money. And another one says, American education isn't mediocre,
it's deeply unequal. And a third headline proclaims that, indeed, we're still a nation
at risk. Now you'd be correct if you guessed that each of these headlines was from a national
news story about how the American educational system fares on international education achievement
tests, especially compared to countries around the world. And there's some foundation for
these criticisms. The United States ranks in the middle, or just slightly above the
average in reading, mathematics, and science on the two most frequently cited international
tests of student achievement. Even more distressing to many Americans is that we score below countries
that most of us consider to be our economic and political competitors, like China, for example.
And we don't seem to be able to crack into the top achieving group in spite of decade
after decade of educational reforms. A lot of Americans stop right there, and they don't
try to do anything about the perceived problem. Maybe it's because there never seems to be
any good news about our students or education in the United States. So, many people end
up throwing their hands in the air and wondering, what's wrong with us? To address this question,
we can begin by talking about why Americans think about education the way they do. And
once we understand why Americans think about education the way they do, we can start to
understand how to use the data from international test scores and other sources to improve education.
The American educational system is enormous, consisting of almost 16,000 independent school
districts and employing the largest single group of white-collar professionals in the
country. But there's also something that makes it unique. Simply put, education is intensely
personal. Each of us forms a deeply personal philosophy of education. But even though our
philosophies of education are deeply personal, they are also surprisingly similar, because
education is a shared experience worldwide. Education and the experience of schooling
is one of, if not the most important and shared experience humans experience worldwide. It
provides the baseline, or common reference point, that makes even thinking about how
the world learns something that we can all understand regardless of where we are. In
most countries where school attendance is compulsory, at least through the elementary
grades, students spend a large part of their waking hours at school. We learn the fundamentals
of how to communicate and problem-solve in school. We learn how to be part of our larger
communities while also reinforcing our basic social norms. And while we're in school,
we learn the fundamental knowledge that forms the foundation for much of what we believe
and do for the rest of our lives. One of the most famous American educational philosophers,
a man named John Dewey, once said that education is not a preparation for life, education is
life itself. Dewey was one of the earliest comparativists of education in the United States,
so it's worth talking about him and his perspectives a bit more to understand how his comparative
view and his philosophy of education have shaped our educational systems and our perspectives
on education worldwide. Dewey was a philosopher and an educator who lived from 1859 to 1952.
He's most known for his role as a leader of a movement in education in the United States
called the Progressive Movement that came of age in the early 20th century. He also
was a founder of the influential school of philosophy known as Pragmatism, along with
Charles Pierce and William James. And throughout his life, Dewey emphasized ways in which human
intelligence and real-world experiences can be applied through what he called a child-centered
curriculum to solve real problems and understand lived experiences rather than just memorize
facts and learn abstract concepts. Now, this is quite a contrast to be both a renowned
philosopher and an advocate of practical experience and learning. And Dewey's educational ideas
centered on the theoretical gap between child-centered curricula and subject-centered curricula.
This is a gap that he believed arose from education's failure to recognize the natural
and essential interaction between each child and the curriculum being taught in schools.
Dewey was critical also of the traditional curriculum's tendency to see education as
preparation for life rather than life itself. In other words, he didn't see a reason to
separate education from lived experience. And he argued that when education and life
were separated, that education lost its purpose and lost its effectiveness. And although Dewey
made this argument more than 100 years ago, the problem of siloing education into subjects
like English and math and science and so on, and focusing on abstract concepts that can
be tested but not necessarily applied, still persists. In the place of traditional curriculum,
Dewey envisioned new possibilities for education as seeding a child's human potential for development
based on his or her personal experiences. In expressing the importance of integrating
education and experience, Dewey once said, the mind is capacity to refer present conditions
to future results and future consequences to present conditions. He said this was a way
of highlighting our ability to picture future possibilities and events and tie them back
to current circumstances that can yet be changed. Dewey closes this thought by stating that
the ability to hold the future and present in mind are just what is meant by having an
aim or a purpose. Now certainly having an aim or purpose or finding one becomes increasingly
important for children as they move through their early school years toward adulthood.
But to put a finer point on this, Dewey felt that students must experience in order to learn.
And in his view, it was an educator's job to select the appropriate stimuli and appropriate
experiences to bring out young students' interests and impulses. But Dewey was interested in more
than how individual students were educated. He saw that education was more than classrooms
and schools. He saw that education is a social process and a social function that has no definite
meaning until we define the kind of society that we have in mind. Now considering that
Dewey's vision was widely embraced in the early 20th century, although not immediately
implemented, and that it endures even today in educational instruction and thought around
the world, it's almost laughable now that he was really scorned by many other philosophers
of his time who deemed him much too concerned with practice and not concerned enough with
theory. But for most of us, Dewey's point that education is not a preparation for life, but that
education is life itself, is completely accurate, at least through the end of our full-time school
days. Education is life, but it is life in a way that Dewey probably did not expect.
Instead of education in public schools mimicking real-world situations that happen outside of
school, school itself has become the dominant life experience for most people from the ages
of about five or six until they graduate from high school or leave secondary school at around
the age of 18 and then in adulthood. And for many of us, the experience lasts even longer.
So the relevance and importance of today's education, especially formal education, cannot
be overestimated. This might explain why education is the focus of so much public debate and
discussion in the United States and around the world. So now let's take a few moments to ask
some questions that will help us think about what we know and believe about education.
Ready? First, which is more important? Gaining knowledge or learning new skills?
Knowledge is generally defined as what you know. It is information that you have on hand to use
in making decisions, solving problems, and quite frankly, doing things. But it's not the action
or use of knowledge itself. Skills are what you do, and they may require knowledge or they may
be rote procedures. Skills can usually be trained, but knowledge is something that is learned.
So next, ask yourself what you think are the best teaching methods and learning assessment procedures.
In other words, what do you think is the best way for teachers to work with students as they learn
their new knowledge and skills? The answer reveals what you think is the best way to assess
whether students really know and really can do what you think they should be able to know and do.
Some people think that individual learning is the best kind of learning, and this is what happens
in most schools around the world. It is the model that most of us are very familiar with.
I mean, you sit at your desk, you read a book, you take a test, you do a worksheet, whatever,
goes on and on like that. But others are more interested in interactive or shared learning experiences.
And these generally require some sort of communication with other people, and can be experienced through
group projects or some other kind of task that requires more than one person to complete.
So how to assess what someone knows and can do is also a point for discussion.
Do you think that standardized testing is the best way to assess what someone knows and can do?
Or is it better to see how students apply their knowledge and skills to solve practical problems
or perform specific tasks? These are the kinds of questions that educators ask themselves every day.
Now let's take a moment to step back a little bit and continue to ask ourselves what we think
the point of going to school is in the first place. Is it to prepare us for college and university?
Is it to prepare us for jobs and a career? Is it to make us better human beings?
Is there more of a socialization than an academic preparation component to school?
So what do you think the fundamental goal is?
Most educational success is measured in terms of student achievement scores on standardized tests.
Does this translate to success in life? Well, not in my opinion, and thankfully the evidence
supports that this isn't the case as well. But it does translate to success in school.
So what we really know is how well someone will perform on standardized tests in school.
But we still can't be sure whether that knowledge and those test-taking skills will one day
transfer to the real world of work, family, and so on.
For example, I have a friend who's a trial attorney. He absolutely loves to go up against new trial lawyers,
especially those who come from well-known or prestigious law schools, and especially those who are law review editors,
because those are the ones he finds that know, in his opinion at least, the least about how to work in the courtroom.
My friend's approach is to watch and listen carefully and learn what the judge wants to hear.
And then he presents his client's case accordingly in a way that the judge prefers.
Now that's a skill that he has honed over many years as a trial attorney, and it's nearly a foolproof method.
It works most of the time, but it also presents a new challenge and a new learning experience,
every time that he works on a new case or with a new judge.
My friend needed to know something about the law and the legal system in order to pass the bar exam to become an attorney.
But he is successful, not solely because of his legal knowledge, but also because of his courtroom adaptability
and his insights, in other words, his courtroom skill.
Now if we dial back and think about our students in a classroom, and we think about how can our current educational system
do a better job to prepare youth to know what my friend knows and do what my friend does,
and which perhaps you know and can do as well,
we can now start to ask, is there a course or a pedagogical technique that can be used to instruct and inculcate this kind of knowledge and skill?
Well, if there is, it hasn't been clearly defined yet.
The next question is to reflect back on when we were students and ask ourselves how our perspectives have changed as adults.
What do you think the rights and responsibilities of children and students are in schools?
Do students have rights? Is it just a right to learn or is it a privilege?
Should they be able to decide what they are learning or when or how they are learning it?
And what is the best way for students to interact with each other or with their teachers?
And with that in mind, we can go on and ask, what's the responsibility of teachers?
Are teachers responsible for anything more than simply teaching academic content,
or are they also caregivers and counselors?
How do you gauge teacher quality if a teacher has more responsibility than just academics?
One way to answer this is to think about how teachers care about their students.
For example, should educators treat all students alike?
The prevailing thinking right now is that teachers should adjust for students' different backgrounds and abilities.
So when a teacher adjusts instruction to meet a particular student's needs,
this is an example of teachers as caregivers as well as quality instructors.
Then the question arises whether school administrators can also show care,
or if communities can care for students as well.
Now there are two extreme options that we can go to here, and let me explain each in a little bit of detail.
The first is something that has been very sort of sarcastically called the whip-cracker approach.
Now a whip-cracker, the image is of someone who is cracking a whip,
who has high standards and high expectations and no exceptions for that.
And the idea is that this person is going to expect his or her students to live up to those expectations,
to meet that standard or reach that bar no matter where it is set.
Now there are those who suggest that this goes against the rhetoric of schooling as a lifelong pursuit,
although there is certainly plenty of evidence to suggest that this approach can work.
In fact, there is a large and healthy evidence in the research literature that shows that teachers
who do have high expectations for their students tend to have some of the highest performing students among the whole population.
The second or the other extreme is a word I've already used, it's the caregiver approach.
Now from this perspective, the idea is that standards may not matter as much.
We can lower the standards, we can think about different levels of standards,
and what's really important is that these students themselves are being treated in a way that takes into account their background,
that respects their traditions and their community, and that understands that high performance in school
may not be the best outcome for them.
Now these are controversial extremes, right?
Because on the one hand you have the whip-cracker approach that is saying that high standards
and high performance above all else is important.
And on the other extreme you have this more caregiver approach,
which says that perhaps lower standards or different expectations or exceptions to the rule are the best approach.
And what we find is that in the real world, most teachers in schools fall within a pretty narrow swath in the middle.
But when we ask these questions, we're really asking questions of social equity.
And so these are questions that are very appropriate in settings where there are high levels of inequality,
either because there is an extremely poor or less-advantaged community,
or because of racial or ethnic differences, something like that.
Next we can ask, what do you think is the minimum information that someone should know after finishing primary school
or after graduating from high school?
Asking what people should know at the most basic levels involves questions that Dewey would ask as well,
because they help us think about what kind of society we want.
Do we want a society where there is a minimum level of mathematics or science knowledge and skill?
Most communities worldwide have decided that there is a minimum knowledge base.
In other words, everyone needs to know how to read and write and do arithmetic.
You've got your three R's there, right?
There's also the consideration that perhaps some content should be taught just because it helps people understand their community or their culture.
And this can be especially important in minority or marginalized communities,
whose culture is not necessarily reflected in dominant or mainstream media politics or society.
Others argue that all or most curricula should be geared towards preparing students for the transition from school to work
or school to college or college to work.
And your answers to these questions that we've been going over can tell you what you think the curriculum can and should be.
But you might be surprised to know that your answer is likely to echo what most other people answer as well.
U.S. college and university students who are training to become teachers usually are asked to articulate a formal philosophy of education,
which must address these key questions.
So future teachers and administrators will have a vision that guides their career decisions and their behaviors and activities.
And now that you've answered all of these questions for yourselves,
and I wish I could really hear your answers and compare them with some of my own,
but now that you've answered these, let's think about how your answers translate across foreign cultures or across national boundaries.
Do you think your answers are unique to you?
Or are your answers unique to your local community or your nation and its culture and social values?
Or do people share these values worldwide?
We can see how context becomes important very quickly and how global comparisons, again, can be problematic,
especially when they don't account for context.
Now returning to my central premise in this lecture, which is that education is intensely personal and that we form deeply personal philosophies of education.
If this is true, then why are so many people concerned about how the U.S. competes globally in terms of our education system?
In other words, what happened? Did it happen just to me? Or how do our individual concerns for education become shared?
Condoleezza Rice, who's the former U.S. Secretary of State,
published a report through the Council on Foreign Relations that states, and I'm quoting,
the nation's security and economic prosperity are at risk if schools don't improve.
Now this sounds a lot like a nation at risk from the early 1980s, and it's very strong language,
and it shows the intensity of educational importance at every level from the individual to the national.
And these reports and others like them show how we as Americans seem to be in a perpetual state of shock and fear about the quality and outcomes of the U.S. educational system.
But what's really shocking is that we're continually surprised and terrified and even outraged by a system that we've grown up in,
and which is, for better or for worse, reproduced generation after generation in country after country.
I mean, how can U.S. education be both our most important institution, framing the lives of generation after generation of Americans,
while also being the biggest disappointment in public life?
Americans have been publicly and repeatedly saying for more than a century that our students are, very bluntly, lazy, unprepared, incompetent, and unproductive.
And evidence of this, although we could doubt the quality of the evidence, but evidence of this is reported in several academic articles and scholarly books.
But one of the most accessible is a book titled The Way We Were, The Mists and Realities of America's Student Achievement.
This book was written by a prominent education intellectual and commentator named Richard Rothstein.
He's taught at Columbia University in Harvard. He's associated with the Economic Policy Institute in Washington, D.C.
And in his book, which really tries to unearth the myths and realities of America's student achievement, Rothstein looks back decade by decade for 100 years
to see just what the popular and public discourse about education in America was at each of those times.
And he finds that there has never been a honeymoon period with American education, blaming schools for the failures of youth
and for society and for the economy has always been in fashion in the United States and quite frankly around the world.
And in line with this, Rothstein illustrates one extreme example after another about how teachers and schools have been blamed for being inefficient, amateurish, wasteful, and sloppy.
For example, in 1902, editors at The New York Sun wrote that when they attended school, children had to learn, whereas in 1902 school was more like a vaudeville show.
In 1909, L. Wood P. Coverley, the Dean of Stanford School of Education, wrote that whether we like it or not, we're beginning to see that we are pitted against the world in a gigantic battle of brains and skill.
It's 1909.
In 1913, President Woodrow Wilson appointed a Presidential Commission to study vocational education and international competitiveness.
In 1958, Life Magazine reported that students in American cities terrorized teachers and it often takes physical courage to teach.
And in 1961, a report by the Council for Basic Education said that one third of ninth graders couldn't read above a second or third grade level,
which caused problems for businesses and the economy, not to mention shame in comparing U.S. education to schooling in other countries.
You can see there are some extreme examples, and these are interesting historical examples that show that this blame and shame tactic is still being used today.
Experts continue to link problems in the U.S. society and in the economy to the supposedly low quality education that children receive, often around their own, let's say, sometimes political or economic agendas.
In adding fuel to the fire, we have international comparisons that tell us American education is sinking because we never are in that top group.
It shows that American students score lower than their economic and political competitors worldwide and that nothing is improving,
even though vast amounts of time and money are spent on fixing education in America.
So make no mistake, a bleak picture is being painted, but before we get too depressed, let's consider the evidence and that will help us understand where we're going.
I want to get at what's really happening, and I think you do too, and what Americans really believe.
So how do we find out what the American public really thinks about education in the United States?
Well, the answer is simple. We can just ask them.
Every year the Gallup Poll Organization and an education honor society named Phi Delta Kappa get together to poll a representative sample of Americans.
One objective of this poll is to find out what the American educational experience is based on public perceptions about the condition of education in the United States.
Participants are asked many different questions about education, but one set of questions in particular is asked year after year.
People are asked to give a grade to education in the United States ranging from A for excellence to F for failing.
And here's what the poll results tell us year after year.
When asked to grade the nation's schools, people give largely C's, D's and F's.
In other words, the public perception is that education in the United States as a whole is below average or failing.
When asked to grade the schools in their own school district, where perhaps they live, people give largely B's and C's.
In other words, the public's perception tends to be that the schools in their own area are average or slightly above.
And when asked to grade the schools that their own children attend, people then give largely A's and B's.
So let's be clear about this.
Year after year, the Phi Delta Kappa Gallup Poll shows that Americans believe the nation's schools are a failure.
But it's simply not possible that schools everywhere across the country are above average in a national education system that is failing.
It just doesn't add up.
What this shows is that there is misinformation perhaps or misperceptions perhaps about education in the United States, especially about what happens at the national level.
Now perhaps some of the headlines I started this lecture with are examples of how this information gets spread.
Do you remember them?
Dumbest generation getting dumber with time and money?
American education isn't mediocre, it's deeply unequal, and we're still a nation at risk.
Now I'm not suggesting that everything about American education works great, because it doesn't.
And I'm not suggesting that the news articles are factually incorrect, especially not in reporting on how American education is supposedly failing our students' communities and businesses, because there are flaws.
There's plenty of evidence to show that we don't have a perfect educational system.
And yes, all of these complaints are in some ways true, even though schools and teachers probably shouldn't shoulder all of the blame.
But the idea that we can just fix education like we'd fix a flat tire on a car, that isn't the answer either.
And misinformed international comparisons of American education don't help us understand what works or doesn't work in our schools.
Instead, I'm talking about transforming American education by understanding education in light of our own experiences and of the internationally comparable information that we have available to us.
John Dewey said that to learn from experience is to make a backward and forward connection between what we do to things and what we enjoy or suffer from things in consequence.
Under such conditions, doing becomes a trying and experiment with the world to find out what it is like.
The undergoing becomes instruction, discovery of the connection of things.
And that's where we're headed when we look at our own philosophies of education and we think about what the potential for education is, and we can compare with that as our foundation.
Thank you.
