Lecture 5 What Should We Compare About Education?
What is the most important outcome of education?
Is it test scores?
Is it critical thinking skills?
Or is it someone's ability to get a job or solve a personal or a social problem?
If we look at the outcomes of education that get the most attention, we'd have to say that
the most important outcome of education is test scores.
Now how well students in countries around the world do on international tests of achievement
is headline news year after year.
For example, in a recent global survey of math and science skills, the highest scoring
mathematics students were from Taiwan, followed closely by South Korea and Singapore.
In science, the highest scoring students were from Singapore, followed by Taiwan, Japan
and South Korea.
Now even though you might not know the names or much else about these international tests
of achievement, it's likely that you would have a good idea of who were at least some
of the countries that were the big winners.
But if you're in the United States, you probably have heard that American students typically
don't fare as well as the top performers worldwide.
In other words, whenever there's a rankings winner, there's also a rankings loser.
And in the case of an assessment called TIMS, some of the lowest scoring countries are consistently
cutter and the sub-Saharan Africa State of Ghana.
For TIMS stands for the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study.
It's an assessment of math and science achievement and also a background questionnaire for students
and teachers and principals and curriculum specialists that's given about every four
years to students across about 70 different countries.
And it's one of the tests that tell us how well we're doing compared to other countries.
Now whether you're a policymaker or a parent, you might infer that Taiwan, Singapore and
South Korea score so well because their students work the hardest, or because their teachers
teach the best, or because their math and science curriculum is the strongest.
Some education critics also use international comparisons to assert that students in systems
that aren't ranked at the top must be unprepared, unproductive or worse.
They might infer that teachers in schools in low performing systems are amateurish,
inefficient and wasteful.
And this then leads them to think problems in society and the economy are linked together
to the subpar education that children in lower ranking educational systems supposedly receive.
Perhaps even more disturbing, international comparisons suggest that countries at the
lower end of the rankings have sinking education systems, as experienced in a region of the
world known as the Arabian Peninsula or Persian Gulf.
In short, international education data paint a bleak picture for many countries that rank
near the bottom on international tests of educational achievement.
But what is the real story about education in countries around the world?
Even those that don't rank as well on comparative international tests.
Well instead of using internationally comparative education data to highlight the shortcomings
of education in just one country, as in the United States for example, it might be more
helpful to use that information to understand how knowledge is becoming an exchange commodity.
And then we can identify the strengths and the weaknesses in education in specific systems
in order to make improvements.
This would also be a more strategic approach to reforming educational systems than simply
using the data to accuse national education systems of failing without really ever offering
alternatives.
So let's further break down and analyze some common criticisms of national education systems
through three recurring phenomena in mass education.
And I call them achievement envy, the accountability expectation, and access entitlement.
The first of these is achievement envy.
It refers to the envy that knowledge consumers and others tend to have for achievements that
they believe are beyond their own.
It's an attitude that permeates most institutions and organizations, including formal education
systems in schools.
And in the context of educational systems, the primary indicator of successful performance
tends to be average student achievement scores on standardized tests.
So the comparison of student testing achievement between each of those Gulf countries and others
is the source of the envy in achievement envy.
When average student achievement levels are low or stagnant, especially in comparison to
elsewhere, that's when achievement envy sets in.
Education policy makers and parents begin to interpret this as resulting from the lack
of motivation or a lack of ability and effort on the part of principals, teachers, and students.
A second lens through which to analyze mass education is accountability.
Accountability for the youth of any nation might appropriately rest on the shoulders
of the family first, the community second, and other institutions third or even fourth
before schools.
But the nature of schooling assures that responsibility, and as a result, accountability, ultimately
rests with the educational system.
This is because formal education is a mass compulsory institution.
It is the most overt social, political, and economic requirement that every person must
fulfill.
Still, many policy makers and community members use international rankings to argue that their
educational systems are failing, citing the fact that other countries rank higher on TIMS
and other international educational achievement tests.
So it's not surprising then that the second factor that contributes to a strategic understanding
of why we often see international educational comparisons the way we do is this expectation
of accountability.
The accountability expectation suggests that schools and in particular school principals
and classroom teachers should be responsible for student achievement, even more so than
the students themselves.
The third analytical lens then can be understood as access entitlement.
This is based on the expectation that everyone of school age will enroll in and attend school
for most of the most formative years of their lives.
And then this in turn means that literally everyone is a stakeholder in the schools and
has access to the knowledge they disseminate, exchange, and create.
And with so many stakeholders and so many points for the public at large to penetrate,
reform, and generally mess around with schools, school environments become outrageously complex
environments.
Schools come under enormous pressure to satisfy everyone's needs, even when these needs contradict
each other.
And it's this access for all phenomenon that throws off our expectations about achievement
and accountability.
Now part of the reason why American students perform on average, lower than students in
many other countries, is that there's so much variability in the U.S. educational system
just like there is in American society.
Finland is a model for international comparison and this is because in a recent international
assessment called PISA, Finnish students scored on average higher than students in every other
nation that participated.
We already talked about TIMS, but PISA stands for the Program for International Student
Assessment and it's one of the most highly recognizable studies used to compare educational
systems worldwide.
And now that Finland has performed so well on PISA, those Arabian Gulf countries and
others worldwide want to borrow Finnish approaches to education in hopes of reproducing Finland's
successes.
Now to understand this better, Finland's educational system must first be somewhat contextualized.
Since Finland's rise as one of the most scrutinized educational systems in the world, Finnish
educators have repeatedly said that two of the keys to their success are educational
equity and expertise.
The idea of equity revolves around the idea that everyone is provided an equal chance
to learn and in a community that values their ideas and abilities.
In terms of expertise, educators in Finland are considered to be highly professionalized
and selectively trained.
The country's system for educating teachers is meritocratic, it's centralized and it's
standardized and it's taken very seriously by all.
But we have to remember that Finland is unique in many respects.
For example, Finland has a small and culturally unique population, which makes it distinct
compared to most other countries.
And Finland has a teacher training system that is much more centralized and rigorous
than in most other countries.
So how can policymakers and educators elsewhere make a nationwide transformation?
Should they select elements of Finland's success and introduce those into their own country
context?
For example, if Americans want to mimic Finland's educational success, should they emphasize
equality in educational policies or curricula and pedagogy in the same way that Finland
does?
Or should Americans emphasize expertise for teachers and train them rigorously as experts
in their fields as the Finnish people do?
Well, I'm here to tell you, American policymakers and educators and reformers are already doing
these things.
They're already emphasizing equity and expertise among teachers and as they train them.
And if that is the case, then why doesn't the American educational system look like Finland's?
Now perhaps the context and conditions for education in the United States are somehow
uncontrollably different than the context and conditions in Finland.
More pointedly, I would ask, are teachers and the service they already provide to American
youth and communities and the nation seriously undervalued?
Well, the answer is probably yes.
If we think about it simply, policymakers and educators can look at Finland's policies
and their systems as models to learn from and perhaps use that as a template for reforming
their own policies in teacher training.
So doing what such a vastly unique country as Finland does with its youth and schools
won't necessarily change anything in our own American system and schools.
It could help, but there's no guarantee it will because other countries consist of entirely
different communities or different populations and different cultural contexts that are found
in Finland.
But then if we can't be Finland, then maybe we could go the route of China.
A sample of Chinese students who participated in recent PISA tests outperformed the rest
of the world, including Finland.
But only a sample from the city of Shanghai was tested and Shanghai is a city with a distinct
reputation for its educational quality and high-performing students.
Of course, several of the highest-performing countries in the PISA tests, including Taiwan
and Singapore, South Korea and Japan, are systems like China's that historically have
emphasized test-taking and achievement rankings in order to be socially or economically or
politically mobile.
Just ask the Chinese men and women who took civil service or college entrance examinations
to escape the rural farms they were exiled to during the Cultural Revolution.
Or ask the Japanese and Korean families whose economic and social mobility rests entirely
on the ability of one son or daughter to get admitted into an elite university.
If you're an educational reformer or an educator or a parent, you have to think very carefully.
Do we, do you, want a society where advancement and privilege are based on an individual's
ability to memorize and recite information that conforms to what the government wants
you to think?
In other words, how a particular educational system performs is largely dependent on how
it's situated within the broader community.
To mimic other systems more closely, the broader community is also going to have to
change to mimic that other country's community or society.
Quite frankly, this is impossible to do, and it's ill-advised anyway.
Instead, I'm now going to introduce three building blocks for assessing and developing
education systems worldwide.
They revolve around terms that I will explain in fuller detail in a moment, those being
infrastructure, capacity, and sustainability.
Infrastructure refers to the basic physical resources and organizational structures or
facilities like buildings or textbooks or computers or even electricity or the internet.
And these are the things that are needed for the operation of a school or a program or
lesson.
An evidence from international comparisons suggests that the infrastructure for education,
which influences even teacher training and curriculum, needs to be much more stable if
we're going to hold our students and teachers to the highest standards of accountability.
On a simple level, if a child comes to school hungry because she or he doesn't have enough
food at home, this is a key out of school or non-school resource that is missing, and
it can have a significant impact on a child's physical and cognitive abilities.
At school, if there are not enough or updated textbooks, then students may miss information
that is crucial for them to learn a particular concept or skill.
I mean, just imagine what would happen if teachers had to make up all of the materials
they teach to their 30 more students in a class every day.
So having access to basic physical resources, organizational structures, facilities, and
other infrastructure elements is crucial to the development of education.
Our next consideration is the capacity of students for learning and the capacity of
teachers for teaching.
Capacity refers to whether someone has the knowledge and skills necessary to do, experience,
or understand something.
Teachers need to know how to teach content to students.
Students need to know and be able to learn both in response to direct instruction as
well as independently in unique situations.
And here we must also ask, how can policymakers and educators build and stabilize educational
capacity beyond what already exists?
Well, international, large-scale educational assessment data and involvement in these assessments
builds the capacity for assessment and evaluation at the national level, but it also builds
at the local levels.
Big data and big data application requires tools and knowledge for how to use them for
teachers and school leaders to make their own decisions and use the data for evidence
in making those decisions.
This can be done through training and professional development opportunities for teachers and
school leaders, which in turn helps them use that big data for their own educational decision-making.
That is an example of capacity building.
Our third means for assessing and developing educational systems worldwide is what we can
call sustainability.
Sustainability refers to the ability to continue a defined behavior, program, project, or system
indefinitely, or at least, at least beyond the introductory phase.
Whatever changes educators and policymakers ultimately decide to implement when their
reforming education has to be sustainable beyond that initial implementation.
Usually, sustainability becomes the responsibility of the people who implement the program or
are the local stakeholders in it.
This means those who work in schools like teachers or who are the target beneficiaries
of education programs, in other words, parents and students.
And this means that local communities of parents, teachers, and students must own their education
system and they must invest in its development and improvement.
The application of big data also contributes tools and knowledge to build capacity to help
teachers and administrators make decisions.
And this can be done through training and professional development opportunities for
teachers and for school leaders, which in turn helps them use big data for their own
educational decision-making.
For example, in Arlington, Virginia recently, a local school superintendent worked with
a Silicon Valley company to sponsor a competition using big data on his school district.
He was trying to get the same kind of big data forecasting for dropout and high school
completion rates that political analysts used for predicting elections.
This way, the application of big data to local problems in context becomes something that
is controlled by those who live and work at the local level rather than a prescription
handed down from a central administration.
Now the good news is that a lot of comparative education data already exists.
Honestly, we don't have to create new data sets or new programs of large-scale assessment
because this has been done.
And now internationally comparative education data is being collected systematically and
regularly by educational systems and organizations worldwide.
One of those international organizations that collects massive amounts of data on education
worldwide is the World Bank, which also provides financing, advice, and research to developing
nations.
And in this role, the World Bank has amassed and continues to collect large databases on
education and related factors in countries worldwide.
Its rationale is that education is, in many ways, an economic investment and indicator.
So collecting large amounts of data about education makes sense, in a way.
For decades, the data collected by the World Bank was not publicly accessible.
But in recent years, the World Bank has opened up its research publications through an Open
Knowledge Repository.
This Open Knowledge Repository exponentially expands the amount of analysis and exposition
on education research that's available.
And it also changes expectations about how knowledge is commoditized or exchanged and
integrated into the fabric of life.
Now it might be premature to say that the floodgates for international data on education
have been opened by the World Bank's Open Knowledge Repository.
But this does mean that a lot more international education information and data is publicly
available to a wide audience.
And it's reasonable to expect that the impact will eventually be significant.
When this much information on an analysis of education worldwide is made freely available
via the Internet, it will continue to contribute to the dissemination, exchange, and creation
of knowledge.
Finally, there is not any society, not even the ones dependent on natural resources such
as in the Arabian Gulf region, that does not thrive on the production of new knowledge
and the exchange or commodification of that knowledge.
Every society seems to be driven by knowledge production and exchange.
But the technologies and mechanisms for doing so are the key variables.
One of the hallmarks of a knowledge economy or knowledge society or knowledge culture
is that the exchange of knowledge, or we could say even information, becomes a keystone
to every activity that occurs.
And this is especially true for formal educational systems, which suggests the importance of translating
internationally comparative data to local classroom practice in national education systems
worldwide.
It is important to not only learn what works and what doesn't work in other countries,
but also to be aware of what works and doesn't in your own.
Ultimately, the way to achieve adequate infrastructure, capacity, and sustainable change is by using
internationally comparative data on education to identify strengths and weaknesses of education.
These strengths and weaknesses become clearer when the data on education is looked at in
comparison across and between internal divisions within education systems and against peer
national education systems.
Many different approaches to shifting school culture have been suggested by reformers,
hoping to improve the consistency and quality of education.
But only a few have been shown to make significant changes.
For example, one way is to shift school culture by changing the discourse, and you can do
this by revising the language and policy about education.
This is the most common approach and has been shown to have the least sustainable effect,
or at least to be significantly compromised in terms of sustainability.
This approach can even have detrimental effects on educational practice or be negatively
reacted to by educators.
A great example of this in the United States is No Child Left Behind, as well as the Common
Core curriculum.
Both of those made a significant impact on the national discourse about education in
the United States.
Remember briefly that No Child Left Behind is the 2001 reauthorization of the elementary
and secondary education act, and it is the legislation that is primarily responsible
for how the federal government supports education nationwide.
The Common Core curriculum is really a set of standards for what students should know
at the end of every grade, and it was developed by a collaborative effort among state's governors
and then state's education departments or systems.
And while a lot of change has resulted from the implementation of No Child Left Behind
and the Common Core, these changes have been directed more towards fulfilling the minimum
requirements than implementing sustainable change.
Another way is to systematically shift expectations for day-to-day behavior and activity.
This is an approach to culture shift that is more located at the school and classroom
level, and operates on the assumption that the kinds of changes that make the most difference
are based on what teachers and students do every day.
These kinds of approaches will use, to take one example, simple postings of classroom or
school average test scores in public spaces like hallways or classrooms.
The argument is that by displaying certain information, the attention gets shifted to
that information, and that behaviors change in response to it.
But the most consistent way to shift school culture and improve education through the
use of big data is to identify essential infrastructure and build on the infrastructure
that already exists.
Then create capacity by identifying strengths and weaknesses in student and teacher knowledge
and skills, and then enhancing strengths while addressing weaknesses.
And then engender sustainability by ensuring that decision making is imbued with local
voice and contextual consideration.
To conclude, education is never an isolated enterprise.
The Gulf States, China, Finland, and the United States all bear witness to how context can
influence education.
Stable, relatively wealthy, and culturally homogenous nations have a natural advantage
on large-scale standardized tests.
But the results show us that there is much more than the numbers behind average student
achievement rankings on internationally comparative tests.
Given by achievement rankings alone, it could be construed that the American educational
system is failing American youth, and as a result failing the nation.
But do policymakers and researchers have enough information yet to say whether this is the
reality of the situation, and that the crisis in education is so great that the nation's
social, political, and economic systems are all about to collapse as a result?
Or is the crisis in education a politically manufactured crisis?
We can find an answer by taking stock of what the situation is.
Do the achievement rankings paint an accurate picture of what's happening in schools internationally
or in the United States?
Well, in short, no.
The achievement rankings do not paint an accurate picture of education in the United States
or abroad, because they do not account for context.
But this also does not mean policymakers or educators should ignore the rankings or toss
out the international studies that they come from.
So why does big data not make it further into the local decision making and educational
change process if it has all of this valuable information to share?
And why is big data like Tim's and Pisa not more accessible and used by those who actually
practice education to make decisions and enact change?
Why is big data not more integrated with national and local assessments in so many national
educational systems worldwide?
Well, there's no easy answer, and certainly no easy solution to any of these questions.
These are complex and unique differences in various national and local contexts that make
a one-size-fits-all solution impossible and certainly ill-advised.
But there are some shared principles to consider nonetheless that reflect both the potential
and performance of international large-scale educational assessments.
These shared principles are namely infrastructure, capacity, and sustainability.
International large-scale educational assessment data and its involvement builds assessment
and evaluation capacity at the national and the local levels.
And the process of participating in Tim's or Pisa can build a scaffold for connecting
big data with what local educators are already doing by developing local organizational structures
and practices and resources that provide access both to the process of administering assessments
as well as gaining access to the data or results from the assessments.
That's a crucial first step, and it comprises infrastructure.
Big data application also requires tools and knowledge of how to use them for teachers
and school leaders to make their own decisions and use the data for evidence.
This can be done through training and professional development opportunities for teachers and
school leaders, which in turn helps them use big data for their own educational decision-making.
That's capacity building.
Then finally, teachers and local school leaders need to own and be empowered by big data rather
than being defined or controlled or punished by it.
And evidence suggests that professional teacher development using that kind of big data needs
to happen among teachers and local school leaders rather than happen to them.
This way, the application of big data to local problems and contexts becomes something that
happens at and is controlled by those who live and work at the local level rather than
a prescription handed down from central administration.
Solutions to the big data to local practice crisis then involve developing and implementing
ways for teachers and local school leaders to have an infrastructure available to them
for using big data for decision-making.
It involves developing and implementing processes for building awareness, knowledge and skills
for teachers and local school leaders to make and use big data for decision-making.
And it involves encouraging and supporting local teachers and school leaders to develop
and implement autonomous processes and professional learning communities that translate big data
for school and classroom practice and decision-making.
Building infrastructure capacity and sustainable practices for the use of big data at the national
and cross-national level has been addressed for decades.
But as we've shown here, translating this data and applying it to the local context
and local practice is the next wave in research about the application of international assessment
data.
