Lecture 6 – The World Learns from Horace Mann
The idea that everybody deserves a chance is at the heart of Horace Mann's belief
that education is the great equalizer.
The American education system today reflects the revolutionary ideals that Mann expressed
to support this concept.
Those are universal enrollment, compulsory attendance, a system of public funding, and
a fundamental belief dating back to Thomas Jefferson's bill for the more general diffusion
of education.
Jefferson believed that schools are local bastions of democracy because they create
educated citizens.
And in this lecture, I'm going to discuss some of what began as unique and revolutionary
about the American educational system.
This involves some history of educational development in the United States, focusing
on key educational thinkers and decision makers from the 19th and 20th centuries, such as
Horace Mann and James Bryant Conant, and their approaches to education.
By doing so, I hope to lay out a roadmap to better understand how the governing ideologies
behind mass or universal education came about in the United States, and how some of these
ideas, including the means to citizenship development, economic growth, and equality,
spread and became central tenants of education around the world.
And finally, we'll examine some reasons as to why the United States might now be failing
relative to international standards, even as it preserves certain strengths that continue
to distinguish American education.
Let's start with the premise that education is continuously critiqued and that this is
not a new phenomenon.
The truth is that Americans today express many of the same criticisms about education
that they complained about a hundred years ago.
Now as well as in the 1890s, Americans publicly complain that vast numbers of youth remain
unprepared for the next level of education or for entering the labor market, even after
completing their formal education.
A second complaint is that people still believe that Americans have serious social and economic
problems in their communities, problems such as teen pregnancy, criminal gangs, and low
youth employment, all as a result of a subpar educational system.
But why are these complaints still prevalent?
And is education really the best way to solve them?
All of these complaints about education are in some ways valid, even though schools and
teachers probably shouldn't shoulder all of the blame.
Horace Mann is often called the father of the common school in the United States, because
he was the first to institutionalize a government-sponsored and regulated system of education.
He did so after he recognized some of these problems and even expressed some of these
same complaints nearly 200 years ago when he was first emerging as among America's pioneering
and most important education reformers.
Mann was born into poverty in Franklin, Massachusetts on May 4, 1796.
Mostly self-taught, he rose to serve in the state assembly before receiving an appointment
in 1837 to become Massachusetts first secretary of education.
At the time, the state school system, dating back to 1647, was in decline as parsimonious
local districts sapped it of resources.
Mann led an effort to reassert state influence over the local schools, including the collection
and dissemination of school-related information throughout the state.
He founded a publication for teachers known as the Common School Journal, and most importantly,
he developed enduring principles for universal, publicly funded schools, which he envisioned
as being taught by well-trained teachers.
These principles were based on Mann's underlying belief that freedom and ignorance were incompatible,
and he tried to eliminate the worst part of schools through explicit organizational reforms.
Specifically, Mann focused on school buildings, on non-religious moral values, on school discipline,
and on the quality of teachers.
And in 1848, Mann resigned from the state post to take the seat in Congress that once belonged
to John Quincy Adams.
Eventually he accepted the presidency of Antioch College in Yellow Springs, Ohio, a new institution
at the time that was committed to his beliefs in non-sectarianism and equal opportunity,
in which even today is known for such progressive objectives as fully funded scholarships for
some first-generation college students and environmental science majors.
A model for Horace Mann's new system of education developed even before he became Massachusetts
Secretary of Education.
In the 1830s, Mann visited Prussia to examine its approach to education, and he found a well-oiled
education system that not only avoided the problems of student preparation for transition
to life outside of school, but also the social and economic problems perceived to be part
of subpar educations elsewhere.
There were some sacrifices, though.
Equity and obedience, not initiative or critical thinking, were the goals for the training
of the common people in Prussia.
And although the joy of learning was engendered among students as much as possible, the Prussian
emphasis was on creating obedient citizens.
The organizational changes that Horace Mann institutionalized were groundbreaking and
set the stage for the development of mass education in the United States and later throughout
many other countries.
For instance, Mann installed a system of state-financed and state-centered compulsory education for
everyone in Massachusetts.
This was unique and was coupled with the establishment of training schools specifically
for teachers, again revolutionary.
The emphasis on teacher quality and their preparation is among the more lasting effects
of Horace Mann's reforms and is where much internationally comparative data on education
focuses attention today.
The demographics of the teacher workforce were also shaped, perhaps permanently, by
Mann's decision to shift the teacher workforce from males to females.
Now, prior to this decision, teachers were mostly male because they were itinerant and
traveled from place to place following the agrarian seasons.
In addition, mixed-age group classrooms often made it unsafe or difficult for women to manage
the students.
So, to fulfill Horace Mann's vision for a common school system across Massachusetts,
he had to have a trained and affordable teaching workforce.
Women were more affordable teachers than men because then, as now, they could be paid less,
as making a larger teacher workforce feasible.
And the training of teachers was made possible by the system of teacher training schools
that Mann established.
This system was unique in that it was separated from other higher education institutions and
programs.
Subjects were also confined to what was taught in common schools.
The idea was that teachers would be more like trained technicians than educated scholars.
They were, however, to be moral exemplars and models of virtue, since they were, under
Horace Mann's system, unmarried women.
It was also believed that women were nurturing by nature.
So, where does all of this lead us?
Well, it shows that there was, and continues to be, an intense belief in the power of education,
especially formal schooling, to control or shape societies, to develop skills of intellectual
inquiry, and to create a socially and economically mobile population.
To a large degree, as a result of Horace Mann's efforts and mimicking of the Prussian
school model, the predominant schooling model in the United States and around the world is
the mass education model, where everyone of school age, regardless of gender, socioeconomic
status, race or ethnicity, is expected and often compelled to enroll in and attend school.
So many stakeholders and points of penetration also mean that schools are under enormous
pressure to satisfy everyone's needs, including needs that contradict each other.
The pressure is intensified further when stakeholders' interests conflict.
And in this lecture, I will survey some components of this opportunity conundrum, especially in
U.S. education, including accessibility, accountability, evidence-based decision making, and meritocracies.
That is the idea that students are rewarded according to their efforts.
And we'll draw some lessons from each example.
But first let's turn from Horace Mann to another important voice in the development of American
education, James Bryant Conant, whose ideas sometimes conflict with man's.
James Bryant Conant is the chief architect of the public high school in the United States,
yet he was not a fan of the mass or universal component of education so strongly advocated
by Horace Mann.
Conant strongly believed in the selective process of schooling.
In other words, he believed that formal schooling should educate the best and the brightest
students regardless of their social or economic background.
Rather than churn out masses of basically literate youth, he thought formal education
could provide opportunities for social and economic mobility rather than reproduce social
and economic status within communities and for selected deserving individuals in particular.
Conant grew up as the only boy in a household with two sisters and parents who pursued different
intellectual paths.
His mother was a religious transcendentalist, his father was a photo engraver, and their
son had a mastery of chemistry and an innovative mindset.
Conant's interest in chemistry and a strong primary education led him to Harvard in 1910,
where he graduated in 1916 with a doctoral degree and entered into the federal government's
chemical warfare service during World War I.
He later married the daughter of a Harvard chemist and Nobel laureate, and Bryant himself
eventually was selected Harvard president in 1933.
Like Horace Mann, Conant strongly believed in equal access to education for girls and
boys alike.
He eliminated separate classes for Ratcliffe and Harvard students and admitted women into
the law and medical schools.
After World War II, he was a strong advocate to Congress for federal support of science
and formation of the National Science Foundation.
But one of the most striking and enduring ideas behind Conant's educational ideas is
the concept of meritocracy.
Conant rejected advancement through hereditary privilege.
In spite of his life of relative social privilege, Conant supported a fluid social structure
that would allow talented people from any class to rise to positions of importance and
responsibility.
Furthermore, Conant believed Americans must value and commit to the important place of
the well-trained meritorious expert in every field.
And he expressed the egalitarian principle that all types of labor must be regarded as
equal, with no position being accorded more social status than any other.
From a more practical perspective, Conant felt that small high schools should be eliminated
because they were expensive and often provided poor quality education.
This was because it was inefficient to maintain good programs for just a few students.
He also felt too many schools were not academically challenging, in part reflecting course content
developed on stereotypical gender, social or ethnic lines.
And at the same time, Conant supported vocational education as a way to reduce dropouts.
He felt that more technical and sometimes practical education provided by vocational coursework
would keep potential dropouts in school and embed at-risk students in particular with
some of the citizenship qualities that American society values so highly.
By mixing students of vastly different backgrounds and abilities in the same school, Conant believed
the comprehensive high school could minimize class distinctions and avoid many of the social
cleavages that characterized other societies he'd investigated.
Conant was convinced that the United States had gone from being a classless democratic
society to one in the early and mid-20th century that was relentlessly falling under the control
of a hereditary aristocracy.
Conant said, each honest calling, each walk of life has its own elite, its own aristocracy
based on excellence of performance.
There will always be the false snobbery which tries to place one vocation above another.
You will become a member of the aristocracy in the American sense only if your accomplishments
and integrity earned this appellation, he said.
This is why at Harvard he sought to recruit a broader range of students, including young
women and financially disadvantaged students.
What was this meritocratic ideal Conant was striving for?
What does it even mean?
Well, a meritocracy is a system in which individuals earn what they have or achieve based on their
own merits or their own effort.
In this context, students in schools with high levels of performance are believed to
have achieved what they have because they worked harder or they somehow otherwise deserved
it.
Now given this idea, when average student achievement levels are stagnant or low, especially
in comparison to other schools or school systems, we begin to interpret the results through
the lens of a meritocracy, that is, as being the result of laziness or a lack of effort
on the part of the school, the principals, the teachers or the students.
And this gets us to some of the angst and lack of satisfaction expressed by parents and students
and educators in America today, as well as a hundred and even nearly two hundred years
ago.
And we'll come back to this idea toward the conclusion of this lecture.
Under meritocracy, the next component of the opportunity conundrum in American education
is the idea of accessibility, one of the virtues and objectives of education that was promoted
both by Horace Mann and James Bryan Conant.
It means that literally everyone is a stakeholder in the schools, even if the immediate clients
are students and parents.
Now schools fall under enormous pressure to satisfy everyone's needs, even when these
needs contradict one another.
And as a result, the equal access ideal comes into conflict with our expectations about
achievement and accountability.
So what is the accountability expectation?
Well, this accountability assumption suggests that schools and in particular school principals
and classroom teachers should be responsible for student achievement, often more so than
even the students themselves.
Accountability for the youth of any nation might more appropriately rest on the shoulders
of the family first, the community second and other institutions third or even fourth
before schools.
But the nature and expectations of schooling as a mass, formal and meritocratic institution
assures that responsibility and as a result, accountability lies with the schools and teachers
and students themselves.
Well, why?
This goes back to the idea that formal education is a mass compulsory institution.
Remember, it is the most overt social, political and economic requirement that any young citizen
must complete.
But a second, more subtle reason why schools are held firmly accountable for the performance
of youth, is that schools in the United States and in many other nations gradually extended
their responsibility beyond academics to additional realms ranging from health and nutrition
to sports, theater and other extracurricular activities.
Schools have always served some social, political or economic purpose beyond academic learning.
But beginning in the 20th century, the additional responsibility was formally incorporated into
the country's educational structure.
Schools came to oversee many non-academic services geared toward the social and economic
development of youth.
And as more and more non-academic services became integral to schools, the operation
and structure of schooling became increasingly and publicly permeable.
Let's look at this logically for a moment.
First, the academic function of public schooling has been shared or even pushed out into non-academic
services.
Second, operating under this broader umbrella are school service providers like nutritionists,
psychologists, athletic coaches, choir teachers, drama instructors and so on, who support the
life of the child beyond strictly academic learning.
And third, as a consequence, parents and children feel entitled to obtain broad access to school
facilities and even classrooms well beyond the academic curriculum.
Fourth, and therefore the accountability component of the opportunity conundrum is still present,
but performance is compromised by all of the non-academic functions of formal education.
This is where the intersection of key school and non-school factors becomes relevant.
How can we hold an individual accountable to our high performance expectations if he or
she doesn't have the same preparation and opportunities as someone else?
This is again where the conflict between access entitlement assumptions and our achievement
expectations comes to imbalance our notions of what American schools and teachers can,
should and will do.
It also means that we will always underperform relative to our goals.
From an international perspective, we will always be in the middle of the achievement
rankings and we will always have great and terrible schools even though the differences
between the two continue to shrink over time.
This is because the variability among and between American schools in terms of non-school
factors, which compromise the ability of schools, teachers and students to be accountable to
a single standard in the United States, is and will continue to be among the largest
in the world as long as the evidence continues to show how distinct school contexts are across
the U.S.
Now we turn to the fourth and final component of the Opportunity Conundrum, a concept known
to educators as evidence-based policymaking.
Evidence sounds like a good thing in principle.
We need information from which to draw sound conclusions.
But data alone sometimes miss related virtues such as experience and cultural context, in
other words, the very human qualities that machine counting can miss.
In a nutshell, data-based policymaking is both the boon and the bane of the one-size-fits-all
input known as standardized tests.
We spend so much time in the classroom and we end up bemoaning at the inevitable comparisons
that these tests bring.
A principal reason for assessing the performance of students in schools is to obtain evidence
from which we can conclude something about the degree of equality and quality attained
in an educational system.
By seeing who performs highly and who does not, it is possible for teachers and principals
and policymakers to identify where disparities exist between individual students, classrooms,
and schools.
And by being able to see these differences, decision makers can plan and begin to implement
policies to remedy low performance in particular students, classrooms, and communities.
For example, if a teacher gives a quiz on poetry to fifth graders and she notices that
many of her students are missing questions on idioms or hyperbole, she can then review
these concepts and re-quiz until her students all seem to understand the concepts.
But the primary indicator of success in the context of educational systems tends to be
measured by average student achievement within particular schools on standardized achievement
tests.
And this can miss a great deal.
Let me explain why.
We have two principal means of measurement in education.
Formative assessments and summative assessments.
A formative assessment is similar to the poetry example I just gave.
It's an assessment that allows the teacher to help form and shape what someone knows
by testing along the way and then coming back to make changes so that strengths and
weaknesses are attended to.
A summative assessment is instead a way to summarize how well an individual or an average
school is doing.
It is usually a one-shot measurement, such as a midterm or a final exam or a standardized
annual test.
And summative assessments represent the sum of knowledge that a student has learned up
until a given point in time.
Afterwards, there usually is no or little opportunity for a teacher to adjust the instruction
for that tested group of students in the hopes that they will do better.
Students either do well on these tests or they don't.
Either way, the evidence based on their test performance informs policy makers about the
perceived quality of education or teaching and learning that's going on in that school
or classroom.
The aggregate performance of state and district level cohorts in such summative assessments
can have profound effects for the future on available resources, required curricula and
in-class teaching methods.
And while the results of these state, national and international assessments usually do not
directly impact the individual students being tested, they have been measured and move on.
The aggregate scores are widely accepted indicators of learning and have big impacts
on educational policy making, funding and practice locally, nationally and internationally.
One criticism of evidence based decision making is its vulnerability to the potential oversimplification
of more complex contexts and issues, which can impact teaching and learning.
In other words, this kind of summative quantitative evidence is often one-dimensional.
There are rich contextual elements that quantitative analysis cannot capture the same way that
qualitative data does.
For example, a student might score below average on a standardized test of achievement, but
it may not be because that student isn't smart or doesn't know the material.
It could be because the student had a bad morning before the test or didn't get enough
sleep.
It could be because the student was hungry or because students know that the standardized
test doesn't impact whether they passed their class or not.
There are more reasons perhaps why non-school factors influence students' test performance
than reasons why teaching and learning influence it.
Scientific educational research is still used to make social policy decisions based on the
assumption that its findings are scientific.
However, contextualization is frequently lacking in educational research evidence and the resultant
policy making.
This means that the evidence for educational policy making may consist of unsubstantiated
findings or one-shot phenomena that might take precedence over long-term trends and
cultural characteristics.
It also means that sound educational policy making based exclusively on empirical research
evidence is neither desirable nor even valid in many cases because of the importance of
considering the evidence within context.
Still, educational decision making is increasingly influenced by data about education.
It gives a firm foundation for decisions about education based on real experiences and the
information we have about them.
Education according to Horace Mann is the great equalizer.
And according to James Bryant Conant, it should eliminate hereditary aristocracy in the United
States by operating as a meritocracy instead.
The challenge for us is to understand how big data helps achieve either of these goals.
Early in the 21st century, American policymakers found themselves struggling to understand
and implement the objectives former President Lyndon Johnson laid out 50 years earlier when
he called on Congress and the nation to establish full educational opportunity as our first
national goal.
That was the fundamental precept of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, which
remains the principal funding implementation tool at the federal level today.
And echoing Johnson, Horace Mann and James Bryant Conant, the education secretary under
President Barack Obama, named Arne Duncan, once said, opportunity is not optional.
The question we continue to ask is how standardized testing and the big data that follows it creates
rather than quashes that opportunity.
