Lecture 7 When Culture Invades the Classroom
How school changes lives is something that has been well documented.
China's present-day economic success is replicated by the high marks of its students on standard
international achievement tests, even though that very success might be a misleading indicator
of future results, as I will soon explain.
At the same time, the expectations of students, parents, and teachers who live and work in
extreme poverty, as in a country such as South Africa, quite often exceed what is reasonably
achievable in a nation's education system, as we're also about to see.
Without the knowledge, skills, connections, and opportunities that you and I got in school,
we might have never have gone on to college, had a career, or dreamed up an idea that changed
the world, or at least impressed a boss, or the family, or a friend.
But the potential of education is frequently cited as a means to affect dramatic change
outside of school and outside of our individual lives.
Many people believe that education can fix social or economic and political problems that
reside in the wider society, and that's one reason why the economic rationale for public
education is so strong.
But it's a two-way street.
Not only does education influence what happens outside of our schools, in the larger world,
but all of the factors and contexts out in the world enter into our schools and classrooms,
too.
Sometimes this is a positive effect, and sometimes it's tragic.
For example, the spread of HIV-AIDS has had a devastating impact on South Africa and
its schools.
More than 6 million South Africans today live with the condition known as HIV, the human
immunodeficiency virus, or the full-blown illness known as AIDS, which has acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome.
That's nearly 12 percent of the country's population, and it's almost double the total
number affected in Nigeria, which is home to the world's second-largest infected population.
The effect of the AIDS epidemic on South African schools is overwhelming.
Nearly a half million South African children up to the age of 14 are infected with HIV,
and AIDS has left about two-and-a-half million children orphaned.
Furthermore, young women, many of them mothers, account for more than half of all South Africans
living with HIV or AIDS, according to the United Nations.
And until now, most research addressing the impact of HIV and AIDS on education in South
Africa has been driven by economics or medicine and epidemiology.
While this is understandable and may ultimately be the path to reduced infection rates or
even finding a cure, it also fails to take into account the contextual factors that embed
the disease in society and its culture.
Research shows that about 60 percent of South African children are sexually active or have
already had a sexual encounter by the end of primary school, and many or most of these
encounters are not consensual.
For now, an understandable sensitivity, call it a stigma, is associated with school programs
that are designed to educate South African students about HIV, AIDS, and thereby help
prevent the spread and suffering from this disease.
The stigma inhibits teachers from talking honestly with primary school-aged children
about the disease and specifically about how HIV is contracted through sex.
Yet education already does play a critical role in arming girls and young women.
Furthermore, new cognitive research shows that even small amounts of accelerated basic
schooling can enhance reasoning and decision-making skills that lead to fewer HIV infections.
So you see, it is a two-way street.
Factors outside of school also have a big impact on teaching and learning in schools,
and the knowledge and skills students learn in school can have a huge impact on what happens
outside in the wider world too.
This lecture investigates the idea that non-school factors such as student poverty are among
the strongest significant predictors of learning, even more so than factors within a school's
control such as curriculum or teacher quality and school resources.
To distinguish between influences that are within the control of educators and those
factors that are beyond educators' control, I identify them respectively as school factors
and non-school factors.
We will concentrate on non-school factors in this lecture and examine two of the largest
culture and economics on opposite sides of the planet.
We'll look at South Africa, where we've seen an example of the HIV-age crisis, and also
in China, halfway across the world, where strong school test scores and national economics
are thought to go hand in hand.
China specifically and Asia broadly produce outstanding average student scores on tests
based largely on rote memorization.
But information hoarding is not the equivalent of knowledge creation.
Instead, China's large share of economic output internationally coincides with low
patent filings and other indices of innovation.
This is a sobering sign for China, and it's an important reminder for the United States
and the rest of the world that learning is about much more than testing.
Now returning to the central theme of this lecture, culture and economics typically
fall outside of the control of schools, teachers, policymakers, reformers, and even outside
the control of parents.
So while it's true around the world that economic forces predominate in influencing
education policy, the actual shape of education is often mediated through culture, and what
results is a large gap between the two.
To explore this gap more fully, we will examine school systems in South Africa and China not
because they are directly comparable, but rather because each represents one important
non-school factor that is highly influential in the development of education and learning
in that country's school system.
South Africa is characterized by extreme poverty and wealth.
Consequently, South Africa shows us how poverty can dramatically influence what schools look
like.
The countervailing example of China, where poverty is receding, demonstrates the sustained
power of social culture in the classroom.
That is to say that in both examples, societal culture lives outside of the school walls,
and in the grand scheme usually wins.
By comparison, education culture is organizational and institutionalized largely from within.
Ever since the publication of the Coleman Report in 1966, as one of the great society
initiatives of Lyndon Johnson's Presidential Administration, governments, parents, development
agencies, and communities have all argued about the degree to which resources matter
when it comes to education.
The Coleman Report was one of the first large-scale studies of the impacts on student learning
of school versus non-school factors.
It found that students' home and background factors were just as important, if not more
important than school factors and resources themselves.
The question since then hasn't been so much whether resources matter, but rather whose
resources matter the most.
For example, it is now quite well known that students from affluent backgrounds tend to
outperform their less-advantaged peers, both in school and in the labor market, almost
everywhere around the world.
And as a result, school reform initiatives that emphasize factors under the direct influence
or control of the educator, while ignoring such external influences, are susceptible
to failure.
It's as if to introduce educational reform in South Africa without taking into account
the pervasive and oppressive non-school factor of poverty in student homes and communities.
Another influence on student performance arises from physical and emotional needs that teachers
at schools in disadvantaged communities are required to meet.
In spite of the fact that they often don't have the knowledge or skills much less the
resources needed to meet these unfulfilled emotional needs.
Such needs can include better nutrition and counseling on birth control, family violence
and even substance abuse.
If taken at face value then, non-school factors such as hunger, which is a direct consequence
of poverty, and emotional hunger, which quite often is a byproduct of impoverishment, have
such a strong impact on classroom teaching and student learning that manipulating school
factors like a math curriculum, for example, might not make any difference at all.
And from this we can develop and test a hypothesis that poverty is a strong and stable predictor
of teacher effectiveness and student performance in South Africa and worldwide.
So now let's estimate the impact of student poverty on teaching and learning in South
Africa by drawing on comparable cross-national quantitative data.
In three cycles of TIMS testing, remember TIMS is the Trends in International Mathematics
and Science Study.
These cycles across almost a decade, South Africa ranked dead last in student achievement
among all participating countries.
This cross-national data is based on comparisons at the time of about 40 countries worldwide
and comes from, again, this Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study.
In a nation that is dealing with a legacy of extreme social and political inequality,
low scores on this education assessment signal a potentially dismal future for the country's
economic development.
Furthermore, the gap between high and low achievers in the testing results is also associated
with the gap between advantaged and disadvantaged groups of students across South Africa.
On the other hand, there's strong comparative evidence suggesting that South African primary
school children are interested in learning some practical concepts of science and might
benefit from being able to develop their own relevant curricula with their teacher's
guidance.
This brings us back to the sociological impact of the HIV-AIDS epidemic in South Africa.
Most non-white South African students live in communities with the highest HIV-AIDS infection
rates in the world, and half of them are at risk of not finishing school.
Furthermore, teachers and educators who constitute the largest white-collar profession in the
country reflect the same high-risk sexual activities and infection rates that are represented
broadly in the adult population.
Student-aged girls and young women who live or work in South Africa's most disadvantaged
communities face a double jeopardy from this exposure.
They're almost constantly confronted with the HIV-AIDS infection around them.
This means not only do they risk seeing their future economic potential diminished if they're
unable to complete their education, but they're also in greater danger of engaging in high-risk
sexual behavior and decision-making, because girls are more likely to engage in non-consensual
sex in poor disadvantaged communities.
So non-school factors can outweigh attempts to level the playing field by providing equitable
school resources and other factors.
Pulling back the lens from South Africa to look around the world more broadly, countries
everywhere made large investments in public education during the 20th century to expand
and increase the social and economic potential of their citizens.
The governing rationale was to make youths more economically productive.
The means consisted of making schooling accessible to every youth and increasing students' levels
of educational attainment, in other words, how far they went in school.
But the attainment of ever higher levels of education has not necessarily ensured future
economic productivity or social literacy or even productive citizenship.
Some blame for this can be attributed to the school's inability to shift their formal
curriculum and programs to meet employers' perceived needs, nor to keep pace with rapid
changes in technology and information systems that dramatically altered world labor markets
during the 20th century.
In other words, a culture of education spread worldwide throughout the 20th century and
it perpetuated its own mythology, which stated plainly was the belief that high achievement
and continued progress in school necessarily leads to high economic returns for nations
and for individuals to escape from poverty and marginalization.
This fundamental rationale, called human capital theory, suggests that after we invest time
and financial resources in education, training, or other skills and opportunity enhancing activities,
then in return we will obtain future benefits, usually in the form of income or some sort
of economic return.
The human capital approach to schooling emphasizes the exchange value of the education we receive.
In addition, the human capital rationale suggests that schooling is an efficient and appropriate
process through which students acquire skills and knowledge needed in the labor market.
Some say that a human capital rationale assumes schooling has cumulative beneficial effects
on individual productivity, occupational prestige, and income.
In other words, taken all together, investment in human capital is believed to produce economic
growth at the individual, local, and national levels, although the individual usually emphasizes
his immediate returns over the returns of others.
So schooling is a formal tool through which we as individuals invest in ourselves.
Now the downside is, if we don't achieve the desired effect through schooling, then
not just one student is likely to fail economically, but rather many students will.
But what if we flip this logic and admit that non-school factors, like those that we just
talked about in poor, marginalized South Africa, if we admit that they directly impact the
potential returns on our investment in school factors, that's an important point.
And accepting this forces us to broaden our understanding of what are sustainable solutions
to common problems in math schooling, such as learning, testing, and the attainment of
employable skills.
Now let's continue our conversation by turning from South Africa to another part of the world,
China.
Regional policymakers in the West often look to China and other East Asian communities
for examples of best practices in education.
But increasingly, the attention is on the role that education plays in linking children
and their creativity to the labor market, as well as to economic growth and technological
innovation.
By drawing on internationally comparative data from China's financial center in Shanghai,
as well as from Taiwan and the formerly colonial communities of Hong Kong and Macau, we can
examine the relationship of school activity among 15-year-olds to measure educational
achievement, creativity, and innovation.
And while there are important limitations to the data, some research suggests that students
themselves play the most important role in developing their own knowledge creation and
even when teachers directly contribute.
I'm drawing from a database known as the Program for International Student Assessment,
or PISA.
And among cross-national assessments, PISA is one of the best to measure the impact
of education on creativity and innovation, because it measures the potential for students
to create new knowledge, rather than measuring the degree to which students have mastered
a curriculum.
The PISA data have been rigorously and representatively sampled and administered so that while there
are limitations to the information, based on its inability to fully capture local context
in communities, something we talk about frequently, it still provides a rare window into a large
number of formal educational systems.
78 countries participated in the PISA data I'm citing here, but the four we're focusing
on are the Chinese and Taiwanese examples.
If we look at average national student performance in reading, mathematics, and science using
the PISA scores, we will see that Shanghai outscored all other participating countries
in every performance category.
Hong Kong was close to the top, just below Shanghai, Korea, and Finland, while Taipei
and Macau came in significantly above the average in mathematics and science performance,
even though they were significantly lower than the average in reading performance.
So if Chinese students are doing so well, why should we be concerned with their future
creativity? And how is this relevant to our discussion about the impact of non-school
factors?
Well, it's because there's another factor at work in East Asian educational systems,
and that is the connection between education and Confucianism in the culture of Asian education.
According to Chinese studies scholars, such as Xing Shan Yao at the University of Wales,
Confucianism, at the most basic level, is a system of ethics, education, and statesmanship
that stresses love for humanity, reverence for ancestors and parents, and harmony in
thought and conduct.
From this perspective, all human relationships involve a set of defined roles and mutual obligations.
Confucianism is the cultural context for education in Chinese societies, and it prizes
and reinforces reverence for precedent and conformity within the status quo.
Now, some characteristics, or at least practices of Confucianism, tend to overlap strongly
with emphases in the Asian education system on standardization and memorization, the very
qualities that we tend to think can kill creativity.
Even more broadly, we sometimes hear that schools kill creativity, but the evidence
on this is mixed.
The British writer and educational consultant Sir Ken Robinson, who is the author of the
book Creative Schools and the star of the YouTube animated video called Changing Education
Paradigms, has become something of a sensation by speaking to packed auditoriums about the
ways in which mass education crushes the creative spirit and turns otherwise engaging pursuits
into mindless routines.
And it's long been held that rote memorization and standardized testing can isolate knowledge
and skills away from real-world applications, as well as from individual contexts and circumstances.
Even a recent U.S. education secretary suggested that the focus on tests rather than learning
is sucking the oxygen out of the room in a lot of schools.
But not everyone is pessimistic.
School curricula and activities are also seen as motivating youth and communities that otherwise
might have nothing in their place, and as establishing opportunities for social and economic
mobility where none would otherwise exist.
In most countries, formal education systems remain the predominant catalyst for innovation
and knowledge.
They're responsible for developing the knowledge and skills in young students that's required
to create new knowledge and sustain society.
And as a consequence, schools are sometimes thought of as incubators of innovation.
But in China, schools might be laboratories for conformity within Confucian culture instead.
Some educators who study Chinese or Confucian culture suggest that this context limits Chinese
students' ability to innovate and create because it requires conformity to the role of students
and discourages questioning or divergent learning.
If this is true, and if schools kill creativity in China largely due to this Confucian cultural
context, then the cycle of innovation and development in education will be hampered if not crushed.
The cycle of innovation development in national education systems ideally passes through three
stages.
First, students and teachers acquire knowledge and skills through formal education.
It's typical of what we think of when we think of education.
Second, students and teachers engage in critical thinking and problem-solving activities, which
trains the students to apply knowledge to real-world problems.
And then finally, students and teachers become producers or creators of knowledge through
collaborative learning activities.
The trick is to learn how to measure knowledge creation in schools and then measure the impact
of this new knowledge on innovation and development in society.
One way to do that is by looking at international indicators of innovation, such as those generated
by individual companies or trade groups and government reports.
In 2010, China accounted for 20 percent of the world's population, 9 percent of the world's
gross domestic product, and 12 percent of the world's research and development expenditure.
And at the same time, it generated only 1 percent of all patent filings or patents outside
of China.
Now these figures tell an important story about the innovation capacity and performance
of China.
The low indicators of innovation and creativity suggest that China's future as a leader in
the global knowledge society and economy may be at serious risk.
The World Bank provides other indicators that measure innovation, knowledge and potential
for development, and their data show that Taiwan ranks above Hong Kong and the rest
of China in all three indicators of innovation and creativity.
Now this foreshadows a potential crisis of innovation and creativity in China relative
not only to the rest of the world as demonstrated by the patent shortfall, but even to its extended
communities in neighboring Taiwan and Hong Kong.
A renowned comparative education scholar, William Cummings, has suggested that even
though formal education provides young people with a solid foundation from which to become
learners, education is nevertheless less effective at guiding students to become critical thinkers
or mature knowledge creators in ways that lead to creativity and innovation.
The problem is that education systems are increasingly organized to create high academic
achievers based on standard tests that rely heavily on memorization rather than on creativity
and new knowledge development.
In other words, formal education systems tend to prepare students to be passive rather than
active knowledge creators.
Now Cummings takes this a step further, asserting that the education system in many East Asian
countries from grade school through college does not provide students with experiences
that foster knowledge creation.
So let me ask it again, is formal education killing creativity?
And if so, then why have Chinese students been performing so well on international assessments
compared to other educational systems worldwide?
The answers may say much about whether China's education system does face a crisis in the
21st century and to what effect.
Is there a culture of education in China and around the world that values educational
achievement more than it does knowledge creation?
Well, the importance of considering the non-school factor of Confucian culture is that this is
a culture that embeds itself in the formal education system and influences education from
the inside out.
In contrast, the South African example of extreme poverty as a key non-school factor
influences education from the outside in.
Now among the consequences may be that if hunger, illness, and poverty represent supreme
non-school obstacles in student learning in South Africa, then in China the Confucian
culture of conformity and being tested for it as an output may very well inhibit student
knowledge, creation, application, and the distribution of that knowledge.
