Lecture nine, borrowing foreign school cultures.
Improving education is a challenge that's often eased by comparison.
If we can find examples of other teachers, classroom schools, or educational systems
that work well and have high levels of student learning and performance, then we're likely
to think they're doing something right.
And if we're likely to think that we can borrow or copy what they do to make our system
better, then it's even more worthwhile.
This lecture will push you to think critically about which countries and cultures are comparable
and which are not.
We're going to revise the classic apples and oranges rationale to discuss what is and
isn't a useful or appropriate comparison.
The most popular type of comparison is the target comparison.
These are usually more aspirational than realistic and focus on high-performing systems and growing
economies.
For example, in the 1980s, Americans compared themselves to the Japanese educational system
because Japan's economy was rapidly expanding while the US was coming out of the 1970s recession.
In the 1990s, the US shifted its focus to compare education with what we call the Asian
Tigers, which included Singapore and South Korea, again because of their rapid economic
growth.
Now the focus of America's attention is on Finland and Shanghai, China for similar reasons.
In the 1950s and 60s, Americans compared themselves to the Soviet Union because they were our
chief competition both politically and technologically.
These target countries that we compare to are all top achievers.
There's no question about that.
But they are our target comparisons because there also are competitors in other ways.
The question is whether these are wise or the most appropriate comparisons.
Even inappropriate comparisons can have some significant positive effects if they're implemented
well.
For example, let's consider what the United Arab Emirates of Abu Dhabi did in 2010.
The UAE, or the United Arab Emirates, isn't the only country that looks around the world
for model educational systems to emulate.
But they have the resources and the decision-making power to really borrow models that they admire.
As you probably know, in international tests of educational achievement, Finland has done
very well.
They have become a global model for education and especially for their teacher training,
teacher professional development, and the classroom practice of Finnish teachers.
Education officials in Abu Dhabi decided that instead of just observing what Finnish teachers
do, comparing them to Emirati school teachers, and wondering if what the Finnish teachers
do would work in Abu Dhabi, that instead they would establish a couple of Finnish-style
primary schools in Abu Dhabi itself using Finnish teachers.
So in 2010, they reformed two schools based on that Finnish model.
And they imported about 50 Finnish teachers to make it happen.
In the years since these schools were established, these Finnish teachers have been using their
Finnish approaches to train other teachers and to influence real classroom teaching in
these two Abu Dhabi schools.
And the results of this target comparison are still being analyzed, but it looks like
the program worked in a lot of different ways and in ways that were purposefully scripted
and focused.
For example, Finnish teachers have changed the structure of Emirati students' days and
how they communicate with their teachers in each other and the kinds of instruction or
teaching they receive.
But there have been some unintended consequences of this Finnish-Emerati target comparison as well.
The Finnish teachers working in Abu Dhabi have gained new insight about the struggles of
being a foreigner in schools, which they say they can take back to Finland with them.
They say their experiences will help them work with immigrant children in Finland in ways
that they didn't understand before.
Also, the bilingual nature of the Finnish schools where they use both Arabic and English
have taught the Emirati educators that using English during the school day is a strong way
to improve not just the students' English academic performance, but also their communication
competence in English, which is a very valuable skill in both business and social and political
life in the United Arab Emirates.
In addition, the Emirati curriculum has still been used in the new Finnish-style schools.
But the teachers and students have found that they were able to blend the Finnish culture
of teaching with the Emirati cultural expectations that were embedded in the curriculum.
In other words, blending cultures within the school seems to have worked since there has
enough time and attention given to the adjustment approach.
Finally, having Finnish teachers in Abu Dhabi has been an opportunity for professional development
among the Emirati teachers that just hasn't existed before.
Finnish teachers have been able to provide professional development in conjunction with
a Finnish university working in Abu Dhabi.
And Emirati teachers who are typically trained in the traditional style of lecturing and monitoring
have been taught by the Finnish teachers how to work in professional learning communities
with other teachers and to work collaboratively as teaching units of professionals rather
than as siloed individual teachers in lone classrooms.
Emphasizing the uniqueness of the students and other western Finnish cultural assumptions
may be different for a Gulf Muslim country, but they have discovered that it's possible.
In the words of one of the Emirati teachers, she said, two and a half years ago we started
as foreigners to each other, but today we are sisters with the mutual vision and a strong
desire to improve education together.
Now, based on this remarkable example, it's tempting to say that target comparisons like
comparing Finland to Abu Dhabi are both doable and can be appropriate.
But there are some additional things to consider when making target comparisons.
Comparisons only work when there is some match between the school and, importantly, the non-school
factors in each community being compared.
Remember that school factors are those things that we can change about education or about
school, like the curriculum or the way the teachers teach or are trained or the ways
that students interact in the classroom.
Whereas non-school factors are those things that we can't change in the school, like we
can't change the income of a student's family.
We can't change the way that the community operates outside of school.
We have a difficult time changing whether or not a student comes to school with enough
sleep or enough food.
But in the Abu Dhabi Finland example I just described, the school factors were relatively
evenly matched between the two primary schools in Abu Dhabi and the schools that the Finnish
teachers are used to working in.
In other words, the Abu Dhabi schools were well-funded, they had an existing and strong
curriculum, and they had building and infrastructure facilities that were safe and conducive to
learning.
These schools were also managed in a flexible and welcome way, and the Abu Dhabi school
teachers who worked with the Finnish teachers were well-trained, academically prepared,
and open to learning new approaches to teaching.
Now to be honest, this was a purposefully developed situation where all of the school
factors were manipulated to align as perfectly as possible.
And that's a good thing, and the Abu Dhabi team that prepared this situation really should
be commended for it.
The risk came more from the potential mismatch in non-school factors.
Remember those factors generally fall into the categories of ethnicity or race, gender,
and socioeconomic status.
This means that the degree of variation in race or ethnicity, or in gender, or in the
social and economic status in the community around the school, or that students and teachers
in a school come from, can make or break a target comparison like the one between Abu
Dhabi and Finland.
Granted, there are a lot of cultural and religious differences between these two communities,
but the two schools selected to become Finnish schools in Abu Dhabi weren't selected at random.
They were chosen because they were relatively stable in terms of that socioeconomic status
and ethnicity and balanced by gender.
I say all of this to emphasize the importance of thinking about how school and non-school
factors need to align to affect real educational change, and also to highlight the importance
of matching those school and non-school factors when making educational comparisons.
This is why target comparisons are often dangerous, because they rarely align as well as the Abu
Dhabi example in terms of school and non-school factors.
Let's consider the following about Finland, for example.
Since it's used as a target comparison by so many other national education systems who
aspire to perform as well as Finland does on tests of academic achievement.
Finland's educational system doesn't emphasize testing.
It's based on a series of equity policies and reforms, and it is well resourced across
the nation's schools, at least for the most part.
Teachers in Finland have status and are respected professionally.
They're highly trained and mentored, and they often co-teach in their classrooms.
Outside of school, the population is largely homogenous, or at least we can say it only
varies mildly in terms of racial and ethnic diversity and socioeconomic status.
And there are fewer disadvantages between gender and other non-school factors than you'd
find in many other countries.
For example, Finland's population is 93% Finn, and 94% of the population speaks Finnish.
78% of the population is Lutheran, and Finland has a social welfare system, meaning that
virtually no one falls below the poverty line.
By contrast, in the United States, there is much more diversity and variability in the
factors outside of schools.
The U.S. population is less than 80% white, and about the same percentage speaks English
exclusively.
51% are Protestant, 24% are Catholic, and 15% of the U.S. population lives below the
poverty line.
Now, evidence shows that the countries with the best education systems also have the least
amount of variation between their highest and lowest achievers, whereas the worst education
systems typically have the most variation among their best and worst schools, teachers,
and students.
And if we look at variation distributions within each country by these indicators, we
find that Finland's population varies much less than the U.S. population does.
We also find that some states and districts in the U.S. don't represent the average at
all.
These differences outside of schools have a significant impact on how teachers teach
and students learn.
So making a target comparison between Finland and the U.S., for example, is highly inappropriate
unless the comparison is to a handful of schools or a specific district that more closely
resembles the Finnish school and the accompanying Finnish non-school characteristics.
The dangers and abuses of target comparisons are many, and unfortunately they outweigh the
positive examples in most cases.
It's absolutely possible, though, to manipulate cross-national comparisons of educational
systems and student achievement based on political and economic agendas of the reformers or
the policy makers and even educators.
And although there are many school and non-school factors that influence teaching and learning,
it's just as important to consider how we compare systems and the interaction that certain
factors may have with each other.
Some critics of comparing national education systems say that using comparisons is a sort
of cognitive Olympics, and it's an inappropriate use of cross-national comparisons of student
achievement because of the manipulability and potential ambiguity of the comparisons.
A second point to consider suggests that the main factors that most national comparisons
make are based on student achievement scores and that they may be inappropriate with comparing
classrooms, schools, or larger systems of education.
Some make the argument, myself included, that we as a nation in the United States engage
in national comparisons of our educational systems more to attain some sort of national
or systemic legitimacy rather than out of an intent to truly change and improve our
educational systems.
And we can base this argument on the fact that little secondary or in-depth analysis
of comparative education data takes place beyond the initial rankings and some rudimentary
descriptions of teaching and learning in other countries.
Based on these simple rankings of average student achievement scores and descriptions,
educational policy makers and administrators tend to make relatively premature recommendations.
So is comparison of national average of student achievement a valid comparison of educational
systems or school outcomes?
It may not be, but even if we were to do more than look at the average scores and rank them,
we still have to ask whether it's always appropriate to compare.
In other words, are we always comparing apples and oranges?
For example, the governance structure and educational curriculum in the United States
system is extremely localized and it varies enormously from state to state and district
to district.
Whereas in Japan or France and other more centralized systems, the opposite is true.
Since American educational policy makers and researchers make so many comparisons between
the United States and East Asian countries, which tend to be much more centralized than
the United States.
This fundamental difference between systems should be an important part of these policy
and research discussions.
Unfortunately, it rarely is.
Another fact to consider when attempting to develop strategic comparisons is that the
instruments of evaluation and assessment themselves might be unreliable.
Reliability of instruments is an issue at the local level all the way up to the international
level.
Although there is certainly always room for improvement, and these are not infallible
instruments, these assessments and these surveys, I'd argue that many of these internationally
comparative data sets and studies provide relatively good comparative information.
If researchers and policy makers consider each nation's unique situation and context
and uses these considerations as filters when drawing conclusions from and suggesting
policy based on the comparative information.
Still, the nature of schooling and culture varies dramatically between nations.
This means that the possibility that international educational data is unreliable is more a question
of degrees than anything else.
We also have to consider that student achievement is often used as a proxy measure for economic
productivity by policy makers and the media when interpreting comparative data.
But is student achievement an appropriate indicator of a nation's economic productivity
or development?
And should educational reform be driven by economic competition and productivity concerns?
Well the fact of the matter is that results of internationally comparative tests of student
performance are frequently interpreted to represent the economic status of a nation.
Studies have shown that direct spending on education and the overall strength of the
economy may positively associate with student achievement.
But this relationship is shaky and not supported by other measures of economic development
and productivity.
Now that's bad news for those developing nations that are contributing as much as twice as
much of their government funds to education as economically strong nations like the United
States do.
And it suggests that perhaps education itself is not the best indicator of or contributor
to national economic development.
Another criticism arising from cross-national comparisons of student achievement is that
some nation's educational environment and curricular exposure in particular make cross-national
comparison inappropriate.
For example in the United States some have argued that school curriculum are a mile wide
and an inch deep, leading students, teachers and classrooms to be unfocused and lack vision.
Characteristics of the educational system itself such as curricular content and coverage
make educational policy resulting from comparisons of achievement in these fundamentally different
systems misguided at best.
This brings us back to context and the importance of non-school factors.
Cultural, contextual and organizational characteristics of education in different systems or communities
worldwide prevent straightforward cross-national or even cross-context comparison of student
achievement.
The fact is that cultural contexts uniquely shape educational and economic communities
and learners.
One of the most interesting debates along the line of educational context and the development
stage of education took place in the early 1990s between two prominent American comparative
education and international testing scholars, David Baker and Ian Westbury.
Their debate concentrated on the interpretation of student achievement rankings in the United
States and Japan given the instructional opportunity and curricular exposure in each
of those nations.
Basically Baker argued that in spite of the fact that Japanese and American students were
exposed to different math curricula at the same age and grades, that American students
really were still scoring below Japanese students, in other words the Japanese really were outperforming
Americans even though they might have had some curriculum advantage.
Whereas Westbury argued that the different exposure to curricula in Japan and the United
States meant that the reason the Japanese scored so much higher than American students
wasn't because Americans really were doing worse, it was really because Japanese students
had learned something more or extra that American students probably hadn't had in their curriculum
at that stage in their education.
Now family background and socioeconomic status are often insurmountable obstacles to appropriate
cross-national comparisons of schooling, including standardized outcomes such as student achievement.
There's also a large body of literature that suggests that the background influences of
students and education professionals are always such significant predictors of student
achievement that cross-national differences in student achievement don't mean anything.
Now it's doubtful that cross-national comparisons of student achievement and their use as indicators
of national economic potential and productivity really will ever end.
And if that's the case then strategically systematizing the analysis of comparative education
information is much more important and productive than simply playing politics with the results
or denying that we can compare.
So comparisons are important for improving education in spite of the dangers of comparison.
The trick then is to approach them thoughtfully and strategically.
So let's run through some examples of how to make comparisons thoughtful and strategic.
First we have to assume that we're putting aside political agendas about economic development
or political competition.
And let's assume that we generally want to improve teaching and learning in schools by
comparing what our own system looks like to another one.
There are two approaches that will yield the most helpful results and can lead to genuine
recommendations for improved educational practice and outcomes.
These two approaches are based on the idea that the school and non-school factors for
the systems being compared are as aligned as possible because when these are both aligned
is when the comparisons are the most helpful.
So the first step in any strategic comparison is to define what your system is and then
compare across units within that system to find where the strengths and weaknesses lie.
If we take the United States as a starting point for our example, we'd need to first
define what educational system we mean.
Remember as one of the largest and most decentralized systems in the world, there are many smaller
systems that make up the U.S. educational system and those include state school systems
and local school districts.
Now more meaningful comparisons often begin with an internal comparison and are factor
driven comparisons.
So comparing across those internal systems, those state and district systems first is
the best start to a reform minded approach.
Let's take the biggest internal system comparison to start.
If we just compare state to state within the U.S., we can begin by comparing school and
non-school factors for state educational systems using data from NAPE, the National Assessment
of Educational Progress.
It is a nationally representative sample of educational systems and students nationwide
and we can get the data for each of those states and even each district and compare them.
We can then move to peer country comparisons.
For example, the United States system is decentralized and characterized by high levels
of variation in educational quality and performance and it's situated within a community of above
average economic and political influence.
The United States is also considered to be a developed and industrialized country.
So comparisons to peer countries would be most fruitful if those countries shared some
of those broad school and non-school characteristics.
For example, we could compare the U.S. system to the Canadian one or the Australian one or
German systems based on some shared characteristics related to school system structure, historical
development and economic productivity or federal political governance.
If we compared the U.S. system to Canada system, it would be more meaningful and more of a
close fit than comparing to Singapore system because Canada and the U.S. share a lot more
of those school and non-school characteristics than the United States and Singapore do.
So why are educational comparisons so popular?
We've seen that international education comparisons are popular because they are a way of legitimizing
what goes on in schools and national education systems.
Comparative assessments and other forms of standardized testing are often the only ways
that anyone can see what schools are actually doing.
Accountability expectations are a big part of this emphasis on comparisons and the actual
object of testing and assessment in schools both in the United States and around the world
is to gauge quality or to create equality and establish some sort of control over schooling.
Some have suggested that large-scale cross-national assessments like the Trends in International
Mathematics and Science Study which we call TIMS or the Program for International Student
Assessment which we call PISA are moving us towards a world curriculum.
In other words, some subjects and types of knowledge are becoming more frequent and more
legitimate for eventual social, economic and political uses than others.
But are tests really moving us towards this kind of homogenization and what we know around
the world and who would benefit from this sort of global standardization?
You see the goal or aim of testing and assessment in a particular school, district or nation
largely determines who benefits and how.
When the point of assessment is quality then students benefit and the larger community
benefits probably more indirectly.
When the point of assessment is to create equality then the students and communities
tend to both benefit because there is hopefully a more even distribution of knowledge and
power throughout that schooled society.
And when the point of assessment is to control schooling which is what a lot of people are
afraid of then the people, organizations or groups who administer those assessments and
evaluate their results are the beneficiaries because they are the ones who can then dictate
what goes on in schools based on the assessment results and their own agendas.
