Lecture 11 Why Blame the Teacher
What makes the education systems of some countries models that so many other countries
aspire to become?
The answer is usually their focus on high performance and economic growth or stability,
which is attributed to education.
In this lecture, we'll look at some characteristics of students, teachers, curriculum resources,
and culture in the so-called model educational systems to see what makes them unique or not
from the U.S. and other middle or low performing educational systems and economies.
Is low student performance the fault of teachers?
Well, a lot of American policy makers and parents seem to think so, and reactions to
low educational performance on international student achievement tests have routinely focused
on reforming teachers as a way to improve national education systems.
For example, in the United States and other countries that perform lower than they expect,
the high performing systems of Singapore and Finland have been venerated because of
their rigorous and seemingly effective systems of teacher training and professional development.
We can also learn a lot about what makes a quality teacher by looking at the way that
some of the lowest scoring and most culturally different systems from Singapore and Finland,
for example, are reforming education through teachers.
This may seem counterintuitive, but looking at these low performing countries is an important
way to think about how teachers can make a difference.
For example, education systems in the Gulf countries of the Middle East are routinely
criticized because of their comparatively low average student performance on internationally
comparative assessments of math and science achievement.
In particular, the participation of several Gulf countries in the Trends in International
Mathematics and Science Study, or TIMS, highlights the low levels of student performance in each
Gulf country compared to target countries around the world and even to the international
average.
Similar to other national education systems worldwide, Gulf policymakers' responses to
low student achievement have been to focus on both teacher quality and teacher improvement
as keys to national educational reform, and they aren't alone.
Preparing and certifying the most highly qualified and competent teachers in the subject areas
of math and science have been elusive goals for most national education systems worldwide.
Primary and secondary teachers are the focus of most of the debate and research in and
about teacher development, but there is also evidence from recent shifts in higher education
that demonstrates the need for increasingly qualified instructors and subject matter expertise
even at the college and university level.
And as a result, establishing internationally-normed, nationally-approved, and professionally-aligned
teacher preparation, professional development, and monitoring systems is increasingly emphasized
around the world.
It emphasizes professionalism and professional development, reflective practice, and both
self and external evaluation of teachers.
So while significant differences exist in the implementation of teacher education worldwide,
there is remarkable similarity in the norms and expectations for pre-service or new teachers
in different countries.
For example, there is internationally-comparative evidence that instead of preparing teachers
to produce highly qualified, high-performing, and highly productive students, teachers who
demonstrate or conform to national standards for teaching have students who run the gamut
of performance from very low to very high.
So although alignment with international standards for teaching is one way to improve teacher
quality, it's not a guarantee that classroom learning and student performance will improve.
Evidence shows that more advantaged students often have the best opportunity or highest
chances of having high-quality teachers than their less advantaged student peers.
There's also evidence that teacher performance cannot be consistently predicted with test
scores.
Even so, international comparative data on education becomes increasingly available worldwide.
Policy makers and educational reformers alike have increasingly shifted their attention
to teacher quality.
This is in part because international policy agendas for education, like the UNESCO-sponsored
Education for All initiative, or the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, translate
into nation-level calls for educational systems to develop standards to improve teacher quality
and to put a qualified teacher in every classroom.
UNESCO is an arm of the United Nations that promotes access to education as a human right
and a means to human development.
However, notwithstanding UNESCO's goals to populate the world's classrooms with qualified
teachers, evidence also shows it's common for teachers who are trained or certified
in, for example, mathematics to be teaching a science class.
One study showed that 23% of middle school students in the United States were taught
mathematics by teachers who neither majored in nor were certified to teach mathematics
and examples of out-of-subject teaching abound worldwide.
There is also ample evidence suggesting that teacher quality is not necessarily tied to
teacher preparation or certification.
Unfortunately, teacher quality and preparation are difficult to adequately and consistently
measure.
On the other hand, it's quite easy to measure student performance using standardized tests.
This means that teacher quality is often determined by proxy.
Teacher certification is a better way of estimating what a teacher knows and can do.
For example, in a report on teacher certification requirements in approximately 60 different
countries from every region of the world, researchers found that a degree from a teacher
education program and a pre-practicum during a teacher education program were the most
commonly reported requirements for certification.
The next most commonly reported requirement for teacher certification, which included
more than half of the countries participating in the study, included a certification examination
alongside the completion of a supervised practicum and a probationary teaching period.
Now, it's important to note that teacher examinations alone are usually not enough for licensure
or certification in most national education systems.
In addition, since teaching is an applied profession, the teacher certification examination
is typically partnered with a practical teaching experience, which is supervised and evaluated
in addition to the teacher exam.
Many educators, policymakers, and scholars all over the world have tied what students
know to professional standards for teachers.
But the evidence connecting teacher standards and student learning remains inconsistent
and questionable, particularly in the Middle Eastern countries that I mentioned earlier.
In short, teacher quality is a policy agenda for every educational system worldwide.
But the elusiveness of teacher quality in the Gulf countries has reached crisis levels,
which makes these education systems an interesting case for us to consider.
Perhaps the most remarkable need in teacher preparation in the Gulf countries is for a
link between demonstrated competency in internationally accepted standards for teachers and real-world
classroom implementation.
Gulf countries share similar social, cultural, political, and economic conditions, and the
countries within this shared context also share many of the same educational problems
and concerns, one of which is definitely teacher quality.
In particular, since 1981, six Gulf states have grouped together to form the Gulf Cooperation
Council.
This council consists of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates.
Although these Gulf countries are known to most of us in the U.S. and elsewhere because
of the political and economic events taking place there, which of course have global ramifications.
We're interested in these countries' educational systems today because they face some challenges
that we face in the United States too.
For example, Saudi Arabia lacks adequate mechanisms for connecting university-based teacher preparation
programs and activities to school-based experiences and activities.
And as the largest Gulf country in both size and population, Saudi Arabia is a good representative
case for the Gulf and a comparison case for our discussion today.
Based on descriptive data from the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study,
the average Saudi 8th grade mathematics and science teacher is less than 40 years old.
And for 8th grade math teachers, Gulf students with teachers between 30 and 39 years old
scored the highest in mathematics achievement.
For science teachers, students with teachers either under 25 years old or 40 to 49 years
old scored the highest in science achievement.
Although students with science teachers that were 49 years or younger scored higher on average
compared to those with teachers aged 50 or older.
Now, if the most effective teachers, as measured by student achievement, are among the newer
or younger teachers, there's a potential drop in teacher quality among those older teachers
even though the older teachers might be the most experienced.
Other factors relevant to education in the Gulf also contribute to a wider contextual
framework.
For instance, gender is an important contextual element of Gulf educational culture and systems
because of the social, cultural, and institutional embeddedness of single-sex education.
This is in part due to the dual nature of Gulf educational systems, like in Saudi Arabia,
where many schools are divided into exclusively male and female schools for students, teachers,
and administrators.
And while single-sex education in Saudi Arabia is the norm nationwide and similar systems
exist throughout the Gulf, it is worth noting that the gender-separated system is highly
unique in terms of both its cultural and social roots as well as the educational impact that
it has on both students and teachers.
Still, it is interesting to note that female students taught by female teachers consistently
outperform male students taught by male teachers in both math and science in the Gulf.
Now, taken by itself, this could suggest that female Saudi teachers may be more effective
than Saudi male teachers.
But the evidence also shows that science teachers seem to be more effective than math teachers
for both genders if we measure effectiveness with student achievement scores.
The evidence then suggests that it would be helpful to include a component of teacher
certification that measures teachers' knowledge about pedagogical skills or how to teach and
student-teacher interactions that facilitate learning.
There is, however, other evidence about the education and training that Gulf teachers
have received.
For example, most eighth-grade math teachers in Saudi Arabia were trained with an emphasis
on mathematics or education mathematics when they were at university.
But students whose mathematics teachers' educational emphasis was not math, in other words, students
who had teachers who teach math but that studied science or some other subject instead
of math at university, they have students who scored significantly higher than those
who actually studied education mathematics or mathematics itself.
Now, teacher certification could be a way to investigate why those pre-service teacher
programs geared towards mathematics don't prepare teachers whose students achieve the
highest levels.
Or on the other hand, it could tell educational researchers why those whose pre-service teacher
training is science or something, anything other than math, do have students who score
at the highest level in mathematics.
Now, there's a host of reasons why being trained in a specific subject content area might not
associate with students' achievement in that content.
But since there are few ways to assess the effectiveness of the teacher training programs
and their specific impact on students, teacher certification examinations offer a potential
way of collecting meaningful teacher-focused data on the issue.
Most Saudi students have science teachers who studied biology as a major or as a concentration
during their university training program.
The TIMS evidence shows that students whose science teachers emphasize biology tend to
score the highest on the general science test, although there's little difference in average
student achievement among all of the science-related educational training emphases.
Out-of-field teaching among mathematics teachers in Saudi Arabia may actually be an advantage
for mathematics students, whereas out-of-field teaching among science teachers is a measurable
disadvantage.
The interesting difference in the impact of out-of-field teaching for math versus science
can be assessed using information from teacher certification examinations.
For example, Saudi math teachers who have pre-service training in science or other disciplines
may have received a different or a unique science and math education that perhaps allows
them to be more applied in the teaching of math concepts.
Or there may be a specific component of math that is typical in science preparation but
which math majors don't have exposure to.
Both golf teachers and students report that most of the mathematics class time is spent
practicing adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing without using a calculator.
And the least amount of time is spent working on fractions and decimals.
But math teachers whose students scored the highest spent some lessons practicing adding,
subtracting, multiplying, and dividing without using a calculator, and about half the lessons
interpreting data in tables or charts or graphs.
And they spend every or almost every lesson writing equations and functions to represent
relationships.
So explaining answers is a relatively straightforward method of engaging students in problem solving
and one that is readily used by teachers and in classrooms around the world.
Students and teachers agree that they relate what they learn in math to their daily lives
and they explain answers every or almost every lesson.
But it is explaining answers during half the lessons or more often that correlates most
closely with high student achievement.
Most science students and teachers report that they spend every or almost every lesson
either giving explanations about what is being studied or relating what they're learning
in science to their daily lives.
And most teachers report that they have students relate what they're learning in science to
their daily lives every or almost every lesson, while students report that they spend about
the same amount of time relating what they're learning in science to their daily lives as
they do giving explanations about what's being studied.
Those students whose teachers reported they spend every or almost every lesson either
relating science learning to their daily lives or giving explanations about what's
being studied were the highest scoring groups among all problem solving activities.
And students who reported they spent time every lesson either relating science to their
daily lives or giving explanations about what they studied were the highest scoring among
student reported groups for problem solving activities.
See it's important to compare what the students and the teachers are each reporting.
We can see though that all science teachers and almost all mathematics teachers assign
homework on a regular basis according to both student and teacher reports among participating
Tim's schools in Saudi Arabia.
And more than half of science students say they review homework in class every or almost
every lesson while even more math students say they review homework in math class or
almost every lesson.
This suggests that in mathematics and science classrooms teachers are using homework as
an in-class instructional tool and assessment activities are more prevalent in science than
in mathematics classrooms according to students.
While teachers report that they spend some class time on quizzes and tests more students
report that they have a science quiz or test every or almost every day than do those who
report having a math quiz or test.
So students reporting that they spent every lesson reviewing homework in class scored
significantly higher than their peers reporting that they spent every lesson having a quiz
or test or beginning their homework in class.
What's interesting is that these Saudi teacher characteristics suggest that teacher certification
in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and across the Gulf Cooperation Council more broadly could
determine and monitor teacher quality by measuring content area focus and expertise or the degree
to which teachers are prepared to teach in a way that links this content to real world
problems and solutions and it encourages critical thinking among students by implementing inquiry
based learning.
This evidence also shows that Gulf teachers are unique and that their characteristics
and behaviors are contextualized by Gulf culture, society and the educational systems, organizational
environment as well.
As teacher certification becomes or has already become the global norm, the quality of certified
teachers becomes the core issue.
And in this situation, the purpose of teacher certification is not to screen new or pre-service
teachers as much as it is to ensure that those qualified to teach are qualified at the highest
levels possible.
So teacher quality is the focus of teacher preparation and reform in the 21st century.
Research has shown the relative differences in teacher quality by teacher certification
status and accounts for the various contextualizing influences that resource allocation, teacher
characteristics and student background have.
In particular, the assumption that teacher certification contributes to teacher quality
and then in turn to student achievement has been tested and retested by researchers.
If teacher certification impacts student performance, then there is an assumption that it will
also associate with teacher quality.
But the sample that we have from Tim's only tells part of the story.
With the exceptions of cuttery math teachers and Dubai's science teachers, there is no
other significant association between teacher certification status and student achievement
in any of the other individual Gulf countries.
In fact, in large part, the association of teacher certification status with both math
and science across the Gulf educational systems is either not statistically significant or
it's weak.
Now this is hardly an endorsement of the impact of teacher certification on teaching and learning
in these Arabian Peninsula states or anywhere else in the world.
And while teacher quality is emphasized as a key characteristic of high functioning educational
systems worldwide.
The evidence in the Gulf countries shows that one of the key indicators of teacher quality
at certification status isn't significantly associated with student performance.
Now explanations for this vary.
In particular, the rapid development of education and the economy in the Gulf may be impacting
the relative importance of teacher quality.
For example, perhaps those households that are higher income or systems where more resources
are available per student are mediating the results.
Further research shows that the strongest predictor of science achievement is per pupil expenditure
as a percent of gross national income, but it's a negative indicator.
As the Gulf example shows, this suggests that lower performing countries expend more resources
per student than higher performing countries.
In other words, there's a disproportionate resource expenditure on education in developing
or low performing educational systems.
And while this indicator is not directly related to the teacher examinations indicator, countries
that devote more resources to education are more likely to develop and administer teacher
examinations.
It's also a proxy indicator for resource allocation to education overall.
Gross national income per capita is also included as an estimate of the impact that socioeconomic
development in a particular country might have on educational achievement among students.
And the effect is quite small.
The next strongest predictor of national average eighth grade science scores is the percent
of teachers who are certified to teach science.
The evidence shows this that for every one percentage point increase in certified science
teachers, there's an increase in science achievement by almost five points.
This is a significant and positive effect of teacher certification on science achievement.
And it suggests that the additional criteria and selection processes that accompany teacher
certification worldwide support higher student achievement.
But the predictor of high relevance to certification status that teacher examination requirement
is not a significant predictor of eighth grade science achievement.
In other words, there's no significant impact on student science achievement that's associated
with requiring teachers to pass an examination in order to become a certified teacher.
So as with science achievement, per pupil expenditure is a significant and negative predictor of
math achievement.
Also as in science, the negative effect of per pupil expenditure on students math achievement
suggests that those countries where average student achievement is lower are more likely
to allocate more resources to education.
But the international evidence suggests that an examination requirement for teacher certification
is not a significant predictor of student achievement and as a result, teacher quality.
The upshot is that while teacher certification has many useful applications in the development
and in the legitimization of teacher quality in whole national education systems, there's
not a one-to-one correlation between teacher certification status and the quality of teaching
and learning occurring in classrooms in the Gulf or in the United States or anywhere around
the world.
The extremely important benefit of teacher certification is that it establishes a culture
of quality and preparation among teachers as well as a system for benchmarking performance
for the initial certification and ongoing monitoring of teacher quality and performance
in national educational systems.
In addition, the data from teacher certification exams can be used by national ed systems to
understand their teacher workforce better as well as identify where there are needs
for improvement or redistribution of resources to address gaps or enhance learning and teaching
in local schools and communities.
Teacher qualifications and training are often not associated with their actual knowledge
and behavior, particularly in disadvantaged communities or challenged educational systems.
The evidence that teacher certification status and student achievement don't consistently
associate is clear.
Simply passing a teacher certification exam is not a guarantee that students of those
teachers or in those schools will be high achievers.
This of course does not mean that there is no value to certification exams or that there
are not other equally important outcomes or impacts of teacher certification.
There's also the very real possibility that the best teachers who have the most impact
on student achievement may not do well on the teacher certification exams that they
themselves are often required to take.
A lot of the time teacher certification is more political in purpose than true measures
of teacher competency and effectiveness.
And until teacher certification processes themselves are rigorously and consistently
evaluated in educational systems, the development and measurement of teacher quality will continue
to remain an elusive goal.
