Lecture 12 Gender Pipeline Lifts a Quality Dream
A few years ago, we were all talking about China's education system.
And ten years ago, we were all talking about Singapore.
Fifteen years before that, we were all talking about Japan.
I mean, let's face it, we love a good success story.
We love to think that the grass is always greener somewhere else.
And we think that because it works in one place,
that it'll work for us in our own schools too.
But we often forget the most basic rule about education.
And that's that it is always, always, always embedded in society and community.
In other words, the problems that exist in the world outside of a school's walls
come right into the classroom every day.
Because teachers and students live in the world.
They don't exist in an educational vacuum
that's just made up of school textbooks and chalk dust.
So if there is school violence,
then chances are that there are factors that exist in the wider community that contribute to it.
Or if teachers are teaching out of field or are less than experts in their fields,
then maybe they live in a society that undervalues teacher professionalism
or mocks intellectualism as being too elitist.
In other words, we need to start thinking of our schools as extensions of our communities and ourselves.
Let's use the finished example for a minute.
Finland has become a focus of international comparison
because finished students scored on the top in a recent international assessment called PISA.
PISA stands for the Program for International Student Assessment.
And it's one of the most highly recognizable studies used to compare educational systems worldwide.
Now that Finland has performed so well on PISA,
there are many attempts to borrow Finnish approaches to education
by other countries that want to recreate Finland's successes in their own schools.
But how does the Finnish system work?
Finnish educators have said over and over
that two of the keys to their success are equity and expertise.
Expertise in Finland has more to do with the quality of teachers than the expertise of students.
The other key to Finland's success is that they are a highly equitable system.
Opportunities and expectations in Finnish schools revolve around the idea
that all are provided the chance to learn in a community that values their ideas
and abilities at the same level as others.
Of course, we have to also remember that Finland has a much smaller
and much less diverse population than the United States and many other countries.
So there might be some problems linking what works in Finland
to what will or can work in other countries.
So how do we make a nationwide transformation by selecting elements of Finland's success
and bringing them to the United States or wherever we are?
Should we emphasize equality in our educational policies or curricula or pedagogy?
Sure, we should, but officially, we already do that.
We have federally mandated educational equality in schools across the United States.
Or maybe we should emphasize expertise for teachers and train them rigorously as experts in their fields.
Yes, absolutely we should, but again, we already do that.
Every state in the United States has a system for certifying teachers
and ensuring that they are what no child left behind calls highly qualified.
So if we're already emphasizing equity and expertise in education, then why don't we look like Finland?
Is it because we don't train our teachers as rigorously or consistently?
Well, maybe so.
Is it because we don't try hard enough or have high enough standards for our teachers?
Again, maybe so.
Is it because teachers and the service they provide our youth and our communities
and our nation is seriously undervalued?
It's possible.
But there's another more obvious answer.
Simply put, it's because we're not the same community or the same population or the same context as Finland.
The U.S. education system cannot be Finland's no matter how hard we try
because we have a unique history, we have unique characteristics and a unique context
and a unique vision for education that will never and can never be the same as Finland's.
And although the ideas and methods they use are tremendous and we should learn from them,
we have to remember that our whole system is a product of our own social, political and economic context.
And our schools respond to that context as much as they shape it.
For example, if Americans want to further emphasize equity in education in the United States,
then we could start by establishing a school finance model
that's not tied to fundamentally unequal things like property taxes or household income
that vary significantly from neighborhood to neighborhood or from district to district.
But there's a serious problem with this.
Given our unique social, political and economic context,
there is very little chance that Americans would be willing to create
a nationwide educational funding system like Finland.
That type of centralization just isn't very likely in the United States and that's not a bad thing.
But if the U.S. can't be Finland, maybe we try creating equity for specific groups of students
either by race or ethnicity or by socioeconomic status or simply by gender.
In other words, a way to level the playing field in education may not be to do exactly what Finland does,
but we can make adjustments that contribute to equity in our own ways.
So let's consider equity by gender right now.
In spite of the well-documented gendered inequality that both exists and persists in schools around the world,
there is a rising amount of evidence that suggests progress towards gender parity in education is taking place, slowly but surely.
Schools are the locus for much of the progress that's being made on behalf of girls and women in society at large,
although there is still much more to be done in order for gender equality to be a consistent characteristic of educational systems around the world.
Some evidence suggests that formal schooling has helped gender egalitarianism become a legitimate part of a pervasive world culture.
For example, the official policies and formal structures of formal schooling now largely avoid formal differentiation by gender.
Let me tell you what I mean.
Only a few decades have passed since boys and girls were formally segregated in many state-sponsored school systems,
which is indicated either by enrollment in schooling itself or by enrollment in specifically gendered courses like home economics or industrial arts or, when I was a kid, woodshop.
A lot has changed since then.
Alongside the mounting evidence of gendered educational inequality,
there's evidence of an emerging educational culture that celebrates equality in education, particularly for girls and women.
Now, how can this be when so much gendered inequality persists in schools around the world?
Well, the answer to this question goes beyond the gender wars dichotomy that was the focus of gender-related research on education for the past few decades.
Some of the most interesting recent comparative work on gender inequality in schools focuses on how gender intersects with other influences on equality like race or ethnicity or socioeconomic status.
And while the differences in schooling between boys and girls exist worldwide, this research also suggests that girls and women's education is strongly contextualized by the political,
the social, and the economic environments of local schools and national educational systems.
Gender egalitarian standards are increasingly becoming institutionalized components of formal political, social, and economic policies as well.
For example, women have the right to vote in most developed and many developing nations around the world.
The civil liberties of women are recognized and even enforced in many nations.
And women technically have the opportunity to hold the same positions in the labor market,
although it's also well documented that girls and women are still often denied these rights and opportunities, even in communities where they are the law.
Still, this recent emphasis on gender egalitarianism can have a double effect.
Because as gender egalitarian standards become institutionalized components of school policy and structure, the definition and scope of gendered inequality expands,
which means that more and more gender differences are both observed and identified as inequality.
Now, there are a lot of benefits that result from educating girls and women.
And I'll name just a few.
Girls and women often have more responsibility for taking care of their families, especially for children.
So when you educate girls and women, you tend to have more educated populations because they then teach the young children and their families.
When you educate girls and women, the health of the community generally improves because now they have a means for understanding hygiene and other health related factors.
And when you educate girls and women, fertility rates tend to drop, which actually can be a very good thing because it keeps an eye on population levels.
Now, the norm in many educational systems around the world is no longer for boys to be officially assigned to more labor market oriented classes like math or science and industrial arts,
and for girls to be more domestic life oriented in history and language and home economics.
And while these gendered curriculum divisions still do exist in some school systems, they largely exist apart from the formal structure and form of formal schooling.
Instead, some argue quite the opposite, that a culture of gender equality has become a globally institutionalized component of formal education.
One example is that many countries that originally established separate schools for boys and girls have already abolished this old system,
and they've integrated boys and girls into a co-educational state sponsored school system, at least for the new schools that are being developed.
Let me give you an example.
There are two countries that are rather high in the percentage of schools that are single sex, but you might be surprised which ones they are.
I'm not talking about Saudi Arabia or Iran or other countries where gender separation is more normal.
I'm talking about South Korea and New Zealand.
South Korea and New Zealand still have relatively high percentages of single sex schools, but it's not because that is the norm now.
It has to do with the historical legacy of religiously founded school systems in both of those countries.
And those single sex schools, those boy schools and girl schools that were originally part of colonial expansion and Christian missionaries,
have still persisted even though there's been a shift to more co-educational schools now.
Even further, girls are now being encouraged to take and sometimes pushed into advanced math and science courses in some school systems,
often beyond what they may individually want or collectively need or even beyond what they've been prepared for.
In fact, in several countries, the lingering gender differences in academic course participation and achievement in secondary school
is tied more to attitudes and potential career than to actual opportunities to learn in schools.
Now this has been variously termed the gender pipeline or opportunity structure,
and instead formal differences in schools by gender have largely shifted to differences in academic achievement rather than by gender.
As a simple example, the official criterion for placement into advanced academic courses isn't a student's gender anymore in most schools around the world.
Instead, in most cases, the official criterion for advanced academic course enrollment is now either demonstrated or anticipated academic ability
instead of gender and other human or social characteristics.
This is a big advance.
But of course, the public and policymakers alike know that just because official policy says one thing,
it doesn't necessarily mean that other and even opposite things stop happening.
For example, delegitimizing gender discrimination in schools does not mean that gender biased teachers or administrators
or curricula and textbooks are going to immediately change their content, attitudes or behavior.
And there's a lot of comparative and international evidence to suggest that there is a hidden curriculum
that still often works against girls and women around the world.
Still, there's quite a bit of evidence to show that the global expansion and legitimization of formal mass education
has hastened a shift in world cultural norms and values from one of gender differentiation to one of gender egalitarianism,
at least formally at the policy or structural level.
In the 21st century, the concept of gender equality pervades the educational systems in every nation around the world,
even in nations where gender equality hasn't been fully achieved in society.
So how then does gender segregation persist in educational systems around the world
that are supposedly steeped in this world culture of egalitarianism?
Well, one way this is possible is through the emphasis that's given to equality of activity versus equality of individuals.
The rationale is that if girls can enroll and achieve at equitable levels in school,
then it's not necessary for them to have access to exactly the same schooling.
In part, this is due to the rationalization and consequent legitimization of inequality in some situations and subcultures.
In other words, as long as overall progress is occurring, there's leeway in terms of specific inequalities.
So even though there are girls in some countries who may be denied formal schooling because it's not considered gender role appropriate for them,
as long as enrollment rates for girls relative to boys continues to improve overall,
the local policymakers and international community is going to overlook the localized inequalities that do occur.
This describes something that I call the cloak of equality.
In other words, there are conditions and formal policy structures that look like equality,
but that really cover up or cloak more deeply embedded inequalities.
Let me give you an example. In some countries in Central Asia like Tajikistan or in other countries like Pakistan,
boys and girls have been in the same classrooms during school,
but more recently, especially in those former Soviet countries of the Central Caucasus,
there has been a shift so that it starts with boys and girls in the same classroom,
which we would consider an equal opportunity for education.
And then boys and girls sitting on separate sides of the classroom.
Again, they're still in the same classroom. They're still receiving the same instruction from the teacher.
And then eventually, there'll be a curtain that will go down the middle of the room.
So boys on one side, girls on the other side, but now they can't see each other.
In this way, separate but equal schooling does exist around the world,
which may be one of the strongest indicators of a cloak of equality that can be found across nations.
In other words, it's possible to say that gender parity and egalitarian values
may be masking some institutionalized gender inequalities.
And as a result, egalitarian values lead to widespread gender parity in many educational contexts,
even though gender equality may not be firmly within the grasp of either schools or societies around the world,
at least not yet.
Now, what's called the opportunity structure or gender pipeline
has been used to examine the causes of gender differences
in both the formal education that boys and girls participate in,
as well as the academic performance of boys versus girls in a few previous studies.
And the basic argument is that if students and their parents think that important future educational and occupational opportunities
are linked to either going to school or to how well they do in school,
then their attendance at school and attempts to improve their school performance tend to intensify.
If, however, the future opportunity is perceived in a way that is not clear to students or parents
what their potential educational occupational opportunities are,
at least in relation to their formal education,
then students and their families won't invest in or be particularly concerned with either school attendance or performance.
For example, if boys are either told, shown, or simply understand
that their future educational and occupational opportunities are tied to their mathematics performance in school,
then they may try harder in school, and teachers may encourage them more,
and parents and peers may more consistently support their commitment to studying math.
By the same token, if future educational and occupational opportunities are perceived by students
and their parents as favoring males,
then female students, faced with the prospects of lesser opportunities tied to their math achievement,
may think about and treat mathematics as less important for their future.
Also, their teachers, parents, and friends are likely to reinforce these behaviors and beliefs
linking student school performance to their future adult status or job opportunities.
Now, there's a lot of research out there on something called gender-related socialization
that shows how the gender-related experiences of adult women in their families
or in jobs and societies clearly influence the experiences of younger generations.
And we can also use this perspective to make sense of gender differences in mathematics performance
and other opportunities for education.
For example, there's clear evidence showing that gender differences in both higher education
and the labor market experiences impact student school attendance and performance.
There are also parallel associations between future opportunity structures
and cross-national gender differences in parental encouragement to learn mathematics.
And evidence from around the world shows that what female students believe
and how they engage in formal education is consistently tied to their perceptions
about women's share of future educational and occupational opportunities.
I'll give you an easy example.
There's been quite a bit of research that has shown that in school textbooks,
the images of people can affect boys and girls differently.
For example, if female students, if girls, see in their science textbooks examples of female scientists,
then they understand they have a real example, a real opportunity to think that they can also become a scientist.
But if they only see women represented in other kinds of positions like a homemaker
or something other than a scientist or something other than a science-related field,
they might not have that expectation that they can become a scientist or work in a science field.
So when opportunities for women's careers are related to domestic and stereotypical women's work,
female students may see little reason to work hard in challenging and competitive school subjects like science and math.
Taken as a whole, it's relatively easy to see that there are corresponding links
between what girls and boys see or believe they can do in their future education or career
and what they do or achieve in school.
The national context of gender differences shapes the resulting effort, appropriateness,
and resources that students and their families devote to school, especially in the areas of math and science.
The effects are most likely subtle, but they're often persistent.
There's also evidence that different combinations of perceived education and labor market opportunities
work differently for certain groups of students and not others.
For example, improving or publicizing equal access to opportunities that are most attractive to elite students,
particularly in the realms of science and engineering that relate to higher education and upper-level government positions,
can itself reduce gendered achievement differences among advanced students.
But these effects do not apply to gender differences among students in the lower-level courses.
For lower-level students, more general gender equality reflected in education overall has a more relevant opportunity effect.
Mathematics in school is definitely an important gatekeeper skill for students' long-term educational and career changes.
And understanding how social factors such as gender influence mathematics performance
links patterns of social difference to individual differences in performance.
Then salient cross-national variation in gender differences has been evident for the past 40 years of standardized international testing.
So national gender differences in the perception of future educational and occupational opportunities
provide some understanding about why there are gender differences in educational attendance and performance.
And we can't forget that the formal education system in every country plays an important role
in advancing both egalitarian ideology as well as really providing an equal opportunity for students to learn,
regardless of their gender, their race, their ethnicity or socioeconomic status.
The issue of single-sex schooling seems to be increasingly forgotten in national and global-level discussions about education.
Several nations continue to maintain high levels of single-sex education in their school systems,
which means that boys and girls attend separate educational facilities.
They have separate teachers, female for female students, male for male students,
and sometimes different administrative systems.
Yet many of these countries whose national education systems are formally gender segregated
are able to proudly display enrollment and achievement statistics that show girls often matching or even exceeding the level of boys.
The question then remains whether or not gender equality in education is really being achieved in gender segregated systems.
The reports on single-sex and gender differentiation in education is mixed.
While some of the single-sex education research suggests that the effects on achievement and opportunity are strong,
others working from the same data find weak effects.
Still, other evidence suggests that educational systems themselves harbor institutionalized sexism
that oppresses and inhibits girls' schooling and women's chances in wider society.
While evidence and arguments from both evidence bases and perspectives make good points
and bring the knowledge of gender differentiation versus equality forward,
there is still no adequate explanation for why some systems remain gender segregated
and why others are becoming increasingly segregated by gender.
Many nations around the world are still formally segregated by gender,
sometimes at the system level, sometimes at the school level, and sometimes at the classroom level.
In fact, in some countries, gender segregated schooling is being embraced
as a new way to create equality in access and opportunity to schooling for girls where none may have existed before.
The question is, to what extent gender segregated schooling is creating or reproducing inequality
versus the extent to which it may be creating new opportunities and advantages where none may have previously existed?
I'll give you an example of Saudi Arabia, a completely gender separated education system,
and yet Saudi Arabia can show parity in enrollment between boys and girls,
it can show parity in achievement between boys and girls,
and it can show that boys and girls are receiving roughly the same opportunities to learn.
In other words, they use the same curriculum, they have similar school facilities,
their teachers are trained and experienced to about the same levels and on and on,
and yet the system remains completely separated.
So as the Saudi example suggests, alongside the mounting evidence of gendered educational inequality,
there's also an evidence of an emerging world culture that celebrates equality in education,
particularly for girls and women, even when there's separation sometimes.
The rationale is that if girls can enroll and achieve at equitable levels in school,
then it may not be necessary for them to have access to exactly the same schooling as boys.
In other words, as long as overall progress is occurring, there is leeway in terms of specific inequalities.
So even though there are girls in Uganda, for example, who may be denied formal schooling
because it's not considered gender appropriate for them,
as long as enrollment rates for girls relative to boys continues to improve overall,
the local policymakers and the international community is going to overlook the localized inequalities that do occur.
In this way, separate but equal schooling exists around the world,
which may be one of the strongest indicators of a cloak of equality that can be found across nations.
Much of an organization's communities or nation's legitimacy within the world system
is the result of meeting internationally recognized standards for democratic nations
and having a well-informed and participatory citizenry, a strong civil society,
and a government that guarantees state-society interactions are all internationally recognized democratic values.
And a key component of each of these democratic values is gender egalitarianism in society
or in the labor market and in government-sponsored institutions like schools.
So given the evidence laid out here for you, do you think it's possible to say
that gender parity and egalitarian values about gender may be masking some institutionalized gender inequalities,
especially in education?
And is there enough evidence that egalitarian values lead to widespread gender parity
in different educational contexts?
Even though gender equality may not now or ever be firmly within our grasp.
