Education acts as a strong agent of socialization as well as identity formation.
But it can also distinguish between who belongs in a particular society and who doesn't.
Let's look at the insider versus the outsider in national education systems to see how education
bridges political citizenship, academic performance, and economic productivity.
Here we examine how education is a means for producing citizens who reflect the desired
image of national peoples and their governments.
We'll begin with Saudi Arabia, where education is something of a byproduct of culture and
families tend to facilitate the school-to-work transition.
Saudi Arabia is one of the few systems in the world that is still 100% gender segregated.
Saudi women aren't allowed to drive and only recently did they win the right to vote by
proclamation of the late King Abdullah.
Boys and girls go to separate schools.
They have separate teachers who are male in boys schools and female in girls schools.
But you might be surprised by the way Saudi Arabia performs on indicators of gender equity
in school.
Saudi girls enroll in school at relatively equal rates to boys and have teachers and
school resources that are roughly equal to boys or even better.
This is a remarkable development given that in the 1970s only a fraction of girls enrolled
in school.
And most of the adult population of the country was still illiterate at that time.
But now literacy rates in Saudi Arabia have skyrocketed.
Saudi educators, parents, and the public are eventually going to have to ask themselves
What is the good of all these advances that girls have made relative to boys in their
educational system?
If they're unable to translate these achievements to benefits and applications outside of schools
in the labor market, in the government, or in society.
There's another group we should look at in Saudi Arabia and in other Arabian Gulf countries.
And that's the expatriate population.
In Gulf countries, residents of foreign birth, or expatriates, typically far outnumber the
national or the citizen populations.
So this gives us an opportunity to compare how Gulf and other educational systems around
the world deal with non-native or non-national students.
This takes on a sharper edge because several Gulf countries are implementing policies and
programs geared towards nationalization of the labor force.
This is defined as Saudiization in Saudi Arabia, Emiratiization in the United Arab Emirates,
Omanization in Oman, and so on throughout the Gulf.
Labor nationalization agendas emphasize the development of knowledge and skills among
Gulf nationals.
It's a process, some argue, which will lead to higher employment for Gulf citizens in
high-skill and high-salary positions, often in the private sector.
Now, in Saudi Arabia, as in much of the Gulf, the public sector, in other words, the government
or government-sponsored sector, currently employs the largest population of nationals.
But the subplot is the goal of eventually replacing the expatriates who currently hold
a lot of high-skill and high-salary positions, with predominantly Arab citizens holding those
positions.
In Saudi Arabia, for example, there are specific limitations on who can receive citizenship
to be a Saudi national.
Saudi citizenship is available only if both of an individual's parents are Saudi nationals.
Now, Saudi employers, like those throughout the Gulf region and elsewhere, frequently
complain that the national educational system does not adequately prepare Saudi youth for
labor market participation, especially with those high-knowledge, high-skill, private
sector jobs.
As a result, the percentage of non-nationals in the total labor force is high throughout
the Gulf.
It's led by Qatar at around 90% expatriates and down to Saudi Arabia at around 50% expatriates.
The overall Gulf percentage of non-nationals or expatriates in the labor force is about
67%.
It's pretty high.
Now, over time, the percentage of non-nationals in the labor force has increased in all Gulf
countries except for Saudi Arabia.
And as the level of non-nationals in Gulf labor markets rises, labor nationalization
policies and public discussions about it increase.
But there's relatively little empirical research that investigates Saudi or Gulf nationals
potential to productively participate in the labor market, especially in those high-skill,
high-salary and private sector positions.
So the question for Gulf educators and policymakers is whether citizenship status is a significant
predictor of youth's higher education and labor market transition or in their potential
participation or productivity in either.
The evidence we have shows that students born in Gulf countries to expatriate parents are
the highest achieving in both math and science, though there's some interesting variation
in student achievement by national origin as well.
For example, in Saudi Arabia, non-national students with neither parent born in the country
have the highest achievement scores, while non-national students with only one parent
born in the country have the lowest achievement.
National students or national citizens whose parents were both born in the country tend
to score in between these two non-national groups.
In fact, this pattern is seen in the Gulf average and is repeated in each Gulf country
except for Oman and Qatar.
But a broader cross-national sample shows a slightly different pattern.
Elsewhere around the world, by contrast, national students typically score the highest, followed
by one parent non-nationals and then neither parent non-nationals.
So let me recap this for emphasis.
Student achievement in Saudi Arabia and elsewhere around the world can generally be characterized
and ranked according to parental origins.
And the results are almost precisely opposite in Saudi Arabia from the rest of the world.
For example, in Saudi Arabia, student achievement by parental origin comes in this order from
highest to lowest.
Highest achieving students have two non-national parents.
The middle achieving students have two national parents, and the lowest achieving students
have only one non-national parent.
Everywhere else on average, student achievement according to parental origin is, and again
from highest to lowest, a little different.
In this case, the highest achieving students have two national parents, the middle achieving
have one national parent, and the lowest achieving have two non-national parents.
Now it's interesting because socioeconomic status also plays a role in how well students
do.
For example, while Gulf students' achievement scores are positively associated with parents'
education levels, higher achieving students are more likely to have non-national parents.
We can also consider the context of education based on whether a school is composed predominantly
of foreign or national students.
There's little difference between Saudi national students' science achievement in national
versus non-national majority schools.
In other words, schools where most of the students are national versus non-national.
But there's a significant difference between non-national students in these different contexts.
In particular, Saudi non-national students performed at significantly higher levels within
non-national majority schools than they do within national majority context schools.
In other words, expatriates do better when they're surrounded by expatriates.
Now that's a unique finding that suggests there is consistency in the impact of national
status on students' science performance regardless of school context.
But that non-national students in Saudi Arabia may be either limited in national majority
schools or somehow encouraged in non-national majority schools.
Evidence also shows that Saudi non-national students have relatively similar expectations
to Saudi national students related to their perceived importance of science for, let's
say, university entrance.
Saudi data shows that on average non-nationals with neither parent born in the country are
more likely to expect that science is important for getting the job they want.
In other words, non-national or expatriate students expect the link between science and
the labor market to be stronger than nationals do.
Being a Saudi national has a small but significantly negative impact on science achievement and
on science-based university expectations, but no significant impact on their science-based
job expectations.
This indicates that Saudi nationals are somewhat disadvantaged compared to non-nationals in
terms of science achievement and expectations for both the labor market and university.
This is in many ways a reflection of Saudi culture and the traditional lack of emphasis
on both private sector employment and the importance of education for an individual's
future education and employment.
Now the evidence we've just been discussing shows how international educational data can
be used to both test and to estimate the impact of a student's citizenship status
on their current academic achievement as well as on their estimated future economic and
educational potential.
The key context for this analysis is the nationalist-oriented expectations in education
and other socioeconomic arenas in the Gulf and in Saudi Arabia specifically.
But these findings are similar to what we would find in other countries with similar
divisions between national citizens and expatriates.
As Gulf policies, programs and curricula expand for nationalizing the labor market through
greater participation of Gulf citizens, we still see non-national students performing
at significantly higher levels, with a greater expectation of future labor market and higher
education participation, all as a result of their science education as well.
This perhaps confirms pro-nationalist warnings in Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries and
also might suggest that educationally there's a significant difference between national
and non-national youth performance and their future labor market potential that deserves
continued investigation.
But moving away from Saudi Arabia and the Gulf now and looking broadly, a long-recognized
key element in the creation of stable nation-states has been the state's ability to socialize
youth into the role of citizen.
Lots of previous analyses of the origins of formal mass education have recognized the
association between government-sponsored education and nation-states agendas for producing citizens.
In fact, this association is assumed by a variety of political interests, both inside
and outside the government, and is emphasized as an effective means to bring about social
order within a national political system.
This assumption has become widespread across nations, leading some scholars to hypothesize
that political socialization is becoming more of a global than a national phenomenon because
of increased commonality in international educational goals and standards.
Sometimes this is referred to as intensified isomorphic mass schooling.
But exactly how schooling produces citizens and which political context, for example national
political systems or a world system of nations, dominate the substance of citizenship aren't
well understood.
As tools of national political and economic development, schools are also politically
constructed institutions, and as politically constructed institutions, they've been used
for nation building for generations.
Because the relationship between mass education and citizenship production is closely aligned
with the rise and dominance of the nation-state system, it's often taken for granted, even
though it's theorized as a major institutional effect of formal education on society.
Beginning as early as the 15th century, the modern political institution of the nation-state
has grown in number and type, and both formal schooling and informal education have fundamentally
contributed to this development.
Political leaders discovered early on the importance of schools and organized mass schooling
for the creation of a loyal and productive citizenry.
Let me give a brief example of Prussia.
In the mid-1800s, an American educator from Massachusetts named Horace Mann went to Prussia
to examine their education system.
And what he found there was an education system that was organized very much along the lines
of a military unit.
It was organized into classrooms, much like you might organize into a squad.
It had a person who was leading that classroom, a teacher, much like you might have a squadron
leader.
It was free, and it taught people in Prussia, especially those who had been recently conquered
by Prussia, that they were part of a larger community, that they were Prussians now.
And since this discovery, there's really been no turning back.
And this is why mass schooling is an explicit project of nations, and why schools are key
components in the political socialization of youth.
The use of schooling as a national development project is now taken for granted by policymakers
and planners in nations at most stages of development, as well as those working with
these nations in other capacities.
This is one of the reasons why responsibility for education is provided in most or all nations'
constitutions, especially those nations who developed or redeveloped during the 20th century.
The influence of schooling on nation-state development has in turn had an effect on the
growth of schooling itself.
And due to the legitimacy of education for development, schooling rapidly developed and
spread worldwide throughout the 20th century.
Along with this global spread of formal mass education came a gradual normalization of
school structure and content, including curriculum.
But has the global spread of schooling fundamentally changed the function of schooling as a tool
of nation-specific political socialization and citizenship production?
And if so, what are the effects of schooling on youth political socialization across nations?
Well, in comparison to research on achievement in reading, mathematics, and science, their
research on education has tended not to look at the effects of schooling on political socialization
as much.
And a political scientific study of that topic has all but ignored the potential impact of
schooling as a major political institution.
So let's take a moment to summarize three defining issues related to developing education
and the challenges of citizenship.
The first issue is the robustness of formal education as a socialization agent.
Consider this.
There are two contrasting perspectives about how school creates citizens.
The first perspective, which is civic education, assumes that schooling has a considerable,
although formal and narrow impact on citizen development.
It assumes that citizenship is mainly formed through direct instruction using a civic education
curriculum specifically developed for that purpose.
Civic education is the older of the two contrasting perspectives by at least half a century, and
is the traditional education approach.
Civic education has many forms, but it's shifted and in some ways softened in many countries
around the world.
One country that still has a strong civic education system, and overt as well, is China.
But in China it's called moral or character education.
Sometimes it's even called values education.
Officially, moral education in China is intended to positively influence the character and
well-being of Chinese youth.
China's Federal Ministry of Education has two special departments in charge of moral
education.
One is in general education and includes primary, middle, and high school education, and the
other is in higher education, which includes, of course, colleges and universities.
In the 27 provincial and three municipal boards of education, there's a special section in
China called the Department of Moral Education.
And in almost every school, there's an office of moral education.
Some of the things that happen in moral education have to do with teaching students about how
they should interact with each other, training them in the ways that they should be involved
as good Chinese citizens in their community, giving them an understanding of the political
ideology of China.
These are all elements of moral education, and sometimes students take it more seriously
than other times.
But now moving away from China, the second broad perspective, which is political socialization,
is a product of the intense anxiety felt by millions around the world during the mid-20th
century in response to the Cold War and the constant threat of international instability.
Political socialization acknowledges that schooling in a general sense socializes students.
It assumes that schooling is just one of many ways to create citizens and may not have much
overall impact in different contexts.
According to civics education, the political socialization perspective has dominated the
study of citizenship formation since the end of the 1950s.
And that political socialization perspective says that citizenship development is the result
of a lot of different influences, such as family, peer groups, and the mass media, all on use
civic values, attitudes, and knowledge.
And although the school is listed among these, it was more or less lost among all of the
other influences at first.
But by the late 1970s, one seminal work defined political socialization as a developmental
process by which adolescents acquire cognitions, attitudes, and behaviors relating to their
political environment.
And this image of political socialization led to two ways of understanding the process.
The first of those ways is mapping individuals' political attitudes at certain times during
their youth.
And the second way is searching for the key influence that guides the development process.
It could be parents, it could be peers, it could be the media, or some other influence.
And now there's broader recognition that formal mass education provides the structure and
the opportunity for the political socialization of youth to occur around the world.
For example, some political scientists, returning to early ideas about civic education, hypothesize
that the direct effect of civic education and other politically or civically-oriented
curricula and courses in schools is the dominant method of political socialization.
Others say that political socialization through schooling is the product of participation
in activities that generate knowledge about the political process and awareness of the
importance of political participation, for example, running for student body president
or joining an extracurricular club.
Also, there's considerable evidence that there is an effect of simply going to school
for longer and longer periods.
For example, people who have attained higher and higher levels of education tend to be
more involved citizens everywhere in the world.
They tend to have similar attitudes about social justice and human rights even across
nations.
And more frequently, they exercise their political rights and responsibilities within
their own nations.
Now let's move on to the second issue, which is national versus global citizenship formation.
The older version of the civic education perspective assumed that schools of a particular nation
trained youth in a curriculum that mirrored the politics of that nation.
What we might call the nationalism effect is simply that youth's socialization reflects
salient political context of their nations.
And there are some empirical studies that suggest that political socialization of youth
is largely influenced by specific political characteristics of nations.
In contrast to the nationalism effect is a now well-known set of education studies showing
how nations operate schools under a considerable amount of external global pressure.
And how this influences the content of schooling right down to the curriculum presented in
classrooms.
A subtle yet important distinction is made in these studies between the facts that, first
of all, national public mass schooling is the basic engine behind political socialization.
And secondly, that the content of both the formal and informal curricula in schools is
increasingly similar across nations.
A scholar named Mary Rauner in her doctoral dissertation at Stanford University conducted
one of the most influential studies on the effect of schooling on political socialization.
She looked at cross-national historical trends from 1955 to 1995 in civics curricula and found
clear evidence of a shift away from more particular national civics material, in other words, durable
national cultures or political national traditions or founding myths and social characters of
particular nations, in national education worldwide, to material that presents citizenship
to students as a global and universal process.
The image of the nation in the newer curricula de-emphasized unique historical images and
replaced them with content about democracy, social justice, inclusion, and generalized
citizen rights and responsibilities that are all part of an emerging ideology of individual
civil, political, social, and economic rights across the global community.
Also, there are some recent cross-national studies reporting global trends in democratic
attitudes among youth and the ways that political ideas are transmitted among adults and youth
and the impact of education on democratization processes and adolescent civic commitments
across nations.
Next, let's talk about the third issue, citizenship education beyond a human capital investment.
We know far less about the role that school resources, content, and school quality play
in learning civics or political skills and attitudes than we do about how they contribute
to economic productivity and labor market transition.
And we know even less about cross-national trends in civic education and its effect on
youth political socialization.
Yet one of the main motivations behind the long-term spread of formal schooling within
and across nations was and still is the interest in socializing not only productive members
for the economy, but also citizens for the nation.
For example, history has shown us that national reactions to political, military, and economic
crises often resulted in mobilizing state resources for mass education as a strategic
plan to make better citizen soldiers in addition to productive workers.
Although citizenship production is discussed as a central task of nation states, how this
actually happens through schools is still not well understood.
We do know that when people make individual decisions, they do so in reference to other
people's similar experiences or situations or obligations.
So because schools are the main context that students live in during most of their days
in most countries around the world, their contextualized experiences within schools
are what drive the political socialization of youth.
Schools and the teachers in them also implement curricular content that affects the civic
development of youth at the local level in the United States and similarly decentralized
school systems.
But most policy or curricular decisions in more centralized countries like France or
Japan are made at the national level.
But the impact of formal mass schooling around the world is that political socialization
into local and national communities is now increasingly normal.
The result is that students increasingly claim the rights and responsibilities of global
citizens rather than citizens of specific or limited communities.
