Lecture 15 How Parents Shaped Student Outcomes
When I was a classroom teacher in Japan and then again in the United States, I had two
very different experiences interacting with parents.
In Japan, the parents were extremely trusting and they gave me what felt like absolute decision-making
authority for their children's education and well-being.
Japanese parents, when I saw them, were deferential to me in terms of what I did in class, how
I involved their children in learning activities, how I graded their children, and what my recommendations
were for where their children should go after they graduated from my classroom.
Japanese parents gave me gifts at the beginning of each of the four seasons and were some
of the most polite people I met while I was in Japan.
They also always knew where I was and what I'd been doing around town, and when I saw
them, they would always ask about my visit to a particular restaurant or part of the
city.
If I had a problem with any of the students in my class, the Japanese parents seemed
both ashamed and somewhat aghast that their children could be the cause of any classroom
discipline problems or that their children weren't doing everything in their power to
be at the head of their class.
I never had a Japanese parent suggest, even mildly, that any of the problems or challenges
that either I or their children encountered in my class were my fault or that I could
be doing anything differently.
Instead, they always took responsibility for their children's behavior and would even
profusely apologize for problems or obstacles that I knew and I told them so were my fault.
If I ever accidentally hinted that I needed something either for class or in my personal
life when I was around any of my students' parents, I would find that item on my desk
in the teacher's room the next day, or they would pass it to me through their children
or mutual friends sooner rather than later.
I'm not going to assume that every Japanese teacher has the same experience, and part
of what I experienced was a product of the fact that I was working in a school based
in a strong middle class community and that I was a foreigner teaching in Japan, but I
also know that my experience wasn't totally unique.
These experiences with parents seemed normal at the time, but when I returned to the United
States and began teaching at a high school in New Mexico, I found out how different parental
involvement in Japan was compared to my American school experience.
As a basketball coach, my interactions with parents in New Mexico were less academic and
much more performance based.
We discussed playing time, how hard their children hustled in practice, and the chances
for winning against rival teams.
I also regularly traveled with the students to other schools for games.
I got to know who had allergies, which ones were extra rambunctious and needed to sit
next to me on the bus, and which ones were going to get coached by their parents from
the sidelines while I coached from the bench.
As a teacher, though, it was even more different from the Japanese experience, although parents
were still involved and aware for the most part.
Relations with parents in the United States were much less frequent for me as a teacher
than I experienced in Japan.
Parents of children with academic struggles often questioned my ability to teach or my
understanding of a situation rather than assuming that their children were somehow at fault.
A very big contrast with the experience I had in Japan.
But don't just take my word for it.
Let's think about what evidence we have about how parents influence education worldwide.
For one thing, we know that parental involvement aligns with the family's socio-economic status.
At the upper end of the socio-economic range, parents act more like their children's education
managers.
Here's where we often see the insinuation of something called private tutoring into the
school equation.
Private tutoring is just one way that systems outside of the formal mass education system
tend to shadow that formal system.
These tend to look like cram schools in Korea or like Sylvan learning centers in the United
States.
When parents get their children involved in shadow education systems like private tutoring,
this is one of the ways that parents can involve themselves in school without really being at
the school building or even having some sort of interaction with teachers.
At the other end of the parental involvement range, where there are a lot of non-native
English speakers, for example, or families on the lower end of the economic spectrum,
parents tend to be less involved in their children's academics and more uncomfortable
in the school environment.
Even though there are different approaches to parental involvement, the output is typically
a product of the same equation.
The more involved parents are, the better the students perform both in and out of school.
Let's return for a minute to one of the main ways that parents can be involved in their
children's education without really being in schools or interacting with teachers.
The supplementary education phenomenon, that's what we're calling shadow education or private
tutoring, is simultaneously both familiar and mysterious.
It tends to occur in two kinds of contexts around the world.
The most familiar is in high stakes situations.
In other words, where the transition from school to work or from one stage of school
to another stage of school is based on academic performance, then shadow education parents
more frequently use the kinds of supplements that we see in private tutoring.
Another context is found in low quality educational systems.
In these situations, parents with the economic and social means will supplement their children's
education through private tutoring or some other sort of shadow education.
Now several high stakes educational systems, like in Japan, South Korea and other East
Asian nations, are known for having widespread cram school systems.
These cram schools, where literally they're trying to cram as much information into the
students as possible, are privately run but literally mirror what goes on during the regular
school day in public schools.
And that the curriculum in the cram schools is often more rigorous or more accelerated
than that in the public schools.
Of course these shadow education opportunities are not cheap or free.
This means that only those parents that are wealthy enough to afford shadow education
send their children for these extra lessons.
So we see from this example that parental involvement doesn't even have to be that
involved from the parent's point of view, especially if they have a little money.
There are other ways though that parents influence education worldwide.
To begin, structural features of educational systems, specifically curriculum standardization
and others like that, impact parental involvement in their children's schooling.
Lower socioeconomic status parents in standardized educational systems may maximize the benefits
of communicating with their children more than comparable parents in non-standardized
systems.
Lower socioeconomic status parents in standardized systems have more access to the needed information
of academic schooling than lower socioeconomic status parents in non-standardized systems.
Having more transparency in standardized systems allows parents more information and more access
to student performance as there are established educational standards.
On the other hand, non-standardized educational systems that have diverse resources and skills
and information based on socioeconomic status may limit the benefits of parents communicating
with their children.
So in a standardized educational system, parent-child communication may help decrease the achievement
gap for lower socioeconomic status families.
Most nation-level analyses focus on the nation-state as the unit of comparison because it is the
de facto organizational unit for the delivery of formal education.
But since this has become the globally normed unit for formal education delivery, the distinctiveness
of national education systems is no longer in the political and economic boundaries themselves
that define nation-states.
Instead, the unique interaction between characteristics of national communities and national educational
systems is what makes nation-level comparisons meaningful.
Now a lot of research shows that student literacy is influenced by parents' socioeconomic status
more than any other factor.
And we're going to make that connection by looking at how parents' behavior and activities
with their children lay the foundation for additional learning as specified in a country's
national curriculum and the degree and variation in a country's or a community's social and
economic status.
The research shows that when curriculum is standardized within nations, parents from
lower-class backgrounds are more likely to become involved in their children's school
and in managing their child's education.
Parental involvement in the early years has long-term influences on a child's literacy
development and future academic success.
Having books in the home, parents reading with their children and teaching reading and
writing in the home form the building blocks to vocabulary development, phonemic awareness,
and even enables fluent readers.
Informal literacy captures the exposure to printed material through reading to their
children and discussing the meaning of the story or meaning of words.
Formal literacy includes reading and teaching the print in the book, discussing letter recognition
and letter sounds, and a recent longitudinal study of parental involvement and literacy
found that informal literacy predicted vocabulary and listening comprehensive skills.
Formal literacy, parental involvement, was linked to early literacy skills.
Recent research on parental involvement and students' reading motivation suggest the
importance of book-rich classrooms and home re-reading.
Findings from the studies suggest that student reading comprehension and interest in reading
improved when book-rich school environments were paired with that home re-reading.
So when teachers and parents work together to provide a rich literacy environment, children,
teachers and parents are more interested in reading and more engaged in reading.
An enjoyment of reading is an important component of student success and an area overlooked
by a lot of current research on parental involvement.
There's also the indirect influence of parental involvement on children's interest in reading
and the importance of focusing on language acquisition and parental involvement as a way
to reduce the language skills gap, especially in terms of achievement.
Parental involvement in children's schooling encompasses parental involvement activities
in the home and parental involvement activities in the school.
In the home, parental involvement includes provision of a home learning environment.
It includes parental aspirations for their children, parent-child interactions, and the
regulation of a child's schedule.
In the school, interactions between teachers in the school and parents include participation
in school-directed learning activities and other activities in the school environment
that might be less formal.
Researchers have found strong relationships between parent-child interactions, including
helping their children with their homework and talking to their children about academic
interests.
In the Netherlands, evidence suggests that parental reading with children has more of
a positive influence on student attainment than participating in art or other programs
at school.
In the school, there are two main forms of parental involvement.
Remember interactions between school personnel and parents, including parental participation
in school events and the school environment.
And school-based involvement, including parent-teacher organization meetings or school events and
parent-teacher meetings and schools contacting parents.
The school learning environment includes public and private schools and the charter that goes
with those schools, as well as factors related to the school like absenteeism and delinquent
behaviors or teacher morale and teacher responsiveness to parents.
In addition to the home and school, parents also engage in bridging activities that support
their children's academic life, including connecting with other parents and neighbors,
school personnel and work colleagues.
Now these interactions connect parents with more resources to the school and community
that promote shared responsibility for children's academic life.
Studies suggest that family background characteristics also influence the way parents are involved
in their children's schooling.
Wealthier parents engage to a greater degree in both parental involvement activities in
the home and school than less wealthy parents.
So students from lower socioeconomic status families gain less from parent-child discussions
than children from higher socioeconomic families.
In a longitudinal study across different ethnic groups, researchers found different influences
on parenting practices and the effect on academic achievement.
School communication and parental aspirations are important for student aspirations.
Evidence shows that parents who communicate with their children about academic and school
activities and who hold high educational aspirations tend to have children who hold higher educational
aspirations and who have improved academic achievement.
So it's clear that when parents communicate with their children, it influences their academic
trajectory.
Parent-child interactions in the early years have long-term effects for literacy and schooling
outcomes.
A recent study of 14 countries focused on home-based parent-child communication as
an indicator of frequency of parental engagement and reading literacy.
In the parental involvement literature, there's little discussion of preschool attendance as
a form of parental involvement.
But there are many studies that focus on the importance of early childhood education and
the important role that parents play in developing a child's literacy and learning skills.
Let's take a look at one.
Perls, or the Progress in International Reading and Literacy Study, is an international assessment
of reading and literacy that is administered by the International Association for the Evaluation
of Educational Achievement, the same group that administers the Trends in International
Mathematics and Science Study.
The Perls in 2006 found that there's a positive relationship between the year of preschool
attendance and reading achievement in the fourth grade.
Also researchers found that preschool attendance was positively related to school performance.
Now parent-school partnerships at the preschool level seem to be a critical entry point for
parents offering educational support at home for their children.
And another study of parental reading socialization, reading by example, reading aloud and discussing
books and parental school involvement, found that there was a positive relationship of
parental reading socialization and school-related involvement on language performance at the
start of primary school.
Researchers found that parental involvement, but not parental reading socialization, was
beneficial for math success, and they also found that for all children, reading socialization
and parental school involvement are important for language skill acquisition, and that those
from advantaged households begin primary school with higher language skills.
So when we have children who are socialized into the importance of reading, in other words
they see their parents engaging in it, their parents are supporting the reading that they're
doing in schools, and they're getting all sorts of reinforcement from both the school
side and the home side, we see when that happens, their interest in reading and their achievement
in reading improves.
So the need to focus on reducing the language acquisition gap between advantaged and disadvantaged
households becomes even more important.
Free kindergarten parental involvement and parent perception of teacher responsiveness
were positively associated with children's social skills and math skills.
This suggests that parents seek information from teachers who they think will respond
warmly to their queries.
In a study of Head Start programs here in the United States and regular day care centers,
reported that Head Start parents reported more parental home involvement and home school
communication than did parents from community day care centers.
That's important because it suggests that there are ways to facilitate improved parental
involvement even in low socioeconomic status communities.
And although the most recent educational trends have been to emulate and even adopt Japanese
or Finnish or Singaporean educational models in western nations, particularly the United
States, there are those who reverse the paradigm and consider these models as examples of,
for example, Japan's incorporation of Western educational rationales and structures.
Educational anthropologist and Japanese educational expert Gerald K. Latondra has asserted that
a growing body of work suggests that while Japan has vigorously adopted many important
institutions from the West, such as a wide range of educational institutions, these institutions
have been significantly modified to align with underlying Japanese values.
The Japanese educational system in particular provides an interesting example of successful
cultural discontinuity through tightly coupled and culturally orchestrated institutional
linkages between family and schools and the labor market.
As with Japan's tightly linked school-to-school transition process, Japanese high schools
are particularly active and involved in helping workforce-bound students enter the labor force
directly upon high school graduation.
There's an academic researcher named Okano who asserts that one reason non-college-bound
to Japanese students often continue through high school is because their schools will
share or even assume the responsibility of finding them suitable employment.
But before finding them employment, students have to be appropriately educated, and the
Japanese public school system follows a general curriculum until the end of secondary school.
Other academic researchers named Kanaya and Sako have argued that Japan's educational
system caters to employers with a preference for employees who can retrain themselves and
who know how to learn.
Now this is important because of the increasingly un-Western tradition of many Japanese employees
to remain with one company throughout their lifetimes.
And in addition, employers often maintain tightly coupled relationships with individual
schools and faculty through semi-formal contracts.
By doing this, employers can supposedly cull the best and the brightest from the schools
and then improve the quality and production of their services.
Now this is interesting because it shows a relationship between schools and the work
that would otherwise be facilitated by families or parents.
So it's a different way of thinking about how parents are involved and how schools assume
some of those responsibilities of parents in the Japanese system.
So Japanese companies will often recruit students with reputations for high achievement in the
general curriculum.
And as a result, grade reports and the recommendations of teachers, not of parents, can influence
a company's decision to hire particular graduating students.
Although Japanese families may not need to become involved in the education of students
due to those tight institutional couplings between education and employment, family
background and involvement can still encourage or even accelerate students' achievement
during schooling, which then may lead to teacher recommendations or other positive consequences
of academic success for future employment.
So Japanese families become instruments for successfully incorporating culture into the
institutional linkage between schooling and employment that otherwise might contribute
to what we earlier called cultural discontinuity.
The influence of family on students can also ensure that students are acculturated early
in their academic careers so that, in the case of Japan, Japanese social values and
customs permeate students' lives, even though their institutional experiences in schools
and other places may include exposure to or adoption of more Western models of or rationales
for schooling.
In other words, Japanese families encourage and enable that transition to work through
their support of students' academic pursuits, but they maintain the cultural mores and traditions
of Japanese society through early in-culturation efforts.
Now once hired, training commences for Japanese employees.
As we know, many Japanese employers, especially large firms, provide high-quality vocational
training to their new recruits.
These new recruits rely upon their background in the non-specific basics in order to learn
quickly during company training programs and to remain flexible throughout their tenure
at the company.
So foundation and flexibility are especially necessary in the Japanese model due to the
tradition that managers and supervisors rotate from department to department, often on a
yearly basis.
One of the most admired aspects of Japanese schooling, especially among Western observers,
is the flow between and cooperation among schools and employers that we've just talked
about.
In the United States in particular, back in the 1980s, the Commission on the Skills of
the American Workforce reported that Japanese schools and workplaces act as virtual families
between which students seamlessly transition with little or no external assistance.
Japanese schooling is characterized by strong institutional ties then between schools and
families and employers, but we see the connection between schools and employers more vividly.
These institutional ties are however supplemented by parental management of students' academic
careers and school-to-school placement counseling among other influences.
Employers in Japan also recognize the value of certain types of human capital specific
to their needs.
For this reason, Japanese employers approve of and even encourage general education rather
than occupationally specific education for students.
And finally, employers share the responsibility for providing students with skill value through
work-based training, especially for new employees and large firms.
Now let's move from the Japanese example to another one in Saudi Arabia and let's see
how families in Saudi Arabia facilitate education and that transition to work.
Saudi families participate in their children's transition from schooling, usually through
management efforts of the parents, who may influence transitions at many key points in
students' academic careers, even prior to graduation, just like many Japanese families
do.
In fact, two prominent academic researchers on the Middle East, Alhidi and Brock, have
pointed out the frequent lack of appropriate institutional guidance both in school and
between school and work in Arab school systems.
So many parents in Saudi Arabia have to assume the guidance responsibility taken instead
by the school institution in other countries like Japan.
While the Japanese family is strongly tied to the school, this is not the case in Saudi
Arabia.
So we have Japanese families inserting themselves in the school during the transition process,
but we have Saudi families inserting themselves in that transition point after school.
So Saudi parents' management efforts on behalf of their children are born less out of support
for the institutional relationships between schools and employers than they are from a
need to socially introduce their children to the world of work and life management.
In other words, Saudi parents often help their children find jobs because they think their
children are socially unprepared rather than because they lack skills or because parental
involvement is part of an institutionally supported arrangement.
Saudi families think that students need the presence and symbolic support of an adult
to get a job.
The symbolism of family support in the schooling process is especially relevant in nations
like Saudi Arabia because the patriarchal family hierarchy is a lifelong and life permeating
relationship in most Islamic Arab nations.
The idea of independence from one's family is replaced by an idea of accountability.
Children of any age often have little or no right to either contradict or refuse to
follow their parents' wishes and their parents' advice because of that patriarchal structure
of Islamic influence religion and culture.
As a result, Saudi educators, policymakers, economists and businessmen often suggest that
offering a comprehensive curriculum is one way to ensure that all students obtain training
in the basic academic and labor market skills.
The Saudi Arabian education is centralized in a national ministry of education.
Educators like the Saudi Al-Salam also assert that the education system needs to be more
flexible.
He suggests that school districts need more autonomy and authority so they can adapt
programs to address their students' needs, to prepare them either for college or employment
as well as to implement changes as needed to respond to future needs.
There's no institutional link between schools and employers in Saudi Arabia like there is
in Japan.
Instead, the effort to link schooling with employment is influenced by Saudi Arabia's
uniquely prosperous economic condition and Islamic cultural mores such as those dictating
family relationships.
Schooling therefore and classes are more individualistic and oriented towards skill acquisition.
And although Saudis as Islamic Arabs often consciously reject Western influences, the
nature of Saudi schooling suggests the predominance of Western human capital rationales in educational
investment and implementation decisions among Saudi students, parents and families in accordance
with Saudi culture rather than against it.
Saudi modernization theorists are right in that economic development is associated with
major changes in prevailing values and beliefs, especially the kinds of beliefs that we see
in families and among parents.
And to a certain degree, human capital rationales suggest that school curricula and programs
impart skills which go beyond the strictly technical functional outcomes of work and
employment as benefits to individuals.
Graduates at the system or national level are then possible but not necessarily predicted.
