Lecture 16 Reading, Writing, and Religion
There are some basics in educational systems around the world that everyone teaches and
everyone learns.
For example, all schools teach some form of language that usually involves grammar, reading,
and writing.
All systems require students to learn mathematics and science, and all systems usually have some
requirements related to history, humanities, or social studies.
Then there are varying degrees of emphasis on civics or citizenship education, foreign
languages, and the arts.
So most of the subjects taught and learned in schools around the world are a part of
every country's national curriculum, with the core being language, particularly reading,
mathematics, and science, more than all of the others.
In today's lecture, we're going to think about how educators and students in different
systems around the world decide what to teach and what to learn.
And we'll find that deciding what to teach and learn is as much a product of context
as it is a staple of educational systems worldwide.
First of all, an examination of national curricula around the world shows us that in some countries
there are specific subjects that we don't find required in other systems.
For example, Saudi Arabia and other Islamic nation states have a religious curricula requirement,
which means that students are taught about Islam as part of the formal national education
curriculum.
Or other countries have a political ideology that's embedded in their formal national curriculum,
like China.
For example, in China, moral or character education is a required part of the curriculum.
And although it is different now than it was several years ago, moral education taught
in Chinese schools is about learning how to behave and think like a good Chinese citizen,
of course, depending on what the government's definition of citizen is.
There are also differences in what is taught by grade level, as well as by subject area.
For example, the mathematics curriculum taught to Japanese students in eighth grade is not
necessarily the same curriculum that's taught to American eighth grade students, or French,
or Finnish, or Saudi eighth grade students.
The scope or specific content of curriculum in each grade and subject differs from country
to country, sometimes enough to put students in one country a full year ahead or behind
students in another country, even though they're all studying the same general subject.
And variations like this can even occur within countries.
For example, depending on the U.S. state or even on whether a student is in the advanced
math class or not, students might learn algebra in sixth, seventh, eighth, or even ninth grade
for the first time.
This means that even though every teacher and student around the world might be teaching
and learning roughly the same subjects at roughly the same period in their educational
career, it isn't an exact science.
And what teachers and students do in one place might not align with what's happening in another.
We can see from the different kinds of subjects that are taught and learned worldwide that
the curriculum, in other words, what is actually being taught and learned, serves both academic
and socialization purposes.
Curriculum is academic by default, since students are learning the content as knowledge that
they will then be asked to either demonstrate or apply at some point in their classes.
But it's also a component of socialization.
This is especially easy to see with the religious and moral education examples from Saudi Arabia
and China.
While these do have an academic component to them, religious and moral education curricula
are more about teaching students about what society believes and how to be a good member
of society in those countries.
In other words, the content of the curriculum is meant to help socialize students into the
broader community.
There's also a socialization aspect to what is taught and learned in educational systems
broadly speaking.
In other words, being a part of the formal education system as a student socializes youth
into commonly accepted ways to interact with each other.
For example, this can be through individual achievement within larger collaborative groups.
It can also help organize them into hierarchical social groups.
For example, students versus the teacher.
And it can share certain norms, values and beliefs within a community.
Sometimes this is called the hidden curriculum, because it isn't necessarily an overt or
explicit part of the curriculum, even though the social outcomes of what's taught and
learned are very real.
Sometimes curriculum developers, specialists and educators are critical of the socialization
aspect of curriculum, because they argue, often quite rightly, that the socialization
that occurs through formal education and its curriculum tends to benefit those who are
in charge economically, politically or socially in the first place.
For example, a famous educator and educational critic was the Brazilian Paulo Freire.
Freire is one of the key leaders of the movement during the 20th century to use education to
liberate communities and peoples that were oppressed.
One of Freire's most famous books is called Pedagogy of the Oppressed.
And one of the most famous concepts from this book is the banking concept of education.
With this concept, Freire argued quite persuasively that education serves to reproduce patterns
of dominance and power in the larger society by treating students as passive receptors
of deposits prescribed and delivered by teachers.
He said that according to this banking concept of education, knowledge is a gift bestowed
by those who consider themselves knowledgeable upon those whom they consider to know nothing.
In this way, according to Freire, the teacher knows everything and the students know nothing.
And the teacher chooses and enforces his choice and the students simply comply.
Now this is in stark contrast to the system of deciding what to teach and learn that American
philosopher John Dewey proposed at the beginning of the 20th century.
Dewey said that there was a significant gap between curriculum that was child-centered
and curriculum that was subject-centered.
In the subject-centered curriculum, education is seen as a form of preparation for some
future life and that deciding what curriculum to teach is simply a matter of deciding what
subject matter to present to children hoping that it will be useful someday.
But Dewey's idea was different.
He suggested that curriculum, or what we teach and learn in schools, should be based
in the child's immediate experiences and their own activities.
The teacher's job then is to select the appropriate stimuli to bring out desired interests and
impulses in students.
But regardless of the subject, students must experience in order to learn.
Both Freery and Dewey have been very influential in deciding what to teach and learn in countries
around the world.
And quite frankly, both are seen as perhaps more idealistic than realistic, even when
educators agree with them.
But the reality of deciding what to teach and learn is much more straightforward and
perhaps a lot more functional.
Every curriculum is a process that goes in stages from what is officially intended to
what is implemented in the classroom.
The curriculum delivered in the classroom is then learned or received by students who
then enact or implement what they learned.
In other words, curriculum can be intended by policymakers, implemented by teachers and
then received and enacted by students.
But the enacted version of the curriculum may look completely different from the intended
version.
Let me explain what I mean.
In most countries, the official or intended curriculum is developed by teams of curriculum
specialists and subject matter experts.
So for example, the elementary level mathematics curriculum in Singapore was first developed
in 1981 by the Curriculum Development Institute of Singapore.
Since then, it's been updated several times by the Ministry of Education to make it more
focused and problem oriented.
Now the Singaporean elementary level mathematics curriculum has been adopted in many countries,
including some states and districts in the United States and also in the United Kingdom.
This official elementary level math curriculum is represented in a textbook published by
Singapore Math Incorporated as either the primary mathematics standard edition or more
recently the primary mathematics common core edition for a US audience.
This published curriculum that was developed by experts in the Curriculum Development Institute
and Ministry of Education in Singapore is the official intended curriculum in Singapore
and in many other countries.
But this intended curriculum, which is clearly documented in these primary mathematics textbooks,
is then implemented or delivered by teachers in classrooms in Singapore and elsewhere.
How tightly teachers stick to the textbook, in other words the intended curriculum, depends
on how closely they are monitored or how closely the students are tested on the exact intended
curriculum.
In Singapore, this may be a very tight link, but in the United States for example, it's
going to depend on how teachers and students are assessed in each district or state as
to how tightly it will link with the curriculum itself.
So for example, in states that require common core standards and assess students on those
standards, teachers may stick closely to the official curriculum as represented by the
textbook in order to help their students achieve as much as possible on their standardized
tests.
But in states where common core standards are not assessed, there may be a looser fit
between what the official mathematics curriculum requires and what teachers actually teach.
At the received and enacted level, students are responsible for deciding what's learned.
They may not be making overt or even conscious decisions about what they learn, but if the
content teachers teach isn't interesting or doesn't seem relevant to their lives or expectations
about what they need to know or if they know they won't be formally assessed on what they
learn, then students may not learn all of what the teachers teach.
Now this might not seem like rocket science, but it's important to recognize that just
because something is part of the official curriculum in a particular country doesn't
mean that every student automatically is taught it or knows it.
Using similar reasoning, if certain content is not included as part of the official curriculum,
then it's rare that teachers will ever teach it, and students will probably never have
a chance to learn it, at least not in school.
This is a scenario where the old debate between Ian Westbury and David Baker is important
to consider.
In the 1980s, when Japan was outperforming the United States in mathematics on the second
International Mathematics Study, Westbury and Baker academically debated whether it
was because Japanese students really knew more than American students or if it was just
because Japanese students knew more than American students at that same age and grade level.
Westbury's argument was that Japanese students had an advantage because their official math
curriculum was a year or more ahead of most American math curricula.
In other words, U.S. students didn't perform as well as Japanese students, according to
Westbury, because they hadn't yet had a chance to learn what the Japanese students had already
learned, simply because their policymakers and educators had decided to teach different
more advanced math than Americans had.
But deciding what to teach and learn is about more than just teaching more or less advanced
content in particular subjects.
It's also about deciding how to integrate subjects.
This is sometimes called interdisciplinary education, and it's becoming more and more
common after almost a century of being pushed aside.
When I was an English teacher in New Mexico many years ago, the formal curriculum required
that I teach several Shakespearean plays to my students.
In fact, every grade had a particular Shakespearean play that teachers were required to teach
and students required to learn as decided by our state curriculum developers.
My personal favorite was Macbeth, and I taught it to every 11th grade class every year.
Of course, we discussed the plot, the themes, and the literary elements of the plays.
But there was also an interesting historical and contextual component to Shakespeare.
My students and I often discussed how the plays were thought to have been originally
performed, and discussed the challenges and the opportunities of Shakespeare's Globe
Theater in light of the social or moral or legal context during Shakespeare's time
and location.
One day I was having a conversation with the shop teacher, he's the guy that taught woodworking
and metal shop to students, and we had an idea to combine our classes.
Mine would focus on the English literature side and his on the design and construction
side to build a small replica of the Globe Theater.
If we were successful, it would be the first such interdisciplinary class project attempted
at our high school.
And we talked about our plans for this on several different occasions.
But after a few weeks and then a few months, it became plain to both of us that our idea
to collaborate on this interdisciplinary project wasn't going to work.
It wasn't because we weren't both motivated.
It was because we didn't have enough support and quite frankly enough infrastructure to
teach interdisciplinary courses.
In other words, in our case, deciding what to teach and learn was limited by what we
could do in our prescribed schedules with limited or no budget, and without a way to
officially assess our project in accordance with the state curriculum standards at the
time.
It was a difficult disappointment for me when I realized we weren't going to be able to
follow through with our idea.
But it was a stark reminder that the organizational or internal educational context was just as
prohibitive and limiting as the external or community context sometimes felt.
Deciding what to teach and learn also depends on who gets to make the decision.
In highly centralized educational systems, the decisions about what curriculum will be
often reside at the central administration level, whereas in more decentralized systems,
the decisions about what to teach and learn are distributed to schools and teachers.
In the United States, the Common Core Standards Movement will create a shared or centralized
curriculum for students.
But in reality, every state has its own version of curriculum standards, and then each school
district within each state has its own version of curriculum that is supposed to address
and meet those standards.
So the secondary English curriculum that I learned as a pre-service teacher in Oklahoma
was not the same as the secondary English curriculum that I taught in New Mexico.
And neither the Oklahoma nor the New Mexico curricula are the same as the secondary English
curriculum that my children are taught in Pennsylvania.
Another highly decentralized educational system is Finland, and it also provides a lot of
leeway in deciding what to teach and learn.
In Finland, there are national guidelines about what should be taught.
But teachers decide the standards for what they teach and how they teach to those standards.
Finnish teachers have the freedom to use unorthodox methods of teaching if they think it will
be more interesting or more effective with their students.
For example, one example reported in the Guardian newspaper documented that Finnish teachers
could take their students outside for what they call wood mathematics.
This is when teachers take their students to nearby forests or patches of trees and
teach students to do math by counting twigs or stones.
Also, Finnish teachers are much more likely to engage in interdisciplinary education
than students in other countries.
As an example, in another class, students who are non-native Finnish speakers learn
to identify and name the parts of a mouse in Finnish.
For example, they learn the word for ears and whiskers and tail.
And then they show where mice live on a chalkboard outline of the country.
It seems simple, but this combines literacy, biology, and geography all in one.
But there are other national education systems that are much more centralized and much less
interdisciplinary.
The French system is said to be one of the most centralized systems in the world.
It's been said, if I told you what day and hour it was, then someone in France in the
Central Administration could tell me exactly what every student in France was doing because
it was all so prescribed and so uniform across the country.
It isn't this way out of an effort to control or limit what French students learn, so much
as a commitment to recognizing the role of the central government as a guarantor of free,
equal education for all.
So the motivation is quite democratic, even though the enactment of that motivation might
not seem to be.
So looking around the world, it might seem like there are a lot of moving parts that
determine what teachers teach and what students learn.
And to some degree, that's true.
But even though the official curriculum may be the one that most people pay attention
to in the research and media, it's really what happens between teachers and students
that makes a difference.
At this level, teachers have to weigh what they are required to teach against what students
need to or are ready to learn.
This is where comparative education, data, or information can be useful.
Teachers typically know what they're required to teach as part of the formal curriculum,
either because they've been told or they have a copy of the curriculum and they've read
it.
Even if they don't, most textbooks that teachers use include the required curriculum.
And in some countries, like Saudi Arabia, at least until recently, the textbooks have
actually served as the official curriculum.
But if teachers also have assessment data for their students, then they know what their
students supposedly know, and they can see where they're strong and where they're weak.
So if a math teacher is required to teach students content related to geometry and algebra,
but the assessment data for students shows that they are strong in geometry and weak
in algebra, then most teachers would probably decide to teach algebra and not teach geometry,
even though geometry is part of the required curriculum.
Let me give an example of how I could use data to make decisions about what to teach.
If I was an eighth grade math teacher, let's say in Taiwan, and I had access to the trends
in international mathematics and science data, which assesses students' math and science
achievement around the world, including in Taiwan.
Some of the recent data shows that Taiwanese eighth graders scored around 600 on the mathematics
portion of the TIMS assessment, the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study.
But it also shows that Taiwanese students were tested on the following content domains.
They were tested on numbers, algebra, geometry, and something like statistics called data
and chance.
These eighth grade students scored significantly below 600, below their own average, on the
numbers and the data chance portions of the math test.
But they scored about the same as they averaged or significantly higher on the geometry and
algebra portions of the test.
If the eighth grade mathematics curriculum for Taiwanese students includes all four of
these content domains, numbers, algebra, geometry, and then data and chance, it would
be easy for me to decide to teach numbers and that data chance category, because my
students need to learn it more than they need to learn geometry and algebra.
In other words, even though all four content areas are part of the formal curriculum, I
would probably use this data to decide that I was only going to teach, or at least only
emphasize in my teaching, two of these content areas where students needed the most help.
In conclusion, what teachers teach and what students learn is about more than just a list
of content or subject matter.
Students all over the world are learning a lot of the same content matter and cognitive
skills because what is taught and learned worldwide largely reflects shared norms and
values about what kind of knowledge is valuable.
Put simply, language, math, and science are universal in curriculum around the world.
And so when we talk about what people teach and what people learn, we find that those
three areas are always there.
In other words, it's become a point of legitimization.
We teach language and mathematics and science because they are the building blocks for all
of our other content areas, but also because they become normal, they become expected.
We assess them and we understand that they are now a part of curricula all over the world.
It's the additional parts to the curriculum, the parts related to religion or morality
or values or other content areas that might not be as core as reading or as math or science
that have more decision-making flexibility in them.
And that's when the locus of decision-making becomes the most important.
Is it going to be the teachers deciding based on what they understand students' needs and
based on what the community context is?
Or is it going to be a central administration deciding based on a set of standards or based
on ideas or agendas about developing economically productive communities?
We've also seen that in some countries where specialized curriculum is required, it reflects
unique social, political or ideological characteristics of the country context, such as the religious
context in Saudi Arabia and moral education in China.
We've seen that there is a hidden curriculum that transmits dominant norms, values and
beliefs implicitly rather than explicitly in most educational systems.
And we've understood that this hidden curriculum sometimes teaches things that aren't necessarily
beneficial for all students.
It usually reflects the values and the norms of the dominant social and political and economic
groups.
And there have been reformers and advocates for education from different parts of the
world that have both identified this phenomenon and offered solutions or alternatives to it.
Finally, we've taken a close look at the various characteristics of curriculum, including
its process, the way that it moves from official to implemented, to received, to enacted.
We've looked at the level of decision making, whether it's centralized at that central
administrative level or whether it's decentralized at the school, the classroom and even the
teacher level.
And we've talked about the scope of curriculum in our discussion of how teachers decide
what to teach and students what to learn.
And we've looked at how curriculum can be interdisciplinary, in other words how we can
blend different content areas to teach the core subjects, to teach the key areas, but
also in ways that complement each other, in ways that reflect more of the real world,
like in the example with the Finnish teachers and thinking about teaching the parts of the
mouse to Finnish language learners.
So after this discussion, we're left with a key finding.
It isn't the differences in what is taught and learned that show us how the world learns
as much as it is the similarities.
Of course there are differences.
That's not a surprise.
What is a surprise, at least for some of us, is that what we teach and learn is as similar
as it is around the world in spite of the differences in context, community and culture
of educational systems worldwide.
