Lecture 18 – Turning a Good Teacher into a Great One
What makes a good teacher?
We all have a memory of that one teacher from our own school days who was really good and
inspired us or motivated us or challenged us.
I'll bet most of you can name that teacher right now if I asked you to.
Unfortunately, you could probably think of a few teachers that were horrible at what
they did as well.
So we know what makes a good teacher from a student's perspective because we were
once students ourselves and we've all experienced both good and bad teaching.
But have you ever broken down the basic parts of what makes a good teacher or what constitutes
good teaching?
In this lecture, we're going to think about what makes some teaching good and some not
as good.
And we're going to look at the ways that teachers teach in different systems and countries
around the world.
By doing this, we can then understand a little bit better about how the world learns.
Teachers represent the point where the educational system intersects with the students and the
community at large.
They embody the policies, curriculum, and resources of each educational system.
And they're also real people who come from the community outside of school just like
the students do and bring all of that context into the classroom as well.
But what makes a good teacher really?
I'm going to suggest a few characteristics that have been identified in teacher and teaching
research to represent the best about teaching regardless of culture or context.
The first characteristic of a good teacher is expertise or subject matter knowledge.
Teachers who know what they're teaching and have experienced teaching it are considered
to be some of the strongest educators in every school system.
Sometimes this is measured by the length of time that teachers studied a particular subject
or teaching methodology during their training programs.
For example, in Finland, where teachers are considered to be some of the best in the world,
teachers all have a master's degree and are put through a highly competitive selection
process just to get into their teacher education program in the first place.
A second key characteristic of good teachers is pedagogical skill.
This means that teachers know how to teach.
Being how to teach has as much to do with getting students engaged in the content as
it does being able to present the content in an understandable and appropriate way.
For example, a science teacher who never engages his or her students in hands-on experiments
might not have the finest pedagogical skills.
So being able to connect what students need to know to know how they can use that information
is a key to being a good teacher.
One of the ways that teachers learn about pedagogy is through mentorship programs.
For example, in Singapore, school-based practicums are essential in training teachers and form
a backbone of their teacher training program at the National Institute of Education in Singapore.
A third characteristic of a good teacher is their passion or their personality.
Some might even say that a teacher's values are important to their passion and personality
as well.
For example, if a teacher is excited about a particular subject or topic, they're more
likely to convey their excitement to their students.
Or if they feel that a particular piece of information or skill is necessary to create
better communities or solve social problems, then they also might be more animated when
they teach.
In other words, being a teacher is more than just knowledge, the what of teaching.
And it's more than just skill, which is the how of teaching.
It's also about being motivated and bringing value to the teaching profession.
In my own experience, having passion and personality is what sets good teachers apart from great
teachers.
I can still remember one of my own high school English teachers, who became so moved by a
passage from a book she was teaching my class that she actually teared up.
Now, I not only learned what I needed to know in that class and how to use the information
the teacher was teaching, but I learned that this was valuable and meaningful knowledge
that moved a teacher to tears.
So we know that good teachers have expert knowledge about what to teach, have the skills
necessary to know how to teach, and are invested enough and value what they teach enough to
be passionate and motivated about their teaching.
But we don't yet know what teaching looks like in countries around the world.
In other words, what do teachers do that sets them apart in different countries?
We're going to shift our focus now to look at teaching in the United States, Saudi Arabia,
Finland, and Japan.
The United States is probably the most difficult to summarize because the educational system
and its teachers are the most diverse.
We're going to look at teaching in Saudi Arabia because they have a system that uniquely separates
boys and girls into single-sex schools across the nation, and they are at the cusp of developing
their education system right now.
We're going to look at teaching in Finland because of the status of Finland as one of
the highest scoring countries on internationally comparative tests of student achievement and
because their teachers are considered some of the best in the world.
And finally, we're going to look at teaching in Japan because it is such a highly centralized
and high-performing educational system which uniquely represents much about what is good
in East Asian educational systems.
We'll begin our comparison of teaching worldwide by looking at some of the school factors that
influence teaching and that can be manipulated by educational policy and reform to shift how
teachers teach and what students learn.
Then we'll shift our focus and look at some of the non-school factors that accompany teachers
and teaching and that we can't easily change by adjusting the conditions, resources, or
behaviors of educators in and others in schools.
School factors related to teaching in countries around the world include how teachers are
trained or educated, what they do in their classrooms and schools, and what some of the
conditions of teaching are worldwide.
We'll start with how teachers become teachers by looking at their education, training, and
professional development.
As you may or may not know, in the United States, teachers typically earn a degree from
a four-year university or college where they also participate in a teacher education program
and a supervised teaching experience, which we generally call student teaching.
Early childhood and elementary school teachers usually earn a bachelor's degree in education.
But secondary school teachers, that's middle and high school teachers, usually earn a bachelor's
in their subject area, like English or math or science, where they double major in education
and their subject area, or sometimes they earn a master's degree in education too.
Every teacher that teaches at a public school in the United States must be licensed or certified.
Teaching licenses are granted by individual states' departments of education, although
colleges and universities usually align their teacher education programs with their state's
licensing system or requirements.
There are a few states that require teachers to obtain a master's degree as part of their
licensing requirements, but it's not the norm nationwide.
In addition, all new teachers are required to demonstrate expertise in their subjects
and pedagogy by passing a certification exam.
In contrast, Saudi Arabia's requirements are much simpler, although they are rapidly becoming
more rigorous.
To Saudi Arabia's credit, they have recently established a Public Education Evaluation Commission.
And part of the commission's responsibilities is to establish national teacher standards,
a national teacher examination and certification process, and to help the Ministry of Education
more rigorously monitor, evaluate, and certify high quality teachers.
At this time, this is still in the beginning stages, but it's an ambitious project, and
the results should be groundbreaking in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf region.
One country that has already created a reputation for its high quality teaching is Finland.
Finnish teachers are required to have a master's degree and most major in education and then
complete their master's degree in about five years.
General Education teachers and specialist teachers in Finland are required by the national
government to take a minimum number of credits in their concentration or specialty areas,
as well as specific pedagogical studies.
Finnish teachers are also required to participate in a teaching practicum as part of their pedagogical
studies.
These practicum take place at either university teacher training schools or schools that are
affiliated with university training programs.
Finally, Japan's teacher education is also rigorous, but very straightforward.
Japanese teachers have to graduate from a ministry-approved university teacher education program.
While they're at university in their teacher education programs, pre-service teachers not
only have to earn a certain number of course credits in their subject area and pedagogy,
but they also have to participate in a pre-practicum based in a school for at least a few weeks.
It's the board of education for each prefecture or state or municipal district that awards
teaching certificates.
So once a pre-service teacher graduates from their university teacher education program
in Japan, they must pass a teacher employment examination, which is administered by their
local board of education.
Then the new teacher has to complete a one-year conditional employment period, during which
they receive further training in pedagogy from their local school board.
The structural components that we see repeated from country to country are that a university
degree is typically a minimum requirement, and participation in a teacher education program
is usually part of their degree.
We also see that some sort of practical school-based teaching experience is part of most teacher
education programs, and that monitoring or mentoring for new teachers is a less common,
but important part of teacher education and development as well.
Finally, teachers are legitimized and confirmed through the process of teacher examination
and licensing or certification in all of the countries examined here.
So next, let's talk about what teachers actually do in their classrooms.
In other words, how do they actually teach, or what kind of instruction do they try to
provide to their students?
In order to minimize the variables, let's concentrate on mathematics and science education
at the eighth grade level.
And let's also concentrate on a few pedagogical tools and behaviors, including the use of
collaboration with other teachers.
Using student and teacher questionnaire data from the 2011 Trends in International Mathematics
and Science Study, we can see the extent to which math and science teachers in our comparison
countries collaborated to improve their teaching.
This tells us the extent to which teachers interacted with other teachers to do a few
things, to discuss how to teach certain topics, to plan and prepare instructional materials,
to share their teaching experiences with each other, to visit their colleagues' classrooms
to learn more about teaching, and to work together to try new ideas.
Those teachers who were very collaborative interacted with other teachers at least one
to three times every week in three of the areas I just mentioned, and then two to three
times per month in the other two areas.
Of course, teachers who were also collaborative or somewhat collaborative or not collaborative
at all would be another variation of how often they engaged in those five activities.
But we're interested in the very collaborative ones right now.
In the United States, 39 percent of students in math classes and 38 percent of students
in science classes had teachers that reported being very collaborative, meaning that they
frequently interact with other teachers to develop and improve their teaching.
This is the largest percentage of any of our comparison countries, and it suggests that
even though American teachers are siloed in the individual classrooms, they are remarkably
active in reaching out to their teaching colleagues and trying to work together to improve their
teaching.
In Saudi Arabia, where students are some of the lowest scoring in the math and science
world, 25 percent of students in math classes and 21 percent of students in science had
teachers that reported being very collaborative.
So even in this low achieving system, teachers who are often really very traditional in their
approach to teaching, in other words, Saudi teachers really like teacher focused classrooms
rather than student centered lessons.
About a quarter of eighth grade Saudi teachers are interacting with their peers to improve
instruction and teaching.
Now the fact that the United States and Saudi Arabia are both average to poor performers
on international assessments of educational achievement suggests that there may be a disconnect
between teachers teaching and students learning, which we're going to investigate in a moment.
Students in Finland, 19 percent of students in math classes and 15 percent of students
in science classes had teachers that reported being very collaborative.
As one of the highest performing countries with some of the most revered teachers in
the world, it's interesting that only about a fifth of teachers are very collaborative
with each other.
It's also remarkable that this is the case in a country where professional learning
communities that rely on teacher interaction are the norm rather than the exception.
Yet Finnish teachers are reputed to be systematic and efficient in their interactions.
So the fact that they spend less time being very collaborative with other teachers is
less about their commitment to collaborative teaching and development and more about their
effectiveness in doing so.
Finally, in Japan, 15 percent of students in math classes and 17 percent of students
in science classes had teachers that reported being very collaborative.
Now this is the lowest percentage of time that teachers in any of our comparison countries
spends interacting with teaching colleagues to improve their teaching.
But it's also an interesting result.
Japanese teachers, unlike teachers in many Western countries, do not spend their days
in individual classrooms.
Japanese teachers move from class to class, teaching their lessons to students who remain
in their own individual student classrooms instead.
The rest of the time, Japanese teachers can usually be found in the school's teacher
office.
This is usually a large room where teachers sit at desks arranged together by subject
area.
So Japanese teachers have quite a bit of time when they could be engaging each other in
professional conversations and other activities to improve their teaching.
But what this data tells us is that proximity to other teachers does not always mean that
there is an increasing amount of time spent collaborating with them.
It could also mean that they, like Finnish teachers, are used to engaging in this type
of collaboration, so they are more efficient and targeted in their collaborative efforts.
Whichever way you interpret it, it's clear that teachers in mid- and lower-performing
countries are much more collaborative with each other than teachers in higher-performing
countries.
This doesn't mean, though, that more collaboration leads to lower performance.
In fact, if anything, it's the other way around.
In lower-performing countries like the United States and Saudi Arabia, teachers are less
used to collaborating to improve their teaching, but more eager and willing to try it.
Likewise, in countries like Finland and Japan, which are higher-performing, teachers are
more used to ... and can spend less time interacting and more time actually teaching.
Another way to compare teacher pedagogy is to look at the kinds of instruction that teachers
use to engage students in learning.
Again, using data from the 2011 Trends in International Mathematics and Science study,
we can see the extent to which teachers engage their students in the following ways.
We can see when they summarized each lesson's learning goals, used questioning to elicit
reasons and explanations from students, encouraged students to show improvement, and praised
students for good effort.
Unfortunately, so few math teachers reported relating their lessons to students' daily
lives and bringing interesting materials to class at the secondary level, which were
the two additional indicators, that these two pedagogical approaches to engaging students
in learning weren't included in the data for eighth-grade teachers.
As with teacher collaboration to improve teaching, the evidence showing the extent to which teachers
tailor their instruction to engage students in learning is also uniquely split between
those countries that are lower-performing and those that are at the higher end.
For example, in the United States, about 90% of students had math and science teachers
who reported using their instruction to engage students in learning during most lessons.
Likewise, in Saudi Arabia, almost 90% of students had teachers who did this.
In other words, teachers in these two countries are highly active in overtly engaging students
in summarizing and questioning, at least on average, and they're also highly encouraging
of students as well.
Whereas in Finland and Japan, only about half of their students had math and science teachers
who used instruction to engage students in learning during most lessons.
As I've already mentioned, math teachers were much less likely to relate their lessons and
the content they teach to students' daily lives or to bring interesting materials to
class in any of our comparison countries, even though science teachers were much more
likely to do so.
So we've seen that teaching in lower-performing countries is typically more collaborative
and more engaging.
But in higher-performing countries, there isn't as much time devoted to collaboration
and student engagement as in the others.
And we've come to the conclusion that this isn't because teachers in high-performing
countries are resistant to collaboration or student engagement, but rather that they
have more experience in it and are potentially more effective in the ways teachers collaborate
and engage students as learners.
Now what's encouraging about this, though, is that it shows teachers in each country
at both ends of the achievement spectrum are actively working to improve how they teach
and how they engage students.
This shows that teachers are a unique group of people, and even though they are often
among the first to be blamed and sometimes punished for low student performance, they
are also resilient and continually working to improve their teaching.
Now so far in this lecture, we've looked at the differences and similarities in teacher
preparation programs in different educational systems around the world.
And we've examined two key elements of teacher pedagogy, the degree to which teachers collaborate
with each other to improve their teaching and the degree to which teachers engage in
instructional activities that engage students in learning.
Of course, there are more unique and different types of activities that teachers can engage
in in different subjects.
For example, math teachers and language teachers will use different specific teaching approaches
that are unique to their subjects and the kinds of knowledge and skills students need
to learn.
But if we take a moment to reflect on what we've discovered so far today, we can see
that there are some unique revelations.
First of all, teacher preparation and certification definitely vary somewhat from country to country,
but not as much as we might have thought.
The differences are more a matter of degrees than sins of omission or commission.
In other words, countries like Finland that have international reputations for the high
quality of their teachers don't do anything radically different from other countries like
the United States.
The differences are rather in terms of the emphasis on certain training approaches like
pre-service teacher practical, where teacher candidates learn how to teach by getting
into real classrooms and being mentored by more experienced teachers.
And while the content of teacher education programs may be similar, the quality of teachers
that graduate from those programs also may have more to do with the quality of a university
degree in a particular country or system than with the teacher education program itself.
Last but not least, we started our conversation by discussing what makes a good teacher.
And the evidence we looked at during this lecture has showed us that good teachers are
well trained, highly or at least effectively collaborative with other teachers, and know
how to engage students in learning.
We've also seen that the degrees to which teachers collaborate with each other and engage
students in learning differs from country to country and seems to associate with the
average performance level of students and schools in each country.
But these indicators of good teaching are mostly school factors.
In other words, we've discussed the things that we can change about teaching as a way
to learn what is good about teaching and what works in different country contexts.
But the importance of values, passion and personality in teachers still remains slightly
out of our reach.
Many teacher education programs claim to develop certain dispositions in pre-service teachers.
But even though these dispositions or values related to teaching are part of teacher education
programs, it doesn't mean that teachers will be passionate about what they teach.
Still if we want to know how the world learns, we have to understand how the world's teachers
teach.
And now we know that while good teachers across the globe use similar approaches in the classroom,
there's still a mysterious element of teaching that resides in the minds and hearts of each
individual teacher.
And it's often that individual spark in spite of all of the school factors we've just discussed
that turns a good teacher into a great one.
