After 9-11, the schools in Saudi Arabia were blamed by groups like the American Textbook
Association for creating an atmosphere of religious bias or even hate.
In particular, the religious education that is part of the formal curriculum in Saudi
Arabia has been highlighted as teaching that Christians and Jews are inferior to Muslims.
And after years of international criticism, the Saudi Ministry of Education eventually
changed all of its religious textbooks to be more respectful and less critical of other
religions.
But this wasn't a religious issue for the Saudis as much as it was a political one.
Creating young Saudi citizens who understand their culture and align with the values and
norms that Saudi educators established is really the goal.
And they've been able to accomplish this even with a modified religious curriculum in schools.
Now I've been looking at youth political socialization for several years now, and the
research that has been done shows that schools are key components in the political socialization
of youth.
Schools are often part of national education systems, are populated by government-trained
or certified teachers, and teach students a government-approved curriculum.
National education systems are often mandatory and enroll large segments of the youth population
during some of the most important developmental years of their lives.
In short, national education systems are an effective tool for socializing a country's
entire youth population, while doing so under the premise that education is what's fair
or best for each student.
In this lecture, we're going to think critically about something called political socialization
and why it plays such a large part in education worldwide.
We'll look closely at the specific ways that students are politically socialized, and then
we'll look at what the results of these socialization efforts are and who, realistically, not ideally
benefits.
What we'll find is that using education to create citizens or politically socialized
youth isn't about improving teaching and learning as much as it is about creating functioning
and hopefully civil societies.
So let's begin at the beginning.
There are two approaches to thinking about schools as components in the political socialization
of youth.
One is called civic education, and the other is political socialization.
Civic education is a more formal and often narrow version of overt civics curricula and
instruction.
It's what you got as a student when you took a government class in high school or something
like it.
But I'd like to focus on what isn't so obvious or overt.
Students can be politically socialized through different educational structures and opportunities
without any overt civics curricula and instruction taking place.
Since the beginning of formal schooling, it's been known that schools are politically constructed
institutions and that schooling can contribute to the creation of loyal and productive citizens.
Now perhaps this is a bit scary for many of us because it suggests that schools are a way
to brainwash our children into serving a particular government or ideology.
Just talking about it like this seems a little bit like reading Brave New World or 1984.
This is an important starting point for us because it portrays the political role of
schools as the political incorporation of youth into the national political culture
rather than simply a venue for providing education about the rights and responsibilities
of citizenship to students.
Despite the national citizenship element of schooling, civic and political orientation
is being normalized worldwide through formal education, even more than it is being tailored
by unique national communities and characteristics.
So at this point, we know a few key features of the political impact of formal education
based on the research that's already been done on the topic.
First, we know that political socialization is the less overt cousin of civics education
and that it disseminates the ideology and expectations of the government through the
structure of schooling and opportunities and activities that students engage in during school.
We also know that political identity, in other words, citizenship, is globally normalized
among youth in many countries.
But we don't yet know so much about how these phenomena occur and whether the global normalization
of civic knowledge, skills, and political attitudes is as evident as previous analyses
have suggested.
Various forms of government types are often described broadly as democracies, anocracies,
and autocracies in cross-nationally comparative social science research.
Autocracies are systems where one person or system controls and sometimes dominates the rest.
Democracies are governments where the majority or the whole controls the system through a
system of election.
And anocracies are generally a mix of democratic and autocratic systems, tending to be politically
and stable and somewhat ineffective.
Since 1948, the most significant global trend is the rise in democracies relative to both
anocracies and autocracies.
Perhaps this shift has been embedded in formal education, or maybe the global expansion of
democracies contributes to the global normalization of civic knowledge and skills and political
attitudes among youth worldwide as well.
Among many different international assessments of education, one is the International Civics
and Citizenship Education Study.
38 countries participated in the 2009 assessment, although only 35 have data available to help
us answer our questions about the political socialization of youth.
And of those, I might identify only two of them as autocracies, Cyprus and Hong Kong.
The rest are democracies or weak democracies.
In fact, national education systems, even in relatively autocratic governments, are
still overwhelmingly biased in terms of democratic tendencies.
It's quite striking to think that education systems, rather than militaries, are the most
active means of political transformation around the world.
Now, China is one of the largest autocracies, according to common definition, in the world
today.
But within the International Civic and Citizenship Education Study, two Chinese communities fall
at different ends of the spectrum as I see it.
Hong Kong falls into the autocracy category, and Taiwan into the democracy category.
So as a preliminary approach to looking at measurable variation in political identity
and civic values by regime type, we can begin by using data from Hong Kong and Taipei to
provide a general description.
The data from the International Civics and Citizenship Study in 2009, which we sometimes
call ICCS, present 13-year-old student achievement in a test of knowledge, conceptual understanding,
and competencies in civic and citizenship education.
It also provides evidence on student dispositions and attitudes relating to civics and citizenship.
But as a preliminary analysis, today we're just going to look at the results from a national
context survey, which collected information about the provision of civic and citizenship
education in each participating country.
And we're going to pay special attention to two communities from the total that participated,
Taiwan and Hong Kong.
We're going to measure the degree of emphasis given to the overt civics curriculum in the
National Social Studies or civics curriculum as a preliminary approach.
But as I indicated earlier, we'll need to also measure less overt contributions to political
socialization to fully understand the phenomenon.
Results for the overt official civics curriculum show that there is relatively little difference
in the topics and content between the two government types represented by Hong Kong and Taiwan.
But that there is significant variation in the emphasis on civic values between those
two communities.
Especially because the official curriculum in Hong Kong does not emphasize any of the
more democratic values at all.
So is there measurable variation in political identity and civic values by regime type?
Well, after our preliminary analysis of the official curriculum and the emphasis being
given to political identity and civic values in countries around the world, as well as
in Hong Kong and Taiwan specifically, the short answer to that question is yes.
There is a significant and positive correlation between government type and our measures of
processes and topics that represent ways youth are being socialized into particular political
identities and civic values in schools.
However, this finding is a bit too simple.
We have not given in-depth attention to the political history and culture of the two Chinese
communities highlighted here.
And political and cultural contextualization is absolutely necessary for a more accurate
understanding of political socialization in each community.
But we can still acknowledge the strong role that formal mass education continues to play
in youth political socialization.
And we do have some preliminary evidence that suggests that overt civics curricula doesn't
vary as much as the less obvious teaching of civics values through the school structure
and opportunities for youth to learn or demonstrate those values in school.
This is a finding that we can work with to build a more comprehensive understanding of
the impact of government type on the political socialization of youth.
So now we know that the content of civic education is not as important as the structures
and assumptions that accompany education opportunities and activities in schools when it comes to
political socialization of youth.
And we've seen that students' political understandings and values seem to increasingly have more
in common from one country or system to the next than we might have previously thought
just by looking at the government type for a particular country or educational system.
But can we also talk about how politics has an impact on the ways that educational decision
making takes place around the world?
Well, yes we can.
The increasing availability of internationally comparative educational information has had
a profound effect on educational policymaking and governance worldwide.
It has intensified an environment of extensive policy borrowing from one nation to the next
by providing internationally comparative benchmarks for educational, economic and social development.
In some cases, this development has led to a gradual standardization of educational structure
and delivery in otherwise diverse systems through the development of internationalized
models of educational governance and policy.
For most of the history of modern mass schooling, the state has been the agent of educational
expansion, cultural dissemination and political governance.
For example, a system of centralized management became the basis for educational governance
worldwide as modern mass schooling spread throughout Europe and eventually the rest
of the world.
In addition to the standardization of the various components of schooling such as buildings,
curriculum and personnel, an emphasis on the incorporation of all communities within a
common system with uniform decision making provided a basis for a common model of educational
governance that was replicated system by system in every country around the world.
Government education entities tend to be similar in goal and vision even across otherwise
different national political systems.
For instance, political stability, economic growth and citizenship formation are common
goals that state-sponsored educational systems around the world strive to achieve regardless
of political structure.
Even though more recent waves of educational decentralization and privatization have shifted
some of the responsibility for education, a global educational model remains firmly
ensconced in the public psyche and has institutionalized the governance, policy, structure and implementation
of education.
The results of these changes are degrees of difference within a strikingly similar model
of educational governance across national systems.
Some say that no part of the world is immune from global systems.
Internationalization is changing the politics of the nation state and our modern education
systems which emerged out of the era of nation building and are just as susceptible to internationalization
today as our goods, services, money, people and ideas.
Internationalization means that an international and comparative framework is inherent in educational
decision making among policy makers, administrators and even classroom teachers.
Others find that assimilation and convergence of educational systems are quasi-natural social
processes of internationalization and that cultural diffusion is responsible for the
modernization of education.
Such policy diffusion has resulted in far-reaching convergence of educational systems in all
national societies.
For example, when a country like Saudi Arabia decides to reform its educational system,
it does so by first looking at what other countries both in the Arab region or the Gulf
Cooperation Council are doing, as well as those nations in larger global target groups
that may include countries like Finland, Singapore, Germany and the United States.
International decision makers in these target countries in turn look at other countries'
systems to evaluate, benchmark and develop their own educational systems using the experiences
and evidence from them.
The Japan Exchange and Teaching Program, or JET, provides a useful example of internationalization
and policy diffusion.
The JET program is administered by the Japanese government, which invites college graduates
from around the world to come teach their native language, usually English, French or
German, in Japanese public schools for a period of one to three years.
The JET program's goal is to promote internationalization in Japan's local communities by improving
foreign language education and developing international exchange at the community level.
JET has had a profound impact on the language learning and cultural exposure of Japanese
students for several decades by bringing natives of English, French and German-speaking countries
to work in local schools as short-term assistant language teachers.
While much of the evidence of the JET program's impact is seen in a whole generation of Japanese
students' improved ability to speak and understand the targeted foreign languages, it's also
evident in the increased spread of more Western ideals through the Japanese educational system.
The JET program is neither a passive nor a one-way program.
The sharing and comparison of Western ideals, models and educational culture has impacted
Japanese teachers, students and administrators.
American, Australian and European JET teachers, in turn, have brought Japanese ideals and
practices back to their respective home systems.
One well-known example is Japanese lesson study, which has become prevalent in both
math and science teacher training and leadership preparation and scholarship outside of Japan.
Lesson study is simply the fact that teachers can come together and they can look at a lesson
and they can talk about the best and the worst ways to implement that lesson.
It's something that came about after examining how Japanese teachers were collaborating around
developing their lessons that's been imported into the United States and other countries.
In fact, at the beginning of the 21st century, educational decision-making is already largely
internationalized worldwide.
The underlying question is why has internationalization become a taken-for-granted system for educational
decision-making?
One major contributing factor is the widespread availability of internationally comparative
educational data.
UNESCO data provides information for most national education systems around the world
on enrollment, expenditure and other fundamental points for comparison.
Additionally, achievement studies like the program for international student assessment
and trends in international mathematics and science study have become ubiquitous components
of educational decision-making processes.
While these international data sets are not solely responsible for the internationalization
of educational decision-making, they do facilitate the development of international educational
governance and the transfer of policies, methods, curricula and even lesson planning
among the policy makers, the administrators and educators across national systems of
education.
This internationalization of educational decision-making as a result of massive exposure
to and availability of international educational data and information exchange has had a profound
impact on the way that educational systems are governed.
But the global trend has not been for educational decision-makers to simply adopt one standardized
model of educational governance, even though many critics of multinational educational and
development organizations argue otherwise.
It's really much more complex than simple standardization.
As national educational systems expanded worldwide, they did so largely with the support of state
or government sponsorship.
And as a result for most of the history of modern mass schooling, national educational
systems have been governed by the state.
Yet this model of government sponsorship at all levels of mass education has been challenged
by decentralization and privatization movements around the world, sometimes at the urging
of the local communities and sometimes encouraged by multilateral aid and development organizations.
But what's interesting about these shifts as a whole is not that they have changed the
process of educational governance, but that they exist within a surprisingly stable global
structure of educational governance.
Schools around the world, regardless of their status as publicly or privately governed institutions
at the local and national level, continue to follow similar models.
This is a basic but significant phenomenon because it suggests that there is a legitimate
institutional-based model for schools that is taken for granted and surprisingly stable
given the amount of cultural and social variation that contextualizes each nation's educational system.
All variations of schooling are measured against this standard when examining whether or not
there are global governance models and policy convergence across diverse countries and systems.
In other words, the foundation for a standard model not only exists, it has been globally
institutionalized.
This lecture addressed the first phenomenon of youth political socialization and then
the issue of international educational governance by exploring some of the factors contributing
to increasingly internationalized national educational policymaking and the ways that
related trends in educational policymaking either constrain or shift to meet particular
needs and challenges within specific national contexts.
The case for internationalized educational decision-making was first discussed as an artifact
of the rapid increase in international education data, especially since World War II.
Along with the international data also came the increased mobility of people and ideas
related to education through programs like JET, for example.
Either in spite of or because of this, the internationalization of educational decision-making,
a legitimate institutionalized model for schools arose over time and is still in place in the
early 21st century.
Some evidence suggests that mass schooling has helped establish a legitimate and pervasive
world culture.
This same world culture is also impacting schools through the common structure and shared norms
that mass schooling both incorporates and disseminates.
For example, the official policies and formal structures of modern mass schooling now largely
avoid formal differentiation in schooling by gender.
The slippery phenomenon of globalization also contributes to the discussion on international
educational governance because of its particular emphasis on the condition of modernity, cultural
impact and complex interactions between decentralization and centralization of power.
The case of gender and specifically gender segregation in Saudi Arabia provides a targeted
example of how the ideas and formal structure of education could align with internationally
legitimized social and educational norms while being simultaneously aligned with strict
non-conventional national traditions and beliefs.
Only a few decades have passed since boys and girls were formally segregated in many
state-sponsored school systems as indicated either by enrolment in schooling itself or
specifically gendered courses, but a lot has changed worldwide since then.
In short, those who control which knowledge or policy is legitimate are those who govern.
And if legitimacy is in reference to a global governance structure, then educators, researchers
and policymakers should be thinking about challenging that which is taken for granted
in order to make changes and improvements to the way educational governance is realized
worldwide.
The increasing availability of internationally-comparative educational information has intensified
an environment of extensive policy borrowing and model transfer from one nation to the next
by providing internationally-comparative benchmarks for educational, economic and social development.
And this environment has led to widespread expansion of internationalized governance
models for educational systems around the world.
In some cases, this development has led to a gradual standardization of educational
structure and delivery in otherwise diverse systems through the development of internationalized
models of educational governance and policy.
National educational systems have long been considered paragons of a nation state's cultural
sovereignty.
Evidence demonstrates that for most of the history of modern mass schooling, the state
has been the agent of educational expansion, cultural dissemination and political governance.
In addition to the standardization of the various components of schooling such as buildings,
curriculum and personnel, an emphasis on the incorporation of all communities within a
common system with uniform decision-making provided a basis for a common model of educational
governance that was replicated system by system in every nation around the world.
Government education entities tend to be similar in goal and vision, even across otherwise
different national political systems.
For instance, political stability, economic growth and citizenship formation are common
goals that state-sponsored educational systems around the world strive for regardless of
political structure, and this has been documented for several nations already.
Even though more recent waves of educational decentralization and privatization have shifted
some of the responsibility for education, a global educational model remains firmly ensconced
in the public psyche and has institutionalized the governance, policy, structure and implementation
of education.
The results of these changes and degrees of difference within a strikingly similar model
of educational governance across national systems.
Yet there are important differences and needs within each national educational environment
that conflict with or contradict the institutionalized trend of government sponsorship for educational
systems worldwide.
