Lecture 20 From National Student to Global Citizen
I have a button in my office at work that hangs from a lanyard on the corner of a bookcase.
And that button reads, I am a citizen of the world.
Sometimes I look at that button and I think, I am a citizen of the world because I read
the news and I know what is going on in different parts of the world.
But at other times I look at the button and I think, I am a citizen of the world because
I know how to speak or at least communicate in more than one language.
Still at other times, I think I am a citizen of the world because I have traveled to a
lot of different countries and I know what a township in South Africa smells like or
what the high plateaus in Mongolia look like.
But more often than not, I look at that button and I wonder, what does it really mean to
be a global citizen?
So let's think about that for a moment.
Citizens are usually people who belong to a certain government or group or who have certain
rights or responsibilities.
So maybe a global citizen would know about governments or groups around the world.
For example, wouldn't a citizen of the world know who some of the most important world
leaders are?
If I asked you to name the President of the United States, you undoubtedly could.
But what if I asked you to name the Prime Minister of Canada or of the United Kingdom,
which are two of the United States closest allies?
What if I asked you who the King of Saudi Arabia was or who the Premier of China is?
Could you tell me?
Now I'm actually cheating a little because I already know what your answer is likely
to be.
Most people that I talk to know right away who the American President is, and they may
know the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.
But very few people know who Canada's leader is, at least the people that I talk to, and
even fewer know who the King of Saudi Arabia and the Premier of China are.
So if you missed those last few, you're actually in the majority.
The fact of the matter is, though, that you don't have to study to be a global citizen.
Global citizenship isn't a product of your knowledge as much as it's a product of your
identity, although a certain amount of knowledge can shape your identity too, and we'll talk
about that in a moment.
It's also not something that is a product of competition.
For example, being driven to outcompete other countries doesn't make you a global citizen,
but becoming a part of a global community does.
And the ways that people, especially young people and students, become global citizens
has more to do with what Benedict Anderson, who's an emeritus professor at Cornell University,
has called imagined communities.
More specifically, Anderson defined a nation as an imagined political community that is
both inherently limited and sovereign.
While there are a lot of ways we could go with this definition, for our purposes of
discussing global citizenship and understanding how the world learns to be global citizens,
we can stick to understanding what it means to be an imagined political community.
Anderson's point is that although governments have rules and boundaries that limit the state
itself, nations are different.
For example, I'm an American.
Hard to tell I know.
When I travel, I carry a U.S. passport.
Wherever I am in the world, I take for granted my rights and responsibilities that are unique
to being a citizen of the United States.
And by the way, I'm not complaining.
It's great to be an American traveling abroad.
But it's also a little weird, partly because I don't know 99 percent of the rest of my
fellow Americans, and I probably never will.
I'll probably never see them, or talk to them, or quite frankly even be aware of their
individual existences.
And they probably don't know me either.
Yet I have no problem imagining myself as a part of this unknown yet still American
community.
My identity is tied up in my American-ness.
And my de facto community, especially when traveling outside of the U.S., is automatically
other Americans.
If I hear an American accent in the airport, or I see an American flag on someone's backpack,
I feel a connection to them in a way that I wouldn't if they were speaking with a British
accent or had a Canadian flag on their backpack.
In the same way, I'm a citizen of the world.
I don't know most of the other global citizens out there.
I won't meet them, I won't talk to them, and I won't even be aware of their individual
lives.
And again, they probably won't know me either.
But I identify with others around the world in a way that makes me connected to them.
I identify with other people around the world not because we share a government, or a language,
or an ethnicity.
But instead, I identify with them because we share a key experience, and we share some
key norms and values.
In other words, we do share a culture worldwide.
In this lecture, we're talking about how education in countries around the world develops
global citizens both explicitly and implicitly.
Let me explain what I mean.
Education, especially formal schooling, is the experience that I share with most of
the world's population, and the norms and values that are transmitted through that shared
educational experience.
Even though we didn't all experience it together, make up the culture that I share with most
of the world's population as well.
For example, each of you have had your own school experience.
But the fact of the matter is, in most of our cases, it's relatively similar.
We know what the inside of a classroom looks like, smells like, feels like.
We know what it's like to hear a teacher's voice reprimand us.
We have an embedded sense of identity within that school or within a classroom, and we've
generalized that to understand education more broadly.
We also have certain norms and values that are a result of that experience in schools.
For example, we have the idea that we can work together in groups to learn certain ideas,
and we often have the idea that there is one person who has maybe more information or different
information, I'm talking about the teacher in this case, who can help us as we're learning.
We learn about how to work together in a classroom and how to individually achieve even though
we're collaborating on certain projects.
It shows that we connect with schooled society worldwide, regardless of which nation we're
officially citizens in.
In other words, for those of us who've been through formal education systems, we are citizens
of an imagined school community.
It doesn't matter if we have PhDs or we've just barely finished fourth grade.
If we've been part of a formal school and have an experience as a student in a classroom,
then we're in that community.
Think about it this way.
If I ask you to think of a school, most of us would think of the building or the place
where we went to school, and our minds tend to combine different shared elements of each
of the schools we went to.
By this I mean that I can purposefully think of Edgemere Elementary School in Oklahoma
City where I went to fourth grade.
But when I think about what a school is, I blend my experiences and what I know about
that place called school across all of the different schools that I've attended or visited.
If I ask you to imagine you're in a school, you can remember sitting in rows or in a circle
during reading time.
You can hear the sound of the chalk on the chalkboard or the marker on the whiteboard
if you're younger than me.
You can remember the smell of sweaty children after recess or the taste of the mushy peas
in the cafeteria lunches.
In other words, you can imagine the experience because it's embedded in you now.
In other words, it embodies a large part of your identity.
So when you meet other people or you imagine yourself connected to other people that you
haven't even met yet, you probably imagine them having similar characteristics to you.
And that includes being part of a formal education system.
This is part of being a global citizen, identifying with others who also have had the same or
at least similar experiences as students in school.
Okay, so we know that part of becoming a global citizen is having a shared experience.
And school provides one of the most universal shared experiences that there is.
We can also imagine that others we don't know are part of this shared experience because
of the fact that education is a mass or a universal phenomenon all over the world.
That means that everyone is usually expected to participate regardless of their gender,
race, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status.
So most of the world's population has experienced a formal school classroom.
And we can make that assumption when we're thinking about who our global community is.
Now there are benefits and disadvantages to that.
There are those like Ivan Illich, a very famous philosopher, who have argued that when people
haven't had the opportunity to be part of school, that they lose some of their humanity.
And for that reason, he wrote a very popular book called De-Schooling Society, where he
argued that instead of creating a society where we have those who are in school and
those who are not, we should create a society where there are no schools.
And so that wouldn't be a dividing point.
What he failed to realize, though, was that the modern mass institution of formal education
has become so prevalent around the world that we actually have gotten to a point where
most people have experienced that formal education system.
And even though Japanese students have static classrooms, but American students change rooms
every class, or even though Taiwanese students may be learning math in a more high-stakes
testing environment while Finnish students are not, or even though teachers in Botswana
may not be officially certified while teachers in the United Kingdom go through rigorous
certification programs, we all know that we are part of a shared experience called school.
And just having similar experiences and identifying with others who've had them isn't all there
is to global citizenship.
Global citizenship is also something that can be taught, either explicitly or implicitly.
There's a group called Oxfam that has developed a curriculum to specifically teach students
what global citizenship is and how to become a global citizen.
The name Oxfam stands for the Oxford Committee for Famine Relief, and it was originally founded
in Great Britain in 1942 as an emergency relief organization.
Later, in 1995, Oxfam International was founded by a group of independent, non-governmental
organizations, or NGOs.
Oxfam International's goal is to reduce poverty and social injustice worldwide.
Interestingly, part of their efforts to do this have led to Oxfam creating one of the
most articulated global citizenship curriculums in the world.
Oxfam's global citizenship curriculum is particularly influential in England, Scotland,
and Wales, where they provide free online resources for teaching global citizenship,
but they also support schools through activities and projects.
Oxfam has even managed to lobby for global citizenship to be included in Scotland's
official educational policy, and Oxfam in Scotland works closely with six different
Scottish Development Education Centers to train and support teachers in learning about
and incorporating global citizenship into their teaching and curricula.
They do this through professional development training, resources for teaching global citizenship,
and support for related projects with students.
In England, Oxfam has developed youth ambassador groups with many different schools.
These are locally coordinated action groups that involve teachers and students in projects
related to social justice and poverty reduction.
For example, one group of youth ambassadors in the UK took what they learned about global
issues and then turned what they learned into projects.
Now this particular group made postcards showing how climate change impacted the community
near their partner school all the way in Bangladesh.
And through the efforts of these student youth ambassadors, they were able to get thousands
of children to write messages on these postcards, and then they presented their local representative
in Parliament with the postcards to influence his decisions about climate change issues.
In this way, we can see that global citizenship requires action, but it also hinges on knowledge,
skills, and values.
The online resources that Oxfam provides related to global citizenship provide a curriculum
that teachers can use to supplement their regular curriculum or as a standalone global
citizenship unit.
The curriculum is framed in terms of knowledge, skills, and values like this.
The knowledge components of the curriculum teach students what concepts like social
justice, equity, diversity, globalization, sustainability, and both peace and conflict
mean.
The skills component of the curriculum teaches students how to think critically, argue effectively,
challenge injustices, and inequalities, respect all people and things, and how to cooperate
and resolve conflict.
Finally, the values and attitudes component of a global citizenship curriculum emphasizes
identity and self-esteem, empathy, respect for diversity, and concern for the environment
and sustainable development.
Another overt model for global citizenship development that is used all over the world
is the International Baccalaureate, or IB for short.
The IB was created in 1968, and it's a non-profit educational foundation that offers four programs
of international education meant to develop the intellectual, personal, emotional, and
social skills that students need in a rapidly globalizing world.
IB schools have to be authorized by the IB organization to offer any of their programs,
and so far a little over 4,000 schools worldwide have become IB schools.
Of those approximately 4,000 schools, more than half of them are in either North or South
America.
About 24% of them are in Africa, Europe, and the Middle East, and about 18% are in the
Asia-Pacific region.
These schools are usually private, independent, or chartered schools, but there are some government
or state-sponsored schools in countries around the world that participate as well.
As part of the IB program, students are broadly exposed to world literature, world languages,
and world history, and people who support this approach say that the IB curriculum creates
global citizens because it creates students who are knowledgeable about what's going
on in the world, or can communicate with people outside of their own community and country,
and because it creates a sense of international awareness.
For example, every year the IB program releases a new set of what they call global lessons.
These lessons fit within their programs of study, but are also shared publicly and in
multiple languages so that teachers worldwide can use them.
The topics are usually international, and they also tend to lean more towards elite
culture.
For example, in 2012, one of the IB's global lessons focused on thinking about intercultural
interaction, by analyzing a painting by the famous French artist Paul Gauguin, who is often
known for his paintings representing his time and experiences in Tahiti and Polynesia.
So global citizenship can be explicitly taught either through direct instruction in knowledge,
skills, and values, or implicitly through education in international or global affairs,
languages, and art.
And we've seen how two international NGOs have influenced the development of global
citizenship in students around the world.
Of course, what kind of global citizen we are depends on the context we're in, and
which community we belong to at the local level too.
For example, there's some interesting international research looking at what students know about
civics and citizenship, and the ways that students' involvement in school activities
translates to their involvement in civil society and politics after they leave school.
There's evidence from the roughly 38 countries that participated in the International Civics
and Citizenship Study from 2009, which shows that ninth grade girls in particular tend
to have higher levels of knowledge about civics than boys do, and participate more in school
and community civic activities than boys do while they're in school.
But girls don't think that they will be as active in political activities as boys do
after they leave school.
If we look at some specific countries, we can see some unique differences in how civic
and political education contributes to the development of global citizens.
For example, in Hong Kong, which is a special administrative region of China, moral and civic
education activities are promoted in school-based programs and in morning assemblies, classroom
instruction, and school-coordinated community service activities.
They can include activities like green or environmental days, or national flag-raising
ceremonies.
But in this system, students are not able to formally participate in school governance.
This is in sharp contrast to civic education in the United States.
There's certainly an emphasis on learning about government and how the system in the
U.S. works in the national government, as well as in the state governments through the
formal curriculum.
But there are also ample opportunities for students to be politically involved in their
schools and communities through extracurricular organizations as well as student government.
In Finland, civic and citizenship education is not directly mentioned anywhere in the
national curriculum, but it's still a part of education through some of the basic values
that are included in the curriculum and activities taught through that basic education system.
For example, human rights, issues of equality, democracy, diversity, and the environment are
all topics of study.
And teachers work to promote responsibility, a sense of community, and an understanding
and respect for individual rights.
More recently, Finnish schools have started establishing student boards at both the primary
and secondary levels.
These student boards make some decisions about schoolwork, but are mainly focused on planning
school trips and school celebrations.
England, on the other hand, has a specific recommendation that citizenship education
be taught in schools at the early primary levels and then becomes a required subject
as students progress.
The curricular content ranges from understanding their individual rights to learning about
politics, geography, and economics.
Students do not necessarily have to be involved in the citizenship lessons they receive, but
there are opportunities for English students to participate in community projects, school
councils, and other extracurricular activities.
There are many other examples we could look at, but they start to look kind of similar
after a while.
The trend worldwide is for educational systems to have a civics and citizenship component
to their curriculum, either explicitly as a standalone course or implicitly as part
of other subjects being taught.
There are also opportunities for students to involve themselves in civic activities,
either at or through the school and in their communities, which are often coordinated with
the help of the school.
There's an implied civic ideology that comes through most of these efforts and is heavily
influenced by the dominant political system.
For example, in Hong Kong, there's a more Chinese political perspective than a democratic
one.
While in Finland, there is a more obvious social democratic perspective that permeates
civic education and activities.
Regardless of the particular educational system or political ideology that contextualizes
it, students in schools in all of these comparison countries are receiving basic information about
social justice and the importance of civic engagement.
Now while the perspective may differ from country to country to a greater or lesser
degree, students the world over are learning that social injustice is wrong, that community
participation is good, and that they should be willing to take action to make the world
a better place.
Now I know these sound like platitudes, but really they are more than that.
What we're seeing is an officially uncoordinated but highly effective effort to educate students
around the world with similar knowledge, skills, and values.
And these particular types of knowledge, skills, and values contribute to the understanding
and identity of youth as global citizens as much as national citizens.
Through the Oxfam and International Baccalaureate curricula and the nation-specific civic and
citizenship education that goes on in schools around the world, students are learning some
key things that contribute to global citizenship.
For one, they're learning to ask questions, and when students learn to ask their own questions,
they take more control over what they learn.
When they learn to ask questions, they start along a process of change that can influence
what they think and do, and that's pretty powerful.
Another thing that students learn to do is reflect on their own knowledge, skills, and
values.
They're taught to reflect on their progress and think about what they've learned and
how they can put it into practice.
This is perhaps not unique to just civics and citizenship, because I can think of a lot
of examples of science lessons that do the same thing.
But it is part of a pattern that we see developing in schools and curriculum worldwide.
Now speaking of patterns, the explicit and implicit attention to issues of social justice,
equality, diversity, and others helps students start to think about patterns and connections
between these issues, and evidence shows that they tend to make connections in four areas.
First, global citizenship involves exploring what all kinds of humans have in common with
each other, even if they live in different places or contexts.
Second, global citizenship involves exploring the links that exist among people through
things like trade, technology, immigration, and the environment.
Third, global citizenship involves exploring the links between issues like poverty or war.
And fourth, global citizenship involves exploring the links between issues that may seem global
at first, but are also meaningful in students' immediate and local contexts as well, like
their homes and classrooms.
So becoming global citizens is something that seems complicated when we just think about
the term.
But when we consider the ways that education in so many different countries and schools
around the world operates, we can see that global citizenship is more normal than exceptional.
Really, if we think about it, the essence of global citizenship is a combination of
identity, knowledge, skills, and action.
And it's rooted in concern for making the world a better place and being a part of that
place.
So when I sit in my office the next time and I look at that button that says, I am a citizen
of the world, what I'm really doing is thinking about who my imagined community is and how
I fit with them.
And the education researcher side of me understands that global citizenship is both something
that is taught and something that happens as a result of my shared experiences.
So I don't have to know all of the answers about who the world leaders in every country
are in order to be a citizen of the world.
But I do have to have some understanding of the world, and I have to have some idea of
how I can participate in it.
I also am a citizen of the world because even though I may differ politically with people
in China or Finland or even my own home state of Oklahoma, in spite of all the differences
we still share core norms and values about social justice, environmental protection,
and human rights, even if we use different words or even if we disagree about how to
show support for or actively contribute to their development.
