Lecture 21 – The Problem with Teachings Best Practices
The real work of education isn't a test score.
Now we do use test scores to compare state and national school systems around the world
and to impose some accountability by parents and policymakers on a country's educators and administrators.
But it's what teachers and students do in the classroom that makes the most difference in education.
In this lecture, we're going to focus on what works for some teachers and some students
in a few key systems around the world.
We'll discover that what produces a great outcome in one place doesn't necessarily mean success in another.
And we'll find that some educational practices that we might think of as fail-safe simply aren't,
at least not if the conditions aren't right.
Most people assume that educational successes in other countries can be easily transferred to their own national system
and to their own neighborhood schools.
But it's not quite that easy.
For instance, the way we do things in American schools is a product of our own unique history,
political landscape, and social and cultural norms.
I know this speaking both as a specialist in comparative and international education
and as a father with two children who are enrolled in U.S. public schools.
Every school and educational system around the world has its own history, political, social, and economic.
And local views and ideologies in the context of these histories
end up playing a much larger role than people usually think.
This means that over many years, what we do in one place becomes unique as compared to any other place in the world.
In the United States, we've developed a unique blend of centralized educational decision-making
combined with decentralized responsibility for implementing it.
The implementation side of the equation is part of a phenomenon known as democratic localism.
And it is a cornerstone of America's political system and social ideology well beyond the classroom.
It is, in a nutshell, the belief that local communities should govern themselves
from building local roads and housing developments to drawing up local ordinances and state laws.
And it means empowering citizens to make certain decisions about education in their own communities
even if they aren't experts in education.
The concept of democratic localism as applied to education
suggests that local communities should be responsible for the daily workings of schools
and the teachers and students in them as well.
Now on the one hand, this means that national agendas and standardized curricula
are viewed with a lot of suspicion and are often resisted.
Examples of this kind of resistance could be seen in recent years
in some public reactions to the reauthorization of the 1965 Elementary and Secondary Education Act
which we also know as No Child Left Behind
which ties federal funding for schools and districts directly to measures of student achievement
and also in active opposition to the so-called common core curriculum standards.
On the other hand, democratic localism also means that very unique and even highly controversial beliefs
can sometimes be introduced into the educational curriculum of individual states and school districts.
An example of this is the controversy in Texas over teaching evolution versus intelligent design in science classes.
The clash made news both nationally and internationally
and served as the basis for the documentary movie The Revisionaries
which in 2012 won the Tribeca Film Festival Special Jury Prize.
As a result of democratic localism and its long historical role on American conceptions
about how education works and who gets to make decisions about what teachers teach and students learn,
there are some activities and behaviors that work in U.S. schools that wouldn't work elsewhere.
The state school superintendent in Texas who advocated so strongly against presenting evolution
as a valid theory in the public schools curriculum was not an educator.
He was a dentist by training.
In other, more centralized national systems,
the fact that laypersons are allowed and even encouraged to make such important educational decisions
would be surprising.
We can also think about how the idea of education in a particular national educational system
such as a colonial system might have been developed by a culture and society
entirely foreign to the local population.
For example, Africa is home to many former colonies that struggle as independent states
with ways to overcome the colonial roots of their education systems
and to introduce post-colonial, Africanized ways of teaching and learning.
We know from even recent history in such places as South Africa
that education can be used to perpetuate inequalities in a society for generations.
Sometimes the marginalization of Native Africans by European colonizers
and even the legacies of those colonial systems decades later
produced a purposeful distortion of school-gained knowledge
along with the introduction of state propaganda
that was directed at keeping Native African students and society subordinate.
For example, the Bantu education system instituted in South Africa during the 1950s
which placed African education firmly under the control of the national government
and thereby rested it away from the missionary schools
that had helped produce some young Native scholars such as Nelson Mandela
was established to keep Black South African students subordinated to the rest of the population.
South Africa's Minister of Native Affairs at the time, Hendrik Feverd,
has sometimes been called the architect of apartheid.
He's documented, as once saying,
there is no place for the Bantu in the European community above the level of certain forms of labor.
And he also publicly asked,
what is the use of teaching the Bantu child mathematics when it cannot use it in practice?
Some now argue that Africanizing education in the continent's post-colonial age
is essential to providing an education that is relevant to Native Africans
rather than a system that reproduces the colonial culture and expectations.
Of course, teaching and learning in African communities
would be much different than the traditional forms of teaching and learning
that rely heavily on literacy and numeracy taught through seat work
and in abstract forms without direct practical applications.
One question I'd throw in is whether the African countries really would reject
a more European style of education with standard curricula and traditional teacher roles.
After all, this is a form of teaching widely applied across cultures, even if content differs.
Many of these same problems with education
have been debated in American and European educational circles as well.
Does best practice teaching and learning really look like what we've come to expect school to look like?
Or is there some other way of doing things that is more relevant?
The answer, it seems, lies in the appearance that what works depends on where you are
and what you expect the outcomes to be.
If we think great education can be recognized by student scores on standard tests,
then we will have a much different perspective on what works
than if we think that great education is recognized by student abilities
to live, work, and succeed in broader society.
This is part of the dilemma when deciding what are global best practices in teaching and learning.
But if we go with the more common expectation that student test scores are indicators of good education,
then we are a little closer to being able to talk about best practices.
Still, there is some significant variation between countries, cultures, and education systems.
Many of us who look at education around the world are enamored by education systems
that tend to produce the highest scoring students on the international standardized assessments.
So let's look at a few and highlight the best practices they demonstrate.
In Taiwan, students typically score at the upper end of the international achievement rankings.
Taiwanese students characteristically are studious, they work well under pressure,
and they seem to have an encyclopedic knowledge of the items that are regularly tested.
But Taiwan also has a high stakes education system.
This means that social and economic mobility, which is one way of measuring how well someone does in life,
is tightly linked to their school performance.
Taiwanese students study hard for the national high school entrance exams while they are in junior high school
so that they can get into one of the top schools.
If they are successful in gaining admission to one of those elite high schools,
then they will study extremely hard again so that they can do well on the national university entrance exams.
And if they do well on the national university entrance tests,
then they can get into a four year university that is a gateway to prestigious jobs that bring status and economic security.
If they don't do as well, then they will struggle a bit more in school and later in the labor market.
As a result, best practices in teaching and learning in Taiwan chiefly consist of preparations for these entrance exams.
Of course, the curriculum is worthwhile in its own right,
consisting of math, science, literature, and other easily recognizable subjects.
But the ways that teachers help students prepare is not so much about developing a flexible and critical understanding of the content
as much as it is about drilling students on facts and testable knowledge.
In addition, families who can afford to do so tend to send their children to private tutoring or supplemental lessons.
These classes are in the evenings after school and can last long into the night.
Tutoring at these private schools consists of practice exams and the content that teachers know was covered on the entrance exams in previous years.
Now to many Americans, the Taiwanese education system like this would seem like a nightmare,
focusing only on getting the right answers so that students do well on the tests.
But for the Taiwanese and the Japanese to name only two high-stakes education systems,
this kind of teaching and learning is considered optimal because it works in their contexts.
Finland is at the opposite end of the spectrum.
It has a system that focuses on equitable access and contextualized education.
Teachers teach in ways that incorporate the human elements of relationships by creating lessons that encourage interaction among students
and making the time to provide truly individualized attention to students, even beyond the regular classroom time.
This can include specialized instruction that is just not possible in high-stakes systems.
Not surprisingly, Finland does not have any required standardized or entrance examinations during basic primary and secondary schooling.
And students do not participate in these kinds of tests very often, at least not compared to most other countries worldwide.
Instead, teachers are given the flexibility and support to work with individual students, as well as whole classes,
in ways that are highly relevant to the strengths and weaknesses of each individual learner.
But in order to successfully implement such a close relational type of teaching between teacher and student,
there has to be a set of conditions that allows and supports this method.
One way to get to know students better and build relationships that allow for such specialized instruction,
tailored to the strengths and weaknesses of individual students,
is for teachers to stay with students throughout multiple grades or years in school.
In other words, best practice teaching in Finland is built on relationships between teacher and student that is intimate and long-term.
It's not a system where students are necessarily turned over to a new teacher at the end of every semester or academic year.
But the relationships that make up best practice teaching there don't exist only between teachers and students.
They're also teacher-to-teacher.
Collaboration and professional interaction between teachers is not commonplace, broadly speaking, but is expected among teachers in Finland.
If one teacher is having difficulty getting students to focus on a lesson or is unsure how to get some who are lagging to catch up with the others,
it's common for teachers to collaborate on a solution.
This can mean teachers inviting other teachers into their classrooms so that they can observe what's going on to provide feedback.
Or even more likely, it can mean helping the teacher who has the problem to design a solution or try a new approach that might work better.
This is possible in Finland because teachers are not siloed in their classrooms.
They aren't required to stay on campus all day long or to teach as long during the day as teachers in, for example, the United States are.
Teachers have aids and specialized teachers who come in and out of their classrooms to assist when needed,
or to provide special services for students with learning challenges that might be linguistic, cultural, cognitive, or emotional.
Now this is in many ways a radical difference from the way education works in more rigid and frankly more administratively bureaucratic systems like in the United States.
It also signifies a degree of respect and professionalism among teachers that is encouraged by their peers' educational administrators.
Another thing that works exceptionally well in Finland is that there is a whatever-it-takes mentality that doesn't have test scores as the final goal.
The goal is understanding and the whatever-it-takes approach means that innovation by teachers is not limited,
nor is it overly regulated by administrators or even by resource availability.
Instead, there is an expectation that students will be active and achieve understanding rather than basic competence.
This means that being dictated to by a teacher, which is something of a Taiwanese educational trait or a high-stakes testing system trait,
something like that would fail in Finland.
So we can see from our two contrasting examples in Taiwan and in Finland that if the objective is test scores and the context is a high-stakes education system,
then there are clear best practices involving the accumulation of facts and in some ways the disassociation of knowledge and its application outside of the test.
In Taiwan, it might be a distraction and a disadvantage to focus on how to use the knowledge that students learn
because it would detract from the expectation that there are right and wrong answers that can be measured on a standardized exam.
And we can see from Finland that if the outcome is understanding and individualization, then teachers have to be prepared and professional.
They also must be innovative on the one hand and willing to collaborate with one another on the other in order to resolve difficulties and to overcome challenges.
And of course, they must be able to make decisions about what and how to teach so that students are able to make connections between what they learn and its real-world usefulness.
After the end of apartheid in South Africa, there was a massive national and international push to reform South Africa's education system.
One key reform was to make South African education outcomes-based.
Now, outcomes-based education is a simple idea that really does seem logical and pretty appropriate.
The idea was that all curricula would be revised to specify a target outcome.
If a teacher were teaching an English class, every one of the outcomes that the students were supposed to achieve would be explicitly named and articulated in the curriculum.
And it was thought that if the outcomes were clear, then teachers and students could focus on what they really needed to teach and learn rather than have too much variation between what the curriculum stated and what teachers and students did in the classroom.
One problem, however, was that outcomes-based education in South Africa led to an overwhelming number of official outcomes.
It became almost something of a joke among educators to tell people how many required outcomes there were for a single science class, for example.
And the burden of assessing each outcome was overwhelming as well.
The outcomes-based education system instituted too many requirements.
Teachers were never able to fully innovate in their classrooms because they were always having to get back to the required outcomes, even if they weren't as relevant for a group of students.
Now, this was especially true at a time when the education gap between white South Africans and black South Africans was enormous.
It's also been a popular tactic of educational systems intent on reform to look at the time that students and teachers in high-performing countries spend in school.
Since many of the highest-scoring students on international assessments of educational achievement are from East Asian countries,
a strategy of the United States and other Western countries has been to look at the number of instructional days in a year in Taiwan or Japan, for example, and then mimic that.
The logic was that if teachers and students had more time together, then the teaching and learning that took place would be more in-depth and more consistent.
In other words, reformers thought that teaching and learning in classrooms would be best when school years were longer and the orientation was more instructional.
So by upping the number of days that students were kept in school during a year and lengthening the instructional time in class, either by reducing the number of non-instructional activities, like taking attendance,
or by making the class periods longer, like they are when schools implement block scheduling in the United States, then education reformers thought that teaching and learning would improve as well.
But what educators found is that there's some misunderstanding about the differences in instructional time and the length of the school year.
Having more time in school is definitely not a bad thing. For example, block schedules have been highly successful in schools across the United States because they give teachers and students the chance to prepare,
implement, and assess their teaching and learning in 90-minute blocks rather than pushing students through much shorter 50-minute periods.
But lengthening the school year has not been as successful when implemented in the United States because, as it turns out, not as much of the time spent in school in Japan, for example,
and other high-performing systems, was dedicated to instructional time, as was originally thought. In fact, much of the extra time in school is dedicated to non-instructional activities, like sports and clubs.
In other words, the extra time was used to develop relationships or to extend opportunities for students to engage in the academic and other extracurricular learning activities that they really enjoyed pursuing.
The time factor and its contributions to best practices in teaching and learning was not related to changing what teachers and students actually do in the classroom, as much as it has been to provide them with the opportunity to do more of the same, whatever that is in a particular context.
To build relationships and pursue individual interests beyond what might be possible during regular academic instruction.
One change that seems to show the most impact is shifting the way that the time in school is divided.
In the United States, there is traditionally a long summer vacation, where much learning tends to be lost between the end of school in May or June and the beginning of school in August or sometime September.
Today, some schools have restructured their breaks throughout the year so that there is a smaller gap in direct instructional time over the winter or summer holidays.
Again, teachers and students are not doing anything different. They are doing more of the same and are able to more seamlessly link past learning to future learning when there is not a three month hiatus in the middle of the year.
So in this lecture, we've looked at ways that teachers and students behave in classrooms around the world and focused on what seems to work for teachers and students in a few key systems.
What we discovered is that what works in one place doesn't necessarily work in another.
And we found that some things we think are good educational practices might not be when the conditions or environment aren't right.
In Taiwan, the high stakes educational system there makes memorization and lectures a highly effective approach to teaching and learning because performance on standardized tests is what determines how good someone's education has been.
But in Finland, we saw that creating space for innovation, collaboration and relationship building was a better model.
It led to knowledge and applications that were not necessarily testable but were still the goal of teachers and students.
We also saw that in countries where the curricula and teaching approaches were established by a former political regime or colonizing country, the teaching and learning that goes on in those schools doesn't always reflect the culture and social norms of the indigenous community.
So even if students were scoring well in the past and even if teachers were teaching in a way that conveyed the curriculum well, it might still not be relevant to the students in their community.
Global best practices in teaching and learning are highly dependent upon context and may be highly different in terms of targets and goals for education.
The key to great education then is less about prescribed activities or methods and more about understanding who the teachers and students are and what the expectations for them are in school and society.
