Lecture 23 – The Rich and Poor Learning Cycle
What is success?
As someone who talks about education every day as part of my work, and because education
is something I like talking about, I'm frequently bothered by the use of the word success.
That's because it's used by educational reformers, policymakers, and even by educators
in a way that is often left undefined but dramatically conveyed.
It's a catch-all phrase that can take on what seems like mythical importance depending
on the person I'm talking with.
The problem you see is that everyone has his or her own version of what success means.
To the vast majority of people, high test scores demonstrate successful education.
Even when people hate standardized testing, they tend to look at test scores as a way
to measure success.
And I have to admit that standardized tests and school grades are the traditional measure
of success for many national education systems around the world.
In high-stakes education systems such as Japan and Taiwan, test scores determine advancement
from one level of schooling to the next.
And in the United States, test scores measure, or at least denote, a formal evaluation mechanism
known as adequate yearly progress, which is tied to federal funding.
Tests are an efficient measuring tool because they can be administered while students are
in class doing what they would normally do.
The knowledge the students are tested on can be fairly easily linked to the curriculum
they're supposed to learn, and the data that results from standard test scores and school
grades can be recorded, tracked, and then analyzed by everyone from educators and administrators
and policymakers to researchers like me.
But test scores are largely a measure of knowledge rather than a measure of skills.
The trends in international mathematics and science study, for example, which is one of
the international assessments that national education systems most frequently use to evaluate
their competitiveness, is tied very closely to math and science curricula.
In other words, it's tied to what students know much more than it is to their skills
or what they can do.
And yet, test scores aren't the only way that successful education is imagined.
While some look to high test scores as an indicator of success, others, such as myself,
prefer to look at what students can actually do with their knowledge and skills.
Let's turn for a moment to consider another standardized test known as PISA, which stands
for the Program for International Student Assessment.
It also assesses students around the world and is frequently used to rank national education
systems. But in contrast with the TIMS, or the Trends in International Math and Science
Study, the Math and Science Assessment of TIMS, PISA focuses on evaluating what students can
do with their knowledge. It is still a measure of student achievement, but the types of questions
it asks are meant to elicit how students use that knowledge rather than whether or not
they know the curriculum. And there are still other ways to measure students' skills.
Transition and mobility within an education system, such as from school to work and from
school to university, is another measure of success that policymakers and the public
often turn to.
Now, this transition is not a direct or causal link, of course. But, in other words, while
the percentage of graduates who are employed is one way to measure how well an education
system prepares youth for the labor market, it's also possible that in some countries
the transition to work or to university is facilitated by family networks. This is the
case in some countries in sub-Saharan Africa and in Gulf countries such as Saudi Arabia,
where the procedure for university acceptance and labor market transition is much different
than in East Asian countries like Japan, Korea and Hong Kong or even then in the United States.
That makes transition and mobility within an education system and beyond somewhat difficult
to read as an indicator of educational success.
But there are still other ways to measure and envision success in education around the
world. These include whether the education offered meets the needs of a particular society
or culture.
If students are educated to know something or trained to do something that is not useful
or relevant in a particular community, then what is the value of it?
One last way for now that education can be demonstrated as successful is the degree to
which it creates productive citizens and reinforces a stable society, especially in communities
that have experienced conflict or other extraordinary forms of stress.
For example, in countries where political upheaval, war or genocide have occurred,
education can be a springboard to healing the society and creating a new future for the survivors.
This can be seen in Germany after World War II, Cambodia following Pol Pot's regime,
Rwanda after the Hutu Tutsi genocide and in many other examples.
In each country, education was a vehicle for post-conflict governments and relief organizations
to establish or restore stability, calm and normalcy in traumatized communities.
It's also a means to prepare rising generations to become new leaders in society as well as
to heal them of social and psychological wounds.
Even so, the procedures and outcomes of successful education systems do change from country to
country and from system to system.
And true success in education is a delicate balance between what I refer to as school factors
and non-school factors.
Because this is unfamiliar terminology to many people, I often preface my remarks on the subject
by saying that school factors are elements and influences that can be changed or manipulated
within the education system itself.
This includes school facilities, buildings and resources like books or technology.
It also includes teacher characteristics like level of education and study focus during
university training.
It can also include what students learn, in other words the curriculum and how it's taught in the classroom.
Non-school factors on the other hand are forces and influences that educators and policy makers
cannot fix or necessarily change because they originate outside of school.
Non-school factors include such things as a family's social status or their income and the influence
of friends and community.
And at the macro level, it can include a society's culture or a nation's economy.
These are all non-school factors.
In the United States, school resources, curricula and teachers themselves vary quite a bit across
states and districts as well as within particular schools sometimes.
Now this is a result of the highly decentralized nature of education in the United States.
And it reflects the fact that the financial support and governance decisions for each state
and school district are the responsibility of local constituencies and leadership,
which represents distinct communities, sometimes with very different education priorities.
As a result, educational indicators of success in the United States vary quite a bit.
Student achievement across the nation is relatively average on the whole by international measures,
but that's not because the country as a whole is average.
Rather, it's because Americans produce such a wide range of testing performance from very low
to very high across the country.
Likewise, transitions within an educational system in the United States are fairly easy and friction-free
because the U.S. does not operate on a high-stakes testing system,
and its students are generally not tested in order to gain acceptance to the next level or grade.
By comparison, the transition from school to university or school to work in the United States
is fairly competitive and outcomes vary from school to school and from person to person.
In the United States, we do not see established or institutionalized links, for the most part,
between schools and employers or between schools and universities.
And entrance to higher education, as well as to the labor market,
is much more the responsibility of the individual student than it is the responsibility of their family, school, or society.
So successful education in the United States is really fairly hard to put your finger on,
especially when we look at the average student and the average school,
because aggregations obliterate the wide variation in results among schools, districts, and states.
But if we look at individual examples of a particular school, classroom,
or a student who performs exceptionally well, then Americans, by their nature,
are more likely to give credit to the individual student rather than to the educational system.
This is also in part due to the decentralized nature of United States schooling.
But it's also a remnant of the enduring ideologies of individual exceptionalism
and meritocracy in America, which tend to view individuals as unique
and success as resulting from merit, in other words, from hard work,
rather than from privilege or social advantage, even though that may be the reality.
Successful education in many other countries looks remarkably different than it does in the United States.
Hong Kong, for example, is a high-stakes education system
where entrance to the best schools at each level of primary, secondary, and tertiary education
is determined by highly competitive examinations.
One outcome of this high-stakes system is that Hong Kong students typically score extremely well
on internationally-comparative achievement tests, such as TIMS and PISA,
because they are part of a rigorous and highly competitive education culture.
I mean, a lot rides on a Hong Kong student's ability to do well on the entrance exams to schools at each of those levels.
For example, if a child scores well enough on the primary school entrance exam,
then she or he can get into one of the best primary schools.
Being a student at the best primary schools in Hong Kong offers some advantage
simply because of the status or prestige associated with it.
But the even greater advantage is that teachers and students at these schools
know how to best prepare for the entrance exams into the best secondary schools.
And then at the secondary schools, the best students and teachers know how to prepare
for the Hong Kong Certificate of Education examination,
and later for the Hong Kong Advanced Level examination.
These tests and others are given at key transition moments,
determining each Hong Kong student's eligibility for passing from this into the next grade,
and eventually to gain university admission.
Student performance on these tests can have long lasting effects on their eventual career opportunities as well,
going so far as to encompass social status and life opportunities including marriage.
In Hong Kong, mainland China, South Korea, Singapore and Japan,
what students know and what they can do are fairly closely aligned.
Because they're being taught the curriculum,
the curriculum also prepares them with skills for taking and passing the entrance exams.
In other words, if we look at Hong Kong as representative of this group of East Asian countries,
proficiency at taking achievement tests is a skill that will serve its students well,
because it is the tool that Hong Kong's educational system and society
have determined is necessary for mobility from school to university and from school to career.
In the United States, the opposite logic would apply.
In other words, how well an American student can take a test
is usually not a meaningful measure of their potential skills and applications.
To assess that more practical outcome of a U.S. education,
you have to be able to determine what a student is capable of doing with the knowledge he or she has gained.
Often the goal of U.S. education is to prepare a student
to make use of knowledge in a creative fashion that involves a new combination of knowledge and skills.
And then there is the example of yet another country such as Finland,
where the demographics are relatively homogeneous,
the economy is fairly stable,
and where the variability among school and non-school factors
is not so great as it is in the United States and, quite frankly, many other countries around the world.
The traditional indicators of success in the Finnish education system, in other words,
student achievement and mobility within and out of school
are just not as important there as they often are elsewhere.
Instead, successful education in Finland is more about engendering understanding
and developing a child as a good, healthy and educated citizen.
Now there are certainly a unique set of conditions that enable this definition of success
to guide educational decisions and practices in Finland.
But it was a conscious policy by the Finnish government
and its education sector to create a system like this,
and it seems to be working.
In Finland, standardized tests are rare,
and when they're given, taking them is often voluntary.
Results are not reported publicly,
and educators use the results to help them improve teaching and learning,
rather than as indicators of success.
Likewise with the transition out of school.
While employment and labor market productivity are certainly important to Finland,
these are not indicators that educators or others use to gauge educational success.
Instead, there is a specific focus on individual and local decision making
that gives teachers the freedom to determine what their students need
and what good education looks like in their own communities.
This might be student achievement,
or it could be related to a performance or a conversation,
or any indicator that a teacher felt was a reasonable representation of success
for their community, class and the individual students.
So to come full circle,
what is successful in the United States
is not necessarily the same as what is successful in Hong Kong.
And what is successful in Hong Kong
is not the same as what is successful in Finland.
Although the school factors in each of these countries might resemble one another,
the non-school factors,
and most importantly, the expectations for education
vary from system to system and from culture to culture.
Now I should also state that there are some school factors and non-school factors
that repeatedly do come up as important for educational success in each of these systems.
So let's take a look at a few.
Two key school factors in educational success,
broadly defined and broadly applied,
are related to teaching and learning.
In terms of teaching,
one successful ingredient is preparing highly qualified teachers
and providing them with ample opportunities for professional development
and emphasizing the importance of teacher relationships
and an ability to contextualize their teaching
as well as a focus on the work of teaching itself.
That's one big category.
In a small city in the western Cape of South Africa,
sits a primary school that abuts a large squatter camp
filled with wooden and corrugated steel shacks
and desperately poor mixed-race families.
It also has a relatively middle-class mixed-race student population
that goes to that school as well.
Now I tell this story to illustrate a number of lessons about national school systems
and international comparisons.
This school's racial and ethnic profile
and the fact that such a significant portion of its students come from abject poverty
make it a clearly disadvantaged school,
serving a highly marginalized student population.
But the teachers there are special.
I visited this school and its communities several times
while working on a project called the South Africa Educational Development Initiative.
And I had a chance to get to know the teachers fairly well.
Most of them were from mixed-race backgrounds themselves,
so they shared that racial and ethnic heritage with their students.
But most of them were also pretty well established in the middle class.
They were educated professionals.
Many had their own homes,
and they enjoyed relative status and moderate prosperity,
at least as much as you can have as a teacher.
They were educated at local polytechnic institutions in South Africa
before the end of the apartheid era for the most part,
because this was where university students from their racial background could go at that time.
They received teaching degrees and became school teachers as a result,
and most had worked often in that same school for the past 10 to 20 years.
Now, according to many of the standard teacher-related indicators of success,
they should have been successful.
They were highly qualified,
meaning they had a specialized degree in education and in their subject area.
They participated in professional development workshops
and other opportunities that were offered by the district of education in their region.
They were a group that engaged with one another
and had close relationships with their colleagues at the school,
and they knew their context very well,
and either had lived or worked in that community for a very long time.
And finally, I can say from my own experiences observing them teach
that they were excellent teachers and they had fine pedagogical skills.
But their students still underperformed by both national and international measures,
and the teachers were very worried about how their students did
on these mandated standardized tests.
This is an example of the ways that teaching is not the only
or perhaps even the best indicator of successful education.
Remember that student assessments play a key role
in evaluating a successful education and successful education systems in most countries.
Learning relies on student preparation and readiness,
student understanding and capacity for learning,
student academic performance,
and the application of learning outside of school.
In other words, while teaching-related indicators of success
are highly aligned with school factors,
learning-related indicators of success are highly aligned with non-school factors.
In this one South African school,
the mixed-race student body came from two very different social and economic backgrounds
within the surrounding community,
even though they shared a racial heritage.
And the overwhelming influence of the students who lived in the adjacent squatter camp
meant that students there were largely unprepared or ready for school.
They did not eat outside of the meals provided by the school.
Many did not have stable families or live in the same place from night to night.
Many were victims of domestic violence and sexual assault.
Many had so much else going on other than school
that it was difficult for them to be ready or prepared for school each day.
Often making it to class could be judged as success all by itself.
And as this example suggests,
learning, performance, and application outside of school
just isn't possible when students can't meet the first success indicator for learning,
which is being ready to learn.
So non-school factors become extremely important to recognize and address
when teaching in schools anywhere around the world.
Resources consist of learning materials and school facilities,
and their availability is often based on family background
and student socioeconomic status, or as we call it for short, SES.
The most stable connection between educational success and any other variable is with SES.
In short, rich kids do better.
Now, this is true not just because they have the resources,
but because they have opportunities to learn,
and they align with the preferred school culture.
In other words, they look like what teachers look like often.
Equity is a second key successful education feature,
and is about what's fair, not what's equal.
Refer back to the community context example I just gave you
of the South African townships and the squatter camps that lie right next to the middle-class housing at schools.
Part of the problem, or maybe part of the reason,
why non-school factors prevented the success of the middle-class students
as well as of the students coming out of poverty,
was that there were no successful ways to provide an equitable education
to these two populations of students.
The children coming out of the squatter camps could not be ready or prepared for school
at the same level as the middle-class students,
and making that adjustment was too great for the school and teachers to accomplish alone.
Now, even though it's challenging sometimes,
we know that the best way to achieve successful education
is to align school and non-school factors to create equitable
and contextually relevant environments for learning,
and to provide quality and opportune conditions for learning in school.
And although we've seen that the school and non-school factors that contribute to educational success
seem to be fairly stable, at least from country to country, in context to context,
there's still no one formula for achieving success,
because every school and community combination is unique.
We can, however, look at how to balance school and non-school factors.
When someone asks me what successful education looks like,
I talk about what works in some contexts but not in others,
and I have to admit that there is a difference between what we can efficiently measure
and what students can really do.
We have a long ways to go before we will find the perfect combination of factors
that creates one model of success.
But isn't it good to know that instead of there just being one perfect solution,
that there are many?
