Lecture 24 – How to Fix Education – Part, Head, Hands
Only relatively recently has the small Southeast Asian country of Myanmar, formerly known as
Burma, come out from many decades of military dictatorship.
Not surprisingly, education is one way that the people and the government of Myanmar hope
to see peace, democracy, and economic recovery eventually spread there.
I had an interesting conversation with a man who works with the American Friends Service
Committee in Southeast Asia recently.
It was about the work they're doing to support monastic schools in Myanmar.
The American Friends Service Committee is a Quaker organization that advocates for social
justice and peace around the world.
And Myanmar is a particularly interesting place for them to be.
You see, Buddhist monks in Myanmar began establishing schools at their monasteries some time ago
as a way to develop democracy and to make up for the particularly poor quality of government
provided education in that country.
These monastic schools are not religious institutions, they're simply schools that
are located in monasteries, and they're run mostly by volunteer teachers.
The teachers are often women who frequently have the equivalent of only a high school
education, but they're willing to do the job, and they are eager to improve the ways
they teach.
So the American Friends Service Committee is working with these largely untrained teachers
to develop a sustainable and self-directed teacher training program.
Now my goal in this lecture is to talk about how to fix schools.
Not only in Myanmar, but you name it, around the world.
This assumes that there is something wrong, and that there is a need to improve the schools
somehow.
But I don't expressly promote that assumption.
There actually may be nothing wrong with the school near you.
What I'm responding to is the well-established, but more general, lingering complaint that
there is something wrong with local, state, and national school systems that needs to
be fixed.
Perhaps the extreme conditions of the monastic schools in Myanmar are more drastic than the
conditions of local schools in communities across the United States or other developed
countries.
But the desire to fix education is just as strong in Myanmar as it is in other better-known
countries that we often talk about.
What makes Myanmar's monastic schools unique is they have perhaps one of the newest and
most sustainable approaches to teacher training and professional development that I've ever
seen.
And it's this approach to fixing education rather than the teacher training itself that's
worth mentioning here.
The man I was talking to at the American Friends Service Committee described their approach
to improving teacher outcomes in monastic schools as one of heart, head, and hands.
The heart part focuses on developing the teacher's self-awareness.
Now, consciousness training, mindfulness, and self-awareness are all traditions in Buddhist
thought and practice.
And one of the oldest branches of Buddhist thought and belief is predominant in Myanmar
today.
So it might not come as a surprise that the concept of greater self-awareness would be
applied to education practice in this country.
As the representative of the American Friends Service Committee described it to me, the self-awareness
objective is to help empower Burmese teachers by helping them think deeply about what they
do and then provide them with the tools to use this self-awareness to move ahead with
their own professional development in ways that make sense for each of them.
By using this long-established and culturally specific approach to begin the process of
fixing education in Myanmar, these monastic schools are paying attention to non-school
factors first.
In other words, they're recognizing the things that they cannot change and that are embedded
in society, and they're using that context and those factors to support educational
reform.
It is a very savvy strategy.
The head part of teacher development or education reform in these monastic schools involves
building a knowledge base around what good teachers tend to look like and what good teaching
tends to look like as well.
Specifically, they're working on ways to get the knowledge and skills they need to improve
their pedagogy, that is their methods of teaching.
This part of the training is about school factors.
In other words, training and being more effective and better teachers is something that can
be adjusted and learned.
It's also something that is not necessarily unique to Myanmar or monastic schools.
Good teachers tend to do similar things in classrooms around the world.
But if the teachers in Myanmar's monastic schools understand what best practices from
around the world are, then they can learn how to do those best practices in their own
classrooms and schools.
Finally, the hands part of the equation has to do with teachers implementing what they
learn and doing so in ways that make the most sense for their schools and students.
Another part of developing teachers and fixing monastic schools in Myanmar, which remains
among the poorest countries in the world, is by using the existing infrastructure.
In other words, the facilities and resources they already have, like the facilities at
the monasteries.
Doing so is sustainable because it makes use of what is already there to empower the teachers
themselves and to make sure the process is driven by local decisions and activities rather
than by external sources and external resources.
The monastic school teacher training program in Myanmar is a classic example of how to
integrate infrastructure, capacity building, and sustainability all within a culture's
history, a culture's context, and the traditional approach to schooling for that community.
It really is about the heart, head, and hands.
Now while I found the Myanmar example to be relevant broadly to the question of how do
we fix our schools, there are still those who are going to argue that this example, coming
from a small, distant, and quite frankly little understood country, is perhaps too basic and
too remote to be applicable or even comparable with what's going on in the United States,
Germany, or other more developed countries with much larger and more complex education
systems.
So let's step back a little bit and think more broadly about how change occurs in education
around the world.
So how does change occur in education anyway?
Well, there are basically three ways.
There's something called imposition, which is a way to impose a particular educational
model, activity, or approach.
Imposition is typically a way to control education, sometimes extending to controlling
educational content, resources, and policy itself.
The second way education changes, broadly speaking, is by invitation.
This means that educational models or approaches are borrowed or copied.
They're invited by one school, district, or country from another one that's seen as being
successful or effective or has a quality that they want to take.
And finally, there's innovation, which is creative and solutions-oriented.
And it involves risk, much like entrepreneurship does.
Innovation combines current education practices and policies with new ones to find solutions
that no one else has thought of before.
So let's look at each of these three approaches and then come back and compare them to the
framework for change in Myanmar.
When educators or policymakers are forced to adopt an ideology, a policy, or a practice
that is foreign or even more so unwanted, that's imposition, right?
Imposition rarely involves considering the infrastructure, capacity, or sustainability
of the educational practice or policy that's being implemented.
Mandatory participation in standardized international assessments is one example of imposition.
In the United States, requirements to adopt and adhere to the federal education policy
known as no child left behind are a form of imposition.
Any failure by U.S. schools to demonstrate adequate yearly progress, which is the formal
terminology for the outcomes required by no child left behind, puts at risk the federal
funding that is so essential to their functioning.
If we look further abroad, we can find examples of imposition in other countries, too.
In South Africa, after the end of legal apartheid, large multinational organizations, such as
the World Bank and others, suggested that South Africa reform its education system through
competency-based outcomes at every grade level and in every subject.
This was not a locally or even a nationally generated reform, but was instead developed
by international organizations for South Africa.
And in some cases, was tied to much-needed aid packages offered to South Africa by these
international organizations.
In other words, there was no heart to the imposition of outcomes-based education in South Africa.
It was all head and hands.
But now let's look at imposition, invitation, and innovation, and how they can work to change
or fix education worldwide.
One example that is both extreme and yet representative of global trends is the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Saudi Arabia is a good example here because its educational system encompasses extreme
cultural differences between the traditional, on the one hand, along with western and global
influences on the other.
And as such, it reveals the impact that discussions about education at the global level can have
or even fail to have on the development of local education systems, specifically in societies
where global and local cultures intersect.
Saudi Arabia's participation in the Quadrennial Trends in International Mathematics and Science
Study is actually a mix of both imposition and invitation.
While Saudis voluntarily participate in TIMS, the rationale for doing so came from mounting
external pressure to participate in some sort of external validation of their educational
system.
It was initiated by the imposition of external pressures that led to internal legitimacy-seeking
measures by Saudi policymakers.
As a result, we still see the lack of buy-in by the Saudis in relation to their participation
in TIMS or the Trends in International Math and Science Study.
To date, the test score results from Saudi participation in TIMS assessments in 2003,
2007, and 2011 have barely had a ripple effect on informing its educational policy and decision-making.
Yet, national education decision-makers continue to recommend that Saudi Arabia's students
participate in the TIMS assessments cycle after cycle.
Now the Saudi Arabian Ministry of Education does sometimes question why the country should
participate and what it should do with the results.
But more subtly, and despite the outward lack of effect on Saudi policy-making, important
discussions about the relevance of knowledge and data production have quietly gained traction
there, specifically due to the country's participation in TIMS.
So imposition and invitation can occur in concert.
But in the Saudi example, neither approach considered the existing education system's
infrastructure, capacity, or sustainability, much less the concept of self-awareness that
we encountered in Myanmar that would empower Saudi policy-making to make informed decisions.
If we look more closely at invitation as a model of educational change, we'll see that
invitation is when students, teachers, administrators, or policymakers literally invite a foreign
policy or practice into their own system.
Education is often the first step in borrowing a particular idea about education.
But it's not always successful.
Consider the fact that the German vocational system, which is streamed and tracked, as we
say, would never work in the United States, where school is thought to be a little democracy.
But exceptions always exist.
For example, some American schools are struggling now with how to balance an adopted or borrowed
model with their local population and with their original context.
A specific example of this is Booker T. Washington High School in Tulsa, Oklahoma, which has
adopted a magnet school model.
Now, magnet schools and charter schools are sort of unique organizational characteristics
of schools in the United States.
And a magnet school allows that school to have a particular focus in its curriculum
or in its activities, but still be administratively controlled by the school district.
As a result of developing a magnet school within the conventional facility, Booker T.
Booker T. Washington High School has unintentionally developed a system of haves and have-nots.
The magnet students who come to that high school, who are often white and from middle
and upper middle class families, are separated from the rest of the student body, who frequently
come from African American and much less affluent families.
They're separated not only by virtue of the elevated curriculum in the magnet part of
the school, but also in terms of classroom locations and physical space because the local
community students and the magnet community students are housed in different parts of
the building.
Another example of invitation is the introduction of tightly coupled management techniques and
specifically those that resemble a school of thought to modernize government policies
and the public sector, which is known as new public management.
And that's been used in the highly traditional society and educational system of Saudi Arabia.
The King Abdullah Public Education Development Project in Saudi Arabia, which is also sometimes
called the TATWIR Project, TATWIR is an Arabic word meaning development.
The TATWIR Project is an example of how ideas and expectations about education that are
completely foreign to the Saudi context are nevertheless being invited into the Saudi
system of education.
The TATWIR Project is coupled with a public holding company that gives a market orientation
to the educational reforms it's trying to implement.
This is a classic example of the so-called new public management techniques, which try
to use private sector approaches in traditionally public sector situations.
The implementation of any reform or development idea created by the TATWIR Project results
in an RFP or a request for proposals, which is then submitted to the TATWIR holding company.
And the holding company then solicits proposals to implement the introduced reform in the most
cost efficient manner.
While this might seem like a new way of doing the business of education, it really is such
a radical departure in Saudi Arabia that is not as tight a fit with the education system
there as some had hoped it would be.
So while inviting new models and approaches can be a way to jumpstart reform, it can also
lead to some mismatches in culture and expectations, much less in terms of infrastructure capacity
and the heart approach to adopting and implementing sustainable reforms.
Evidence from the trends in international mathematics and science study suggests that
Gulf countries are on average imposing global education community frameworks on their own
students more than our other nearby Arab nations.
But the Gulf countries still remain something of an outlier compared to the rest of the world.
Within the Gulf, Qatar and Oman, for example, are particularly innovative or perhaps particularly
daring in their willingness to innovate in the classroom.
In this instance, using group work in education is considered innovative because it carries
some risk with it.
That is, education that is not traditional lecture style instruction in most Gulf countries
is considered somewhat risky because it doesn't look like the legitimate version of schooling
that Gulf countries are most familiar with and because it turns over some of the control
of the teaching and learning in a classroom to the students.
This can be quite scary in educational systems where this is a new procedure.
Still, Gulf countries are at last embracing a global educational community, at least more
so than some of their more traditional Arab neighbors.
And they're doing so in spite of continuing low marks on the standardized international
assessments, as well as some continuing cultural resistance to Western norms and conventions.
It's important to note this because it suggests that the Gulf is particularly good at incorporating
otherwise foreign or new ideas and new ways of doing things into their own systems.
It also suggests that Gulf countries are poised to compete better between nations and internationally
as a result of their involvement in the global educational community.
So certainly much more data and discussion is needed to confirm this.
In short, we've seen how the larger forces of imposition, invitation, and innovation
can lead to change.
So let's return now to my original question and ask, why is fixing education so important
to social, political, and economic reform?
And why is the question of how the world learns relevant to fixing education?
Let me take a moment to discuss that.
Knowing how the world learns is relevant to fixing education because it provides a foundation
force.
It helps us understand what education looks like in other countries, other communities,
other contexts, and it helps us see how other people or other systems are uniquely combining
the school and the non-school factors to create the success that they want in their system.
Now that seems rather simple, but it's actually quite a radical concept.
If we start to understand that education and the way that it is structured, in other words,
what education generally looks like is pretty highly shared around the world, that helps
us understand that there isn't a magic bullet or a quick fix that one country is doing that
another country can just borrow.
Instead it establishes a baseline where we say, OK, we're all doing education in similar
ways.
What are the unique combinations of those different school and non-school factors that make it
work better in one context or in one system than it does here, or that provides opportunities
in one way or in one system that aren't available in our own system?
So balancing local culture and global discourse about education is the key factor shared across
imposition, invitation, and innovation.
Remember, imposition can happen both across institutions and systems as well as within
systems.
Invitation might be as much about legitimacy seeking as it is about finding what works
or what are the best practices.
And innovation can be unequal because some are able to bear the risk of innovating better
than others.
Harnessing these three methods of change is how we fix our schools, and it's best done
through the alignment of school and non-school factors.
From a practical standpoint, the factors to align concern infrastructure, capacity,
and sustainable practices.
From a strategic standpoint, the factors to align address the heart, that's the empowerment.
They address the head, that's the knowledge and skills, and they address the hands, that's
the implementation.
So we have quite a mix of change methods, school and non-school factors, and both practical
and strategic steps to fixing our schools.
Yet at the end of the day, we're still left with a dilemma.
Knowing how the world learns is a stepping stone to understanding how students learn,
how teachers teach, and how educational systems function in the best and in the worst ways.
But it's not necessarily focused on fixing what's wrong with education.
Instead, it's about understanding the unique conditions and factors that allow educational
systems around the world to share structural characteristics and all of the norms and values
that are shared along with it.
Even more importantly, it's about making decisions that affect how certain types of
teaching and learning develop, and which ones do not.
As a young English language teacher in the Japanese public school system, when I was
just starting out in my career, I learned a lot about how the Japanese did what they
did and how what they did with their students was unique to the Japanese.
In fact, it was my very first year teaching in Japan that convinced me that all education
is context specific.
But it was also this first year teaching abroad that showed me that all education is also
structured in much the same way worldwide.
The differences in opportunities for each system are therefore a product of the context
and culture outside of school and the structure and content inside of school.
Of course, my ideas about education and how it develops have deepened and grown since then.
But the importance of understanding context and the significant role that expectations
for education play have stayed with me for a long time.
So about halfway through my time as a teacher in Japan, I was asked to play host to a visiting
American teacher.
She was from my home state of Oklahoma, and my Japanese supervisor thought that I would
make her the most comfortable as her tour guide in such an otherwise foreign location.
I went to meet this very nice and enthusiastic teacher from Oklahoma one day, and we visited
a local primary school.
When we got there, the children were noisily playing with toys and talking loudly to each
other.
The Japanese teacher didn't do much of anything to stop the children from being so loud and
disruptive, although I have to say it didn't seem like anyone would mind.
But our guest from Oklahoma commented to me that it seemed like this Japanese teacher
didn't have a very good grasp of classroom management, and then she walked on to the
next classroom.
And I have to say I'll never forget this moment, because it was precisely then that this internal
voice came on in my head and said loud enough that it could have been a real person in the
room, she just doesn't get it.
Now by it, I mean the point of a slightly unruly and louder primary classroom in Japan.
By it, I also mean the fact that the students' school supplies, clothing, coats, other items
were arranged exactly as they should be and were neatly stored near the door to the room.
And by it, I mean that she did not understand the context or the future of these students
within the Japanese educational system and culture more broadly.
This example shows that while traditional organized Japanese life was a central element
of this classroom, it was also punctuated by the noise, fun, and children's chaos.
The Japanese approach to early and elementary years education is one that sees the students'
personal development to be just as important as their academic development.
And in fact, they're seen to be the same in many ways.
What the Oklahoma teacher couldn't see was that the unruliness of this classroom was
a way the Japanese teacher was allowing young children to develop their own senses of expression
and creativity.
And you have to take into account in this button-down society that by the time they
hit junior high school, there would be little time for playing and rowdiness.
So when someone asks you how to fix education, remember what goes into every unique educational
moment.
Remember to account for school and non-school factors.
Remember to consider the existing infrastructure, capacity needs, and capacity building, and
how the fix, whatever that is, will be sustainable.
And remember to think about how to change education in ways that involve the heart,
the head, and the hands.
If you can do this, you'll be on the right track to fixing your schools in a way that
is meaningful and fits the context.
Because I believe, as Nelson Mandela once said, education is the most powerful weapon
which you can use to change the world.
We hope you have enjoyed these lectures from The Great Courses.
Our courses are available online or via the free The Great Courses app for smartphones
and tablets available on the App Store or Google Play.
View our full library at thegreatcourses.com or as always, you can call our customer care
representatives at 1-800-832-2412.
Thank you very much.
