I think if I was driving my daughter to school, we had a conversation about the day life savings
time.
She was expressing confusion about how it works.
I recall myself at one point sitting down and carefully working out.
Okay, what does the day life savings time thing work?
I tried to do this case.
There's something like adding a periodic square wave to this.
I'm doing this.
I'm listening to the explanation.
I didn't try to do it.
That's right.
So my point is that any change in the usual notion of time is very hard for us to understand.
We're very fixed in the way we typically think about time.
And so what I'll do today is just say some things about some results about perhaps about
the nature of time that I've run across in the quest to build it upon inferior gravity.
And so in particular, I'll try to describe a way of thinking about time in terms of unfolding
of the process.
I didn't use an article in my title because I didn't want you to think that there's
necessarily just a single process that would describe the universe.
So what I really mean is something like a quantum process.
I don't know exactly how to describe a quantum process, but the idea is there will be some
process that is a multi-fingered character that would involve not necessarily a single
history, but perhaps a set of histories.
So I'll start by introducing the basis of the approach, which is what Kozl said, which
we heard a little bit about this morning.
And then I'll describe a dynamical law for Kozl sets, which is based on the process of
growth of the universe.
And then I will present a number of results of this order that have arisen from thinking
about time in this way, which may be of interest to this audience.
And then in particular, I'll talk about the way of expressing a quantum dynamics for Kozl
sets in terms of the action of growth of the universe, but with some conclusions.
So in 1978, we were at a toped, won the Nobel Prize for the Elecrimic Theory, an article
about quantum gravity, in which he mused about how one would attempt to write down the theory
of quantum gravity.
And it goes on for 10 plus pages describing his thoughts.
And then about three pages before the end of the article, he chips gears and talks about
how one might try to write down a lattice description of gravity, and he essentially
outlines the Kozl set approach in that order.
So the argument is that we should take the lattice discretization seriously as a model
for gravity, so that maybe the lattice itself is somehow telling us something about space
time geometry.
However, the metric tensor is difficult to define on the lattice, while respecting covariance.
And so the simpler concept, which is covariance under the variance transformation set under
the theory is the Kozl ordering.
And so the idea is to build a theory based on Kozl ordering, and in the discrete language,
in the context of the screen, this is going to be mathematically represented as a partial
ordering.
And so the idea is that this partial ordering itself defines the lattice.
So the lattice is going to be a set of elements of, if you think of them as atoms of space
time.
So the Kozl set is the word I usually use, which is endowed with the partial ordering,
which has a physical meaning of Kozl ordering.
And so then the idea is that the consistency of the Kozl ordering of the discrete lattice
with the continuum gives a relatively precise correspondence between the discrete structure
and the continuum structure with which we're more familiar.
And then furthermore, he proposes that you're in the universe should emerge as something
like a tree, which begins from the same level.
So before I describe the theory, I just want to say a few words about how I think about
it.
So the idea is I want to write down a model.
We want to write down a model for which we expect to describe the gravitational interaction.
Hopefully this will be a simple model, because the general simple models are better than
complex ones.
So I'd be surprised if it's a theory of everything.
I don't particularly expect that this would be rise to a theory of everything.
I'm not entirely sure whether it's fundamental.
Maybe you can tell me your comments on whether it could be a fundamental theory.
But again, the goal is to give a quantum account of the gravitational field.
Of course, we hope to get more of this.
We hope that some portion, for example, some portion of the standard model comes out of
the theory.
But the onset of the real goal is to write down a theory which describes, which gives a quantum
description of gravity.
So the attitude behind the approach is based on the writings of the Japanese philosopher
Kakehane, who described the process of theory construction or model building in terms of
three stages, which form a cycle.
So the first stage, regardless of the phenomenological stage, so what are the phenomena which the
theory should explain.
And then once that's identified, a second theory is a kinematical stage in which one
decides what is the fundamental mathematical structure, which will be used to build the
theory.
What is the mathematical underpinning of the theory?
And then the third stage is the dynamical stage in which we decide what are the equations
of motion of the substance.
The kinematical stage decides what is the substance of the theory, which is something that we
kind of describe in the dynamical stage.
And one point I want to make is that it can be important to spend a fair amount of time
thinking carefully about the kinematical description of the theory.
It can be useful in guiding other processes.
So what is the causal set?
So the causal set is, as I described, it's a set of atoms of space-time, if you like,
which have a partial order defined on them.
The idea is based on the observation that causal structure is a very rich structure.
So there's a theorem of a David Mellon and similar ones by others, which prove that
they are reasonably well-behaved space-time.
One can recover the space-time geometry up to a conformal vector just by the causal
structure of that space-time.
So there's a lot of information included in the causal structure.
And the second is the need for distribution, which is a character observed as well.
So the theory is going to be defined in terms of a set, which, if you don't know what
think of it as being a countable set, which has a partial order defined on it,
which is simply a binary relation, which is irreflexive, transitive, and locally
finite.
So locally finite just means the set of elements y between any pair x and z is finite.
And on the right, this is a Hasse diagram, which we've seen earlier.
The edges, the lines in this diagram represent relations, such that the earlier nodes are
drawn below the later nodes.
And the relations which are implied by transitivity, so, for example, I know that x precedes y
in this puzzle set on the right.
I don't draw that explicitly because it's implied by the existence of these intermediate
relations, which are called links.
So those are relations and links.
The chain is a totally ordered subset of the puzzle set.
The subset in which every pair is ordered are the relations.
An anti-chain is a subset which has no relations among its elements.
The height of a puzzle set, this will be an important concept for recovering some notion
of time from the theory.
So the height is the length of the longest chain.
And the width, analogously, is the cardinality of the largest anti-chain.
The notion of a causal interval or an order interval is sometimes useful, as we've seen
earlier, for example, the set of elements between x and y form a causal interval.
And furthermore, maximal and minimal elements are useful.
Maximum elements have nothing to do with the future, and minimal elements have nothing
to do with the past.
So I've given a precise mathematical description of the fundamental objects of the theory.
That's the kinematical structure of the puzzle set.
But in order to understand what it means, whatever it becomes, is space-time.
I need to say something about how to connect that with everyday experience, or if you'd
have experience of theoretical physicists working on quantum gravity.
So the idea is to describe the correspondence between the discrete and the continuum in
terms of an embedding.
So an embedding is in order to preserve a map from the puzzle set to a space-time, which
is in pi here.
The two elements are related to the puzzle set, and their image points are related to the
space-time.
The faithful embedding is one which furthermore preserves the correspondence between number
and volume, which means that the number of puzzle set elements which get mapped into
some region of space-time is a plus-on random variable whose mean is v, where v is the volume
of that space-time.
So that gives you an idea of what I mean by an atom of space-time, an element of the puzzle
set.
And then furthermore, the space-time cannot possess structure at scales smaller than
the screener's scale.
So the idea then is that the puzzle set itself is fundamental, but this correspondence with
the continuum is necessary so that you understand how to think about the puzzle set, what does
it mean physically?
And so the idea is that if there exists a faithful embedding from the puzzle set into some space-time,
then we say that that space-time is a good large scale approximation of the underlying
puzzle set.
And so this is a picture of a puzzle set which arises from sprinkling into a region of a
two-dimensional Minkowski space.
The points are given by a plus-on process in the square region, and the green lines represent
the links in the puzzle set.
One-card invariance comes out of this?
Is it Lorentz and Merck?
Yes.
So this is, well, the sprinkling into the entire Minkowski space is Lorentz and Merck.
And so why is that?
Because it depends only on the, on average.
So it depends only on the volume.
The description of the lattice depends only on the space-time line, which is what Merck
wanted to do.
So by contrast, on the right here, I've drawn another sort of lattice.
So the red points describe a regular diamond lattice, if you like, in the Minkowski space
point.
And the green points represent that same lattice, for which it's viewed from the highly-amused
observer.
So there, it's pretty clear that this lattice is not there in sequence.
It turns out that the random lattice is the random sequence.
So we can already say some things about time, about clock time, from what I've told you
so far.
So the idea is to recover something like a time-like distance you measure using a clock
on the puzzle set.
So we know that in special relativity or general relativity, a time-like geodesic is an extremal
chronological curve.
And so not that because of the Lorentzian signature, the extremal curve of interest is in fact
the longest curve.
So I want to know the proper time separation of two time-like related events in space-time
when I look for the longest geodesic, which connects them.
And so the idea is to do the another thing on the puzzle set to look at the length of
the chain connecting a pair of points section 1 as doing the time-like separation.
So this is a picture of the set of all longest chains between a pair of points and a sprinkling
in the chemistry space.
So you can see the set of longest chains highlighted in blue here.
And then right here on the right well on Gregory, we know that this length of the longest chain
is proportional to the time-like separation of these two events in the limit of large density
of sprinkling.
So now what about dynamics?
So the first thing you might think about when writing down the dynamical law maybe to think
in terms of Hamiltonian evolution.
So the Hamiltonian is a generator of the time evolution of the system.
However, when thinking about quantum gravity, it's difficult because, well, for example,
we don't have a preferred notion of time.
So in order to avoid questions of that sort, it seems natural to turn attention to the
Lagrangian formulation of dynamics and then integrate Lagrangian to get an action.
And so later on we'll do something rather like that.
So the idea is to write down the dynamics in terms of the sum over histories.
So if you want to think for a moment about a classical stochastic theory that assigns
a probability p to every history in the space of histories gamma, then I can write down
the probability of some events, event in the sense of probability theory, the subset of histories.
Probability of an event is just the sum of the probabilities of each history in the set.
The quantum theory.
So then we can do something just given by, finally, we can describe an amplitude with
the history gamma given by the exponential of the action.
And then we can do something like break down the probability of, again, an event in the
set of histories in terms of some of this form, which is a combination of the coherent
and coherent sum of histories.
And the idea then is to write down something like a quantum measure to describe the dynamics
in terms of some quantum measure on the set of histories of the theory, which will look
something like this.
I'm in the description where there's something like a final delta function that's
on truncation time t to give us a unitary, to maintain unitary.
Of course, we don't know what the exact form is.
You go here and it's functional. The quantum measure for gamma should look like this.
Let's look more at the closed theory.
Okay.
So since the quantum theory is complicated, let's go back and just think about the classical
theory, but in this case the classical stochastic theory.
And to get you in the mood for it, imagine the simplest possible dynamic of law, which
is just to take all the histories, put them in a bag, and then pick one out at random.
And so if you do that for the set of coin tosses on 40 coins, this is the fourth sample
history, as you might get, of coin tosses, 40 coin tosses of a coin.
And what I want to ask is, which is the typical sequence?
So which sequence would you expect to arise when you pull one of these out of the bag?
Does anyone see it?
Well, I know two of them that it's not.
The one.
Yes.
The one is the superman.
So now we can do the same thing for more complicated structures such as a graph.
So take the set of all simple graphs on 10 nodes, put them in the bag, pull one out
at random.
Which sort of graph would we expect to see from this one?
Well, looks different, too.
It's hard to see it in the picture, but the edges are between the nearby nodes.
So this has some structure, which is not generic in that sense.
So the idea is that what will come out is an erudite-stranding random graph.
What would the probability be?
Equals I have.
Well, finally, I never know what this one is.
So that would be the second here.
Why isn't it flat?
Oh, this is something close to the big graph.
Yes, it has many relations, and I then get started to look more and more like that.
Okay.
I would like to give this on a partially erudite set, a finite partially erudite set.
What's the typical finite partial erudite look like?
It turns out the answer is surprising.
It's in fact the bottom object.
So these have a very regular structure.
It has three layers.
It's very close to N over 2.
The elements in the middle layer has close to N over 4 elements in the top.
The bottom layer has a little bunch of relations.
It turns out that there's a theorem, like that in the Rothschild, that sends the...
As the number of elements gets large, almost every partial erudite is always flat.
This one is something like a sprinkling into Nekowski's face sign.
And the others are different ones.
So the theory faces a big challenge.
How can we get something like a space sign, which we've seen.
We expected something like a sprinkling into Nekowski's face sign.
Out of the theory in which almost every history looks like this.
In fact, a super exponential number of these histories dominates in a super exponential form.
So you might be concerned how can a locally dependent action never overcome such a dominance of these other Rothschild partial erudites.
So now I'd like to say some words about dynamics.
A different approach to writing down the dynamics.
One which is based on the process, which I started with, of sequential growth.
So the idea is to write down a dynamical law for causal sets, a stochastic dynamical law, in terms of the growth process.
In which the causal set grows one element at a time, beginning with the empty set.
So the idea is that this is a stochastic process.
In fact, it's a Markov process if you regard the entire causal set as a state of a Markov chain.
And the probabilities are based on three principles.
So if we didn't place any restrictions, if we just wrote down the most general stochastic law of this form,
it would turn out that there's an enormous number of possible theories.
So in order to get something reasonable, we have to impose some physically motivated conditions on this set of possible dynamical laws of this form.
So we impose three conditions.
One is internal temporality, which is that the causal set only grows only to the future.
So this is some hint of the, well, I'll get back to that.
The second, which is going to be very important, is the screen journal covariance.
So this condition, the idea is that the probability of arriving at any finite causal set should be independent of the order in which the nodes of the causal set arose in the growth process.
And so we call this the screen journal covariance.
And the third, we call Bell causality, is a causality condition which is intended to reproduce the notion of causality which could violate the Bell inequality.
Perhaps reasonable for a possible theory.
And so the idea is that the sequence of the growth is, in a sense, erased by this screen journal covariance condition, although there's some shadow of the sequence which is maintained in this internal temporality.
So this is a picture of the growth process.
This is a diagram which, a diagram of the poset of finite causal sets where I've drawn an arrow between any pair of causal sets if the upper causal set could arise by adding a single maximal element to the lower causal set.
So any upward-directed chain in this diagram or path describes one growth process of the poset set.
For example, the blue path here is one particular way of drawing this flat element partial order.
What are the symbols?
The symbols are decorations that I can describe in the fact that Chris had a lot to say earlier about.
You can ask, for example, how many ways are there to go from this causal set to this 4-element causal set to this 5-element causal set?
You can think that there's two, because the new element that arises is this rightmost maximal element.
So the future of this disconnected element in one of these two is two different ways.
So that's if you do these queues of transition probabilities.
So it turns out that you've just given these conditions.
You can write down a relatively unique family of the numerical laws of this form,
which gives it the probability of a transition from an n-element causal set to an n-element causal set.
The expression for these transition probabilities is given by, well, it includes some quantities of pi and m,
which are order invariance of the past of the newborn element, which gives rise to the transition.
And furthermore, a collection of free parameters, in fact, an infinite sequence of free parameters of the theory,
which you can think of as analogous to a couple of those things, the standard models.
These are parameters of the theory which are not determined by principles you can tell so far.
This is an infinite number of free parameters.
Yes, it's infinite.
So in what sense is it constrained?
Yeah, so it sounds like a big number.
So I'm just a dumb physicist. I can't understand really big numbers of coupling constants.
Yeah, so at the end of the point, that is only countable, which in a sense isn't so bad.
So a simple thing I can say is that the observable universe is finite as well.
As far as we know.
As far as we can see.
So in that sense, it's finite.
One important thing to say is that, I'll get to it later, but there's a sense in which there's only one sequence of parameters,
a one parameter family of sequences that are relevant, which after a long time, if you wait long enough,
the one parameter family of sequences is relevant, and that's given by this transitive percolation dynamic.
So the pn is given by the one parameter p, which is a probability between zero and one.
So pn is this combination at the end.
So transitive percolation is a very simple model.
The idea, so p is a very simple meaning.
If I take any causal set, say this, we'll go back to this four-element causal set, and I add a new element.
I want to work out the probability to go to this five-element causal set.
All I do is tip out the unfair coin, the coin that leads P.
Once for each element, I'm going to draw the new element above all the ones today.
I'm going to take the transitive, take the fast closure with those points so that they maintain transitive.
So before I go on, I want to give a brief outline of some of the results that come out of thinking about time and gravity in this way.
So much are based on the model as I've described before, and so much are quantum in the sense that I'll get to in a moment.
So one is that the model gives rise to a cyclic cosmology.
It's something like evolving coupling constants.
So pn evolved under the cyclic cosmology.
The second is that it gives rise to a considerably early universe.
The third is that you can think of a complex network such as the Internet, which are ubiquitous in the real world.
It turns out that this sort of thinking can give rise to something like an internal knot of time.
This is sort of an intrinsic notion of time, which is separate from the external clock time.
And then I'll talk about a quantum approach.
So the quantum approach will be based on, again, on the sum over histories on the Feynman-Pathener rule.
And so we can ask some questions which are relevant to time of that approach.
So one simple question is, when do we expect the Feynman-Rossschild called the sets to dominate these three-layer generic partial layers?
How large does that have to be in order for them to dominate the set of histories?
The second question you might ask is, are almost all histories roughly time reversal symmetric?
If the set of all histories is really described by the Feynman-Rossschild rules, then you might ask, are they all time reversal symmetric?
The third question is, is the dynamics able to escape from the Feynman-Rossschild partial layers?
So if we impose a reasonable dynamic law, then it gives us something other than these three-layer generic causal sets.
And then, is there current observational evidence which is hinting at the way of thinking about quantum cosmology at this point?
So terms of percolation, it turns out it's fairly simple to understand.
It's a completely homogeneous model where the future of any element is independent of anything space-like to it.
However, due to random fluctuations, it's inhomogeneous in time.
And in particular, there are theorems which prove that there's an infinite number of pulses.
And there's some results on the size of these intermediate regions for the transfer of percolation dynamics.
So after one of these pulses, we get something which is described by an originary dynamics,
which is simply a transfer of percolation condition on the fact that each new element is the future of the pulses.
And so if we think about it, the universe extends to a volume of something like 1 over P, one of these pulses.
Which I'll get to in a moment.
So the theory then gives rise to something which we call cosmic renormalization.
So the originary dynamics is formally Markovian because the entire passage theory is taken as a current state, however it has a long memory.
And so the idea of this cosmic renormalization is that you can describe the growth in terms of cycles of the universe,
or each cycle is described by some collection of these coupling constants, P, N.
And in terms that you can describe the sequential growth dynamics in terms of an effective dynamics
in each of these cycles which is given by a particular sequence.
And these sequences get transformed by a cosmic renormalization process, as we call it,
the cycles of attraction and expansion of the universe.
And then it turns out that there's an attractive fixed point of this cosmic renormalization process,
which is in fact the transfer of percolation dynamics.
So in this sense the transfer of percolation is a natural attractor of this renormalization flow of the dynamics.
And then for this particular sequence P, N is given by this formula.
It should be the result of the infinite number of cycles.
So back to the originary percolation, so in the limit where P is very small,
when nevertheless we condition on the case that each new element appears in the future of the post,
then we get something like exponential expansion.
So we get something like, we get something that expands very rapidly from the post.
However, we don't get something which is exactly the space-time manifold of qr.
So this is a picture of the originary percolation process.
This is a picture of a much larger realization of the originary percolation.
So it turns out that this causal set is the citerlite in the sense that if you look at the number of elements in every order interval of height L,
and you plot that as a function of value, you get something which is not so dissimilar from what we would expect from big, less one-dimensional citerlite.
So the internet, so network sciences, the idea is to describe the structure of networks which are ubiquitous in the real world.
Yet, part of the goal of this, the goal is again to write down a theory, write down a model which describes these networks in an effective way.
And so one of the models of these networks is based on something very similar to what I've described.
It's based on a sprinkling, again it puts on there in a process into not a Laurentian space-time but a Riemannian mathematical.
So this is a picture of a two-dimensional disc within the H2, within the hyperbolic plane.
And it is to connect any pair of points which are, whose distance is less than the radius of this disc.
So this yellow point here connects to this.
So because of the structure of the hyperbolic geometry, this yellow point connects to this red disc.
So it turns out that this model bears a striking resemblance to the model of the sprinkling, which we call instead an inter-citer space-time.
The idea is that, so this is a picture of a hyperbolic disc.
And this is a picture of the considered space-time, the center manifold around it.
So the idea is I want to write down a simple mapping from the hyperbolic disc to the considered space-time.
Such that the nodes in the hyperbolic disc give map to points, give map to points in the considered space-time.
And the connections described by this model that I just described, this diagram are given by the causal relations of the considered space-time.
So this is, one interesting feature of this is that in the considered space-time we have, of course, the notion of time.
And so under this mapping it suggests that the radius, which is implied by this model of sprinkling into a hyperbolic geometry, is capturing the notion of some intrinsic notion of time in the considered space-time.
So there's some sense in which there's a time, an intrinsic time in the internet.
Okay, so now I want to talk about the last few minutes of our quantum model.
So the idea is to write down the Lorentzian functional integral for gravity.
So it looks something like this where we have some expression for Einstein's overdaction for gravity.
In the case of causal sets, this becomes much simpler.
It's simply a path sum over causal sets.
And yet we can make it simpler, rather simpler by restricting this onto causal sets of experimentality.
So if we have an effective expression for Einstein's overdaction for causal sets, then we can write down a path amplitude.
And so the idea is to write down something which is based on the screen-down version.
So we can write down a down version operator on a causal set, which mimics the behavior of the down version in the continuum.
So the idea is quite simple.
If we have a point, an element x in a causal set, and I have a scalar field, 5, to find them in a causal set.
So some math from the causal set elements gives you real numbers, say.
And I want to write down an expression which behaves like the down version operator on that point.
It turns out to be a fairly simple sum over field values of the causal set elements of the past of x,
where there's a weight which goes into the coefficient weight, which depends on the layer of how far,
essentially, how many elements are there between the candidate element y to the past of x and x.
So layer one or the set of elements of the length directly to layer two are those that have exactly one element in between,
and layer three are those that have two elements in between.
And one can do an analogous thing in four dimensions, and one gets a similar sort of expression.
If you want to know what this looks like for large density, this is the same picture, but for very large sprinkling density.
It could be some idea of the intuition for how this would look like for large ends.
So these are, again, the same layers, the same four layers to the past of the element.
So then the idea is that in curve space time, one can show that under certain conditions,
one can show that in the limit of large sprinkling density, this delibration operator that you wrote down,
its excretion value, the average over sprinklings, gives rise to not just the delibration in the continuum,
but the delibration minus curvature correction, which is proportional to Ritchie's scalar in that space time.
And so if you apply this box operator in the puzzle set to a constant function of minus two,
then you can get something which you might expect to be proportional to the Ritchie's scalar.
And so then using this, one can integrate this sum over the puzzle set elements
and get an expression for the Einstein-Houbert action on the puzzle set,
where the terms and the action is a very simple system in alternating sum of terms,
alternating coefficients.
For each of these terms, it's just the number of order intervals of a given part of the melody.
And so then using this, we can write down an expression for the partition function.
So here's an example of how to compute the expression of what these terms are for a very simple puzzle set.
It's kind of the number of order intervals of a given part of the melody.
And then the usual way to handle something like this is to do a weight rotation.
Our key gets rotated to imaginary time.
But in the case of the puzzle sets, we can't do exactly that.
So we could do something similar, which is perform an analytic continuation
in an arbitrary coefficient of beta for this one in the action.
So then doing this, we can grasp the theory in terms of the Euclidean sum
which can be analyzed using a surplus of money or though.
So what are the results?
So we asked before.
So if we take the limit as, if you like, you could think of the space where it goes to infinity.
Really, I'm just saying the coefficient of the action goes to zero.
So this is a very simple theory, which is simply a uniform measure in the sample space.
We're back to just putting all the histories in a bag, picking one out at random.
What does it look like?
We know by theorem of Feynman and Rothschild that almost every partial letter should look something like this.
So this is the opposite of a classical limit when h bar goes to zero.
What is this?
So what is this supposed to be corresponding with?
Is this a corresponding to this whole chart argument or something different?
Well, maybe for the moment, just forget about the h bar going to infinity and just have beta to zero.
We can get back to the main questions.
So how big is big?
So the way to see that is to focus on the height of the causal set.
So height is, again, the length of the longest chain of the causal set.
So it's something like the total length and time of the causal set.
And so we can ask how does this distribution of heights of the causal set vary with the cardinality of the causal set?
So here we're looking at the distribution of heights for the first nine values of n.
And so it's a little bit confusing in this diagram.
So each value of n gives a histogram where each color is a different value of the height.
Perhaps the most interesting will be height of three, which is given by this dark blue.
So as n grows to be six or seven, there's a maximum, the fraction of partial letters that have height three,
and the steps that go down.
So we can ask what happens to those.
And it turns out that to the binomial simulation, we can measure the fraction of partial letters, which have height three,
and we get this very complicated.
As n gets large, say, after 70 or 80, it starts to behave like one would expect from a person.
However, we get some very surprising behavior around n equals 32 or so.
So the structure of the space of the history, the space of the causal set is somewhat surprising.
There is no indication that this would happen.
And then it's in the same picture at the long scale.
If you look at the difference between the number of maximal elements and the number of minimal elements,
this is on, I think, 58, the causal sets of 58 elements.
You see this in something like a p, which is away from zero.
And it turns out that what we find is that, in fact, for naturally labeled causal sets,
so causal sets, which are labeled based on the order in which the nodes would arise from the growth process,
if you look at that set of partial orders, then it's not the case that almost all histories are time symmetric
in the sense that the number of minimal elements is close to the number of maximal elements.
So there's some hint in which, if you like, the theory could give something like a narrow time just from an entropy and a set of histories.
And then the final question about the dynamics, so can we escape from the Feynman-Rossschild orders?
So this is a histogram of, again, the height for a 64-element causal set.
So I'm showing in blue what you've seen already, the distribution of heights for 64-element causal sets.
You can see it's p to h equals 3.
And so now we can ask what happens if we send beta to be something other than zero,
if we allow coefficient of the action to be non-zero.
And in that case, you can see that we get something that's distinctly different from the Feynman-Rossschild orders.
In fact, the most popular height or causal sets which are described by this analytically-continued action,
beta equal to minus 0.57 is 5 instead of 3.
So the dynamics is able to escape.
They're pretty much the same.
And then I'll just close with a brief remark that there's some recent,
so this is a quote from a recent paper from January saying,
the current measurements of the low and high spreadsheet universe or intention would be restricted
ourselves to the standard six-parameter model of the plan to send you.
So this is a mitigation from cosmology that there may be some problems with the usual plan to send you.
It's an important model.
In fact, it suggests that the cosmology of constant...
So a prediction of this way of thinking about all the set dynamics in terms of sequential growth
is that the cosmology of constant is not in fact constant, but varies.
And it undergoes some random fluctuation.
And so the evidence for something like this is building.
And so I'll just conclude by going back to my original reason.
Results, so there's something from the pre-continent for sequential growth descriptions.
And then something from the newer results.
The Pevenrothschild causal sets dominate for some end, maybe a couple of hundred or so.
It's not the case that almost all histories are roughly time-reversal symmetric,
but it's some indication of perhaps a narrow time in the space of history itself.
Dynamics is able to escape from the Pevenrothschild partial loaders.
There may be some hints from observational evidence.
It lends support to ideas with this problem.
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
Of course, I have a really basic question, which is just if you have a space time that's a solution
of the Einstein-Field equations, and then you have a faithful embedding or sprinkling of that,
what's the relationship between the causal set dynamics that's describing the growth
and the dynamical evolution you've described for say the, you know,
if you took the initial value formulation with G or R?
Are they related in some way or is the causal set like generation,
the dynamics there, is that a completely different?
That was our original hope.
So what dynamics would give you general relativity?
It's kind of the most optimistic thing you can imagine.
It doesn't.
And some of what I said earlier in describing the behavior of that theory in terms of the cyclic cosmology
and the sort of general relativity is maybe an approximate but incorrect description
and the causal set dynamics is really the dynamical law.
Well, that's the idea. That's the end idea.
Of course, we don't expect literally, so this theory is classical the way I described it.
So the classical stochastic theory.
So we don't expect it to be the final theory by any means.
But it gives some interesting hints about some of the things that we might expect to arise from phonogravity.
One thing I can say on the positive side is that after one of these posts,
the early universe described by the expansion of the growth of the causal set
has some properties in common with three plus one dimensional considers.
So in that sense...
There's all kinds of things like the singularity theorems,
but anything like that.
So when you're talking about the cyclic cosmology,
if the dynamics is...
I mean, is the dynamics so different from general relativity
that when you're talking about the post and the neck,
all of the thoughts about singularities and worries that would come in classical GR,
those are just inappropriate because the dynamics are so different or...
So what sort of concerns are you having?
Well, I mean, do you have...
Is it a kinematical effect?
Is it a violation of the energy conditions?
Why is it that you have a post then?
So in the cycle, you don't have a singularity, presumably, but...
It's a dynamical effect.
In fact, it arises from random fluctuations.
If you wait long enough...
Well, under the transfer of percolation dynamics,
by random fluctuations, it will collapse to a single element.
And then subsequent to that collapse,
you can get some early universe which is considered like properties.
So is that a singularity?
Well, I think it's a little bit premature to really say too much more
of the connection with the general relativity.
So the two in the middle of the time reversal symmetry
and the Breitman-Ross challenge.
So those are based on, like, really, I mean,
space-tied small causal sets, right?
Tens of nodes, right?
Very small.
So you think that they're really addictive
of what happens for larger causal sets?
This I do.
Okay, so let's...
So by this, the concrete result is that the...
If you look at the difference between the number of maximals,
the relative value of the difference between the number of maximum elements
and the number of minimum elements,
or causal sets on n elements,
and you divide that by n,
you get exactly a different version of one quarter rather than zero.
So is that kind of...
like all the nodes between here and here or something?
Here and here or something?
That'd be a time solution, I suppose?
Well, so if you're thinking of this as quantum cosmology
and the dynamics are very simple,
we're just pulling the history out of the bag in this thing.
This is the universe, then...
Okay.
Can you feel the tens of millions?
This volume, I've got one second or something,
the network in there.
Would I see that as symmetry?
It's possible.
So that's kind of the idea that some of the things that we're learning here
about the structure of causal sets
on relatively small number of elements
may be somehow relevant for the behavior of physics of small scales.
That's not a very small...
I mean, I really mean that, yeah.
This volume of space...
like this spatial volume of one second.
Well, one second is here, so this is...
So that's what I'm asking about.
I mean, am I going to see the effects of that asymmetry
in a macroscopic scale or something?
Well, I think that's a...
I don't want to overstate the case, so...
Of course, in the real dynamical law,
it won't be of this simple case.
It won't be simply grabbing a sphere of the bag.
It'll be given by some dynamics such as...
given by the section that I wrote down at the finite temperature.
So in that case,
well, we hope not to get these much of partial loaders,
but I'm just suggesting here that there may be another route
to arriving at the...
an arrow of time in cosmology,
which is different from the usual way of thinking about entropy
and matter fields and all.
So there may be a...
a different sort of dynamical mechanism that gives rise to an arrow of time
that comes from the structure of the space of history.
You saw some interesting things happening around 32
or whatever it was in your graphs that you had to skip over a bit quickly.
Those are finite and are effects of some kind.
Do you understand what they are?
No.
32 is about the square root of longer.
I've got no idea if they'll root in...
Where would that scale of a rise?
You might expect that...
it kind of has to do with...
maybe with fluctuations of it.
So one of the things we found is that the way that the...
the kind of moustache out there in the stated
and in particular in the publication by Graham Brightwell
describes the fluctuations and the cardinality of these top and bottom layers,
which fall off like square root of n.
And so...
those are arbitrarily labeled puzzle sets
or if you like unlabeled puzzle sets, they're almost the same.
So what this is saying is that if you impose what we call a natural labeling
just by patching a number each puzzle set element
which tells you which stage of the growth process it arose
then the asymptotic form changes slightly.
They're still very close to n over two elements in the middle layer.
But the probability of...
what we seem to get is that the cardinality of the bottom and top layers
is in fact uniformly distributed
between zero and n over two.
So that's where the one quarter...
So you're right.
So if n is thirty-two then n over four is eight.
And so then the square root of a is not too...
is large compared to eight.
Maybe that's something that comes up.
Okay.
Just to add to that.
Okay.
So the Cleveland Rothschild paper
gives sort of an asymptotic description
of the types of puzzle or process that you get.
The dominant one from large n is these three-layer ones.
But then the sub-dominant ones are ones with four layers
and then the sub-subdominant ones are ones with five layers.
And for small n there are coefficients in front of those
which might make the five-layer ones or the four-layer ones.
Awesome.
Well, I think it's time for a little more question.
I just want to ask how do you like the...
either house store for the special dimension scale
and different dimensions?
Yeah, so we have this like,
dimensional reduction in that.
It seems intuitive if there...
the dimension of these types of puzzles
that should be very large.
Because they're very degenerate.
So I imagine if we measured something like this
quite full dimension of these things
it would get something very large.
So, yeah, so of course we want the theory
to give rise to something which is smaller dimension.
It'll be finite, for example.
And so,
so this...
result that for finite beta
the height seems to get larger
is some points in that direction.
Forgetting something that has some non-trivial
temporal extension
out of the theory.
So that's a necessary condition
to get something finite dimensional.
It's difficult to say too much.
All right.
Thank you.
Good, so thank you.
