I was 13 when I first got access to a computer.
My parents bought me a Macintosh in 1984 when I was 8 years old.
I was in sixth grade.
I learned to code in college.
Freshman year, first semester, intro to computer science.
I wrote a program to play Tic-Tac-Toe.
I think it was pretty humble beginnings.
I think the first program I wrote asked things like,
what's your favorite color?
Or how old are you?
I first learned how to make a green circle
and a red square appear on the screen.
The first time I actually had something come up
and say, hello world.
I made a computer do that.
It was just astonishing.
Learning how to program didn't start off
as wanting to learn all of computer science
or trying to master this discipline or anything like that.
It just started off because I wanted
to do this one simple thing.
I wanted to make something that was fun for myself
and my sisters.
And I wrote this little program and then basically just
add a little bit to it.
And then when I needed to learn something new,
I looked it up, either in a book or on the internet,
and then added a little bit to it.
It's really not unlike kind of playing an instrument or something
or playing a sport.
It starts out being very intimidating,
but you kind of get the hang of it over time.
Coding is something that can be learned.
And I know it can be intimidating.
A lot of things are intimidating.
But what isn't?
A lot of the coding that people do is actually fairly simple.
It's more about the process of breaking down problems
than sort of coming up with complicated algorithms
as people traditionally think about it.
You don't have to be a genius to know how to code.
You need to be determined.
Addition, subtraction, that's about it.
You should probably know your multiplication tables.
You don't have to be a genius to code.
Do you have to be a genius to read?
Even if you want to become a race car driver or play baseball
or build a house, all of these things
have been turned upside down by software.
What it is is computers are everywhere.
You want to work in agriculture?
Do you want to work in entertainment?
Do you want to work in manufacturing?
It's just all over.
Here we are in 2013.
We all depend on technology to communicate, to bank,
information, and none of us know how to read and write code.
When I was in school, I was in this after-school group
called the WizKids.
And when people found out, they laughed at me
and you know all these things.
And I'm like, man, I don't care.
I think it's cool.
And, you know, I'm learning a lot.
And some of my friends have jobs.
Our policy is literally to hire as many talented engineers
as we can find.
The whole limit in the system is just
that there just aren't enough people who are trained
and have these skills today.
To get the very best people we try to make the office
as awesome as possible.
You have a fantastic chef.
Free food.
Breakfast, lunch, and dinner.
Free laundry.
Snacks.
Even places to play in video games and scooters.
There's all these kind of interesting things around the
office and places where people can play or relax.
You have a fantastic chef.
Free food.
Breakfast, lunch, and dinner.
Free laundry.
Snacks.
Places where people can play or relax or go to think or play
music or be creative.
Whether you're trying to make a lot of money or whether you
just want to change the world, computer programming is
an incredibly empowering skill to learn.
I think if someone had told me that software is really
about humanity, that it's really about helping people
by using computer technology, it would have changed
my outlook a lot earlier.
To be able to actually come up with an idea and then see it
in your hands and then be able to press a button and have it
be in millions of people's hands, I think we're the first
generation in the world that's really ever had
that kind of experience.
Just to think that you can start something in your college
dorm room and you can have a set of people who haven't built
a big company before come together and built something
that a billion people use as part of their daily lives is
just crazy to think about.
It's humbling and it's amazing.
The programmers of tomorrow are the wizards of the future.
You know, you're going to look like you have magic powers
compared to everybody else.
I think it's amazing.
I think it's the closest thing we have to a superpower.
Great coders are today's rock stars.
That's it.
