Thank you for joining us.
It's lovely to have you here.
Thank you.
It's wonderful.
Finally, being back at UPI after this long absence.
Well, thank you for coming.
I was struggling with ways to introduce you to our audience because there's so many things
that, you know, theoretical physicist and author and world traveler and philosopher.
So I decided I didn't want to introduce you.
I want you to tell me, pretend I'm a stranger on a plane and I just sat down next to you
and I buckled up and I say, Hey, what do you do for a living?
That's a bad way.
I would say hi.
My name is Carlo.
I was born in Italy and I go around to talk with people, ideas, I try to do them.
What about you?
I talk to people like you trying to figure out what they do.
So it's a good thing we're sat next to each other on this plane.
You didn't mention theoretical physics.
Is that because what you consider yourself doing is more just talking to people about
a variety of subjects?
No.
If you have to define me what I am, primarily, I'm definitely a theoretical physicist.
The rest of the things that I do are part motivating, part around that.
So my competence, if I have any, it's in theoretical physics.
I don't like to define myself, even in front of myself.
So I'd like to keep things open.
And when I started writing books for the large public, there was a moment in which I was
telling myself wait a moment.
Are you just turning into a writer instead of a scientist?
And then I realized that this is a meaningless question.
I'm just doing what I'm doing and things are connected.
The only meaningful question is how many hours I devote for one and the other.
That's my view.
Right.
Well, I ask partly because you're currently, you have a position in London, Ontario at the
Rotman School of Philosophy, which seems, at least on the surface, to be a strange place
for a theoretical physicist to be.
Can you explain what you're doing at a school of philosophy?
I talk with philosophers.
I love to talk with philosophers because I think it's useful for physics.
I have this convention since a long time.
I was interested in philosophy since I've been interested in philosophy since I was
a kid.
I guess when I was a student studying physics, I also continued studying philosophy.
And I think that the clear-cut separation is a bit artificial and is damaging for both
disciplines.
How so?
Well, first of all, of course, not all physics needs to talk with philosophy.
In fact, most of physics does not need to talk with philosophy.
If you have to solve the Maxwell equations for a certain antenna, you just happily ignore
philosophers for that particular problem.
And a lot of physics is just concrete specific problems.
But of course, there's a part of physics which is not to apply knowledge that we have
for solving problems, is to find out what is the knowledge we have at the basis.
And that part, it's a kind of thing that Einstein, Maxwell, Newton, Galileo, Boltzmann were doing
for Heisenberg.
And that kind of activity traditionally was done by people who were schooled in philosophy.
I mean, Einstein had deep knowledge of philosophy.
And so Heisenberg in Newton, Galileo, he was an avid reader of Aristotle.
Because there's a mistake in the understanding of physics and science in general.
Science is just collecting data and writing equations that predict this data.
I mean, that's just a little part of it.
The largest part of it is figuring out a set of notion, a concept of structure, how to
think about that.
When you go from the Ptolemaic to the Copernical system, you don't just collect data and make
it.
You rearrange the order of the world in a different way.
And you do the same when that's what Einstein did, that's what Maxwell and Faraday did,
that's what Heisenberg did, and Boltzmann and so on.
So the core problems in fundamental physics today, like quantum gravity, the problem in
which I am, do require the same kind of rethinking the conceptual basis of a discipline.
And the philosophers are very good in that, not because they solve the problem of physics.
I mean, the relativity was found by Einstein, the physics, not philosophy.
But as a physicist who was talking, listening to what the philosophers were saying, philosophy
has a capacity of critical thinking, which is very deep, has imagination, philosophy
come out with completely different ways of thinking about reality.
Sometimes crazy, we don't care about that, but that's our point.
Sometimes very useful.
Sometimes I think theoretical physicists come up with ideas of reality that strike me as
crazy too.
Sometimes they do, sometimes they have perhaps too much crazy, and they should listen to
philosophers who say, well, come on, don't exaggerate, guys.
Are there certain open questions in physics that you think would most benefit from input
from philosophers?
Yes, and they change, of course, because physics is a process, and right now the number of
open questions where philosophical thinking, philosophical clarity is useful.
Some of them, for instance, have to do with time.
In trying to write a quantum theory of gravity, of course, space and time change have to change,
because now we're looking at the quantum property of space and time.
We have so many prejudices about how space should be, and how time should be, and a careful
philosophical analysis of what we know, I find it useful.
That's what I think I'm exchanging with philosophers in touch with.
Even in simple things, one very well-known problem about time is that the past is different
from the future, and so what's the root of this difference between past and future?
Is that something intrinsic in time by itself or not?
The answer is not just academic, well, yeah, it is academic, but the question is important,
because if you want to understand more, understand how quantum gravity works, we have to get
clarity about these things.
The nature of observer is another one.
We now are in this funny situation with quantum mechanics, which is a fantastically good theory,
but it's formulated in terms of an observer.
So why?
Do you need a guy with a PhD in physics to formulate, understand how the things work?
No, I mean things work by themselves without an observer.
So how to make sense of that?
These are questions that physicists have been struggling with, and they are, and they will
come up with a solution.
I think solutions are being debated around the table, but philosophers can listen, contribute,
and provide perspective.
I was struck when I have your book here, reality is not what it seems about quantum gravity,
and we'll get more into quantum gravity, but what struck me most was the book essentially
begins with the ancient Greeks.
Quantum gravity and loop quantum gravity are relatively new fields of physics, but to explain
them you went back thousands of years.
Can you tell us what inspired you to go so far back to bring us to the present of quantum
gravity?
That book, reality is not what it seems, it's actually the first popular book that they
wrote about science, and I wrote it quite late after so many people had told me why
didn't you write the book, popular book about quantum gravity.
It was at least 20 years that people were telling me that and pushing, and some publishers
also, come on Carlo, you write nice, why don't you write the people, you have these beautiful
science, why don't you write about that?
Also, because people seek and tire with string theory, they can't start string theory anymore,
so let's do some good quantum gravity.
But I didn't know how to do it, because how do you tell quantum gravity to people, right?
You have to digest generativity of quantum mechanics, it's a long story.
I hesitated because I wanted to do physics and not waste time writing, then I started
considering the idea, but I couldn't find the right way.
And then it just was a flash, I had so many things to do, but I couldn't organize them,
and I mentioned in one of the preface of my books, and I don't remember which edition,
I was driving from Italy to France, where I had moved at the time, and in the middle
of the night, and then I said, well, I need to explain this concept, I need to explain
this concept, I need to explain this concept, I need to tell the reader what is a field,
is an electric field, it's not clear.
I need to tell the reader what exactly we mean by geometry, it's not what we use, it's subtle.
I need to tell the reader that particles are not precisely particles, so there's some
discreteness, some granularity.
And then I started thinking, maybe I should say when these ideas were born, so the ideas
needed to understand, if I tell how they were born, and suddenly the entire history, the
narration came in front of my mind.
And of course, I just talk about the Moquitus, I talk about Galileo, I talk about Faraday,
I talk about Maxwell, what problem they were addressing, how they come out with that particular
solution, and why we're using this notion now, and how this notion built up, changed,
and came all the way to quantum gravity.
Now, this evolution of the world, the time of the cart, in the Renaissance, this idea
that this is rest extents, and then Newton comes and says, okay, I got the world, is
a space, time passes, and there are some little stones that move around with forces.
That's how it works.
And then Faraday comes, I don't know why, you're missing something, there's a field.
Okay, and Maxwell put order in the field.
And then Einstein comes and says, look, the space and the time are actually mixed, so
you should not have two different things, you should think to talk about that.
Space time.
Space time.
And then Einstein 10 years later realized that the space time is a field.
Wow, okay, now we connect the notion of field to space time.
And quantum mechanics connect the notion of a particle with a field.
So unless you go through the way these things developed, you don't get them, I think.
So I decided to write a book without details, but with a core flow of ideas.
That's how it came out.
And when that epiphany hit you while driving, I know what happened after that.
You know what happened after that, I got a ticket.
Because you were driving too fast?
I was driving too fast, it was empty in the night highway, I was so excited, so excited.
The first chapter is going to be soon.
And then somebody I hear, wow, wow, wow, shit.
And I look at the speedometer, I don't know how you call it in English.
And I'm going, you know, 180 kilometers per hour on the highways.
Oh, no.
So I had to pull on the side and the policemen, what the hell they were doing?
And I was, you know, I just told him.
I said, I'm sorry, I just was going extremely fast.
The reality was I was not even in a hurry.
I just got an idea how to write the book and was so happy with that.
I just was excited, excited.
And the policemen said, OK, good luck with your book and let me go.
You let you go.
I'm dying to use that excuse someday.
You know, I was speeding because I figured out how to write a book about quantum gravity.
I don't think it will work for me, but I'm glad it worked for you.
Yeah, it's good to know that.
I have a question.
A lot of what you're talking about, it seems that it's very fundamental,
this idea of unlearning things, both when you're writing books,
to encourage your readers to unlearn some things, or even in your research.
I think that when we're thinking about something, we can be stuck in certain ways
of conceptual thinking or be making some assumptions and not even realize it.
Are there certain strategies that you've learned, perhaps from philosophers,
that encourage you to challenge your conceptual ways of thinking?
Oh, that's a very good question.
I don't know the answer.
The premise of your question are, I think, the most fundamental point about learning.
The difficulty of learning is not to learn something new.
That's easy.
The difficulty of learning is to unlearn what we think we know.
We're all deeply convinced that we are right about the way we see the world, everybody including
myself. We just don't give up easily the ideas we have, and we don't learn unless we give up.
You wrote once that science is born from an act of humility.
Do you mean by humility the idea that we can accept that we don't know everything?
That, but even stronger.
The idea that what we think we know, we might be wrong.
What we don't know is so much more and so large that we shouldn't rely so much on what we know.
I think humility, there is this beautiful letter by Newton.
Newton was arrogant, pretentious, perfectly aware that he was the greatest thinker of his time,
and please send this letter.
We still think this is a greater thinker, maybe in science of all the times.
He was aware of that, and at the end of his life, he writes this letter.
He says, I don't know how the others are looking at me or will be looking at me,
but I myself look at myself like a kid, playing with little pebbles on the shore
in front of the ocean of our ignorance.
That's why he succeeded in being Newton, I think,
because he was perfectly aware that there was everything to be discovered.
So he was both arrogant and humble at the same time?
Humble, exactly.
Arrogant and humble is a mixture of the two.
You can be arrogant with respect to the others.
Humble with respect to your arrogance and the fact that we might be right, we might be wrong.
I've been reading this summer, because we're doing an audio book in English,
Galileo's greatest book, it's the dialogue of the two maximum systems of the world.
It's a fantastic book.
It's a book that convinced humankind, in fact, that the earth is moving,
spinning and it's going around the sun,
and it has all the arguments for the earth to move.
But we're reading it, surprise, is that the arguments are just a few pages.
The large part of the book is to convince the reader that it's possible to question what he
gives granted.
It's all about, look, you think that, but that might not be right, and give an example,
give a thing.
It's only when three-quarter into the book say, okay, now you're open to the book.
I haven't argued anything.
I've just told you consider alternatives.
Only at that point, he brings argument for the movement of the earth,
which by the way, I'm wrong.
I'm mistaken.
We know that.
But nevertheless, he convinced the world not by giving good argument, in fact,
he isn't wrong, but by showing that it is nothing wrong in accepting that something
completely obvious to you is not right.
But that was not your question.
Your question, well, what's the strategy we can go into for not being trapped in our own
beliefs?
And I don't know, I think it's because we are.
And scientists are like everybody else.
And more than being aware of that, he's repeating to himself that I don't know what's
the right way of doing so.
Do you remember a moment in your earlier life when maybe physics or science itself sort of
revealed to you this new way of looking or unlearning things you may have known,
open your eyes to new possibilities?
Was there a epiphany there or was it a series of happening?
It was a series of happening starting from when I was a student.
I fell in love with science late when I was already a university student in physics
and in studying modern physics, it was a series of shocks like, oh my god,
somehow reality is not what it seems.
That became the title of my book.
So it was a strong experience at that time.
Is that a phrase that you've had in your mind for a long time before the book came out that
reality is not what it seems?
Is that sort of the realization you had those years ago?
The concept, yes, for sure.
Somehow it grew with me in various manners.
The phrase itself, I'm not sure.
I think it came from the text of the book and then I picked it up because I think it represented
what was going on.
We were talking about, you mentioned quantum gravity before and there's a line in your book,
Seven Brief Lessons on Physics.
It's just such a simple short line.
There is a paradox at the heart of our understanding of the physical world.
And that paradox is essentially the root of quantum gravity, the paradox between
general relativity and quantum mechanics.
Can you elaborate a bit more on why that's a paradox?
What paradox we're struggling with and why we need a solution to it?
Yes.
I believe it is an apparent paradox, but it's a striking paradoxical the way it looks.
And I think the way I describe it in that book, I'm not sure it's that book, is that
it's what a student of physics learns when he goes to school at the university
and he just minimally thinks.
Because you go to classes on quantum mechanics and you get to the explanation of the world.
And the world is all about discreteness.
Light is photons, it's just discrete particles, the elementary particle bits of things.
Everything is in bits and chunks.
It's probabilistic.
Things jump from one to another.
And there is this strange interactive thing for which in quantum mechanics
how things interact with one another.
So you say, okay, that's the way reality is.
I mean, okay, God did reality that.
I mean, we don't know what she thinks or why, but that's where we're at.
And then you go to the other class, but there's other teacher that teaches you about general
relativity.
And this is equally meant from the mental successful theory.
And the universe is continuous, is perfectly continuous.
There's nothing probabilistic.
There is deterministic equations of motion.
Everything is perfectly objective out there.
You can write the history of space-time in a single equation.
And then you think, wait a minute.
I mean, either one or the other, I mean, my teacher stops talking to one another,
haven't talked to another for 30 years.
And they're both professors of physics with a PhD in tenure.
So it's really two totally different images of how reality works.
And, you know, God can be complicated.
I don't know, but not so self-contradictory.
The world is either this way or the other way, or some way which is compatible with both.
But what is the one that is compatible with both?
And is that the question of quantum gravity?
And speaking of quantum gravity as part of the show, we collect questions from other listeners.
And a mutual friend of ours, Karlo Linching Chen.
She's a post-doc for a researcher in Brussels, Belgium.
She sent in a question for you.
Oh, fantastic.
Hi, Karlo.
This is Linching.
So in our quest for a theory of quantum gravity, do you think we will need new fundamental principles
that both quantum mechanics or general relativity have not yet revealed to us?
And what is your strategy for finding them out?
Thank you.
That's a great question.
She's fantastic.
And it follows immediately from what you were asking before.
The answer I have, I'm not sure, but that the answer on which I'm working, is no.
No to the question, do you think there is some fundamental principle that we'll be missing?
And I think that the idea that, oh, we're missing something crucial from the mental down there
is just wrong.
The point is that we have to take seriously what we learn with quantum mechanics
and seriously what we learn about general relativity and bring them together.
And they do go together.
They just have to rearrange things and to understand that.
So I'm a very conservative guy from this perspective.
I don't believe we need something new by a supersymmetry of other worlds, many dimensions,
breaking the Lorentz invariance, correction to quantum mechanics.
Nature has been saying no to all the attempts to test this alternative hypothesis so far.
So I don't see any evidence that we're missing something.
It's just that
general relativity, it's about space time.
So it's a shape of space time, shape of space and shape of time,
which means how different clocks move with respect to one another and how meters
and that's quantum.
And so we have to understand the quantum properties of time and the quantum property of space.
And that's radical.
So the assumption is conservative, but if you follow up, this is completely radical
because it means that's a continuous space that you thought it was.
Forget about it.
The time evolution in a single variable, forget about it.
You have to replace the usual way of thinking space, the usual way of thinking time
with something consistent with quantum mechanics, but not the quantum mechanics in spacetime,
quantum mechanics off spacetime.
So for instance, you have to have a mathematics and a physical intuition
that allows you for having quantum superposition of spacetime's plural of geometries.
Like there's a shooting a cat that can be both awake and sleep, or somebody said they don't lie
and alive, but they don't like it.
I like your version better.
I like cats, so.
Exactly.
So shooting a cat in quantum mechanics can be both awake and sleepy.
And sleeping.
And so in the same sense,
space can have a shape and also another shape in a superposition of the two.
And of course, this requires imagination, finding the right concept to talk about that.
That's also where philosophy comes in useful.
And the right mathematics.
And I think there are, I mean, loop quantum gravity is an example of a theory that attempts to do that.
We don't know if it is right.
It's very conservative.
And that's why the answer to Li-Chi question is no.
So there's no other principle to be added.
But it's completely radical then because it forces us to rethink the basic notions.
And you mentioned evidence when you were giving this explanation,
looking for evidence to support various theories of quantum gravity.
What kind of evidence would you be looking for?
I think that recently there have been a lot of evidence that helps us.
And in science, evidence is never definitive.
It's always indications, like in life, by the way.
So it's not that you kill a theory.
It's very rarely that you really, really kill a theory with an experiment.
But you create problems to a theory.
And when you have two main problems, you look somewhere else.
And there have been a lot of these things recently.
The strongest and the most unexpected for many people has been the absence of low energy supersymmetry.
There was a big part of the community that was completely convinced,
sort of 99.9%, that supersymmetry was going to be detected.
By the Large Hydron Collider?
At CERN, right, with LHC.
And it wasn't.
It was a shock.
There was a title of the journals like, you know, this is a crisis of physics.
Of course, it's not the crisis of physics.
It's only the crisis for those who expected it, which is not physics.
It's just a school, a particular school of thought.
But that's nature talking.
And when nature talking, we should listen, I think.
Another example, it's breaking a lot of low-energy variants.
The symmetry at the basis of Einstein's specialty, which is low-energy variants.
Some people thought it was very, also that was like supersymmetry.
It was a very good, very nice idea.
You can make the problem of quantum gravity easier if you don't have low-energy variants.
So people try to try theories which break low-energy variants,
and might be going to gravity theories.
So this was tested 10 years, about 15 years now, of astrophysical observations.
And all the expected signs of breaking low-energy variants, zero.
So once again, nature talks.
As far as we know, nature is saying, no, no, no, guys, that's not the right way to look for the solution.
So I think nature is giving indication.
I mean, a lot of people expect a negative cosmological constant.
Even today, there is a large part of the community that continues to do calculations,
and calculations, calculations, with a negative cosmological constant.
It's called ADS-CFT.
ADS means anti-deficient.
There is a space with an effective negative cosmological constant.
Except that the cosmological constant has been measured
by the astronomers, by the cosmologists, in a very convincing way.
They got the Nobel Prize, the ones who did that.
And it's positive.
So once again, I think my interpretation, my reading of that as a scientist,
I mean, I might be wrong.
I know I might be wrong.
But my reading of that is that nature is talking,
listen, that's not the right direction.
So what will nature say to you?
How will nature speak to you to advance loop quantum gravity, say?
What signs are you looking for?
There are two or three directions where me and many of my colleagues are looking
in two.
For the moment, zero.
So we have no negative response for nature,
but we don't have any positive response for nature.
Can you explain that a bit?
We don't know.
So there's nothing that has come as a contradiction to what we expected,
but there is nothing that has come to confirm predictions of the theory either.
So I cannot say that loop quantum gravity is confirmed in any sense.
It's a tentative theory.
It's just out on the table and let's see.
So where could the confirmation could come from?
I see three possible directions.
One is early cosmology.
There's a lot of literature, papers and papers written.
So the universe, we know, come out to the Big Bang.
The very early moment at the beginning of its life was deep into quantum gravity regime.
So that's where quantum gravity should play a role.
And a lot of colleagues have applied loop quantum gravity to describe what happens there.
It seems to be working and to see if one can predict effects of what happened there
that can be tested in the cosmic background of the issue.
It's possible, people working, measurements getting more precise.
I hope they will convert to something useful, but for the moment, there's nothing.
That's one.
The second one is black holes.
I'm working on black holes.
Loop quantum gravity is consistent very much with the idea that a black hole evaporates.
That's hooking rate realization.
The black holes evaporate.
They become smaller, smaller, smaller.
And then at the end, they don't just disappear, pop out of existence,
but there's a remnant, which is a white hole.
So there's a quantum gravity transition, a jump, the most jump of quantum mechanics,
from a black hole to a white hole with a little throat but a huge inside.
And then this white hole slowly, the things come out, the information slowly come out.
It lives for a very long time.
So this is a scenario, it's a possibility.
It might have astrophysical consequences.
These have been explored by this group, including London, the people I'm working with.
It's one of these possibilities which I'm particularly attracted to,
which is that these little things that float around in the universe,
these black or remnants of white holes, are actually dark matter.
That's a component of dark matter.
If so, it might be that we have already observed something.
We just haven't recognized it.
Dark matter being another great puzzle of modern...
Dark matter is a big puzzle, and that's the opposite of the quantum gravity puzzle,
because it's not a puzzle in our understanding.
It's a puzzle in what we see.
So we look at the universe around us, and we see galaxies, stars, clouds of hydrogen,
all sorts of stuff, and then there is this stuff out there.
We're not even sure it's stuff.
I mean, there is something that produces effect out there.
We see the gravitational effect of these things.
And we have quite convincing evidence that it's not usual matter.
It's not just atoms or molecules or protons or neutrinos or protons.
It's something else.
And it's a lot.
It's quite as much normal matter and dark matter, even more dark matter than...
Nobody knows what it is.
So it's fantastic.
People who say that we're close to the end of physics and close to the theory of everything.
Come on, guys.
We don't even know what we see around us.
So dark matter is really an open question.
We have a lot of possible explanations, but too many and non-confirmed, non-really credible.
I like the black hole ones because it does not rely on any new assumption.
You can say, oh, dark matter is some new kind of particle we haven't seen yet.
While if it is black holes, it's just generating what it is.
So something we know exists.
But I don't know.
It's an open question.
It's funny.
You said it's a mystery we don't know and that's fantastic.
And that's not always the case in a lot of professions where
the lack of knowledge about something is something you're excited about.
Are you glad that physics is nowhere near being complete?
Oh, infinitely so, of course.
Of course.
Otherwise, it would be boring, right?
Imagine what a disaster if we got somebody wrote, okay, I got it.
Everything is a final equation of everything.
But that's what you're going for?
No.
No?
No, zero.
Is it quantum gravity not sort of that grand unifying theory?
No, it's a step on the way.
It's just figuring out what are the quantum properties of space and time.
I mean, then there's so much more to figure out.
I'm not working for a theory of everything.
I'm working just for the next step in understanding what's around.
So what would be beyond quantum gravity and our understanding or
once we've figured out the quantum nature of space time,
does that open up new questions or help us answer old ones?
You're referring to fundamental physics, right?
Because, of course, there are plenty of questions if you're not fundamental physics,
like what is consciousness or how a thunderstorm really works,
which hasn't been figured out yet.
But in fundamental physics, suppose loop quantum gravity is confirmed.
With a colleague, Marius Christodulo, we have an experiment,
which we propose, which might even be doable in 10 years or so,
which would actually test the discreteness of time predicted by loop quantum gravity.
So suppose this can be done.
And bingo, the right numbers that because loop quantum gravity predicts that space is discrete.
Right.
It's granular.
And I think continuous is really granular.
Like light is made by photons.
Space is made this grain of space.
But also time is, I expect it has this well allowed.
And we have an idea of, perhaps, with some slight
advancing technology not excessive could be tested.
Now suppose this come out right, okay?
Bingo. Loop quantum gravity is correct.
Perfect.
The right numbers are there.
Now what?
Well, now we still have a universe described by a funny standard model,
where the weak interaction and the strong interactions are completely separated.
Described by similar theories, but not really unified in any way.
Gravity described by still another theory.
19 parameters of a standard model with who chose them.
Why?
Why three generations?
Why?
We have, suppose with quantum gravity, we figure out the big bank.
And what seems likely is that it was not the initial explosion was a bounce.
It's an idea not just in loop quantum gravity.
The idea this studied by various people.
That our universe is the result of a previous one.
Yeah.
So there was some universe that was collapsing in some sense under its own weight.
It gets to the sort of maximal compression where quantum gravity comes in.
It bounces and what we see as a big bank is this bounce.
I think it's a reasonable hypothesis.
It seems to be more reasonable than a big bank, but we don't know.
Suppose we figure this out.
Have we solved everything?
No, of course.
I mean, what was the collapsing universe coming from?
I mean, what was there?
Yeah.
I mean, it's a little bit.
It seems today so impossibly difficult to figure out what was in the collapsing universe.
But at the time of my grand-grandfather, it was
seemed impossible to discover what was a chemical composition of Jupiter.
I mean, it was considered an absolvable problem.
I mean, now we know in Jupiter everything.
Even there were ants there.
We would have seen that.
So science finds new problems and grows at all levels.
And no, if there are mysteries, it's not a reason of sadness.
It's a reason of joy because you think to discover it's a beauty of understanding.
You're still like Isaac Newton playing with pebbles on the vast sea of what we don't know?
Absolutely.
And regarding this general idea of working in a field where you maybe don't yet have
evidence for or against it, it just reminds me of something you write about in your book,
The Seven Brief Lessons, when you're talking about Einstein's theory.
You write about how a lot of times something very important is kind of considered useless
at the time when it's developed.
One example you gave is that Riemann's work that was generalizing Gauss' explanations was
considered useless at the time, but it was then a fundamental piece of Einstein's theory.
So it seems that this is very crucial to work on things where we don't actually know exactly
what the application will be or exactly how long it will be.
But I'm wondering if you think that physicists need to find in general some kind of a balance
between working on problems where we have an idea of the time horizon for the applications
versus working on these problems where we don't really know where it will lead.
Yes, obviously there is a balance to be searched there.
I think if you look at this from the main hall of perimeter,
this is the same city, hard to find balance.
But if you look at it on a large scale, 99.9% of the money put into research
worldwide is to practical applications.
And the tendency is to go more towards practical applications.
And that's a disaster, I think, because of course we need practical application.
We need people who study chemistry of material because we need a certain material for something,
healing people and replacing bones, I'm just defending.
So applied science is great, but to concentrate resources toward applied science so much as
done today, I think it's a disaster.
We need people who do the kind of pure science or fundamental science or basic science,
I mean all these words are imprecise, all of them, namely don't think about applications.
Just forget applications because somehow our science is built upon a number of key results
obtained through the same twist.
If you look at each of one, no one was looking for application and if he had looked for application
at his own time, he wouldn't have got there.
So it's obvious that we need to just ask the question what's behind things,
what's how can I understand better at the fundamental level.
Applications will come out sometimes fortunately, sometimes unfortunately,
because sometimes applications are to kill people and to make war and that's not going to that.
So you're the organizer of a research initiative called the Quantum Information Structure of
Spacetime and this brings together theorists, experimentalists and philosophers.
Can you tell us why you think it's so useful to bring together that group of people and
what you're trying to answer through this initiative?
Yeah, thank you for this question.
A Quantum Information Structure of Spacetime, the short name is KISS,
KISS written with a Q, but we like this.
It's a big consortium with a big grant, most used for supporting young people for stocks.
A group of PI here, in fact, two groups of PI's are part of it and there are about dozens of
groups all over the world from Hong Kong to Mexico to California.
And the aim is to bring together two communities or actually three communities.
The two communities are Quantum Information and Quantum Gravity.
And the idea is that Quantum Gravity people have been using Quantum Information notions
or beginning to use in various ways and Quantum Information people are starting thinking about
how Quantum Information works in space and time, let me say it this way.
And so the same problems are being addressed from a completely different perspective.
And the third community is philosophers because this dialogue opens fundamental questions
like what we were saying before, the direction of time, the nature of what is information,
what we mean by information.
And in Quantum Gravity, it's a theory which is not written in spacetime.
So in some sense, spacetime has to be rethought to come out on the theory in some way.
And these are philosophical questions.
So these are different communities which have been
wrote together.
And in June this year, there will be not far from PI in London, Ontario.
So it's just a short drive from PI, a conference bringing together this.
And it's a conference that we have organized.
It's not a standard conference with speeches and a few questions.
Why do you say that?
Each half day, we'll have a few 10, 15 minutes of very short flash presentations.
And then a couple of hours of open discussion, everybody with everybody,
in which the different opinions are being with a good chair who tries to balance and follow.
So discussion compares on point of view because there are these communities,
Quantum Information, Quantum Gravity, and philosophers who look at these things
which have different ways of viewing the same thing.
So we want to compare and of course learn from these differences.
Are there frustrations that tend to come up when people with such different backgrounds
and education are trying to discuss a topic with each other?
Yeah, absolutely.
Because there are things you give for granted,
then a person with good scientists come to you and say, you're wrong.
It's a way of telling you you're wrong.
And that's frustrating.
But that's great because I think that's how the process of knowledge works.
And we learn from experiments, but we even more learn from continuous exchange of perspective.
And the more we listen to other perspectives.
And that's a great opportunity, I think, because Quantum Information
has boomed for various reasons in the last decade, probably.
And there are very good ideas there which I think are relevant for Quantum Gravity.
On the other hand, if you're Quantum Information are not aware that some of the things that they are
struggling with have already been addressed by Quantum Gravity.
So there is really a dialogue to start here.
And the philosophers are interested in both and have things to say about both.
So I hope that this dialogue in three based not just in presentation,
but in discussion will work and I look forward to that.
Oh, I'm sorry.
After two years of lockdown of pandemics and people staying at home,
have you felt distinctly the absence of in-person gatherings with other researchers
and scientists getting together in the same place?
A little bit, yes, a little bit, yes.
It has, for me, it's not been dramatic because we're all on the Internet,
we're not on Zoom, but being always on Zoom is also painful.
And this morning finally is the first day I'm back in PIS so long.
Finally, I was with a young colleague, the miniature meeting in front of a blackboard
writing things to say, no, wait, this is not this is not that.
Oh, what a pleasure.
It was so long this didn't happen.
And from reading the website for this KISS initiative,
it seems that a major goal is to deepen the understanding of information.
Could you just tell us what you think of information as meaning
and why you think that information is so fundamental?
Yes, information is a very tricky word because the spectrum of meanings is very wide,
extremely wide.
So it's also when we're talking about information, people often get confused
because in a debate, in a dialogue, people mean different things.
And it goes from the most complex one, I mean, you have information about your father?
Of course, I know a lot about my father.
To the most basic one, which is my little card here contains so many megabyte of information.
Obviously, the two are connected somehow, but the two are very different, completely different.
About your father is something that has to do with meaning.
In that case, it's not even emotions, but certainly it's interpreted information in some sense.
So it has to do something that needs to be decoded, that's being translated.
While in the case of the memory card, it's just counting something.
It's a number of counting things.
I counted the number of atoms or counting the number of something.
In this spectrum, I think what is interesting is exactly the spectrum that has so many possible
meanings, but what the most interesting is the basic one.
And the basic one, there's a very simple notion of information which is purely physical,
which is correlation when two things know about one another.
If you glue two things, if one points to one direction, the other also points to that direction.
So if you have information about one, if you know one, you know the other one.
So one has information about that, meaning that there is a correlation between the two.
That's the basic notion of information.
It's purely physical, nothing mental, no meaning, no significance, no, no, no.
That's the basic notion of information.
And I think this notion of information is fundamental.
Not because the world is made by information.
The world is made by staff, by variable, by things, which are.
But because the world is made by relations, the properties of things are relative to something else.
So if you want to describe the structural world, you're always talking about how one thing
affects another one, so how they get correlated to the other one.
So immediately, you can quantify how much things affect one another by using the notion of information.
And this means, not that information is an ingredient of the world, but it's a key ingredient
of how we're thinking about the world, how we're thinking about the variables.
And I think quantum mechanics itself can be largely thought in this way.
I've been thinking this since back in the 90s when I started thinking about the notion of quantum mechanics.
And because of that, I think in quantum gravity, also it could be a fundamental role
to thinking about information systems have about one another.
But once we go into this way of thinking about physics, not as how systems are,
but how systems have information about that, how they're correlated, then it's easier to
understand as a continuity to the most complicated notion of information,
the one about your grandfather or your father.
Right? So the mental is not so far away from the physical now,
because we start taking the physical from the right perspective, from which it's easier
to construct the more complicated notion of information.
Meaning, for instance, we talk about memory traces and we build up more and more complicated.
So it's a very versatile, rich, confusing, but key notion for understanding the world
information, because the world is made by relations, not by things.
Mm-hmm.
In reality, it's not what it seems. There's a passage that I love.
I even told you about it after I read it, because you go through so much of the book
explaining the historical context of quantum gravity and explaining the concepts in very
easy to follow terms, which I appreciate. And then late in the book, you say,
if, dear reader, you have found the journey so far a little rough,
hold on tighter, because we're now flying between voids of air.
And then you get into your new ideas, which you said, if the ideas seem confused,
it's because the person with the confused mind is me.
Yourself. First of all, that's something I don't often see in popular science books,
is the warning to the reader, like, it's okay to be shaken by this. It's okay to not fully get it.
So you gave this warning, and then you express ideas that you personally don't have a full concept
of. Can you explain a little bit about what that's like going into territory that is less
historically sound and more speculative and putting your own ideas out on the line like that?
Yeah, I think that there is a lot about the world that we understand, and there's a lot
we don't understand. And it doesn't make more much sense to do what we too often do,
in my opinion, which is to pretend that we understand the part we don't understand.
Maybe it's just my education of my way. I mean, university professors that teach
lecture on physics, they shouldn't pretend that they know everything about it. They don't
know about it. And they may be wrong. I mean, they will be teaching things which are wrong.
So they should say, look, this is what we understand. This is what I understand.
And be aware that there's something wrong. And if there's something confusing,
it might well be because it is confusing. And it might well because or because a person is confused
or because the community is confused. A good example is quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics is
100 years old, spectacularly successful, used in technological applications that we wear,
but it's still confusing. And the fact it's confusing may be good because it may be that
we still haven't got something, some right way of looking at it. So let's say it's confusing,
not hide it. And I think this makes also things easier for the student at the university or for
the reader of a book, who is not presented this, you know, smooth, white, clean piece of stone,
say this is it period. No, I mean, we are humans. Science is a human activity like everything else.
It's dirty, it's imprecise, there are holes. So I think it's better to present what it is.
I think I connected with the idea that you yourself are struggling with these ideas. And
you know, when you read a book by an expert on any subject, you assume the expert knows
everything. And for you to say later in the book, here's what I'm grappling with it. It helps,
I think it helps the reader understand that this is a difficult complex pursuit.
Yeah, my book, my book's a little bit different in spirit from most popular science books,
because they also are aimed as a slightly different audience. And in fact,
I've remarked from the reactions that I get, that the typical reader of science book
likes my book less. And the people who like my book are at both the two extreme sides,
are either people who know zero about science or people who know a lot about science. And I
understand the reason, because I think it is two extreme categories when I'm talking about.
But what I do, the typical science book, it's written for somebody who want to know more and
more and more and more and more about some domain. So you give more details, you give more information,
say, oh, and we know that, and we know that, and we know that, and we know that. And you know,
there are kids, nerds that really want to know more and more and more about the neutrinos and all
the possible details about that. I don't do that, zero. I do the opposite. I take away,
take away, take away. I strip away as much as possible, trying to reduce to what seems to be
the core that we have understood about something. And to present it in a way that it stays together,
it holds on and allows the reader to understand what it is and what seems to me the real thing
we have understood. And then, of course, this, those who know nothing about science, they like it,
because they say, oh, great, I can, I get to that. And those who know a lot about science
also like it, because they say, oh, wow, that's a good way of viewing things. Maybe I didn't think
this way. Maybe I was thinking the other way. That's a new perspective on things. And a lot of my best
colleagues tell me, ah, I read your book. Wow. I didn't, I didn't think about this way of putting
it. Great, great. I've learned something. I'm not going to tell his name, but even my greatest enemy,
the chief of the opposite, you know, band, theoretical physics, who is a Nobel Prize winner,
sent a message to me saying, fantastic, little book. I loved it. Right? So this is a,
but the student of physics who just studied that at school reads what I'm saying, get
nervous, because I wait a minute. I mean, you just, there's all missing here. I got an email,
they say, you talk about quantum mechanics in the seven lessons, you don't even mention the
Schrodinger equation. I thought, yeah, that's right. I don't mention Schrodinger equation,
but that's not the core of the story. Right? So, so yes, and this connects to your question,
what you were saying before, because to do that, you need to understand something all the way through.
So once we have totally digested something, then you can just bingo in one place.
Down to the essence? To the essence, right? I mean, take Copernicus. If you read the book of
Copernicus, you know, it says 300 pages of calculations, detail, geometry, perspective,
it's horrendously complicated. And the equant, and he has the epicycles still and this and this
and that, and to make this complicated, and the moon is complicated.
What is it? 400 years have gone from Copernicus. Now we have digested everything, right?
Can say in two lines. The earth is spinning and is moving around, is orbiting around the sun.
That's what Copernicus has clarified. So it's totally clear. It's strange if you think about,
we're actually moving, it's revolutionary, it changes everything, the earth is a planet like
the others, but it can be said in two lines. Once we have really understood something, at the end
we can say it in two lines in a way that has it, has it really, and the people understand what it is.
So my ambition, but we're not there, would to do the same, I just did with Copernicus,
the same with, you know, the standard models of speciality, generality, quantum mechanics,
quantum philosophy, quantum gravity. Yeah. You said in one piece, you wrote,
sometimes dreams come true. I felt there was a story about the adventure of physics that had
to be told, but I thought people were not interested. But you were wrong. You were dead wrong,
because a lot of people were interested. You know, millions of people have read your book,
it's translated into dozens of languages. What do you think you got wrong about estimating
people's interest in the subject matter? I don't know. I didn't, it was just me wrong. The seven
leaf lesson physics was printed in 5,000 copies at the beginning. So that was the estimate of the
publisher that was going to sell. Do you think it was because you whittled down to the essence
and you left out the equations? No, I think, no, I think it's because I,
mostly because of the last chapter of the seventh. I think that's what made the book. So
it's a book that is not just about physics. It's a book that tries to go down to the essence and
then ask the question, all right, so what does it mean for us? How does it reflect on the way we
see ourselves, we see ourselves, and the way we think about the material, the physical world,
and our, let me use the stronger spiritual world. And I think that, let me tell you my
interpretation of that. It's a, I and my friends and many people around me share a view of the world
which is not much known by the large majority of the population. And it's a view of the world
that is neither, you know, the world is made by little atoms bouncing with one another and that's
it. So, you know, emotions, the sense of lies, whatever, that's bullshit that come later.
It's neither that, it's not that, but it's neither, you know, the material world is irrelevant.
There is a spiritual world with, you know, God, morality and thing, and that's, that's
what the reality is. Somehow a lot of people are unhappy with both because they don't believe the
spiritual world too much anymore because we're in a secular society which doesn't hold anymore for
a large number of people, less and less and less. But neither people find convincing a sort of cold
and ground scientism which has no hold for meaning, for emotion, for our aim, for what we are as
thinking and desiring and suffering. So the fact that somehow people find in my book a
perspective where the two things can very well stay together and there's no contradiction with
one another is what a lot of people jump in and say, oh, but then there are people who can,
you know, think that what matters for me is my emotions, but also there's nothing
in contradiction with fundamental science there. I think that this is bringing together that
make people react. And regarding this goal that you have in your writing of getting to the essence
of a concept, I would think this would be uniquely challenging when you're talking about something
like time because the average person will probably talk about time at least once in a typical day.
So there must be a lot that you need to strip away because the average person has a lot of
assumptions that they're making about this word time. Can you tell us about what that process
was like when you're describing time? Yeah, I mean, absolutely. I wrote a book just uniquely
entirely about time. And that was another easy to write book because exactly for the reason you
are asking and you're pointing to. And when I decide how to write this book, I exactly ask myself
this question. And so the first half, the longest half of the book is just one by one
chapter after chapter demolishing something we give granted for time. And on good grounds,
on things we know. So we think that time has its property and it seems obvious to that as a way
we think. And now I tell you it's not the case. And I show why we know it's not the case. So the
first part of the book, it's in part, it's just a way of telling Boltzmann theory, of telling Einstein's
special activity, of putting the various pieces of the story together. But not just
for talking about physics, for talking about what this implies with respect to our notion of time.
Special activity definitely changes our notion of time. The notion of present everywhere in the
universe doesn't hold. But it's hard to think the world without a notion of present everywhere in the
universe. The question what is going on right now on Andromeda, the galaxy, is meaningless.
It's no meaning in what is going on right now. There's no now in Andromeda. So they're asking
what is going on here in Beijing? I mean, no, we're not in Beijing. So they're not here in
Beijing. Beijing is elsewhere. So the book was designed exactly to address what you are saying,
to take away one by one the place of positions of people that the people give for granted in the
insights. And as some of my colleagues, which are very reflective and, you know,
the read the book, there's absolutely nothing they learn, because they've gone through that.
But a lot of my colleagues that teach special activity and never have stopped in thinking
what actually they're teaching. And I think that's wrong. I mean, physics is interesting,
because it tells us something about the world, not just because you write equations,
and then you make predictions and it matches with what you measure.
And are you yet at a stage where you can give this one or two sentence definition that's the core
of what time is? No, with time is very complicated. And the reason is exactly because we haven't
got to the end of understanding. There are things about time, which I think we're generally confused.
A lot of things we have figured out with total clarity, like the non-existence of
present everywhere in the universe. But there are issues about how to think about time in
a fully consistent way with everything we know, which I don't think we have figured out.
Yes. Even the direction of time is complicated, because we have connected it to entropy,
to the microscopic description, but there are definitely holes in our understanding, in my opinion.
I found that book, The Order of Time, to really make my brain meld and squish in other directions.
I was listening to the audiobook, and at one point I was rushing somewhere,
and something you wrote about time made me think, why am I rushing anywhere?
Rush is an illusion. So I appreciated your writing of that book. I also really liked
Benedict Cumberbatch reading it to me. That was a nice experience. Boy, it helps when these concepts
are so mind-bending. He's astonishingly good. I've been listening to his voice and saying,
wow, who wrote these wonderful things? That's too good for him. Certainly not me. He has a way
of making it comprehensive, but also it's like it's talking to you and telling you in a friend.
But we actually have another student question about your books. Do you want to introduce that?
Yeah. This question was sent in by a PhD student here at Perimeter.
This is Matt Duchenne, a student at IQC in Perimeter.
Writing, how did you first get started into writing science books? And how has that writing
helped your own research? Do you find writing a technical paper or a more accessible book more
challenging? What's tricky? A detailed scientific paper or a popular piece of science writing for
a general audience? Probably a book for a general audience. Why is that? Because
roughly you write a paper, a scientific paper, after you've figured something out.
So you just get confused in a problem and either alone or with somebody else in physics, we
mostly in little groups of two or three in theoretical physics, you sort of come out and
at some point it's clear and then you write it down and you write it down what you have understood.
So the writing is relatively easy. I'm picky. I'm complicated in writing scientific articles.
I try to write them clear. So I spend time writing every writing, every writing, perhaps more than
what I should or could. But the writing is, you know what you're saying, exactly. While
when you're writing a book, you still don't know what you're saying. You're making up what you're
saying in the writing itself. So for me, it's complicated. And writing for me, it's a complicated
process. So my books are the result of a large number of revisions in that large number of
cancellations that take away a lot. This is not useful for what comes and that's just
superfluous. So I take away and then the same phrase I write it 10 times. So that's
clear. I mean, is there a way to say it better? So that's the hard part of writing for me.
I was just going to say for you, it seems that this must be particularly challenging because
you're not just writing a book for the general public. As you said, you're hoping that your book
will be influential for the general public and also for experts in the field, even though the
material is not technical or maybe doesn't rely on math. So I would assume writing something that
can be a good fit for both of those audience is must be very challenging. Yes, it is. And I have
these two readers in mind, the super expert one who knows everything and the one who knows nothing,
which is good because thinking at the super expert one is what, you know, warns me for not
saying something. So if I say that, he's going to complain. And thinking about the, you know,
the prototypical grandmother who doesn't know anything stops me from saying things.
That's too complicated. I mean, how can anybody get this point? So I always have to struggle. So
this simplifies because it gives me guidance. But yes, it's also a complication try because I'm
putting my own ideas in the books, mostly because it's my own perspective of things, written a book
on quantum mechanics, Helgeland, which is entirely from perspective of Heisenberg,
born in Iraq, rather than from the perspective of Schrdinger. So it's taken quantum mechanics
because I think it's the most interesting thing. I'm not the only one, but there are people who
think different things. No, no, no, no quantum mechanics is all about the wave equation,
Schrdinger equation, the wave function evolving. That's all there is. I think that's wrong. So I
give a different perspective. So my books are a way of defending the perspective. But the two
things help one another because in the moment you reach to try to explain something simple,
you get clarity yourself. I mean, for me, it's not an exercise. It's an exercise of science.
I feel I'm doing science when I'm doing that. I'm clarifying my mind and reading at the great
masters who are pretty better than me. I mean, reading Galileo, when he writes these books,
it seems to me he's doing exactly the same thing. I mean, he's talking to people. That's a book
written for the cultivated person of the European Renaissance in the 17th century,
not for his colleagues, astronomers, because it explains things one by one. But obviously,
it's debating with his colleagues, astronomers in the book is making the subtle points of the
argumentation, proving him right and them wrong in that book. So he has done both things. And
that's what makes this that book so great. Of course, I'm not Galileo and I'm not
writing the dialogue of the two great systems. But is this kind of
a popular science, which I'm other people doing, which is presenting ideas in a way which are
compensable to defend these ideas, which I'm trying to do. Are you working on any books now?
Sorry? Are you working on a book now? Yeah, I am. But I'm not sure I should talk about that.
Are you always working on one book or another? No, no, I have not been writing for one year or
more. I just stopped completely. I'm under a strong pressure, of course, from publishers and
things for writing more. And now I think there's something I want to do. Let me just give you
this. I am not covering a large portion of physics. I want to do the narration, tell the story of how
theoretical physicists like me get into a specific problem, get fascinated by the problem,
work through and come out with some ideas and the struggling on. So whether this particular
thing is right or wrong is irrelevant. I want to tell how is theoretical science in the doing.
Sort of humanizing the process or putting a yes, yes, making it relatable to non-sign?
Yes. Yes. So what is actually going on, including changing mind and realizing things didn't work,
and so on and so forth. Well, I don't actually have any further questions. We've kept you for
more than an hour, I believe. Wonderful. So thank you so much for chatting with us. Thank you.
I'll just ask a question I always ask people when I interview them. What keeps you up at night
these days? What problems or challenges are rolling around in your brain?
Last night I was awake. It was a relevant question.
Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. There is a beautiful experiment, quite a gravity fact,
is being proposed. And there are some people who are questioning the way to think about that.
And I think they're wrong. So I'm trying to find out the right theoretical description
of this experiment. And in doing that, it's fun because it's basic physics but it's
a writing thing in a new ways. And there are technical issues, technical problems. So I
keep going around these things here. So it's not a big, huge question. It's a very small, specific
question. Well, we'll have to have you back another time so you can tell us the results of that.
So thank you again. This has just been a pleasure. Thank you very much. That was very nice.
Thank you.
