Okay, hi everyone, welcome.
It's a great pleasure to start this second season
of Global Non-Communitive Geometry Seminar.
So we have lots of other talks lined up in coming weeks.
Please check the website, register,
and you will receive announcements regularly.
Now, to today's talk, it's my great pleasure
and distinct honor to introduce our specialist speaker,
Alain Kahn, who doesn't need any introduction, thankfully.
So Alain will talk on the notion of a space,
as you can see.
Alain, please.
Okay, thank you Masoud.
I am very grateful to the organizers
for asking me to deliver this talk on the notion of space.
And I mean, what I have chosen to do
is if you want to use two different paradigms
for understanding what is a space.
So the first paradigm is very classical one.
It is the one of algebraic geometry.
And I mean, in a broad sense, I will consider it as follows.
So there is a kind of a base space, if you want,
which is a topos in the sense of Gotendic.
And I mean, and this kind of base, if you want,
which is generalization of topological space,
has a structure and this structure is given by a sheaf.
So the notion of sheaf, of course,
makes sense almost by definition.
And this sheaf will be of algebraic nature.
So I mean, I won't, of course,
go into any detail at this point,
but I mean, this is a broad version,
if you want, of the framework of algebraic geometry.
Of course, I include their manifolds and so on and so forth.
And I mean, in this framework, I mean,
it is typically something which I would describe
as being local, as being classical.
And it's classical in the sense that it doesn't involve,
it doesn't ascribe a special role to complex numbers.
Now, the second framework is quite different.
It is of quantum nature.
And I mean, the place where everything takes space
is Hilbert space.
I mean, the Hilbert space, which is the only,
if you want, infinite dimensional,
of course, countable basis, Hilbert space.
And I mean, it really is the paradigm
which, as I will try to explain,
as, of course, fundamental importance
in non-commutative geometry in the sense that the algebra,
which is involved and which is concretely represented
in Hilbert space, doesn't need to be commutative.
And I mean, in the sense also that all the metric relations
are encoded by another operator in the same Hilbert space.
So they share the same sort of stage, if you want,
which is the Hilbert space,
and which plays a role of the Dirac operator.
Of course, we shall see that in great detail.
But we shall see that in great detail
if you want, not abstractly.
I don't want to talk abstractly.
I want to talk about two very, very concrete examples.
And I mean, these examples will be the following.
There will be space time and the primes.
So I mean, when you talk about geometry,
you can imagine all sorts of spaces,
but there are spaces which you cannot dispense with.
I mean, you cannot dispense with discussing space time.
What is the simplest manner
that we understand space time at this point,
I mean, in a very simple manner?
There is a topological space, okay,
which is the space time.
And this topological space has an additional structure
which is given by the Jimmy Nunes, okay.
Now, these things are understood from Riemann
and then from Einstein to be of Minkowski type.
So there are three pluses and one minus.
But I mean, for the understanding
and due to a lot of thinking of physicists and so on,
I mean, it's simpler at the first shot
to move by what one called a big rotation
in the situation where you have four plus sides.
This move looks a little bit artificial
if you don't know quantum field theory,
but when you are doing quantum field theory,
you will find out that even to define what are the propagators
and so on and so forth, to define the Feynman graphs
and so on, you have to move to Euclidean.
I mean, you have to do this big rotation.
The trouble if you want with this simple form of things
is that it accounts for gravity,
but gravity is not the only force of nature.
There are three other forces
and they are not accounted by this simple paradigm.
Now, for the primes, there is also a very simple,
if you want, down to Earth's paradigm for the primes,
which is to think of the primes
as being the prime ideas of something
that one calls a spec Z, if you want,
which is to look at the prime ideas
in the rings, the advantages.
And endows this, which is, of course,
of what an ectopus in an electric airway,
to endows this with a shift,
which is obtained by localizing the ring
at various primes.
When you do that while you obtain something
which is reasonable, but if you push things a little bit,
you find out that it's not as nice as it looks.
And there are two reasons why it's not as nice as it looks.
I mean, the first reason is that when you take Z
and you tensor over the smallest rings that you know,
which is Z itself, where you find Z.
And I mean, this doesn't fit at all
with the idea that you should,
that you are really considering, you know,
affine functions on an affine variety.
And because normally when you cross it,
I mean, you get something which is more interesting,
which is a surface.
So this is the first issue.
And the second issue is that really, I mean,
it's an affine situation.
It's not corresponding to a compact stuff.
And if you want to compactify it,
well, there is a known compactification,
which is the Aracheloff compactification.
But when you look at the structure shift over spec Z,
which is a sub-shift of the constant shift
with the stock equal to the rational numbers,
then I mean, if you use standard techniques,
you cannot extend this shift
to the Aracheloff compactification.
So you see from the start that the,
I wouldn't call it naive,
but I mean, this kind of straightforward,
if you want idea doesn't really work.
And in fact, what happens is that when you look at the universe,
distant parts of the universe,
what the universe has chosen to communicate with are spectra.
And this spectra, I mean,
they contain an enormous information,
which if you wouldn't look closely, you would miss totally.
The reason is that what they have,
they have something like a barcode,
so when you look at this spectra,
which you get from the light coming from the sun
or from very distant galaxies and so on,
or from the universe, from parts which look empty.
In fact, what you find out is that
there are absorption lines in this spectra.
And these absorption lines,
when you look at them very, very carefully,
what you find out is that they give you
an enormous information about the chemical content.
Why? Because these barcodes,
there is a specific signature for each chemical.
So they give you information, for instance,
about the red shift, which is an amazing fact
because it tells you that these galaxies are shooting off.
And as we shall see very shortly,
they give a much more precious information,
which is the information about quantum mechanics.
Now, the set of primes, similarly,
it looks a little bit, you know,
when you look at it, you spell out the primes,
two, three, five, seven, 11, 13, 17, 19.
Okay, I mean, you know, it's...
But in fact, they do manifest themselves also spectrally.
And this is through the set of zeros
of the Riemann zeta function,
which when you look at them,
you will find out that, you know,
it really looks like one of these physical spectra.
Now, the reason why I said that, you know,
these spectra, they contain an amazing information
is the following.
It was discovered by Ritz and Rittberg long, long time ago,
that in fact, the spectral rays that you see
when you view them, not in wavelengths,
but in frequencies.
So what you do, you plug in the frequencies
and you plug in the corresponding spectral rays.
Now, what you find out is that there is a natural way
to label them by two indices, not by one index.
And when you label them by two indices,
what you find is that for things which are labeled like i, j
and things which are labeled by j and k,
whereas the j is in common to the two,
then the frequencies add up.
So it's not a group, it's not a group,
but it's something which has a partial law of composition,
which is given like that.
Now, this fact looks a little bit strange
when you see this at first, you know,
but the guy who completely deciphered it is Eisenberg.
So Eisenberg, I mean, what he found,
she won't, which is absolutely amazing
because he found it for physical reasons,
his reasoning.
In fact, amazed a friend of it.
I mean, he was with Dirac, in fact,
when he was making his studies
and Dirac was amazed by the discovery of Eisenberg.
So Eisenberg and all these people,
they were looking at spectral rays
and were looking at understanding spectra and so on.
And what Eisenberg found is that, in fact,
the key was in the Ritz-Hitberg combination principle.
And what he did, he said,
okay, well, I don't have a group, I don't have a group.
If I had a group, he was talking about action angle variables
in which you have a Fourier transform.
So he was saying, you know,
normally if I was doing classical mechanics,
I would have a group, the group of frequencies.
It's not a group, but I can do the same transformation
as I do with the action angle variables.
And what do I get?
Well, he computed what he gets.
He used the Ritz-Hitberg combination to define a product.
Okay, in modern language,
we would say that he was defining the Rupoi d'Algebois.
Or, but in this case, for a simple chemical,
which has, if you want transitions going from any to any,
what he found are matrices.
And this was absolutely amazing
because he had no idea that matrices
were known to mathematicians.
And this was found later, you know, by Born and Jordan.
And, I mean, and this opened up a complete world.
And in the end, of course, of Schrodinger,
the spectra were completely deciphered.
They were understood from spectra operators
in inverse space, which had been defined before
by mathematicians and called spectra.
And, I mean, in the end, for Neumann,
and I mean, you know, the things developed considerably
for Neumann and Neur as they considered the subsystems.
They understood that everything was taking place
in inverse space.
That inverse space was the correct stage
for quantum mechanics.
And, I mean, so what happened,
what happened is that to me, if you want,
this discovery of Eisenberg
is really the birthplace of non-commutative geometry.
It's really the place where it was born,
in the sense that he found that when you consider
a microscopic system, and if you look at what people call
the phase space of this system, then this phase space,
you cannot take it to be community.
It's a non-community space.
And then, you know, okay, when I started working,
I worked on factors.
And after my work on factors,
I found that there were ubiquitous,
non-comutative space were ubiquitous
because of four reactions.
And that four reactions were giving so many examples
of non-comutative spaces
that one should develop geometry for them.
And what I found out after many years is that
when you try to develop geometry for spaces
whose coordinates do not commute,
it leads you to a spectral version of geometry,
to a purely spectral version of geometry.
Now, this spectral version of geometry,
I had no idea whatsoever that it would apply to space-time.
I mean, you know, it was intended to understand
non-comutative space is not space-time in any way.
So at this point, I think I will pass the scene
to my alter ego.
And so I will stop sharing my screen and now go.
And this spectral point of view, in fact,
I mean, it's quite amazing that, I mean,
Riemann had in his inaugural talk on geometry.
And if you want the honesty of saying that
nobody can say that his paradigm of geometry
would continue to hold at very, very small distances.
And the reason that he had in mind was that
when you go to very small distances,
then the notion of a light ray
or the notion of a solid body,
which he was using in his own conception of geometry,
no longer makes sense.
And I mean, he wrote some amazing phrase,
which is that in fact, you know,
what he says that the metric relations, in fact,
should come from the binding forces,
which sort of holds things together.
And what we shall see very shortly
is that the spectral paradigm, which I will explain now,
in fact, has exactly this power
that it embodies not only the gravitational force,
but it embodies all the other forces
that we know so far, okay?
And so how is this done?
Well, this is done by somehow, you know,
extracting the square root of the square
of the line element that's defined by Riemann.
And this extraction of the square root
is operator theoretic.
And it goes back, in fact, to a built-on.
It uses the Clifford algebra
and it was concretely done by Tiraq in an amazing vision.
And I mean, the way it's done is that, you know,
when you want to take a square root of the sum of squares,
this is not so easy.
Except if you use Tiraq, if you use Clifford matrices,
because they are anti-commute,
so that when you raise a sum of them to the square,
the cross terms disappear and you get a sum of squares.
And it turns out that in the spectral paradigm,
which is fundamentally non-commutative geometry,
what happens is that it is the Tiraq propagator,
or if you want, it is inverse of the Tiraq operator,
which becomes a line element.
And I mean, this allows you to work,
but to work already in a quantum mechanical environment
because you are working in Hilbert space,
you have an operator,
and the way you measure distances is no longer by making,
you know, an arc or taking an arc
and taking its minimal length between two points.
No, it's by setting a wave,
and but this wave has a kind of bound on its frequency
because the specific condition is that the commutator
of the function with the Tiraq operator
is bounded by one and no.
And in that way, you measure also the geodesic distance,
but you have formula for distances
which is much more adaptable
in the sense that it doesn't require space
to be arcwise connected and so on and so forth.
And it works in many, many situations
in which the other paradigm wouldn't work.
And it gives you the freedom to,
if you want to incorporate fine tuning,
fine details of the space that the previous formalism
with its limitation to continue would allow you to do.
So in fact, what happens is that there is, of course,
a dictionary, so there is a tool from classical to quantum,
which is very, very fundamental, which, I mean,
in part goes back to, I would say, fundamental
and which says if you want that, okay,
the notion of a real variable which gets replaced
by a self-adjoint operator,
they have all the right properties.
I mean, a self-adjoint operator as a spectrum,
which is like the set of values of the variable.
And I mean, one of the most amazing facts
of in-built space operators, which I remember,
I was so struck by when I was sort of a beginning mathematician,
is the fact that when you take a self-adjoint operator,
you can take any measurable function
of this self-adjoint operator
and it will still be a self-adjoint operator.
This is kind of totally mind-blowing.
And I mean, it's due, of course,
to the spectral decomposition, but it's an amazing fact.
And so, I mean, you can apply to a self-adjoint operator
a function which is defined differently
on different intervals and it will still make sense.
So this is the notion of a real variable.
There is a notion of a complex variable
and typically, you know, the great genius of Dirac
was to use this commutation relation
that as a commutator of A and A star is equal to one
and that implies that the module square of A,
which is A star, is quantized.
I mean, it's an integer.
Then there are the values of the variable,
which as I said, you know,
just form the spectrum of the operator
and they can be discrete and continuum.
And this is an amazing fact
because if you would take the usual framework of variables
and if you had just one discrete variable,
the set X would be countable
and it wouldn't allow for continuous variables.
Whereas in neighbor space, the two coexist,
but they don't commute.
This is the only thing that you have to remember.
Okay, so then there is room for infinitesimal variables
and there is an amusing act,
I mean, quite revealing actually,
which is that Newton, when he wrote,
when he was thinking about infinitesimal,
was never thinking about a number like Leibniz.
He was thinking about a variable.
And what is amazing is that if you look
in the writings of Newton,
you'll find out that he had a definition
of an infinitesimal variable,
which when you use a dictionary
from the classical to the quantum,
exactly characterizes what we call compact operators
in neighbor space.
Now, these compact operators
have the right algebraic properties.
They form an idea, two-sided idea.
They, if you want, of course,
this means that you can add them
and you still have an infinitesimal,
but they also have an order.
So you have a notion of infinitesimal order alpha.
This is saying essentially is that
when you take the characteristic value of the operator,
characteristic values,
which are the eigenvalues of the absolute value
of the operator,
then they decay like a specific power of n.
The n's characteristic value is of the order
of n to the power minus alpha.
There is a notion of differential.
I mean, the notion of differential is obtained
by taking a computator,
because that's an operator of square one.
And there is a notion of differential form.
This notion of differential form is at the root
of the discovery which I made in 1980 and 1981
of psychicomology,
because you can develop calculus,
which I call the quantized calculus,
and which gives you immediately the right notion.
But there is much more.
So there is a fact that the light element now is,
if you want, the Dirac propagator,
or the propagator for fermions,
and it embodies the geometry.
And there is a fact that, as I said,
I mean, you can compute the distance
as you were doing before,
but the most refined and the most,
how to say, original of these new ingredients
is the integration.
And the integration uses an idea
which goes back to Jacques Dixier in the 60s.
He discovered, you know, trace,
which is not the ordinary trace on operators.
And I mean, so I had the chance to have lunch
once with him at Bure-sur-Hivette.
And I mean, it was amazing
because I was looking exactly for what he had.
And what he has is, if you want a way
to pick the logarithmic divergency
of the trace of an infinitesimal of order one.
So if I have an infinitesimal of order one,
its eigenvalues will be like one over n.
So if I try to sum them, they diverge because, okay,
I mean, you know, it's a harmonic series.
So I mean, they diverge.
However, it turns out that Dixier had found a way
using amenability of the solvable group
to pick the coefficient of the logarithmic divergency.
And in such a way that you get the trace,
you get something which is additive and which is a trace.
And so, I mean, this opened up a complete world
because what it meant is that one could give a meaning
to the integral independently of the measure.
If you want in this quantized calculus,
the main thing fact is that you have the notion
of infinitesimal and you have the notion of integral.
And I mean, normally when you do measure theory,
you get the whole package
and you get integral of f of x d mu of x.
And integral or d mu of x don't really separate.
I mean, they are in the same box.
But here it's not at all the same.
Here, the notion of integral, which is obtained
by taking the coefficient of the logarithmic divergency,
is absolute.
And in fact, I believe that most of the integrals
that we know, in fact, are special cases of this.
I mean, you have to think a bit about it.
But I mean, for instance, the integration
of a rebranded manifold for the volume
is exactly the integration in the sense,
in this sense of the digital trace
of the right power of the line element,
I mean, the power n, where n is the dimension.
Okay, so these are the tools.
And I mean, one more, a tantalizing fact, okay,
which of course we would need a lot more work,
is that because of the quantum field theory,
and because the line element which defines the geometry
is defined as an operator,
it turns out that it gives room for quantum corrections.
I mean, one knows in physics
that the propagator of fermions gets dressed
by the quantum field theory corrections,
and it gets dressed, if you want,
by a formal power series in the powers of H bar,
in the powers of the Planck constant.
So what this means is that if we understand geometry
from this spectral point of view,
then I mean, it has the correct receptacle
in order to take into account the dressing
from quantum field theory.
And of course, this is what happens in reality,
because in reality, we cannot turn off the quantum field theory.
It is there.
So this means that if we really understand
that our measurements of distances
are using this secretly,
because for instance,
you have the electronic microscope or such things,
then in fact, the geometry we're talking about
is already quantum.
Now, of course, this is amazingly suitable
for non-competitive geometry.
Why?
Because the paradigm, which is given by a spectral geometry,
which is given by an algebra,
which is represented concretely in the space.
So the algebra represents the space in a naive way.
And this self-adjoint operator,
which is the inverse of the line element,
well, the algebra doesn't need to be competitive.
And there are thousands of examples, okay,
which if you want show that,
I mean, taking the algebra to be non-competitive
is a great benefit, in fact.
And the simplest way of understanding this
is to modify the algebra in a very trivial manner
by taking matrices over the algebra.
I mean, when people do, for instance,
case study and so on, they know that
even if you start with a commutative algebra
and when you want to understand bundles and so on,
you better replace the algebra
by matrices over it and by matrices over it.
So that's what you do.
And what you find out is that if you do that,
well, it turns out that the group of different morphisms
becomes more subtle.
Why?
Because normally when you take the algebra
of smooth functions on a manifold,
the group of different morphisms
is simply the group of automorphisms of this algebra.
This is the fact.
But now if you replace the algebra
by matrices of functions, if you want,
of elements of the algebra, then what turns out
to be the case is that because the algebra becomes
non-competitive, it has among the automorphisms,
it has rather trivial ones, which are the inner automorphisms.
And they form a normal subgroup.
So what happens of the group of automorphisms?
So and what happens is that if you want
to have an extension of the group of different morphisms,
which is still there as a quotient of automorphisms
by the inner automorphisms, but it's
an extension by what physicists call the gauge group
of second kind.
So it introduces almost for free the gauge transformations
of the second kind in that example for a group SQN.
And what we did with my collaborator, Alish M.
Cedil, a long time ago, we found out
that if you write what replaces gravity,
but in a spectral manner, which we
call the spectral action, which is just
judging the line element, I mean, roughly.
I mean, counting how many eigenvalues of the line element
are larger than the plant legs.
I mean, this is very rough.
So if you do that, then you will obtain not only
the Einstein action, which appears naturally,
but you will also obtain the Young-Muze action
for these additional fields which
come from the inner automorphisms, which
come if you want from the inner part of the metric.
So this was very encouraging, long, long time ago.
And I mean, this was back in 1996.
And then a lot of things happened.
And I want to be extremely concise about this,
because somehow, if you want, the main difficulties that remain
was to understand what type of non-commutativity one should
put in the algebra so that we recover not only the Young-Muze
couple to the invitation, but the full standard model
with all its complicated things, like the CISO mechanism,
like the v-minus say of Feynman and Gellman,
like the X field, of course, and so on and so forth.
And it turned out that we found with Shamsedin and Mokhanov,
we found a solution to this problem,
and we found a solution purely motivated by geometry.
So the solution came about as follows.
You see the Dirac operator has a great impact
that somehow it is a concise way to assemble together
all the momentum.
Instead of giving the momentum P0, P1, P2, P3,
you assemble them using preferred matrices,
and you have a single entity.
I mean, this is, in a way, the generalization
of the idea that the complex number is a nice way
to put together two real numbers,
but in a single entity.
So here, if you want, the Dirac operator
was sort of encapsulating all the momentum
into a single entity.
Now, after a lot of thinking, a lot of time, and so on,
we finally found with Alish Shamsedin and Slava Mokhanov
that there was a similar way that one could
encapsulate the coordinates.
If you want the position variables,
there was a way to encapsulate them.
But of course, in order to encapsulate them,
you also need some kind of preferred matrices.
And from purely geometry considerations of maps,
the force field, and all that, that we thought about,
and all that, we found out that there was an equation that
would then couple together the Dirac operator, which
puts together all momentum, with certain operators
that would encapsulate together all the coordinates.
And this equation is either a form of the Eisenberg
commutation relation.
Eisenberg was this great relation,
which is p-commutator q equal to i h power,
something like that.
And what we found with Shamsedin and Mokhanov
is that there is a way in dimension n
to write an equation which involves n times the d,
the inverse of the line element, and which
involves this operator z, which actually encapsulates
all coordinates together.
And this equation will be the kind of the roof
of the whole building, because it will prevent it
from collapsing.
Because if you have an equation like that, for instance,
you cannot represent it in finite dimensional space.
And it will sort of, its irreducible representations
will yield you geometries.
And I mean, when we were totally stunned,
was that before with Ali, we had worked from bottom up.
So we had started by looking which algebra was working,
and so on.
And after a long, long time, we had found
a certain specific algebra, which
was two by two matrices of quaternions
and four by four matrices of complex numbers.
And that was doing the right job.
But the real intense pleasure of understanding
was when we found with Ali and Mokhanov
that the key for the algebra that we
need in order to make this geometry, this geometric bearing,
is exactly, in fact, the different algebra which
is coming from five gamma matrices,
and which is either with a plus or minus.
And they give exactly the algebras
that we had found from our bottom up working.
And I mean, it was all amazing, because when
you look at these two algebras, they
don't have the same real dimensions.
So it seemed impossible to find a good conceptual explanation
for them.
I mean, C plus, it's two by two matrices of quaternions.
So I mean, the dimension is 4 times 4, which is 16.
But the other one is dimension 32.
But what happens with the key for the algebra
is that, in fact, you need a new reducible of notation.
And normally, the C plus is M to of H plus M to of H.
But of course, one of them is not needed when
you take a new reducible of notation.
So this was the explanation.
And I mean, the second, I would say, breakthrough that we did
was that then we found that if you take these two,
then it turns out that you can encode all spin 4 geometries,
namely all compact spin manifolds of dimension 4.
We are working in the Euclidean framework
by taking irreducible of annotations.
And I mean, this came about from a theorem
which was quite difficult to prove.
In fact, I got even some help from Simon Donaldson,
and which, in fact, gave the condition
that the square of the seventh Stifler Whitney class
would have to vanish.
But I mean, this is the case when you take a spin manifold.
So in fact, what happens is that, first of all,
when you apply this either an irreducible representation
of this higher Isenberg relation, the volume is quantized.
And second of all, if you have a 4-spin manifold,
and its volume is quantized larger than 5 as an integer,
then you can find it as an irreducible representation
of these relations.
And I mean, this solved many questions.
One of them was the fact that in the spectral action,
normally, you would have a huge cosmological constant.
But because the volume is now quantized,
this problem disappears.
So I mean, this is where we stood.
There were several important papers.
So the paper with Alishan Cedid and Sela Bukanov
is called Geometry and the Quantum Basics.
And another new development that we made since then
was to understand that the spectral action was, in fact,
an entropy.
It's an entropy when you consider second quantized fermions.
You find out that it's an entropy.
So this is, of course, a contribution,
very important contribution of Walter van Zerlko,
who collaborated with us.
And Walter also unveiled many, many properties
of the models that we had by comparing it
with Pati Salam models.
And in fact, I mean, there is a recent work of Walter
and of his student in the Netherlands.
And what they have done, they have done a great discovery,
which is that, in fact, one can follow up
the spectral action under normalization.
That was something which was very much missing
in the spectral action formalism.
And to summarize what I have said,
there is an interview which I did in 2016,
which has just appeared now in a book
which is called Conversation on Quantum Gravity
by Cambridge University Press.
I mean, probably a mathematician that was interrogated,
not that I know much about quantum gravity,
but because of the potential links,
if you want, of non-computative geometry
with quantum gravity.
OK, so this will be so far for the space time.
And the next thing will be to now look
with some concentration to what I call a mysterious spectrum.
And we shall see what we can say about it.
And this mysterious spectrum is obtained
by taking the zeros of the Riemann zeta function
and plotting them like you would do with a spectrum.
So you obtain something which is very, very peculiar,
something which has some regularities and so on.
It starts around 14.
And when you look at it really in the complex plane,
in the complex domain, it looks like that.
So first of all, it looks symmetrical with respect
to the real axis.
It looks like, well, it starts around 14, yes.
And it looks like they all should be on the critical line,
but we don't know.
Now, what happened was that, if you want,
this Riemann zeta function popped up
in the non-computative geometric framework.
And it popped up for a very interesting reason.
I mean, it popped up because, as a special case of the thermodynamics
of non-computative spaces, I mean,
non-computative spaces have the amazing property
that they have a god-given time evolution.
I mean, this is what I showed in my thesis.
I mean, after the work, of course,
but what I showed in my thesis is that the one-parameter
evolution, which was coming from states,
was, in fact, independent of the choice of a state
when you look at it modulo in automorphisms.
And that this, of course, gave immediately
slew of invariance for factors and allowed
me to reduce type 3 factor to type 2 in automorphisms,
except for one case, which was later solved by Takizaki.
But what I discovered at that time
was, in fact, affiliations were giving wonderful examples
of this non-computative space, which
were, in the major theory context, were factors.
But the example, which sort of unveiled,
if you want, the role of the Riemann zeta function,
came from discrete groups.
Now, when you take a discrete group,
when you take its regular representation,
it generates a factor.
So I should say one word about factors.
I mean, what von Neumann and Murray did,
they studied subsystems of quantum systems.
And they found out that they are not all coming from,
like you split the interspace into a tensor square.
And you look at the operators, which only act on one of the two.
But there are other factorizations.
They are called factors.
And somehow, at first, there were factors of type 2, 1.
And they come from discrete group representations.
But it turns out that when you extend your mental framework
a bit and replace discrete group by pairs,
where you have not only just a discrete group,
but you have a subgroup, which is almost normal.
And you really think about the quotient of the larger group
by the subgroup, which is almost normal.
Then you get type 3.
I mean, in general, you get type 3.
And I mean, then you can do a thermodynamics.
Because once you have a type 3, you
have a canonical type evolution.
And you can change the temperature
of the kind of mathematical objects that you have there.
By using a certain condition, which
is invented by physicists, which is called the KMS condition.
So I won't dwell too much with this,
but I will give you what it gives in an example, which
was crucial, which is the work which
I did with Jean-Bourne-Boste in the 90s.
And that's what you take as a pair of groups.
You take the affine group of the rational, but with a positive.
So you take AX plus B, where A and B
are rational numbers, and A is positive.
That's your group, the large group.
I call it B plus of Q. And now you
take a subgroup, which is just a group of integer translations.
Now, this subgroup turns out to be almost normal,
whatever it means.
And then you can construct out of it an AK algebra.
And this AK algebra gives you a space,
which is called the BC system, and which you can treat
thermodynamically, as I explained before.
Now, first of all, as a quantum system,
it exhibits a phase transition with spontaneous symmetry
breaking.
So what does it mean?
It means that the equilibrium states, which are called KMS
states, at the inverse temperature beta,
they turn out to be unique when the temperature is high enough.
Namely, the beta is less than 1, less than or equal to 1.
But when beta cross is 1, there is a phase transition
with spontaneous symmetry breaking.
You know very much what happens in a ferro magnet.
When you cool it down, all the magnets
will align in some direction.
So it is the same, except that the directions of the magnets
are replaced by certain mathematical object, which
is called the Shimura variety, which is very simple,
but which is amazing because it relates the Galois theory
of symmetries with, if you want, the symmetries that
come from the quantum theory.
So the symmetries that come from the quantum theory,
they come from the group GL1 of the hat,
which is a kind of a delict nature.
The hat is the final completion of the.
And when you take the zero temperature states
and you evaluate them on the natural subalgebra,
which is defined over Z, what you found
are algebraic numbers.
And these algebraic numbers generate
the maximal Abellian extension, which
is called the cyclotomic extension of the rational
numbers, the famous Kroniker theorem that tells you
that any Abellian extension of Q can be resolved by also unity.
So that's what you get.
And the symmetry breaking of the physics,
which is an abstract concept of beauty,
actually is tied up in this example
with the Galois ambiguity, which is the Galois ambiguity
of the Galois extension, which is a cyclotomic extension.
So already this is quite amazing.
But what is more amazing, of course,
then what you obtain by relating the two symmetry group
is an isomorphism of groups.
And this isomorphism is actually the class field
theory of the morphism in this instance.
So it gives, if you want, this relation,
this quantum statistical mechanical interpretation
of the explicit class field theory of the rational numbers.
But what is much more amazing is that when
you compute what is called the partition function
of this basic system, you find that it is a Riemann zeta
function.
So you find zeta of beta.
Now, a long, long time ago, I was invited in 96
at the birthday of Zellberg because of this work
that I had done with both.
And when I came back, I was haunted
by the fact of really finding a relation not only just
with a zeta function appearing as a partition function,
but really with its zeros.
And this came about very naturally
because it gave, if you want, the PC system
was giving a space.
And now this space has a dual in the sense
of the duality between type 3 and type 2.
And this dual, when you look at the scaling action
on this dual, it was giving you a natural interpretation
of the zeros of zeta as a absorption spectrum.
Now, it was also giving, if you want, the space.
So the space that was coming out was of adelic nature.
And as a space, it is, if you want, a double quotient.
So you take the adels of q, whatever they mean,
I mean, what they are, the adels of q,
and they are putting together all ways of completing q
into a local field.
And you divide them on one side by q cross
and on the other side by the units
of the profiling completion of z, which
is a piece of the adels of the adels.
So that's what you do.
You get a space.
And I mean, so I was pleased, of course,
to have found this spectrum interpretation much more
by the fact that it was giving an interpretation
of the explicit formulas of reman and vey.
I will come back to that later.
But it remained, if you want, as a difficult non-competitive
space coming from the BC system, which
is so beautiful from its relation to quantum mechanics.
But it remained, if you want, as a non-competitive space,
very much like a leaf space, a very difficult space to render.
And I mean, in 2014 with Katia Konsani,
we really made a discovery that was amazing, which
is that, in fact, this space, the previous space,
OK, so this space, which is this double quotient, in fact,
it appears as being the space of points over topos.
So you might be you don't know what is the topos.
It's a notion which is invented or discovered
by Houghton Dick in his work in algebraic geometry.
And when I was talking about the paradigm
of algebraic geometry, I mean, this
is, if you want, like the most general base that you can take.
I mean, it's a topos.
Now, so what the topos is, I mean,
if you want the idea that somehow instead of looking
at the space per se, this is not the right thing to do.
The right thing to do is to do sensory parameterized
by the space at which you look.
And somehow the space is behind the corner.
It's not there.
You are just doing sensory with parameters.
Now, if you take this idea and you push it far,
you find out that, of course, you can take parameters
to be in an ordinary topological space.
But if you take the idea correctly,
it extends the idea of topological space.
And it extends this idea in such a way which
is very similar to a competitive geometry,
that you can take a space and you can cross it
by endomorphisms.
You can cross it by motions.
Exactly like, you know, this matrix, the rise and bear,
where just a set of points, but which
are related to each other by some motion.
And in particular, you can take what
we call the scaling side, which is the cross product,
if you want, as a topos, of the half line CO infinity, which
you can think of as a line of frequencies.
And you cross it by multiplication
by integers, which, of course, are meaning for frequencies.
So you get a certain space, now, a certain topos.
Now, the amazing fact, which is not easy to prove,
I mean, it requires some proof, is
that when you compute the points of this topos,
they form exactly the previous space which
had been coming from the VC system,
and which was encoding this spectral realization.
So OK, what was very surprising is
that we didn't get this just in one stroke.
I mean, it happened because we had discovered before something
which we called the arithmetic side, which
was even much simpler, which was just the integers acting
on a point, but positive integers under multiplication.
So it's not a group, it's a semi-group, it's a monoid.
And you can endow these integers acting on a point
with a structure shift, which will
be something which we have like a Frobenius for each integer.
And I mean, a very simple thing, which
has a Frobenius for each integer,
is something of tropical nature, which is called Zmax.
So we had discovered this object.
And then what we discovered is that when you extend
scalars by changing, if you want, the basic scalars, which
are in characteristic one, from Zmax to Rmax,
which is very familiar in tropical geometry,
then you find the scaling side.
Now, the beauty is that the scaling action, which
was crucial in the spectral realization before,
actually becomes the action of the automorphism group, which
plays a role of the Frobenius, of this R plus max,
and which is the elevation to the power lambda.
So instead of taking an element and raising it
to power of p when you take a finite field,
here you raise it to a real power, x to the power lambda.
Lambda is positive.
And you get that the automorphism group of this semi-field,
which is called R plus max, is in fact
given by all these analogs of Frobenius.
And when you let these analogs of Frobenius
act on the points of these stoppers,
you find exactly the scaling action
that was used to get the spectral realization.
So one has a perfect analog of the framework
of the finite fields.
And moreover, what we proved with Katia Konsali
is that there is, all the more, a perfect analog
of the assay veil formula using fixed points for the Riemann
data function.
And this is very subtle because one
has to let the Q of the finite field tend to 1.
And also, the counting function is no longer a function.
It's a distribution in the sense of Schwarz.
So there are all these points.
And of course, all these points give you some confidence
that it should be possible using the structure to go further.
So what we found is that the structure
shift of this scaling side, which
gives, if you want, the geometric structure.
Because as I said from the start,
I mean, when you do algebraic geometry,
just topos is not enough.
You need to have a structure shift.
So structure shift is of tropical nature.
It is a shift of piecewise affine convex function
with integral slopes.
So I mean, you have this now, you have this structure.
And what you would like to do is to use
the idea of matuk-tate and grotenic.
You see, when Veil proved the great fact,
which is the analog of the Riemann hypothesis
for function fields, his proof was kind of tricky still.
And it was extremely conceptually simplified
by matuk-tate and grotenic.
Because grotenic gave the final shot, if you want.
And the idea that they had was that when
you want to prove the analog of the Riemann hypothesis,
you have to prove that something quadratic form is positive.
I simplify over, but that's what you need to prove.
And in order to prove that, what they did,
they crossed the space with itself.
Then you get a surface, because they are dealing with a curve.
And then they, on this surface, they
applied the Riemann-Roch formula.
And the Riemann-Roch formula immediately
implied the positivity that they wanted.
When you were using the Riemann-Roch for something
which was related to these graphs of the Frobenius,
to these combinational graphs.
OK, so I mean, with Katia, of course,
we wanted to do something like that.
But what happens when you try to do that, if you want,
is that you have a difficulty.
And the main difficulty we will see immediately
why is the subtility of the local terms in the explicit formulas
of Riemann-Roch as I will show you immediately.
And so what we did instead of trying purely geometrically,
I mean, it couldn't be done totally geometrically
because of the subtility of these terms
in the explicit formulas.
So what we did was to relate our framework of geometry
to the analytic framework by using the Schwarzke analogy.
So this is what I explained now.
And I mean, if you want the analog of very positivity
that you need for the Riemann-Zeta function itself,
you write the explicit formulas of Bayes.
So I mean, it's a formula which, I mean, Riemann Bayes,
because I'm sure Riemann would not have been surprised at all
by this formula because he applied it, in fact, in many cases.
So I mean, this formula gives you the sum of the values
of the Fourier transform of the function on zeros of the zeta
function, non-trivial zeros.
And it equates this with a sum over what
are called places of the global field q of rational numbers.
Now, you will see when I write the Riemann hypothesis,
it's equivalent to the positivity.
Why is there is a minus sign?
There is a minus sign because you see that there
is a minus sign in front of the zero.
So you have to put an overall minus sign to get this positivity.
And I mean, when I show you the formula for the contribution
of the Archimedean place, you will be a little bit frightened
because it's weird.
I mean, when you look at when you see this formula
for the first time, you think, wow, how am I
going to prove positivity by using such a formula?
So I mean, the formulas for the contribution of the other places,
the primes, are much simpler.
But the formula for the Archimedean place
is quite tricky because it takes the principal values.
It's something which is divergent because of the x minus x inverse
in the denominator.
It diverges at 1.
And you remove the divergency in a certain way,
which has to be very, very carefully defined.
I mean, it's not at all arbitrary.
I mean, this is the principal value.
So in fact, there would have been no way to attack this problem
without having, of course, a better understanding
of these local terms.
But this better understanding is what I had obtained
when I wrote my paper in Selecta Mathematica in 1998.
And it's the semi-local trace formula.
And what it does, if you want it, instead of taking all the places
at once, it takes a finite number of places
containing the Archimedean place.
And it replaces the adults or the space
we were talking about before by a much simpler space, which
is the product of the local fields
over a finite, finite Archimedean primes.
That's the Archimedean prime.
And then it turns out that the complicated local terms
of the Riemann wave formula, they pop up.
And they pop up very, very simply
by a formula which uses a quantized calculus, which
I was mentioning before, in the case of spacetime,
and which is that what you have, you
have a certain unitary operator, which is ultimately
tied up to Fourier transform.
And when you take its logarithmic differential
in the quantum sense, you put a 1 half in front.
So this 1 half of u star, this Lachlanou,
is this logarithmic derivative.
Then when you take the trace, you
find that it is a sum of the precise principal values
defined by Baye over the finite set of places
for the test function h.
So I mean, of course, this means that there is a way to handle.
There is a way to comprehend these local terms
and to relate that to the geometric part
that I was mentioning before.
What we did with Katia, we considered,
if you want, the association between these operators
and their Schwarz kernels.
I mean, when you have an operator in a space,
the Schwarz kernel will be an operator
in the square of the space.
So this corresponds exactly to the magic data
idea of taking the square of the curve.
And moreover, the operator being scaling,
it corresponds exactly to the graph of the Frobenius.
And when you do that, you find that the distribution, which
looks very, very complicated, in fact,
because of the expression for the quantized calculus,
splits out into a sum of two pieces.
There is one large piece, which is called sigma.
And there is a small piece, which is called delta.
And when you look at these pieces,
you find out that they give you one idea.
They gave you the idea that while this spectral
evaluation, which I had done a long time ago,
was by an absorption spectrum, when
you look at this geometric picture and the Schwarz kernel
and so on and so forth, you find out that no, I
mean, in fact, there should be a way
to replace this absorption spectrum
by an emission spectrum.
Remember that it was just for a small break,
that it was an amazing fact that at the end of the 19th century,
at the end of the 19th century, while the physicists had
invented a new chemical element, which they had called inu.
And they had invented it, I mean, physicists and chemists,
because of the spectral lines, which were unexplained
and were coming from the sun.
Then there was an eruption of the Vesuvio.
And spectral analysis was done of the lava,
which was the thing from the volcano.
And boom, they found that there was an emission spectrum,
which was inu.
So inu was discovered on Earth.
So I mean, here we are in a similar situation.
And we want, of course, you see the big trouble
with the absorption spectrum is that it doesn't allow you
to prove positivity or something like that,
because it's kind of patient zero in the continuum.
So the emission spectrum is much better.
And in fact, I mean, I had been for a long time
puzzled by an idea of John Keating and Michael Berry.
I mean, they had the idea that they were doing something
very strange compared to what I was doing.
They were using the same operator, which
is a scaling operator.
But instead of making a cutoff and looking at it
as an absorption spectrum, they were looking at it
in a very strange way, which I was very dubious about,
which was to impose a cutoff in these two ways, which
was totally artificial.
But they were getting the right semi-classical limit.
And at some point, I had made a computation
that, in fact, there was an explanation for what
they were doing, which was that I could take my own interpretation
as an absorption spectrum, but I could subtract
this interpretation from the white line.
And when you do that, you find exactly that picture.
But you also find exactly the picture which
we had found with Katia this year.
So I mean, all these things were quite an entire thing.
And what we did with Katia was to treat the simplest possible
case, which is the case of the Archimedean place.
And take this seriously.
Take the computation we had done with the Schwarzkerner
correctly.
And then what we found is that there
was an abstract reason for positivity.
The abstract reason for positivity
is a very simple lemma.
In fact, I mean, it was also motivated by an attempt,
which had been done by Xergyn Lyian for our age.
And this positivity lemma is amazingly simple.
What it tells you is that it's in the framework of the quantized
calculus, but it tells you that automatically,
if the unitary that I was talking about before,
which is related to Fourier, would be triangular in the decomposition
corresponding to the quantized calculus,
then you would immediately have that minus 1
half of trace of f u star f u would be positive.
Why?
Because it would be equal to the trace of the product
of the function f, which is positive,
by the projection on what we place
the whole of the sun in space, which I call s for this reason.
But it's a general lemma.
It's a general lemma.
So it turns out that, I mean, in reality,
the triangularity of the operator is not true.
But one can compute the discrepancy.
And what one finds is that this operator is not triangular.
This unit is not triangular.
But it's triangular modulo infinitesimal in the sense
of the quantized calculus.
So because of that, you can compute the difference.
And you can correct by the difference.
And then when you correct by the difference,
you can try with a computer to see if you get the positivity
that you need.
And amazingly, so this is the discrepancy,
the graph of the discrepancy.
You compute it for a transform, put it on the computer.
And amazingly, you find that it gives you something positive.
Now, of course, you have a conceptual reason
for this positivity coming from operators and so on.
And when you look at it very close,
of course, you may be scared, you know,
because it's never a proof in the computer and the raw graph.
But how can you say that the thing is positive?
You need a proof.
So proof is conceptual.
But what is truly amazing is that this compensation
of the derivative of the angular function
is, in fact, almost exact.
Namely, the remaining angular function is not positive.
It has a drop, if you want.
It has a risk, the derivative of it, which is negative.
The function is not increasing.
It has a place where it's not increasing.
And I mean, discarding this place
was a mistake, not by X and Y.
But the correction exactly compensates for that.
So in fact, with criteria, we went further.
And I mean, we went further by, if you want,
really doing the analysis of the discrepancy of this discrepancy
using pairs of projections and so on.
And what we found is using pairs of projections,
as I had defined them in my paper in Selektat.
What we found is the following theorem.
We found that the veiled term, which one would
like to prove to be positive, which I call here W infinity
of F in the formula, which is minus the WR,
can be expressed as the trace of the product of the function
by the projection on the space.
But the function doesn't restrict to the space.
I mean, multiplication doesn't restrict.
But you can take that product.
And of course, the trace of a product
of two positive operators is positive.
And so this is the root of the positivity.
And it is exactly the root that I was talking about before.
That means this root about triangular unitaries.
But there is a remainder.
There is a remainder.
But this remainder is perfectly computable.
And it's computable in terms of polite functions.
And we analyze this remainder.
And what we proved is that, in fact, this remainder doesn't
spoil things because it has the correct sign.
So in other words, the veiled functional,
which is minus WR, which is the one you want to be positive,
is in fact larger than the trace of the product,
if you want, of the scaling action
by the projection on sunny space.
Of course, when you have a square,
you can move things using the trace property.
So this is what we have.
And I mean, this was published recently in the Selector
Mathematica as a kind of eco eco of my 98 paper.
But I mean, it was not easy because the referee didn't
understand anything in the paper.
OK, so now with Katia, in fact, this year, what we did
was to analyze the, I should have said before,
that one reason why this work for the Archimedean place
is very meaningful, is that, in fact, somehow the process
and the most important fact is that this unitary, which
is coming from the semi-local trace formula,
is not triangular, but it is almost triangular in the sense
that the piece which is not triangular is an infinitesimal.
Now, what we also proved last year with Katia
is that, in fact, the same property
that the piece which is bad is infinitesimal
continues to hold when you take finitely many places.
Now, this fact is extremely promising.
And probably this is what finally convinced the editors
of Selector to accept the paper.
This fact is extremely promising.
Why?
Because it says that there should be a way
to extend our results to finitely many places.
Now, if you do that, you are finished
because you prove the very positivity.
So, in fact, with Katia, what we did this year in the meantime
was to understand the infrared behavior,
if you want, or the low-lying zeros of the Riemann zeta
function.
And the way we did it was to, again, use
these polite functions that were so efficient before.
And we used them to define a spectral triple,
namely a non-competitive geometry,
which is obtained by, if you want,
conditioning the most trivial thing, which
is the Dirac operator on the circle,
by these polite functions.
And I mean, I gave a very detailed talk
about this in June of this year, 2021.
So I won't repeat this talk, but I will just
show you a few pictures to give you what was going on.
So I mean, what was going on is that what we did,
we took the periodic Dirac, and we perturbed it
using this projection on the end.
What I didn't know when I gave my talk, in fact,
is that the part of the spectrum on which we get old,
it comes from the fact that we cut in the sum of our integers,
I mean, like in the Riemann data function,
we cut it to some level.
And the reason why we cut it to some level
is that when we take this polite projection by which we
perturbed the Dirac operator, in fact,
the sums which are involved, the sum of f of nx,
because of the support of the functions,
they only involve a few n.
Now, what we found out was we cut it afterwards.
I mean, after I gave the talk, is that in fact,
the cut at which n we stop is exactly the same as in a very
famous unpublished formula of Riemann, which
is the Riemann-Zegel formula.
And I mean, when we did the calculation,
so when we did the calculation, we
got this spectral triple, which was depending on lambda.
So it's like we are an experimenter,
and we are allowed to choose the frequency at which
we work, the lambda at which we work.
And what we had found with Scatia
is that we were getting spectra of these Dirac operators
perturbed, which were really looking
like the low-lying zeros that are amazingly similar.
But I mean, they were never so, which lambda do we choose?
Now, but what we discovered is that, in fact,
the lambdas, which are meaningful,
are those in which the various choices for making the cut,
if you want, coincide.
And when they coincide, the value that you get
is exactly right.
So for instance, for the first zero of data,
this type of, I showed this type of graphics,
and they were showing that when the ways of doing the cut
agree that you get exactly the right eigenvalue, which
is the corresponding zero of data.
And from that, we developed with Scatia, I mean,
the criterion, and so on.
And from that, we were able to compute
without mentioning data, without mentioning
analytic continuation whatsoever, just operators.
So we were able to compute, if you want,
the first 31 values of the Riemann data function
and compare the two spectra, and there is no difference.
I even forgot which one is coming from zero of data,
and the one which is coming from our way of spectrally
understanding what is going on at the infrared level.
So I mean, time is running.
Of course, I don't want to spend too much time,
but still, I want to mention that somehow, at this point,
where you see this spectral coincidence, and so on,
you could say, well, OK, now forget
about the geometric aspect, and so on.
No, I mean, it's beyond the scene.
And what we found with Scatia is that, in fact, we
understood that when there was coincidence,
there was something going on, which we called z-acycles.
And it turned out that with these z-acycles alone,
you were not able, really, to give a spectral realization.
But in order to give a spectral realization,
you have to put them together.
And amazing me, the space of parameters,
which allows you to put all these things together,
is a scaling site.
And I mean, how does it appear, the scaling site?
It appears because these z-acycles
have the same algebraic property as geodesic.
Because if you take a geodesic, you
can turn it around several times.
So you have a way, if you want, to cover it by n times.
And this gives you a kind of action of n cross.
Now, same old story for z-acycles.
And I mean, it gives you, in fact,
that these z-acycles of correct parameter space
is a scaling site.
And so what we did with Scatia, which is not yet published,
is that we proved, in fact, that the spectralization
on critical zeros, an important, is, in fact, obtained as an H1.
I mean, it is, in fact, what you have to do
is you have to take on this scaling site, x.
You have to take a sheaf.
And this sheaf is best described in terms of a theory, which
I don't have time to talk about, which
is the theory of s-algebras.
And I mean, which is a theory, if you want,
which cures two difficulties with spec z.
One is that z times z is z.
But I mean, when you take the correct base, which is, in fact,
going back to Valdau's and Baudouilly and so on,
which is related to the sphere spectrum,
in the guise defined by Graham Siegel,
then you cure this difficulty.
But you also cure several of them.
You cure the fact, for instance, that now you
have a structure shift for the arachnol convocation,
whose torque at infinity is related to the group of now.
But I won't evolve on that, because I
want to finish on something which is really new,
with respect to all types of previous work,
and which is a collaboration with my collaborator
of a long, long time, Henri Moscovici.
And I mean, what we have done with Henri,
we have done it, we have found, we
have stumbled on something by accident.
I mean, there is no other description.
And what we have solved as a problem
is a problem which was really there for a very, very long time,
which is what about the use of that behavior
of the zeroes of data.
You see, what I have described with Katia
is the infrared behavior.
So it doesn't state how the zeroes behave
when you go very, very far out in the spectrum.
And as a model that we had with the Dirac operator,
which is periodic, of course, doesn't answer this question.
Because when you take the perturbed Dirac,
after a while, the zeroes will be the same.
I mean, as for the Dirac, they will be just very easy behavior.
The zeroes of data are very complicated behavior.
Why?
Because when you look at the number of zeroes, which
was a beautiful element, what you find
is that the number of zeroes of data which are less than e,
where e is some positive number, I mean,
the zeroes which are positive imaginary part, which
are less than e in imaginable, what you find
is that it's e over 2 pi times log of e over 2 pi minus 1.
It is very strange.
Because if you take a manifold of dimension 1,
and if you look at its spectrum, of course,
you'd like to find the zeroes of data
that's coming from a Dirac operator on one dimensional manifold.
Well, it never gives you that.
I mean, it gives you something which is like e proportional to e.
And this e times log e, I mean, when
you think of it in terms of what we call the dimension spectrum
with Henry, I mean, it gives you a dimension spectrum which
is weird, which has a double pole at the point 1 and so on.
So it looks like an impossible problem.
But, I mean, with Henry, we stumbled.
I can say we stumbled on the solution of this problem.
And it turns out that what we found
is a natural Dirac operator which is, in fact,
intimately connected with solid space.
I mean, I am not able to tell you too much
because it's kind of embargo on this idea.
So it's intimately connected with solid space.
And it has exactly the correct ultraviolet behavior.
And from the principles of non-competitive geometry,
we are gradually unveiling the corresponding geometry.
It's a very, very interesting, very mysterious geometry,
but which is new and to us, and it to us by the operator.
We stumbled on the operator, and then
we are unveiling the geometry.
And what is extremely interesting,
and I want to finish on that, is when you compare
the spectrum of this operator, which we
know to be on the critical line.
So I mean, it's not that we restrict zeros to whatever.
No, we know this full spectrum.
When we compare it with the zeros of data, here is what we get.
So I will show you some comparison.
So here is a comparison at the infrared level.
So there is some obvious difference.
Because you are at the infrared level.
And then you keep going, you keep going, you keep going.
So you can see there are yellow dots, and there are blue dots.
And the yellow dots are our spectrum,
and the blue dots are the zeros of the remand data function.
And it continues like that.
I mean, it continues like that.
I mean, of course, the remand data function
is a little bit more erratic than the other one.
But I mean, there are ultraviolet behaviors.
Behavior and infinity is exactly the same.
It's exactly right.
And this we know for our operator.
So if we want what we have done with ARRI is we
have stumbled, really stumbled, on a geometric space
and it to us by an operator.
This operator has a right spectrum.
It's not yet the right one.
It's not yet the right one, because if you want,
in a sense, it is related to the Archimedean place, alone.
It doesn't yet, if you want, contain the input
from the prime numbers.
And it seems clear to me that this input from the prime numbers
will come from the semi-local framework
that I explained before.
OK, so this is where I will end up.
And I mean, what happens really is that there
is two types of spectra or zeros.
The interlaced, I mean, one is between the next one
and the next one is between the two with the same n.
I mean, this is really an amazing fact.
OK, so I think I will end up here.
And I will have conveyed the idea
that there is this spectral standpoint, which
will require a lot more work, but which is really
the way many things actually manifest themselves
to us for our understanding.
OK, thank you.
I will finish here.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Alain.
Yes.
Yes.
OK.
A wonderful talk.
Yes.
Are there any questions or comments?
I should have said one thing at the end, which
is that when you see only a yellow dot,
this yellow dot is hiding the blue dot, which is behind it.
So I mean, when you only see a yellow dot,
it means that it is the same, or essentially the same.
I mean, this is important to say.
Yes.
Uh-huh.
OK.
So yes, please go on with questions, comments.
Maybe I start myself.
I've been a bit selfish here, so sorry.
For quantum gravity, what do you think?
What modifications of the spectral paradigm
you think is needed, or you don't think is needed?
I mean, I want an answer which would be very philosophical
and kind of looking.
I mean.
Yeah, sure.
No, I think if you want for that, OK,
this would require a world talk somehow.
So I mean, what we have found with Alain Walter
is that the spectral action was sort of natural
when you take second quantized fermions.
And what happens is that when you take second quantized fermions,
you can recast the spectral triple
in the second quantized level.
In other words, what you have, you
have to replace the universe space
by the Clifford algebra, infinite dimensional.
And you have to replace the Dirac operator
by automorphisms, which are corresponding
to the Dirac operator.
What the algebra has to be replaced by, we don't know.
But what is clear, if you want, is
that the step which is waiting to be done
is to blend together.
Somehow, if you want, the point of your spectral triple
is very much like a first quantized point of view.
And so what remains to be understood
is to which extent one can incorporate the quantum
corrections and so on.
But this will require to go to the second quantized level.
So if you want, there is a general principle, which
I have observed many, many times, which
is that somehow the operator algebras and so on,
they are like the second quantized form of universe space.
And there are many, many reasons to advocate for that.
So I mean, this seems to be a natural trail.
And one other reason why I think it's a very natural trail
is the following is that somehow,
spectral triples are, of course,
sentimentally related to k-homology for the sort
of homotopical information that they contain.
Now, it turns out that it's natural to think
that when you go to the second quantized level,
you should get a theory which is naturally
dual to algebraic k-series, to the algebraic k-series of Coulomb.
So in other words, I mean, at the homological level,
even at that homological level, there
is a natural question which arises
and which is to understand what replaces
k-homology at this level.
Now, OK, and there are, of course, plenty of questions.
And what one has to do is to experiment with them.
I mean, one other thing, which is very surprising in the work
that we are doing with Henri, is that we
have to extend spectral triple a bit,
because we have a space which is a little bit like spacetime.
I mean, it has an imaginary time.
So I mean, this says that the research that is done partially,
I mean, I know that there are very good contributions already
on that topic of replacing spectral triple
in order to deal directly with spacetime,
not with the recrotated spacetime.
So I mean, this type of thing is also
going to play a key role, I think.
So I mean, the idea of spectral triple is quite basic.
I mean, it is a paradigm of geometry which obviously
allows a lot of things.
But OK, I mean, to say that it is a final paradigm
would be stupid.
I mean, it has to be experimented with.
It has to be used and so on and so forth.
You meant, sorry, you meant Lorentzian spectral triple.
I meant Lorentzian, exactly.
I meant Lorentzian signature.
So what happens in the work with Henri is that very
surprisingly, I mean, this is extremely surprising.
Not only we find something which is related to the zeros
of data, but the part which is sort of imaginary,
I mean, if you want Lorentz gives you
the trivial zeros of data, which is mind-blowing.
And we cannot say that we really understand
what is going on, you know.
So this is the situation.
I mean, and it's kind of the situation
which I love in mathematics, namely the situation in which
instead of, you know, you are looking for something
and you can write a proposal and you say, OK, in one year
I will have done this and I will have no, I mean, come on.
This is not what we are doing.
I mean, you are looking for something for understanding
and you find something else.
I mean, you find something totally unexpected.
So that's exactly what happened to us.
Exactly what happened to us.
Thank you.
Any other comments or questions from the audience?
I think I have a question.
Yes. So is it possible to classify all representation
of the two-sided equation?
That's a pretty good question.
No, I think if you want, I can tell you what one should expect,
but with a lot of enormous work.
If you want, what one should, of course,
impose a few conditions on the representation.
One of the conditions should be if you wanted the veil,
the veil growth for the Dirac should be like in dimension four.
OK, OK.
So what I know is that if you do that,
then the volume is quantized.
This I know.
Moreover, so a certain number of things are already there,
but one would have to prove a fantastic generalization
of the reconstruction theorem in order to answer your question.
You see what I mean?
So I mean, what is very satisfactory is the following,
is that you see, when people saw the Eisenberg commutation
relations, they extended them.
How did they extend them?
They extended them by group representations.
And then there was the Alexandre theory,
you know, all the physicists and, of course, I mean,
you know, it was amazing work, Wigner and so on,
Bergman and so on.
But by doing that, if you want, you cannot, of course,
expect to get geometries by doing that.
I mean, you will get a few parameters,
but you won't get, you know, that the representations
themselves are geometries.
And that's a big, big input of the Eisenberg relation.
The big input that what we know already
is that among the representations,
you will have those which come from speed form manifolds.
We don't know what they are all.
OK, what should be expected is that you get something
like singular manifolds and so on.
But if you want, the main idea is
that by passing from the ordinary Eisenberg relation
to this higher Eisenberg relation, then, oh, wow,
you find that geometry is born in Hilbert space.
So it's born in quantum mechanics.
And that, I mean, that mere statement
should be, of course, a very strong indication
for people who are doing physics because gravity
is the story of geometry.
And then you have to find it compatible with the quantum.
And that's already a sign, you know,
that the compatibility is amazing.
It's amazingly difficult because it
will be, of course, very, very, very difficult
to prove a theorem of this kind.
But somehow, you know, already we
know that at least all the manifolds give you
such a representation.
And what probably I didn't insist enough in my talk
is to explain that what we were looking for with Ali and Slava,
it was really a purely geometric problem.
We had no intention to find the standard model at all.
We wanted to, you know, we had already
done work with Janie and so on in 2000,
I mean, where we were describing the sphere using
a very simple thing, like two by two matrices
and a free product with a projection.
So that was already very satisfactory
because what it is saying, if you want,
is that there is a way to encode the algebra in a way which
can be, which is almost combinatorial
because you give it like a free product.
What we had with Janie was a free product of, like,
two by two matrices with a projection.
When you write such a free product,
you can just write words.
So you are talking by words, adding them and so on.
And that's your algebra.
It's not the algebra of functions on the sphere.
It's algebra of two by two matrices of functions.
But it's much simpler to give it like that than to give
the algebra of functions.
And the idea is that if you want the algebra which
is used by the universe, OK?
It's of the same type.
It's something which is very simple to end combinatorially
and which then, OK, because it has to be ended combinatorially,
cannot be commutative because the commutative creates
a collapse.
If you apply the commutative to the language,
all the anagrams are the same.
So you collapse the meaning.
So you collapse the information which
is a priori available into a dessert.
By passing to the commutative, the lesson which I learned,
if you want, from the non-commutative,
is precise is that, in fact, the non-commutative is not weird.
It's not strange.
No, we are so used to it because we speak, because we write.
So we are used to keeping the information from the order
of the letters and the order of the words.
And so, I mean, and this is the essence of what
we are trying to do.
So what we are trying to do, we are trying to write down,
if you want, the four-dimensional stuff in such a way
that it would be optimal from this point of view.
And then we found these algebras and we were stunned.
We were really stunned.
But I can tell you, I mean, obviously, it
says that the message didn't get understood.
Message is there.
But maybe I didn't talk enough about it or I don't know what.
But I mean, so this is, I think this is a very important thing.
I mean, with respect to the question of Massoud
about quantum gravity, see, I think the quantum gravity,
OK, I mean, it's a very far-fetched goal.
There is a goal that we were addressing.
It's a much simpler goal.
It's to understand why on earth aren't we just
living in gravity?
I mean, this would be beautiful.
We'd just have the Jimmy News and we'd all be happy about it.
No, it's not like that.
So one has to understand.
Just understand.
I mean, why does it have to be something like that?
And I mean, I believe, at least for myself, OK,
I found an explanation.
My visa is something to be improved and so on and so forth.
But then I lost my interest into this problem
when after doing that, because I had the impression
that the reason was there.
The reason was something very combinatorial,
a way, a language, as simple as possible because
of the key for the algebra being so simple
that would actually answer the question.
Any other questions?
May I add something?
So the dream is to somehow take an integral
over all possible representations.
Yes.
OK, well, that's OK.
Then you see this again is a very interesting question
for the following reason, because there is, if you want,
there are two approaches in corner field theory.
There is the one you mentioned, which is the final integral,
which is in a way the one which is most directly
understandable because you can write the integral even
if you don't know what integral means.
Doesn't matter.
We can write it down.
OK, that's one thing.
But there is also the particle approach.
And the particle approach would mean
that you have these geometries and they interact with each other.
You see?
So it's like if what I have given you
are the irreducible representation of the Poincare group.
So you have the notion of particle.
But you don't have the way they interact.
And the way they interact, they should be also
at the particle level.
So of course, this remains to be done.
Now, what you are asking about possible functional integral
and so on, this can be and probably should
be approached by taking a finite dimensional approach.
And that's what we're trying to do also with Walter
by considering operator systems and all that
and trying to find, if you want, an approximation
to these relations in finite dimension.
There's some matrix model, yes?
Yeah, kind of.
Exactly, matrix model.
So of course.
But I mean, so you know, this one,
I think one should remain quite flexible and so on.
And I mean, progress will come.
But I think it will come by accident.
I don't think one can even write a proposal on that.
You see what I mean?
I mean, I think that I have really this very strong belief
that if you do some work to understand,
then some things will pop up.
And sometimes you will be very surprised.
This is exactly the way we were in our work with Henri.
I mean, we were extremely surprised.
Because we had no intention to find this ultraviolet behavior
at all.
I mean, this was totally foreign from our intentions.
But we just stumbled.
Of course, then you have to recognize what you stumbled.
And I should add one thing, which
is that the use of the computer is extremely important.
It's extremely important to be able to handle the computer.
And then, OK, I mean, you have some idea.
And you can, any idea, in fact, I
believe can be already tested if you know how
to use the computer, really.
I mean, now we have something which Riemann didn't have.
He didn't have that.
I mean, he was computing by hand.
He was computing a few zeros and so on.
But I mean, if you had the computer, I don't know.
I mean, you know.
Yeah.
OK, so other questions.
Come on.
Here is a chance to ask questions.
Is everything very clear?
Sorry, I have a question.
What do you think is it wrong to try
to reproduce some transition amplitude
of some simple interactions, ignoring the effect of gravity
within the framework of spectral action?
Yeah, you can do that.
You can do that.
You can certainly do that.
I mean, this is what we did when we found,
if you want, that the standard model emerges
and with a fixed background.
So it's already done, you know, if you want.
No, no, this is perfectly fine.
Yeah, sure.
Other comments, questions?
May I ask a final question?
So why do you believe that the second quantization has
something to do with being dual to algebraic k-theory?
Ah, OK.
It's something mysterious.
Yeah, no, no, it's not so mysterious
because I don't know if you know things which
are called the Schringer terms.
Is something related to the spin representation of?
Yeah, well, I mean, it's something
which was anomalous commutator.
Yeah, exactly.
Yes.
Now, it turns out that these Schringer terms,
when you think of them abstractly as a mathematician,
they are related to algebraic k-two.
And they get an interpretation exactly
from spectral triples.
But when you go a little bit to the second quantized level.
So I mean, it's not totally stupid what I said.
I mean, you know, I mean, in the sense
that there are some hints.
On the other hand, OK, I mean, it's
more like it's a little bit like telling you, OK,
there are two things which are extremely complicated.
Maybe they are related.
So I mean, it's a little bit like that.
Don't take it too seriously.
But on the other hand, OK, I insist on the fact
that while a great discovery of Atiyah Schringer, really,
I mean, independently of Bayatiyah and Bayatiyah
was the introduction of the abstract elliptic operators.
And if you want of the k-homology,
I say independently by Atiyah and Schringer
because Atiyah wrote this little paper about abstract
elliptic operators.
But Schringer also wrote a very visionary paper, 1970,
in which he had similar ideas.
So I mean, the fact that they discovered
that the k-homology cycles are best
realized in Hilbert space, which of course, then,
was tremendously amplified by Kasparov,
by Brandeux-Glasfinmore, by all these developments.
This is somehow missing at the level
of algebraic k-theory.
So what we have, if you want, we have algebraic k-theory
of Coulomb, which is very sophisticated.
It's an extremely sophisticated machine in the sense
that, OK, k0 and k1 are easy.
But the higher kn are extremely fancy objects.
I mean, they are obviously extremely fancy objects.
And the point that I want to make
is that, after all, they are not based on an algebra.
They are based on the GLN groups, for large.
So it's not like you are using the algebra.
You are using its collection of GLN groups.
And that fits perfectly with the second quantized point
that I wanted to make.
Because on the Clifford algebra, you
could have by this group, not by the algebra.
You see what I mean?
Yes, yes, yes.
You see what I mean?
So I mean, there are several hints.
And there is certainly a missing theory,
which is dual to algebraic k-theory.
I mean, the enormous advantage when you have a theory
and it's dual is that you have pairings.
And you can decide that some co-cycle is non-trivial,
because it pairs non-trivial with something else.
So I mean, what one can say, I would summarize,
if you want to say, by saying that, OK,
we understand more or less the first quantized level.
But I believe that, OK, we need to go further.
OK, thank you.
Thank you very much.
Any other questions or we are now abusing Alain?
So I'm perfectly rested.
You know, I didn't.
It was my alter ego was talking.
Yes.
Any other questions or comments?
OK, so I'm sure there are a lot of questions to be asked.
But well, in time, we will ask them anyhow.
So if there are no more questions,
I don't see anything in the chat anymore.
If there are no more questions or comments,
let's thank Alain for fantastic and inspirational talk.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you, Alain.
