Yeah, thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you for the invitation and thank you for the
interest in this work. Let me start by thanking to my collaborators and mentors. Mentorship happened
in person, so thank to John, John Belizard first and foremost, but mentorship also happened through
textbooks and for sure there are many, many of my mentors here in the audience.
Also, I want to thank the funding foundations and you will see why.
Well, my first slide looks like this, but in fact, I will not start with
with this slide. I'll rather show you some experiments so we all know what we try to do
and in fact what we are talking about. First, I want to thank the collaborators, so these are
three extremely fine laboratories in metamaterials, New Jersey Institute of Technology,
University of Colorado, University of Missouri, and I cannot emphasize how much work has been put
into these examples, which I will show. Let me start with the first platform, which is really
spinners, so it's a ball bearing. You can attach these arms. You can take them off and
refit with something else. These arms can be fitted with magnetic these so that we can
couple these spinners, creating discrete resonators, and we can control the couplings
through this separation. Then we can assemble these into structures, one dimensional, two
dimensional, and three dimensional, and this platform is one of the most versatile available.
For example, this stacking here creates a resonators with three degrees of freedom,
and in fact, we can connect these degrees of freedom
pairwise without affecting any other degree, the rest of the degrees of freedom,
and I claim that with this platform, for example, I can generate any Hamiltonian
defined over a lattice, and we can stand it in the lab. Let's us look at some modes. I have
now this put in a collective, so they are coupled through magnets. I have an actuator here,
if I drive at certain frequency, then we see the signal propagating throughout,
so this will be a bulk mode, and I will call this a bulk frequency, and at other frequencies,
for example, this one, we found a mode which looks like this. It doesn't propagate inside the structure,
so this will be a boundary mode. You will hear a lot about these terms, bulk modes, bulk spectrum,
boundary spectrum boundary mode. I would like to make sure it's clear that this actuator,
in fact, it's very soft. It will not do anything to this system unless there is a resonance.
So if you see this moving, there is certainly a resonant frequency right at this driving frequency.
The next element will be that we will actually pattern these resonators
by adjusting these distances between the magnets according to an algorithm, like this one here,
and in this case, if we plot the spectrum, either the one mapped by the experiment or one
mapped by simulations, we obtain a spectrum like a resonance spectrum like this when
plotted as a function of theta, where theta is this.
So we see a lot of gaps, which we like a lot, because the boundary modes will occur
at frequencies inside these spectral gaps, and one part of my talk will be about understanding
this kind of spectrum. Here I'm showing a 2D structure. The driver is right here, and clearly
this frequency is in the bulk spectrum. We witness a bulk mode, and if you are careful,
some of these resonators have six arms, some have three arms, and this alternating structure
opens a gap in the bulk spectrum, and then we can witness such a phenomenon, where if I drive
with a frequency inside that bulk gap, I see the signal propagating along this fine line.
This is an example of a topological edge mode, where signal doesn't go in the bulk,
but rather propagates along the domain wall. So how I generated this domain wall,
the structure here is the same as before, and then there is an imaginary line here, and I
reflected this pattern on the top. In the process, I create a defect where we see fidget spinners
with three arms being concatenated like so. What is interesting about this pattern is that,
for example, as it turns the corner, the wave is not back reflected, but rather it powers through.
If you will work with a fiber optic, then even if you bend it a little bit more,
the light will be no longer transmitted beyond that bending. So this is something different.
Also note that, in fact, I can reconfigure this virtual wave guide by refitting some of these
spinners with arms and taking off arms, and we can imagine this being done automatic for
just for the sake of creating virtual wave guides, which connects each point with each point
and transmitting either energy or information. This is one of the first examples of a topological
behavior in mechanical systems. It comes from William Irvine Lab at the University of Chicago,
and he shaped this resonator at a certain frequency, and clearly he hit the bulk spectrum
because the signal propagated throughout. So what we are looking here are resonators, which actually
are hung on the ceiling of the lab. They are connecting through magnets, and inside here,
they are spinning tops, which are driven by motor. That spinning opens a gap inside the bulk
spectrum, and when you excise, so you will wiggle this one with a frequency inside that
spectral gap, and when you do that, something like this happens. So there is a mode.
Then there is a mode, which, quite funny, doesn't go in the opposite, only go in one direction,
and as it goes, it goes, it goes, and it doesn't disperse, it doesn't
fill in the whole boundary, but sort of goes together. Even more interesting, if you take out
some of these resonators in the defect, the signal doesn't backscatter here, but just goes around,
and voila. So we have a wave channel, which now goes around on the boundary. The wave channel is
active in a certain window of frequencies, and it's very robust against these defects.
So clearly, this is as many potential uses and applications.
We can do the same thing with acoustic resonators. So this is an acoustic cavity.
It supports self-oscillating modes, which happen at different frequencies,
and you can connect such cavities through bridges, like shown here. When you connect,
this resonant frequency then change, and by changing the length of this
bridge, you can map the coupling coefficients for such resonators.
Now, what can you achieve with something like this? I'm showing an extraordinary experiment.
This is a Tau less pump. It was predicted theoretically in the 1980s, but only this year
there was the first experimental implementation of the prediction using this kind of ideas.
So we have here two layers, I mean two periodic arrays, one space by D2, one space by D1.
If we plot the resonant spectrum as a function of this ratio, we start seeing these gaps appearing,
and we label some of these gap topological, some trivial, and if you put this source
at a frequency which is inside this gap, there should be no propagation through the system.
Yet, if you push this upper side like so, you see that the structure basically picks up a signal
and pushes all the way through this side. This is all because there is a boundary mode which forms
here, and as we deform the structure, the frequency of this boundary mode moves up,
and then there is another boundary mode which forms on the other side, which picks up the system
back, and it takes it to the microphone. This is, for example, how I'm not sure if you can
hear the sound through Zoom, but this is how the signal picked up by this microphone sounds like.
So you hear the first topologically pumped sound, and it sounds like this.
As opposed, if you fix this frequency in this trivial gap, it will do it like this.
There's nothing propagating over there.
Here are other, this is an application from Woollian Huang's lab. It's an acoustic crystal,
three-dimensional. These cavities are connected through bridges. The sizes of these bridges are
patterned so that when you put a microphone over here, the signal can be picked up on this corner
as shown by this measurement. The key here is that if there is a little bit of disorder in
the patterning of these bridges, this will be robust. Of course, if you put strong disorder,
the phenomena will be extremely strong disorder. The phenomena will be gone.
So this is what a few examples, and the goal of my talk is to explain why these boundary modes
occur, how do we do this metamaterial design, and how we explain the extraordinary properties
of this signal. So I'm moving to this part, and I formalize first, and the starting point is the
algebra of local observables. I have an observer, he's not an observer, it's an experimenter because
he has an active role. He pokes around with his stick, excites some of these resonators, and he
observed the dynamics. Now, in the linear regime where these wave propagations
happen, the algebra of local observables is just the algebra of compact operators over l2 of these
lattice. I should mention that these resonators are all identical, and they connect themselves with
their invisible force fields. In the acoustic case, these force fields were through bridges,
or through what we call a matrix material, but the healthy view will be that these are,
actually, they carry a force field, and if we put them in a certain configuration,
they couple to each other with no human intervention. So we want to take this human
intervention away. Now, in the nonlinear regime, then the algebra of local observables is this AF
algebra. As a rule, this experimenter cannot do any better than an AF algebra.
So physical grounds require that this local algebra is an AF. The focus is not on this
algebra, but rather on the time evolution. So we are interested in the generators,
and again, this experimenter cannot handle generators which are
not almost inner or inner limit. So the big question now is, okay, can we
generate a sister algebra out of these almost inner generators? And for the case of
when the local algebra is just a compact, then all this bounded almost inner derivation comes
from the algebra of bounded operators in this form. Now, if this was the end of the story,
things will be very, very sad, because the K theory of B of H is trivial. So it means all these
gaps that we cherish so much in the experiment will be the same. There will be no
nothing special about one gap in relation to another. So it's very important, and here is
what I highlight this, and I cannot highlight it enough that, in fact, this HL comes from a
separable sister algebra. Now, here is the setting. The experimenter deforms the lattice
and maps this H of L. This is exactly what we did in some of the experiments. We literally
mapped this. In other words, we were able to evaluate this H on any L.
And in the absence of any background fields, the Galilean invariance works,
which means if L prime happens to be in a relation to L like so, then we must have this
equivalent relation. And then Jean and Johannes assured us that all this HL can be generated from
the left regular representation of a sister algebra of an etal groupoid canonically associated to L.
To me, this is an amazing statement. It means that no matter what type of resonators we work with,
the dynamics is always associated to a fixed separable sister algebra,
which is entirely dictated by the pattern. And the program that I embarked on is basically
generating different sister algebras by or different classes of sister algebra by
working by looking at different patterns. I will come back to this one just to show you
how spectacular this statement is. Now, in this work, I will work with a class of patterns which
I understand very well. What are they? They are perturbations of periodic lattices, and these
perturbations are achieved dynamically. So I have an action of ZD, which generated this
lattice in the first place. I can embed the physical space into a larger space
and generate an action of the same ZD on this larger space. And if I caution this larger space
by a lattice, I get an action of the on the torus. If that's so, then I can take any function from
this abstract torus to physical space, and I can generate a pattern in this way.
I call this one a dynamically generated pattern. And if then the algebra of Galilean invariant
almost in a derivation reduces to the cross product of this algebra with ZD, nothing else,
but the non-commutative D plus D prime torus. This design principle gives us two things. We can
sort of access higher dimensions. So we get access to physics in higher dimension. We call this one
the physical dimension. These are virtual dimensions. And by playing with this lattice L prime and
with these generators, I can populate this A of theta in many ways. This theta is the matrix, which
encodes the coefficients, which encodes the commutation relations of the generators.
Now in general, by this scheme, I cannot populate the entire D plus D prime matrix, theta matrix,
but only certain entries. But they are enough to in fact create very interesting dynamics.
Here are three patterns generated by this algorithm. So I play here with this function
F and with this lattice L prime. And here are three lattices. I took this generic Hamiltonian and
just consider a coupling function very simple. And I evaluated this Hamiltonian on these three
patterns and calculated the spectrum. We are very happy to see these many gaps.
And we knew these gaps will happen. Why? Because the generators of the k theory of A theta
resides in the algebra itself. So we don't need the tensoring with compacts. And this is the reason
why these gaps actually open. And we can be sure that in fact, if we have strong enough
couplings, that will be the case. No fine tuning is required to open these gaps.
Now these gaps carry a topological invariant. What is the topological invariant? It's nothing but the
k theory class of the spectral projection in the
corresponding to the spectrum below the gap. Now here is a way to actually visualize this
invariant. So what I'm doing here, I am taking this spectrum, in particular this one. And I am
computing the integrated density of states by counting the number of eigenvalues below some
energy divided by the number of resonators for larger and larger systems. In the thermodynamic
limit, this is nothing but a unique trace on the non-competitive torus on the spectral projection.
A graph like this emerges. So I will explain what we are looking here. The IDS itself is on this
axis. The angle theta is the parameter theta is here. And I should say that this, I wish I could
vary the entire theta matrix, but I cannot. So I'm only very a parameter. But by varying this
parameter, I'm really changing the matrix theta. And then this kind of, and then energy is out of the
page. What we see here is this abrupt changes of color. What do they mean? Well, we are looking
at the 3D graph right from the top. So it means that the 3D graph, in fact, is vertical,
which means the integrated density of states is constant. Theta is constant. What can it be?
Well, we are just navigating inside the gap. So then these fine lines, in fact,
enable us to identify the values of the integrated density of states in the gap.
And then using this result by Elio, we have a prediction what this curve should look like.
If this is the decomposition of the projection inside the K theory, and here I'm
communicating that the generators of the non-commutative torus can be organized
by or can be enumerated by the subsets of the available indices. And then according to this
result, the IDS is given by this formula. Here this theta j is the restriction of the initial
matrix to the indices containing j. You take the Fafian and you have a prediction. And now if you
show what this prediction is, these are the fine lines. And sure enough, they overlap
perfectly with every single line since in this.
So in the process, we can calculate this numerical invariance, which are
the full set of numerical invariance associated with the gap. So
it's a way to achieve two things to first calculate this numerical invariance, but also to
validate that what we said is correct, that the Hamiltonian is indeed from the non-commutative
four torus in this case. If it was not, then additional lines should have appearing here,
but they do not. While we went in the lab and generated such a structure,
and here I am coming back to the finding by Jean and Johannes,
in this crystal was very difficult to map actually the coupling coefficients.
But I said, look, it doesn't matter. I know what we should see because I put all my trust in this
result by Jean and Johannes that the Hamiltonian for these dynamics is in this algebra.
All you need is to generate strong coupling strong enough so gaps open in the spectrum.
Sure enough, when they do the calculation, then gaps open without even knowing what is the coupling
between this. We could figure out the coupling between pairs, but here that coupling is actually
influenced by the presence of the other resonators. Now here, I will say that a gap is topological if
one of these coefficients is non-zero for J different from the empty set.
If J is empty set, then this EJ is just the identity matrix. So here is a trivial gap,
the ball projection over here is proportional with the identity map, and all these ones are
in fact topological gap. They went in and map what happens on the boundary, and they found
this interesting structure which is predicted entirely from the non-commutative for torus,
the physics of non-commutative for torus. Let me emphasize that the pattern itself
depends on where I start the algorithm on this fictitious torus. So you see this phi here,
and the same phi appear on this axis. So now here the torus is flattened,
and while this phi doesn't matter for the Polk spectrum, it matters for the boundary spectrum,
because once you pick an edge, you virtually fix this phi. The boundary spectrum does depend on
phi, and this structure emerges. It's a topological boundary spectrum, and you cannot get rid of it.
So that's what I will explain why this topological boundary spectrum emerges,
but before doing that, I'll show another example. At Colorado, the group at Colorado,
they were working with this system. It's a layer of resonators on top sitting in a
force field which is shown below. Now, I just told you that the background field should not
be there if I want the theory to apply, so this force field I'll think of as coming from a
second layer of resonators, but the degrees of freedom of those resonators had been
jammed, so they are fixed. Now, you can start from this configuration where the two lattices
are perfectly aligned, but then if you rotate, you start seeing this more pattern, and for a
discrete set of values, you can recover some periodicity with a very large repeating cell,
for the majority of angle, there is no periodicity whatsoever. Furthermore, when they computed a
spectrum, a pattern of this type emerged as function of this theta, and when they plotted
the integrated density of states, we see all these web of lines. My recommendation was to fit
these lines with this expression, and sure enough, every single line that we try can be fitted with
this expression. I think this confirms, beyond doubt, that indeed this dynamics, the algebra
to which the dynamics associate is really the non-commutative
porthorus from where this is. All I had to do was to compute the theta matrix for this system.
Let me show you a few examples. For example, this gap here, whenever you analyze this kind of
patterns, you start with a big gap, because big gaps mean stronger features. In particular, the
IDS for this gap is this line, and it has been fitted nicely by this red line. Let me look for
this black. The IDS corresponding to it is this one. It has been fitted by this line,
and every single gap that we tried could be fitted by this expression.
To somebody who sees this for the first time, it's almost like magic, because I didn't even need it to
know what the exact coupling, how the coupling was realized here. All I asked him that there is no
human intervention. When you couple them, you'll have an identical resonator. It has a force field,
and so on and so on. In the process, we were able to map one, two, three, four, five, six
numerical invariance for each of these gaps. There are about 10 gaps that we work with.
Sure enough, we discover again topological boundary spectrum and all of that. I'll be moving
to explaining where this topological boundary spectrum comes from.
First, I'll present a spectral statement, bulk boundary correspondence in the spectral form.
We have a bulk system, bulk spectrum, and we want these gaps to occur. We can take an edge.
Now, this is an idealized edge. A real edge will look like this. We call a gap topological if
it is entirely covered by spectrum when such a real edge is taken. The statement is that
all gaps in the experiments are in fact topological. This statement is regardless of
what boundary condition we put. To explain, I will use the formalism which was invented by
Richter, Johannes, and Herrmann. Again, I cannot emphasize how monumental these works are starting
with the fact that the almost inner derivations come from a separable c-star algebra fixed by the
lattice, the observation that each gap carries a topological quantity, which is the
gap, the k-theory class of the projection, or if we can resolve it over the generators, then
we have these numerical invariants, which are the gap labels, and then this work, which shows us how
to formalize the bulk boundary correspondence inside c-star algebras. I'll present this
stoplitz extension in this form. It's the universal algebra generated by s-generators.
These are the commutation relations, and the u's are all unitary except for the first one,
which are just an isometry. The generic element takes this form, and now this projection e,
which is inside the algebra, generates a principal ideal, and this principal idea will serve as the
algebra of boundary observables. This principal idea ideal is isomorphic with
compact, operate algebra of compacts, tensor with this a theta hat, a theta hat being the
original theta matrix restricted to these indices. What is the relation with the physics? Well,
there is a canonical representation, which generates all Galilean invariant physical models
with a boundary. I'll talk more on the next slide about this. Of course, there is a sequence.
What's nice here is that the bulk algebra appears here on the right,
and then this sequence is split at the level of linear spaces, so an element from the middle
can be uniquely presented in this way. If we look at the canonical representation of this term,
we will get to be just the bulk element represented on the Hilbert space of the lattice,
and then sandwich with the projection on the half space. This is nothing but the Dirichlet
boundary condition. If you look on this one, then this is just the boundary perturbation.
It is localized near the boundary, so I hope I convince you that from that algebra, in fact,
I can generate these kind of rugged edges. The data for the bulk boundary is like so. You have a
Hamiltonian coming from the bulk algebra, and you have h bar, which is a lift,
and you would like to put down a statement, which doesn't depend on which lift you chose.
Now, that statement relies on this six-term exact sequence between the k-group,
and specifically on how the exponential maps, exponential map shuffles the generators.
A quick reminder here that the generators of these two k-groups can be enumerated using subsets of indices.
The cardinal needs to be even for the k-naught, and over here, the cardinal needs to be odd for k-1.
And what's important is that these generators can be taken so that they are shuffled nicely
by the connecting maps. With this knowledge, I can make a prediction, but first,
an important observation, which comes from the work by Johannes and Hermann and Richter,
is that the mapping, exponential mapping of this, of the projection, of the gap projection,
can be expressed entirely in terms of this data. Because if we want to make a, making a
spectral statement about this h bar, it's the same as making a statement about the algebra
generated by this h hat, so better have this k-element class expressed in terms of an element
which comes from this algebra. So it is nice that we can indeed represent this class in this
extremely explicit form, because then, if this is the composition of pg inside the k-group,
and any of these coefficients, nj, which contains index 1 are non-zero, then necessarily the pull
gap is, in fact, immersed completely inside the spectrum of h hat.
A quick proof, suppose that this is not the case, then there should be a small gap inside
the spectrum of h hat, but then this function, we can concentrate all the variation of this
function inside that tiny gap, and if we do that, the calculation shows that this
element here is just identity, so the class here should be, should be trivial, while from over
here we know it cannot be. So this is the, why we can be so sure that this boundary spectrum occur,
and it is statement independent of the lift of h bar, therefore we
prove this full boundary correspondence principle, at least in this spectral form.
Now there is a second part to this full boundary correspondence, which is the dynamical statement.
It's the formidable part of this full boundary correspondence. Suppose there is, now we are
talking about topological gaps, we have the boundary spectrum, and now if I put a source here,
and I shake this edge, although the spectrum is there, the signal just die out. Usually we say
that when it dies out, it dies out exponentially away from the source. In this case, we call it
localized. There are instances where you shake it, and then the signal propagates throughout
the whole edge. This will be delocalized, so the topological gaps have been
split in two classes, strong and weak. This is an example of a weak topological gap,
and this is an example of a strong topological gap, and a strong topological gap leads to delocalized
boundary, boundary modes, or boundary spectrum. And the full boundary, the statement of the
full boundary correspondence in the dynamical form is that such strong gaps occur.
Now let me mention that there are techniques for proving localization in the presence of disorder
abound. However, the opposite is a formidable task, and to date the only broadly applicable
technique known to me for proving delocalization relies on index theory. So that's what I want
to show you how you do that. First, some preliminaries. The boundary is disorder.
I started on purpose with no disorder inside the bulk, but now there is disorder on the boundary.
So the algebra, the boundary algebra, in fact, reduces to something like this.
So you include the algebra of continuous functions over a topological space,
and this is not just a topological space. There is a whole dynamical system behind it.
And it happens because if I'm looking at this pattern, I can shift this pattern
step by step. And in that case, this pattern, this edge pattern, or boundary pattern,
will produce an orbit in the space of patterns. We close that orbit, we get a topological space,
and together with a map, an action of ZD-1, and even more, I can even calculate a
probability measure just by working out, for example, the histograms of how this rugged
stuff occurs as I'm shifting.
It's important. Ergodicity is important, and ergodicity has to occur with respect to
D-1 shifts, and contractability is not necessary, but I will assume it.
An example is just a disorder boundary where this omega is truly just a Hilbert cube with its
standard shift shifts.
Since this one is already here, it's convenient to just embed the algebra of
algebra of bulk observables into this algebra so that I can have a uniform treatment.
Just a reminder that on such algebra, then there is a
standard trace which involves the integration over this new degree of freedom omega,
and there are circle actions, and there are a lot of them which supply S derivations.
Then, we know that this cyclico-cycle span the entire periodic
cyclicomology of the smooth non-commutative torus, and now what's the thinking here?
While the domain of these
co-cycles is taken this smooth algebra, one observes that in fact these multilinear maps can be
extended to a subolive space.
That's the key here, extending these multilinear forms to the subolive space.
However, we must make sure that the range of these maps remains quantized,
and for this we need an index theorem.
Now, for the top pairing, that is when this j involves all the available indices,
such an index theorem can be generated with a quantized calculus in its standard form.
For lower, when j are not like so, then we need a slight
generalization, which goes like so. On the top line, we have this Casparov product.
What do I have here? I should say that since the boundary algebra and the bulk algebra,
they look the same, I can just state statements for the bulk algebra, and then
I'll use them also for the boundary algebra. What do I have here? I have a set of index j,
and that j bar is the complement of this j.
I have a Casparov model here. How is it obtained? This algebra has in fact a canonical representation
on the standard Hilbert-Sister module for this algebra, and then using the circle actions,
one can generate a Dirac operator for that representation.
At the end, if you take the Casparov product, you land into the key theory of this algebra
following with the trace, you get the numerical invariant.
Now, it turns out that this one has a trace, this algebra has a trace, and this trace can be
canonically promoted to any
Hilbert-Sister module by a resolved by Lacan. Then you can generate the
conchern character following the same procedure and using that trace.
In the process, you have to demonstrate that that module is finitely summable.
Once you do that, then you have the comparing and you demonstrate that the two are the same
using a Fedosov principle in a slightly generalized form. This is how these index
theorems were generated. Now, with these index theorems,
indeed, we can push the pairings into the Sobolev. Here, I'm writing what is the
natural domain of these pairings. This is the weak closure of the Cistar algebra and you intersect
with this Sobolev space. Because of the index theorem, you can be sure that if you have projections
of unitary, which are deformed inside these domains, then the pairings remain constant
and take quantized values. It relates to the problem of localization because the boundary
spectrum, it's said to be localized if, let me say that the Vorel functional calculus
over the boundary spectrum lands in this space. You can show that
at least the examples that we could work, this is equivalent to localization.
Now, let's put the machinery at work. We have a numerical invariant for the bulk.
We have a numerical invariant for the boundary. There is an equality between them.
Very nice proof uses Kasparov product. This is the exponential map written in a different form.
This is the extension module related to the exact sequence of algebras.
This UG is nothing but what we had before. Then we take the product with this Dirac module,
which I describe for the boundary. Since the product is associative, we can look at what
happens when this product, and by a result by Chris and Rainy and Kerry, we see this,
that when you take the Kasparov product of these two modules, you land. In fact, you obtain the
module represented by the Dirac operator in the bulk. The conclusion is that if any of these
coefficients are nonzero, then we know for sure that this pairing, this time on the boundary,
must be nonzero. Now, the punchline. Assume that the boundary spectrum is localized
in g tilde directions. Then we can deform this function f into a step function, such that at
any time we remain inside the subolive space, but then at the end of this deformation,
this is just a unitary element. Therefore, the pairing should be zero. This is a contradiction,
which shows how to use index theorem to demonstrate delocalization of the boundary spectrum,
therefore to prove the bulk boundary correspondence in the strong formulation, that is
dynamical statement. Okay, so this is the end of my talk. I know I went a little bit over.
That's okay. So I'll just end here with, okay, how do I see it? The NCG program for material science.
We have to compute the c star algebra of equivariant almost in derivations on
the local algebras. Then k theory supplies a global picture. It's so useful to have this
global picture and know immediately what you can find and what you cannot find
in one class or another of metamaterials. Cyclic homology supplies numerical invariance.
If they come from these circle actions or things like that, they are always connected with
the physical quantities. For example, these circle actions come from
yuan invariance of the theories. The pairings are associated with transport coefficients
immediately. Quantized calculus supplies cost cycle with quantized range.
One needs to go all the way to the local index formula to push the theory into the subolive
and finally to have the dynamical statements through.
So here are some interesting open problems which I would love to
and are on my radar. Create dynamical patterns, but not starting from ZD, but rather from a
space group that is a discreet so groups of the Euclidean group.
Repeat the same for hyperbolic spaces. Try the same program from beginning to the end for
frontal patterns. Solve the non-linear regime. Complete this program from here all the way here
when the local algebra becomes either the CAR or the spin algebras. That is resolve the non-linear
regime and why not? I call these ones the bottom-up approaches, but we can do the top bottom
where we just start from an abstract algebra where who knows maybe we can complete this program.
And through representation we go back to material science and, for example, use these
platforms that we developed to observe new forms of dynamics. So thank you then and this was the
end of my talk. Thank you very much.
Oh, I guess a lot of people are mute. So thanks, Emil. So are there any questions or comments?
Yes, I just have one small curiosity. You know, I remember in the old times when we were working
with Jean Belissar, I had been very struck by one result of this, which was that when you try to,
when you take the ordinary non-commutative torus and you take the quantized calculus,
then as a fact, if you want the Chattin class properties of the commutator,
do not impose that the function is actually continuous, but somehow you extend.
And so this was playing, so I think it did also play a role in what you explained,
but I lost the exact place where it was playing the role.
Yeah, I know what, so functions which are differentiable, but they are not continuous.
Yeah, I mean, exactly. They have a first differential which is square integrable.
It's a function on the complex torus, but they are not continuous. And I remember very well
that this was really a key point because it showed the power of the method, the analytic method,
with respect to a method that would be too much inspired by differential geometry,
because then you lose a key ingredient. So I presume this was intervening a few
transparencies before the end. Yeah, so this is precisely where the fact that we can extend.
Yes, the co-cycle to the index, not exactly, on this space. Exactly, okay, very good.
Very good. I just wanted to check that. And you can extend that in situations
where you are no longer with the top class as you were saying, where you are.
I also have a question. Do you have mechanical models in the meantime for the K-mini model,
where you have Z2 invariance? For the K? So these models exist, and what do you see?
I mean, with respect to MOT2 invariance.
Unfortunately, the models exist only on paper. If it is to implement them
in the lab, you will need a stacking. It will look something like...
It will look something like this, but you will need four layers, a minimal of
not four, eight layers, and you need certain connections like this.
So although the model exists on paper, the material scientists still have
problems going beyond these first nearest neighbor connections.
And that's because there was no interest before in going beyond. They were always interested in
making things stronger, maybe more robust, but not on this type of question. So they
didn't even try. So it will take some time to actually see
and to implement such a... Yeah, the K-mini.
Okay, any other comments or questions?
I'll ask a question about Imi's last question. What should we look for? I mean,
if you just start with some C-style by considerations, how do we know whether
this is interesting for the material scientists? Ah, okay, very interesting.
So so far, we've been trapped inside the non-commutative torus. We are always
dealing with one form or another of integer quantum whole effect.
Every single project that I mentioned here gets you outside of that physics, and it will bring
something else. Already starting with Fuchsian groups, you'll see that everything
behaves different, and you have to rework everything from the beginning till the end,
and you will escape this trap of the non-commutative torus.
So that's what we want. We want now to just escape this trap of the non-commutative torus.
So there you mean this hyperbolic case? That's what we mean by Fuchsian groups?
That's right. So in the hyperbolic case, for example, this tori that I am using
or to generate the patterns dynamically will be tori with two holes, three holes.
It will be very interesting because now basically I have representations of the
braid group. I can deal with representation of the braid groups, and if that's the case,
then we already can go towards quantum computations, these ideas of topological quantum
computation, which are all based on representations of the braid group.
Same with when you go in the non-linear regime, then you start to see
a whole range of new phenomena. The derivations are unbounded,
and to formalize this algebra of almost inner derivation becomes the bottleneck. So that was
the bottleneck of the whole thing. We don't know how to start. In some sense,
we've been trapped in what Jean and Johannes achieved 20 years ago, and we could not go beyond
what, beyond that achievement. So the whole focus...
May I ask one more thing? Why does the braid group appear there?
I would rather expect the fundamental group of this surface to appear. Why braid groups?
Yes, the fundamental group of that surface.
So how is this linked to braid groups? That was my question.
Or why do braid groups appear? I can see why you might want to see them,
but do they appear in this linear regime already or in the non-linear regime?
They will appear because, as I showed here, we have control over this phi.
Phi, this phi, is in our hands, and we can redesign the pattern by walking this phi.
So here, for example, I have two...
Already, I have two topologically non-trivial loops, which I can use
to implement at least a braid group with two strands. I would like to go to a
braid group with n strands, with 10 strands, for example, where you can do a quantum computation.
Okay, thank you.
Emil, I think if you use something like two more, then there's also not just a non-competitive torus.
So, yes, Johannes, now I'll answer to you this, but
that manifold will not be a smooth manifold, isn't it?
Will it be totally disconnected?
So it will be totally disconnected, so then what I want is to generate monodromes by slowly,
slowly taking the system around one of these loops and coming back.
And by these adiabatic evolutions, then I can generate the representations of the braid group.
So I'll stay away from totally disconnected spaces,
unless, yeah, we've seen the other examples where it's somehow...
It's not totally disconnected when we consider Sturmian sequences with two cuts.
In that case, it looks like this manifold is more interesting.
But indeed, that's what we are trying to do, to just escape the non-competitive torus.
And guess what? Engineers, that's the main point. Can you convince the engineers to
go and look at it? And we started to look at the hyperbole case and the frontal case,
and immediately as you generate a crystal at the second or third generation, you're dealing with
millions of resonators. So it's a huge undertaking. Now, better be something interesting over there,
because otherwise we will be wasting a lot of resources.
But it's a sort of... And I know, Johannes, you're also collaborating now with laboratories.
So it's slowly starting to happen to the language and thinking, sort of
trips down all the way to the laboratories. And I have to say, it's quite amazing.
And it's much more rewarding when you see these things happening.
I should also say that... Sean, you want to say?
I have a question. Yes, I wanted to follow up on your comments concerning other possible manifolds.
In the late 90s, I studied for quite some time the problems from molecular physics.
In particular, the coupling between various degrees of freedom in molecules, which are
digression, rotation, and electronic degrees of freedom, which was interpreted at the time
in terms of semi-glascol analysis. And indeed, for instance, if the spin of a molecule is extremely
high, then classically you get manifolds, which are a little different from what you have in
solid state physics. It's not always a torus. You can get essentially any type of what is called
toric manifold, which are more or less the only model people know in algebraic geometry of
algebraic varieties that are not modeled unnecessarily on the field. And it was...
I mean, it didn't go very far because not so many people were interested, but people who were doing
their stochroscopy in molecular physics were obtaining a lot of results, including there
was chair numbers and crossing of bands giving rise to a change in the numbers of the sub-level
that you could explain in terms of these chair numbers and topology. So I have the feeling that
if you want to have manifolds, which are a little different from the torus, maybe that could be the
direction in physics where you should look at. Very good.
I should say that in the physics literature, you will see this periodic table, which contains
the strong topological insulators. Therefore, the weak topological insulators were filtered out by
exactly these principles that these boundary modes are extended. Now, inside that table,
you will find the ones classified by Z2. That's an open problem. It has not been proven
rigorously that the modes are in fact delocalized. And it's precisely because there is no local
index formula for that Z2 invariant. That's cool. Okay, thank you. Okay, so it looks like there are
no other questions. So, Zhang, should we end the meeting and thank you all. So thank you so much,
Emily. Thank you.
