I'm Nanja Swart of 4Basees.com. Dr. Patrick Moe joins us, co-founder and former leader of Greenpeace and leader in the international environmental field.
For over four decades, Dr. Moe, it's really, really a pleasure to have you with us.
Thanks for having me on, Nadja. There's lots to talk about these days.
Let's start with the story of how you co-founded Greenpeace, you know, what inspired you and also,
at the time, what was the state of the environment and the public's perception thereof?
Well, as a child, I don't think the word environment was ever spoken, and certainly ecology was never
mentioned. Even when we started Greenpeace, the word ecology was not being used in the popular
press, but environment was by that time, of course. I grew up in absolute wilderness on a floating village
in a small bay on northern Vancouver Island with nothing but water and forest around.
And no road came to that village. Everything came by boat from, and the boats had to navigate open
ocean on the west coast of Vancouver Island in the Pacific to get into our harbor. So it was,
it was a completely unique childhood that I had there, and, but the school only went to grade
eight. I went to school by boat every day because our floating village was about two miles from the
fishing village, which was on the land. And there was a small one-room school house with
somewhere between eight and 12 children in the average year in all, all eight grades.
And I saw I went grade one to eight there, and then was sent to boarding school in Vancouver
to a sort of English style boarding school, what they call public schools in England.
And I boarded there, and my parents would come a couple times a year to see me. And then I'd go
home in the summer back to Winter Harbor and work in the logging camp that my father owned.
So that's how I, my childhood, but I didn't realize that I had been in nature
naturally. It wasn't like something special. It was where I lived. And when I
became sort of acidified, I realized how lucky I had been. And, and, and, and went into life
science just naturally that because I was interested in birds and animals and the ocean and shells,
shellfish and fish, and I fished all my life. And so I,
I, I did a PhD in ecology eventually after doing a Bachelor of Science in Forestry and
Biology. And so I had, I was pretty thick into life science already by the time I was 20.
And then I, while I was doing my PhD, I heard about this little group that was starting to meet
in the basement of the Unitarian Church in Vancouver, which is a church that accepts
people from all religions. And, and even if you don't have a religion like me, it accepted you.
So I joined this group as a fledgling group of people. We all were pretty much hippies
by the looks of us, but everybody actually was a pretty professional oriented person. There were
writers and doctors and lawyers and ecologists and etc. And I guess I was the leading life
scientist in, in that early group, because we had, it wasn't about life science. It was about
stopping nuclear testing at the beginning. And so we sailed a boat across the North Pacific Ocean
in September 71 to protest against the five megaton hydrogen bomb the United States was going
to detonate. And we managed to get arrested by the Coast Guard and get on Walter Cronkite's evening
news nationally in the United States. And pretty soon tens of thousands of people were marching
against the bomb. And the day that bomb was detonated, people came from both sides of the
border to join hands and shut the border down for a day between all across Canada. I mean,
that's 4,000 miles or whatever. And every border crossing was shut down. And it was a really big
demonstration. And it's a long time ago now. So hardly anybody remembers it because they weren't
born yet, but many, many people. And that began Greenpeace. And then we went, we won. President
Nixon canceled the, the, the future tests of nuclear weapons in Alaska. That was the last time
the United States detonated a hydrogen bomb. It was very significant. And also the, the,
the beginning of the environmental movement was happening right there. And so then we went against
French atmospheric nuclear testing in the South Pacific. The French public didn't even know that
their government was still testing nuclear weapons down there. It was never printed in because the
government owned all the press that controlled it. And so we went to Paris and, and demonstrated in
Notre Dame Cathedral while our boat was on its way to Murroir Atole in French, in French Polynesia
where they were detonating these bombs in the air and sending radiation around the whole world.
It took two years, but we stopped it. And so, but a lot of people thought we must be commies if
we were trying to stop US and French nuclear testing and weren't going after the Russians.
Well, going after the Russians, we'd come out in a coffin. So it didn't make any sense for us to
Russians should be doing that, but not us because we were the enemy. And so it did have that element
to it. So we didn't get much support, of course, from the United States government or the French
government for that matter, but we beat it. We beat them. And, and again, this was at the height of
the Cold War and the height of the nuclear arms race. And that was the pinnacle of it too. It,
it eased off after that because partly because of the atmosphere we had created and getting people
aware of the how dangerous the situation was that the, and what a nuclear war really would do
to our world. And we're sort of in a space like that now in a little bit. It's as close as it's
been to that kind of atmosphere since then, I would say. But on the other hand, I think people
have thought enough about how much ruin there would be not to the other side, but to your side too,
if ever such a thing happened. So I'm a bit optimistic on that front, but not very optimistic
on the energy front. And so we, we then went on just in and many of our followers thought what
kind of crazy goose are you going to be saving whales after, after you, after you stopped nuclear
war, you're now going to save the whales. What's that got to do with anything? And, and so we lost
a few followers, but we set out into the Pacific for four years in a row every summer when the
Russians were killing and the Japanese were killing 30,000 large whales every year still
in the 1970s, mainly for their oil and for pet food. And the oil of the sperm whale is a special
type of oil. It's used in fine machinery, but it's also possible to grow a bean, which has
it just as good a oil in it. And then you don't have to slaughter a whale. And so we stopped that
by, by 1981, whaling was banned in the entire world because of what we did. We got out and
got in front of the harpoons and the pictures of us in a little boat in front of the harpoon with
the whale being killed went around, went around the world. And that's what really made us famous.
We weren't that famous when we were doing the nuclear testing stuff. It was, you know,
if they got in the newspapers, but when we did the Save the Whales campaign, we just got everybody
excited and interested in being able to do such a thing as to stop that. And because it was the
Japanese and the Russians, it was sort of balanced in terms of East and West. And we didn't have that
same attitude of thinking that we're a bunch of communists because we were actually going against
the communists. And that's what made us catch on fire and pretty soon millions of dollars
were involved and people were just throwing money at us and we started doing some really
good stuff. We stopped the capture of work of whales. I was the leader of that campaign
on Vancouver Island where the last attempt to capture an orca whale was thwarted by us.
And that was the end of that. They'd already taken nearly a third of the population
of the west coast of North America. They did after that start taking some whales from Iceland,
but that too has ended, I believe. And I don't think anybody is catching work of whales anymore.
We got to that point and we were famous around the world. But then we turned to a very serious
problem, which was the damaging of the rivers and lakes, particularly with toxic waste from
factories, especially in Europe. North America had adopted some pretty good
air and water pollution control laws in 1972 under Nixon. Again, it's funny and I mean,
Nixon is remembered for the Watergate break-in, but he actually stopped nuclear testing and stopped
killing whales and stopped toxic waste. He was behind all of those things.
The rivers of Europe, though, like the Elbe and the Rhine and the Thames, they were all poisoned.
There was almost no life in them because factories were putting their waste into the river under
water where no one could see it in a pipe. And we took a smaller boat than the ones we'd used on
the high seas. They were like 150-foot boats. We took more like a 75-foot boat that could go up the
rivers and we put scuba divers in the water to block the pipes where the waste was coming out
and it backed up into the factory and that image and that fact intrigued the media. And we got a
lot of press for plugging the pipes of these industries and today there's fish in all those
rivers. And so, you know, it was really a shame when Greenpeace went bad largely because it was
hijacked by the political left because they saw the money and the political power that we'd created.
We weren't political particularly. I've never been political. I've avoided it like the plague because
I believe that we should just judge every situation on its merit and not just say,
I'm a Republican so I support this, that and the other thing. Or I'm a Democrat and I support
this, that or the other thing. It doesn't make sense to me. I understand that it's legitimate
to have political parties. I just don't want to be in one. And I'd rather be a free agent,
so to say, to make up my own mind and to study things. I always say when I see a situation or
a problem, I don't just look at it from here. I walk all the way around it and look at it from
every direction I can imagine to try to understand it better. And now we've got a situation where
politics and science are being confused with each other. People are saying that there's a consensus
that humans are causing a global catastrophe, a global extreme weather and all this stuff, that
it's caused. So there's a consensus, is there? Well, that's not how science works. I mean,
if you look at any invention or discovery that's been done, that's why there's a Nobel Prize to
give to individuals who have exceptionally discovered something. Things aren't discovered by
committees. Rules are made by committees after the discovery has been made. But to separate
science from politics is absolutely essential and it's there being confused,
totally in the Western world. I think that, you know, I don't want to live in Russia or China
particularly, although Moscow is such a beautiful city. I don't want to live there particularly
because of their political structure. But I think they do a better job in some ways of discerning
the difference between knowledge and politics and because politics is really just about policy.
But if you make policy based on bad science, you get bad policy. You can even get bad policy
based on good science if you're not smart. But the truth of the matter is that there is no
hard evidence that carbon dioxide is causing anything to happen to the temperature of the
earth. There's none. It is totally theoretical. But the reason I called my book Fake Invisible
Catastrophes and Threats of Doom is because they are focusing on things that nobody can see
and making up stories about. It's impossible because you can't see it. The first rule of
science is observation. You have to observe something. It doesn't have to be with your eyes.
It can be with a microscope or with a microphone or it can be with any tool you can imagine.
Radiation is the other one besides carbon dioxide. Those are the two main ones that are in the
invisible category. So they blame everything on carbon dioxide practically. And then the other
category is remote. And that's why polar bears and coral reefs are the icons. Because again,
hardly anybody can see them or go there. Who goes to the North Pole and counts all the polar bears?
When in fact, and why is it that the media never mentions the treaty that was signed in 1973?
Like it wasn't in a thousand years ago. It was in 1973. The treaty was signed
among all the polar nations, which are six, to end the unrestricted hunting of polar bears in 1973.
Because wildlife biologists went to the governments and said they're killing. It's too
easy for rich people to go up there in a plane and hire a guide and get a polar bear or two.
And there was no restriction. They could take as many as they wanted.
So that was ended and and in force and has been ever since. And that's why the polar bear
population has grown three to five times larger than it was then. Which now I don't even believe
because all we see is photographs of lone polar bears on sheets of ice that are about to
to melt. Yes, their common name is sea bears as in SEA bears. They when they jump off an iceberg
and start swimming, they know where they're going. It's not as if they're going to swim out to see
and drown. More people drown every year than polar bears do. And it is ridiculous to suggest
that a polar bear doesn't know how to figure out things. You see, we know that polar bears can
survive through much warmer periods than what we're in now. Because the three interglacial periods
that came before this one, which is known as the Holocene, it's about 10,000 years into it now.
And so it's about time for it to end like in the next hundreds of years somewhere. We're in an ice
age, but the glacial the glacial maximums of which there have been 40 or more have all occurred
within the last 2.6 million years in the Pleistocene Ice Age. We are now in an interglacial period,
but it's still colder than it was for the 250 million years prior to that. Everything is upside
down, Nadia. Everything's upside down. They're saying there's too much CO2 when there's never
been so little. They're saying it's too hot when it's actually colder than it's been almost a whole
time of the earth right now, because that's why all that ice is on the poles. There's a lot, you
know, and they show a picture of the ice in the summer after six months of sunshine 24 hours a day.
But in the winter, every square inch of the Arctic Ocean plus ocean down even further south
than that is frozen solid. They never show you that one. It's still that way every winter.
And they've got people thinking that the ice is disappearing in the Arctic
and the Antarctic, which it's not. One of the most dire some doom and gloom predictions made by
climate alarmists is that we are in the midst of a abrupt climate change. And it's going to be
methane from the Arctic, which will lead to human extinction. Some scientists such as
Professor Guy McPherson believes it'll be by 2026. And you've recently said that
there's so far from the truth. How is it possible that there are two
sad conflicting theories? Is there not sufficient data and evidence that can be used to refute
disastrous claims like that of Professor McPherson? Yes, there are. It's not difficult. It's not
difficult to explain the history of the temperature and the CO2 on the earth, that people only go
back to 1850 when industrialization began. And they say it's like as if they think the
earth began then. It actually began 4.6 billion years ago. And when modern life emerged, which was
about half a billion years ago, before that it had all been the little tiny unicellular plankton in
the sea. But sexual reproduction occurred about 2.5 billion years ago. The photosynthesis occurred
even earlier than that. So life developed a lot of what we would consider to be very miraculous
processes early on. But when multicellular life emerged, that was the what called the
Cambrian explosion about 540 million years ago. Larger life forms came into being with
organs and flippers, but they didn't have any shells or backbones. They were all just like
jellyfish at first. And then gradually, gradually many of these multicellular organisms learned
to combine calcium with carbon dioxide in the ocean and make shells for themselves.
If you start thinking about all the marine creatures, a huge percentage of them,
including the corals, which is about 50% of all the calcium carbonate that is produced
by marine life. All of the limestone in the earth's crust was made by life. And the marble
and the chalk, the white cliffs of Dover are made of the skeletons of coccolithophores,
which are unicellular plant that makes a shell for itself. And you can imagine how important that
would be. Instead of just being a naked blob of jelly, you now have a thick hard shell to
surround yourself. And it's like a knight in armor. And so that was a huge advance in the
evolution of life. Like there's the crabs and snails and barnacles and clams and oysters. And
it goes on and on and on. And the coral reefs. And so that was a huge benefit. But unfortunately,
inadvertently, it meant that the CO2 in the ocean and the atmosphere, because they are connected
at the surface of the ocean, the ocean and the atmosphere are in equilibrium with regard to
their CO2 content, the ocean containing about 50 times as much CO2 as the atmosphere.
So when these shells started pulling carbon dioxide out of the ocean to make their shells,
it started going down from about 5,000 parts per million at the time that that shell
process was invented to 180 parts from 6,000, 5,000 to 6,000 to 180 at the peak of the most recent
glacial advance. And then this went 20,000 years ago. It went down to went down to 180 parts per
million, which is only 50 parts per million above the death of plants. Because plants don't just
need CO2 to live, they need a certain concentration of it. And 180 parts per million is only 0.018%.
And we all currently, according to most sources, we are 0.04.
Yeah, 0.425 or so. Yes, we have increased the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere by about 50%.
And this is one of the best things that has happened in the history of life.
And humans did it inadvertently, just like the shellfish inadvertently caused the CO2 to decline
so drastically over half a billion years. We have come back and saved life from a certain demise.
No other species could do this, could find the fossil fuels.
It highlights our ability to adapt. And we are also evil for doing this.
And it's kind of like a death wish, I think. I don't know why these things come about, but there
was a time when people burned women as witches with absolutely no evidence whatsoever of which
we even was, right? And throwing virgins into volcanoes was fairly popular back in the day.
And all through history, there have been ogrums. And the Germans murdering 8 million
people of a certain genetic extraction. I mean, whoa, we can be evil. But the thing is,
this thing about the climate, it's the people who are calling us deniers who are actually the
evil ones, because when you call a person a denier, we're not denying that the climate changes.
So why don't they use straight language? You accuse us of what we are actually believing,
which is that CO2 is a net benefit to life on Earth. That's what we believe.
We're just about to be joined by one of the winners of the 2022 Nobel Prize for Physics,
in our CO2 coalition in Harlington, Virginia, which is right on the border of Washington, DC.
And I was a founding director along with Will Happer and Dick Linsen.
I interviewed Dr. Linsen last week and Professor Happer last year. And I actually
wanted to mention earlier, when you referred to it as a death wish, that Professor Happer said that
this drive towards net zero, it's a suicide pact. Correct. And Dr. Linsen said last week that
it's almost as if the environmentalists have decided to commit suicide.
If net zero were actually achieved, that is the end of net amounts of CO2 going into the atmosphere.
How close do you think we are to that?
It's never going to happen. The only way it could happen is if we adopted nuclear
energy on a large scale. And that could be done. In 100 years, we could basically get off of at
least 50 to 75% of the fossil fuels we're using today. Everything stationary can be provided
by nuclear energy, heat and electricity. My concern here is where will we get our CO2 from?
We get our CO2 from the atmosphere in the ocean. And at this point in history of the earth,
it has been declining steadily for at least half a billion years. Up and down, just like the
temperature goes up and down, but generally we are now, we're in the place to see an ice age.
This is one of 40 or more interglacial periods where it gets a little bit warmer
than it is during the glacial advances. Canada was covered in over a mile of ice from one side to
the other during the most recent glaciation. And so was it during all the previous ones,
of which there were 40. And in between, you get a situation where it's halfway as livable.
Canada, that is, because less than half of it is lived in. It's working on 90% of Canadians
are within 100 miles of the US border for a good reason. The further north you go, the more inhospitable
it becomes. People forget that humans are a tropical species. We are not an arctic species.
We're not polar bears or penguins. We evolved at the equator, and if it weren't for fire,
clothing, and shelter, we couldn't have moved out of Africa. It's the only reason we were able to do so.
So, and those are all three very important things in our lives, fire, shelter, and clothing,
especially if you live in a cold place. You know, I'm in Baja, California,
which is part of Mexico right now, and it's a beautiful warm day, but it gets cold enough here
in the winter down into the teens and tens that if people came here and didn't have fire,
shelter, and clothing, they would die out very quickly. Even here, and I'm at the Tropic of
Cancer, humans could not live at the Tropic of Cancer without fire, shelter, and clothing.
And even at the equator, there's nights that are cold enough that you want to have a big
animal skin on you while you're sleeping. You know, you could call that clothing.
But I'd like to talk about coral reefs for a bit, because there is this myth that they're going to
die if it gets too hot. Funnily enough, though, the most biodiverse coral reefs in the world are in
the warmest ocean of the world, which is the Indonesian archipelago, and that's where there's
over 600 species of coral and over 2,000 species of reef-ish. By far the most biodiverse in the world,
the Caribbean is the next most diverse, and it happens to be the second warmest ocean in the
world. So the truth is, if the world warms, the corals will expand to a much larger range than
they occupy today. That's the truth. And even the people who study coral try to avoid saying
that, because if you say that, it means you don't believe that global warming is going to destroy
the coral, right? And if you don't believe that global warming is going to destroy the coral,
then you're not on our side. And then you won't get any more money from the politicians through
the bureaucrats into the universities. That's where the quiet side of this whole thing is.
Everybody hears the commotion from the media, and from the greens, and from the world economic
forum and all these people. But where the real business is taking place is where politicians
are instructing their bureaucrats to give scientists in the universities where 80% of all
the research in the United States is done, is in universities. And if you're a professor in a
university, you don't go along with the climate thing, you're not getting any money, period.
And with few exceptions, very few exceptions. And so, and this is the consensus is being paid for,
right? And bought, bought and paid for. And that's what's going on. And so then all the noise comes
from the scientists, from the media, from the greens, and they're all includes together making
a whole pile of money out of this. And it is, there have always been doomsday scenarios.
And yet, for some reason, doom has never occurred. I mean, like the end of the earth,
you know, it's just never seems to come about, no matter how often you predict it.
You just feel like going, wake up, people, wake up. Nothing like a good disaster to make the news.
It's human nature's latest thing. Everything is fine today. So we'd have nothing to say.
That is one of the arguments that's the very devoted to the narrative in terms of climate change.
People argue it when it comes to scientists that disagree with the consensus, that they're not
going to be around for long enough to have, you know, their predictions and advice end up killing
people. It's not going to upset them. Well, most of the people who like myself are willing to tell
the truth about this are not in the, in the clutches of some economic necessity. If you're
working for a living and you defy the narrative of consensus about climate disaster, you're,
you're, you know, you're going to be shunned. And, and I am shunned by these people and they call
me names. That's all they can seem to come up with is calling me names. And, and I don't see
what that has to do with science myself. I've never worked for the fossil fuel industry in my
life. But everyone, what else did you do? Yeah, I don't know why. I mean, I hadn't,
there's no record of it. I haven't hidden anything in my, I've been a very open person all my life.
I've never told a lie. And, and that is, that is, that is the truth. I don't tell lies.
Some people do. I think, and some people, I think they know they're lying. I'm not sure.
You can't, you can't see inside a person's brain. But the truth of the matter is, is there is no
evidence of a climate catastrophe. All they're talking about now is extreme weather events,
which have been going on since the beginning of time. And forest fires, for goodness sakes,
most forest fires are caused by people carelessly failing to put out campfires and throwing
cigarette butts out the window and that sort of thing is a lot of them. But lightning has been
here forever, right? And lightning is, causes forest fires. But the reasons that these fires
are so severe today is due to mismanagement. If you, if you imagine back in the day when I was
talking about when all, all the energy was from wood, every end of every summer, the people went
out from cities and towns and gathered all the dead wood in the forest. That's the first day
would take because it's the easiest to take and it's already dry. So this really reduces the,
the chance of a catastrophic wildfire going up into the crown of the trees and starting the whole
place ablaze. That is, if you look at the United States, they, in the West, a huge amount of land
is owned by the federal government, national parks, national forests, Bureau of Land Management land.
So it's controlled from Washington where most of the politicians are from the east of the Mississippi.
Most of the federal lands are west of the Mississippi. Idaho is 70% federally owned.
So they don't have, they don't care really about what happens there. And so the, the, the forests
in the east of the country down along the, the southern states, Georgia, Mississippi, Louisiana,
they're covered in forest. They almost never have forest fires because they're managed properly.
Because the people who own them want to get the wood, not to have a charred forest left behind.
The people who are, who are owning the federal lands in the western United States don't really care
that much. And then they can use that as a way of saying, look what the climate has done to our
environment. It's causing these forest fires. No, you are causing the forest fires because you
won't let people manage them properly. What got temperate to changes? IPCC reports. Dr. Linsen said
that there's really actually just one working group that deals with science. And now they did not
actually come up with anything that posed an existential threat. Scientists will look at the
data. They won't come up with doomsday predictions, but they'll leave it open-ended and leave the
politicians do what they will. Now the IPCC's reports don't say that there's doomsday coming.
They don't say that. They say the temperature has risen one degree in the last 250 years.
Which is true. We're in a warming period. It's a slight warming period. We've been in cooling
periods and warming periods all through the Holocene. The Holocene was warmer than it is now,
8,000 years ago, until about 6,000 years ago. It was warmer than it is now, even though it's
getting warmer now than it was 200 years ago. It goes up and down. But sometimes it goes up and
down downwards. And sometimes it goes up and down upwards. Just a fact. It wobbles. There's cycles
on cycles on cycles. And there's El Niño and La Niña. And all of these short cycles. And then
there's longer cycles and longer still cycles. And then there's things we just don't even understand
at all. Like why the earth went into another ice age 2.6 million years ago. When there was no ice
on the earth at all for the 250 million years before that. When the Keru Ice Age ended, which
had lasted 100 million years during the Carboniferous period. Extreme weather is one thing. But damage
caused to people is another. The number of people being killed by extreme weather has gone down by
98% in the last 200 years. It's actually just in the last, it's actually just in the last 100 years
since the 1920s. It's been proven that this is the case. And most people who died from weather in
those days was by starvation. Because what the weather did to their crops. It's unbelievable
how much less danger there is for people today than there was just 100 years ago. Much less
danger. And a lot of it is because of fossil fuels and nitrogen fertilizer.
People, I mean it's only 100 years they have to look out there. And to see that there's definite
proof that on a per capita basis there's been a 98% reduction in death from extreme weather.
And that includes all extreme weather of every kind. It's just been published. And it is not
being carried by the mainstream media. I mean they should have this as their top story.
In 2010 this is 40 years after you co-founded Greenpeace. The organization comes out with a
statement saying that you were in fact not a founding member. What is it that you observed
in the organization that led to you walking away? I mean it must have been a really difficult
decision to walk away from something that you were that sincerely passionate about.
It was an easy decision to make because I had no choice. I had no choice for two reasons.
First, much of the environment, we started out with a fairly strong humanitarian orientation to
save civilization from nuclear war. That must mean you care about people at least a little bit.
And it came to the point where the environmental movement including Greenpeace was basically
characterizing humans as the enemies of nature. We are the enemies of the earth. It was sort of like
human beings are the only evil species on the planet. And even cockroaches are better than we
type thing. So this is the philosophical level, high philosophical level of this judgmental idea
that human beings are the enemies of nature. And then came a campaign proposal from people who
had no science education. I was the only one who had a formal science education on the international
board of Greenpeace for the whole of those 15 years. My fellow directors, none of whom had any
formal science education, decided that Greenpeace should start a campaign to ban chlorine worldwide.
That was the slogan. And I said to them, you guys, you gotta be a little more nuanced than that because
chlorine happens to be one of the most important elements for human life that there is. Table salt
for example, is sodium chloride. And it is an essential nutrient. Chlorine, yes, we're talking
about chlorine, which is one of the halogens, which includes fluorine, bromine, chlorine, iodine,
and arginine, I think it's called or something like that. This group of chemicals is one of the
most reactive group of chemicals in the whole periodic table. It's aggressive. And of course,
we know that elemental chlorine gas can kill you really quickly because it combines with everything,
just right like that. The reason there's no chlorine gas around is because it's combined
with something else like sodium. It doesn't. It can't exist freely in the atmosphere. It has to
get attached to something. And it gets attached to lots of things, some of which are the most
important things in medicine. 85% of all our pharmaceuticals are made with chlorine chemistry,
and 25% of our medicines actually have chlorine in them. And table salt, sodium chloride,
which is an essential nutrient for all life, that's why Gandhi marched to the sea to make salt
was because the British were taxing the poor people in India for something that was essential.
And so it was one of his greatest achievements was this making salt by the sea.
And then in addition to that, adding chlorine to drinking water was the biggest advance in the
history of public health and to swimming pools and spas. You don't have a hot tub without chlorine
or bromine pucks floating around in the thing. You don't do that because you don't want to spread
disease. And so I'm going, you guys, you're still going to do this? Have a campaign to van
chlorine worldwide? Yep, we're going ahead. Once we came to the issue of toxicity and chemicals,
you have to have some science. You don't need any science to want to stop nuclear war. You don't
need any science to save 30,000 whales from being killed every year. You don't have to be a whale
scientist for that. But if you're going to deal with chemistry, you have to have some science,
because the first rule of chemistry, in many ways, is the toxicity is in the dose.
So table salt is essential at a small dose. Then you can take too much of it,
but it still doesn't hurt you. You don't need that much of it, but it doesn't hurt you.
Then it starts to hurt you. If you took a cup of salt and put it in your stomach, you're dead.
Also in the final analysis, Greenpeace was hijacked by the political left,
because they were smarter at politics than we were, because we weren't really politicians.
We were campaigners. And we knew how to do that. We knew how to get people's attention.
We knew what the real issues were. And all of a sudden, these guys are saying that chlorine
should be banned. And it was just a fundraising program based on incorrect information. So how
could I be involved in that? So there was no choice. I had to go. I always say I blame
McTaggart. David McTaggart became our chairman. He was kind of a very, very interesting person.
He was friends with the Agat Khan and with the head of the science division in Moscow for Russia.
All kind of high-level people, the person who founded CNN.
He was a real mover in society, but he had no science. And he really believed that everybody
was going to be poisoned by chemicals, the modern civilization, and all the plastics.
You know how people say that they act as though plastic is toxic?
Right? Well, is that why we wrap our food in it? Go on the internet and look for
plastic in the stomachs of albatross chicks. And you'll see these made-up pictures of a dead
albatross chick slaced open, full of plastic. Right? This does not happen in the world.
It is true. It is true that the parents of albatross chicks in the nest bring bits of hard
plastic and other such materials and give it to the chick for its gizzard to grind its food.
Birds don't have teeth, so plastic is actually performing a useful function for seabirds.
They have two stomachs. One has hard objects in it that when the chicks are in this nest,
they can't go out and get it for themselves. But then for the rest of their lives, all birds
ingest hard objects of a certain size and shape to put in their gizzards to grind their food,
because they have no teeth. They can't chew their food. So if a mother bird gives its chick
a squid eight inches long, you know, like that, it goes to the gizzard where it gets ground up,
except for the beak of the squid, which is retained as a hard object to continue helping
digest the food. And this is all well understood for 60 years. It's all been understood. Scientists
at first, when they saw that birds were using plastic as one of the objects that they gave their
chicks to digest their food, were worried about it. But they came to realize that it causes no
harm. As a matter of fact, it works just as well as pumice stones and pieces of wood and
bit nuts that fall off trees into the sea. It's hard to find those hard objects in the sea. There's
no pebbles in the sea, whereas on land birds just use pebbles about the size of a marble
and smaller. So this is all just total fake. And the other thing that plastic does in the sea is
it acts as a substrate, just like driftwood does for marine life to grow on. And then for other
species to eat the marine life that's growing on the piece of plastic. It's like a little floating
reef. Did you know that there is no such thing as the Pacific Garbage Patch, which I'm sure you've
heard of? There isn't such a thing, because it's invisible. It's in the middle of the Pacific Ocean
where Noah can look out the window and see whether it really exists. So they made it up and made
paintings of it. You go on the internet and look for Great Pacific Garbage Patch. You'll find all
these made up cartoon-like things which show this is the Pacific Garbage Patch and they take a brush
and paint a big blob on a map of the earth that they made up. And the only thing that is a real
picture that claims to be part of the Pacific Garbage Patch right underneath it says this is
part of the Great Pacific Garbage Patch. I looked at it and it's a big sea of debris in the ocean,
huge sea of debris. And I looked and in the background there were mountains. And I'm going,
there's no mountains in the middle of the Pacific Ocean. It turns out this was the debris that was
washed off of Japan during the tsunami that killed 20,000 people. And it was all the towns,
the towns all just destroyed. And that's why there were mountains in the background,
because that was Japan. And they pretended that it was the Pacific Garbage Patch. It's on the
internet. Just go on the internet and say Pacific Garbage Patch, twice the size of Texas, they say,
and growing and growing faster than we ever imagined. And it's not true. The most of the
plastic in the sea is discarded fishing gear. And that is an issue that should be addressed.
But the problem is, is fishermen want their boats to be used for putting fish in and nets in that
work, not discarded, not nets they want to get rid of if they're damaged, which happens a lot with
nets. So they just throw them overboard. So maybe somebody should get together with the fishing
industry and see if they can't help them figure out a way, maybe to hang them off the bow,
so that they're not taking up room in the boat. Because the boat, they want the boat for ice and
fish. Because boats have a limited amount of room in them, fishing boats. So that's why they throw
it away. But it isn't as though people are out there shoveling plastic into the ocean.
You know, it's true that plastic gets into rivers. And especially in Southeast Asia,
it was really quite awful to see. All of the people who are selling vegetables and stuff are
often on the bank of a river. And they just throw everything that they don't want away,
rotten food and plastic wrappers. And the whole thing goes into the river.
I see that you also wonder what the possible end goal could be. Do you think that the
motivation is purely a profit? Because only very few people are benefiting from this.
Do you think it's control? I'd say it's more control than money. Yes, I do. I believe it's a
basically it's a communist kind of approach to the situation. And I'm not joining, I'm afraid.
That's just how I see it. I think many people are innocent, innocently being pulled into this fear.
But many people are doing it on purpose and exaggerating it to such an extent.
The earth is actually doing quite fine right now. The human species can be immensely proud of
itself in retrospect, not because we did it on purpose, but because we have reversed the decline
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, which no other species could have done. And this is a good
thing, the replenishment. Every molecule of CO2 we emit came from the environment in the first
place and was turned into fossil fuels or turned into limestone, which we used to make cement.
And that reduces 10% of our CO2 emissions. The other 90% is almost all fossil fuels.
And all of that CO2 that we are emitting from the fossil fuels came from the atmosphere in
the first place. We are just putting it back where it came from. And when it was there, life flourished.
So that's all you need to know. You really don't need to know anything more than that.
