When determining what's real, we begin with those things we can hold in our hands.
If I can see it and touch it, it's real.
But we know that our senses are prone to illusions.
Sometimes we think we see something we don't.
So we would need to make this criterion of metaphysics even stricter.
If I can employ something to accomplish a task, then it's real.
If it wasn't real, I couldn't manipulate it and put it to my particular use.
I might be the victim of a misperception.
But if I can then utilize the thing in a way that serves a purpose, my perception of it
must have been correct, or else it wouldn't have been effective.
By this version of the criterion, money would have to be real.
We hold it in our hand, we feel it in our pocket.
See the exchange in the store where we use it to purchase goods we want.
Money certainly seems to be a thing.
We save money, we spend money, we waste money, we invest money.
Money can burn a hole in our pockets.
The love of money is the root of all evil.
We put money away for a rainy day, but money can't buy me love.
There certainly seems to be something that we're talking about in all of these sentiments.
But what is it?
At the very least, it's the bearer of economic value.
Money is worth something.
We use it to do two things.
Either we trade it for other things we want, that is we give it to someone else in order
to acquire material goods or services, or we use it to make more money.
We invest it or lend it in order to get more later.
The reason we can use it for purchases and investment is that everyone else values it
too.
But that value changes.
Economists use words like inflation, deflation, stagflation, hyperinflation to talk about
the ways in which the value of money changes.
So money is not simply a fixed amount of spending power.
What then is it?
How do we know what it's worth?
Indeed, why is it worth anything?
We've seen that whatever it is, money certainly seems to be crucially important.
Sociologists speak of economic classes and social capital coming from financial capital.
We saw Karl Marx arguing that differences in who has the wealth is the driving factor
behind progress for all of human history.
Karl Marx's Weber contended that we can't understand religious differences between Catholics
and Protestants without understanding the different approaches to the value of money.
Racial politics intimately tied up with the distribution of money.
Surely it must be a real thing if it's affecting both individual lives and the fabric of society.
Economics as a science began in the 18th century when relations between production, consumption,
scarcity and price began to be formulated.
In the shadow of Newton's work on mechanics and gravitation, the idea was that we ought
to be able to model the flow of money in the marketplace on our vision of energy flowing
in a physical system.
Energy is transferred in predictable ways according to relationships between objects
that are subject to rigorous formulation.
Similarly, we should be able to write down equations that determine how wealth is transferred
according to relationships between people and objects.
Energy changes form from gravitational potential to motion to electricity to heat just as wealth
changes forms from labor to money to resources to consumable goods.
When we have a group of particles interacting together, they find equilibrium, a stable
state that high and low ends of the spectrum converge upon after they've had a chance to
interact with each other.
Similarly, prices find equilibrium after a number of transactions through which suppliers
and consumers interact with each other.
Metaphor seem too good not to stick.
The problem of course is that in physics we're dealing with objects that have no will.
The rock doesn't choose to fall.
It does what it has to do and it has no say in the matter.
People on the other hand are seemingly not bound by such deterministic rules we decide
for ourselves.
Hence, the objection that a science of economics would be impossible.
Economics could only be scientific, could only produce universal, quantifiable regularities
if we, the humans, behaved in well-regulated predictable ways.
Early economists objected that this romanticized image of the capricious human who acts however
he or she wants at all times is an empirical matter.
If we look at the functioning of the marketplace, what we see is that what we might expect.
We actually observe a well-regulated system that acts and reacts in fully predictable
ways.
Human choices are not random.
To the contrary, we can fully understand why humans do what they do in the marketplace
in a quite straightforward way.
This was the birth of Homo economicus, economic man.
According to this view, what we call psychological egoism, when people interact in the marketplace
their intentions are transparent.
They want always and only what is in their own best self-interest.
If they're buying something they want or need, they want the most of it they can get for
the smallest price.
If they're selling, they want to get the highest price possible.
This desire to maximize self-interest would be pointless if people were unable to figure
out A, what is in their own best self-interest, and B, how to get what's in their own best
self-interest.
Fortunately, on this view, people are unlike rocks.
We are rational.
We weigh possibilities.
When two vendors make offers, we're able to figure out which is the most advantageous
to us and we choose that one.
We know what we want, we know when one option is better than another for us, and we always
choose the one that is the most favorable.
If humans act according to this model of perfect rational self-interest, then economic interactions
become mathematically representable.
We can draw supply curves, we can draw demand curves, we can place them and see where they
meet and call it an equilibrium.
When we see prices set below this equilibrium, what do we see?
Economic forces move the price up.
When we see alternative products in the marketplace that are cheaper, what do we see?
We see the equilibrium point move down and the price change.
Note the word equilibrium, a term from thermodynamics, the physics of heat.
Now, following James Clark Maxwell, we think of a thermodynamic system, a heated gas for
example, as a collection of molecules moving around, bouncing off of each other.
Pressure and temperature of the gas are measures of the properties and interactions of the
molecules as they bounce off each other in the walls of their container.
We explain the macroscopic properties of the gas by appealing to the microscopic interactions
of the particles that make it up, interactions which follow the deterministic laws of physics.
In the same way, the classical picture of economics has the macro-level fiscal phenomena
derived directly from one-on-one interactions of buyers and sellers in the marketplace.
What happens in the small between individual producers, laborers and consumers is predictable
since they're all seeking only to maximize their own self-interest.
So when we have a great number of these together, the behavior of the economy in the large at
the macro-level is also directly determinable.
Maxwell used the assumption of well-regulated elastic collisions among gas particles in
an inflated body to derive the large-scale ideal gas law governing the macro-level relations
among thermodynamic quantities.
In the same way, classical economists use the picture of interactions guided by self-interest
at the micro-level to derive laws governing the macro-level relations among fiscal quantities.
Indeed, if you look at the economist lexicon, you find many, many thermodynamic terms.
Economists speak of elasticity, inflation, equilibrium, efficiency, work.
They talk about the economy heating up or cooling down.
This isn't an accident.
So we see the classical view of economics based on two primary assumptions.
First, at the micro-level, all financial interactions are between people who always act rationally
and who act in their own best self-interest.
Second, the large-scale behavior of the economy is the result of the well-behaved small-scale
interactions.
Now, it seemed as if these two presuppositions were needed if economics as a science was
even possible.
The 20th century would see advances that undermined both of these beliefs.
But did so on scientific grounds.
The old foundation for economics as a science would be replaced scientifically.
Now, the first of these intellectual pillars to be challenged was the second one, that
the small-scale interactions gave rise to predictable large-scale behavior.
This predictable behavior is what's known as the business cycle.
According to this idea, the economy has an equilibrium point.
But that doesn't mean that it's static.
Much like a pendulum, the idea is that the large-scale economy would alternately grow
and contract around a fixed point.
Business owners are always looking to maximize profit.
And when possible, they will seek to grow.
When times are good, they'll take advantage of them by ramping up production as much as
they can.
The more you can produce, the more you can sell, and therefore the more profit you can
earn.
This means hiring more workers, which leads to lower unemployment.
With more people employed and buying, there's more money available in the economy, and sellers
looking to maximize profits can raise their prices.
This generates inflation.
It also generates higher interest rates.
You see, with businesses everywhere expanding, there's the need for loans.
Business owners know that if I had only this extra bit of cash now to finance the purchase
of new machines or add a few new workers, I could make more product and therefore more
profit.
After paying back the loan to finance their businesses' growth, they would still have
even more money.
So we need banks to supply the seed money for this expansion.
Since lots of businesses are looking to expand, there's competition for the loans and the
price goes up.
That means that the interest rates the bank can charge rises.
Businesses see the money as more expensive.
But they still think that the expansion will bring in a large enough profit for both good
earnings and to pay back the loan.
Now eventually, this inflation makes the product less desirable and demand cools.
But production has been ramped up to meet the demand of the high flying days, so there's
now leftover supply piling up in the warehouses as goods are becoming produced at a rate that's
greater than they're being sold.
The result is that prices go down.
Sellers have product they can't move at current prices, so they try to entice buyers with more
attractive deals.
But this brings in less money, and there are still the loans to be paid off from the expansion.
Further, much less product is needed, so less production is required, and the result is
that people get laid off.
This means fewer people with money.
That further cools demand.
The economy slows, and the downturn begins.
The downturn feeds on itself.
When things are going badly, business owners assume a defensive position.
If we can't count on robust profits, and if we're laying off people as it is, the last
thing we'll think of is expanding by new machines or new properties.
Unemployment increases.
No one looks to open new stores since they're barely keeping up in the ones they have.
The economy contracts, and this is a recession.
But one result of high unemployment is that employers can pay less.
Employers know that there aren't easy jobs to be had, so they don't look to move.
Any openings that occur have multiple inquiries, and bosses know they can get away with paying
lower wages or salaries since people are looking for whatever job they can get.
The glut of supply keeps the price of basic goods down, and as a result, the cost of
doing business is low.
This means that when the business does sell something, the percentage of profit is actually
fairly high.
Further, with business owners playing it safe, few are in need of loans to finance new purchases
or new ventures.
Banks are sitting on lots of money that's not being loaned out and therefore not making
the bankers any money.
The bankers drop the interest rates to make taking out a loan more attractive.
There's cheap money now available.
At the same time, production has been slashed, and eventually the backlogs of goods will
be eliminated.
The demand may be low, but it's not zero.
Business owners making sure not to waste money by overproducing will eventually find that
they've underproduced that even the lesser demand outruns the decreasing supply on hand.
As a result, there's more demand that supply and prices start to rise.
Rising prices signals the need for more supply, and production slowly starts to get ramped
up again.
At low wages, business owners can afford to bring on some new employees.
Unemployment starts to decrease.
These workers have money in their pockets, which increases demand.
The increased demand allows prices to rise further, and when sellers see the rising prices,
they move to get out in front of the recovering economy and take advantage of the increasing
profits that can be made, again, fueling economic growth.
Everyone sees everyone making money, so they do what they can not to miss the boat.
They need the best workers, and wages and salaries rise as the most qualified at their
jobs are wooed away.
Their old jobs need to be filled, and the labor shortage increases pay.
This cuts into profits, so to compensate, prices rise.
This causes inflation, which eventually leads to surplus goods at too high a price, and
the next downturn begins.
Because people are rational and self-interested, and because their decisions take time to implement,
the actions of those in the market will lag behind the timeframe of the actual changes
in the market itself.
As a result, there's never a fixed arrival at the equilibrium.
Economists say that wages and prices are sticky.
Workers are given contracts over a period of time, and even if the going market wages
lower, the bosses are now locked into that wage.
Similarly, prices tend to adjust slowly.
When the market price goes down, owners may be locked in through a contract to provide
for a fixed time at a fixed price.
Another possibility is that perhaps they're still hopeful that they can sell at the old
higher price, and are slow to move it down.
In most cases, they're much quicker to move it up in reaction to the market.
The result of the stickiness of labor costs and prices is that there's a lag between
what's happening on the ground and the reaction by the rational agents in the market.
As a result, there's a boom-bust cycle that occurs around the equilibrium point.
When the economy is hot, the increase in prices and wages will keep it from overheating and
cause a correction that cools it off.
But when it's cold, the low wages it costs will spur it back to life.
Because there's a never-ending supply of human greed and ingenuity, the cycle will continue
on forever, always moving around a fixed, stable equilibrium point.
That was the theory, at least.
And then there was the crash of Black Tuesday, October 29, 1929.
A bubble in the stock market from the roaring 20s caused an overvaluation of stock prices.
Prices were buying on credit, borrowing to buy stocks, and using as collateral the money
they would make when they sold the stock.
But that was money they didn't have, just money they planned to get.
Once the stock stopped going up and up, the borrowers didn't have the cash to repay the
loans.
They not only lost their money, but also decreased the demand for the stocks, which was the reason
the prices had been pumped up so high.
Without the support, prices tumbled.
Those who had their money in the market wiped out.
Wealth vanished.
The result was the Great Depression.
There was very high unemployment and very low interest rates.
The classical model held that this ought to spur on a period of growth.
But it did not.
In Germany, for example, between the World Wars, the result of reparations brought on
a period of high unemployment, high inflation, and slow growth.
Due to the classical model, this should not be possible.
High unemployment ought to lead to low inflation, which would allow the economy to stabilize.
But in the 1930s, nothing seemed economically stable anywhere.
The old approach, in which rational self-interest of individuals would create a system that
was stable in the large, became untenable.
The British economist John Maynard Keynes stepped in and changed the picture.
Let's argue that contrary to the classical picture in which there is a single equilibrium
point about which the business cycle oscillates, there are in fact multiple possible equilibrium
points and it is possible for the economy to become stuck around one of these undesirable
points.
He suggested that, as a result of the crash, the economy had become stuck around one of
these undesirable points.
The economy could be restored to its usual cycle around the usual equilibrium if it
were given a push.
Aggregate demand, the amount of goods and services required by the economy, is such that it can't
accelerate the economy when it's stuck around an undesirable equilibrium point.
People are unemployed, so they don't have money to buy.
Since people aren't buying, businesses don't have money to invest.
A deflationary cycle keeps prices pinned down and growth is not possible.
The defenders of the classical view argue that things would straighten themselves out
if given enough time.
The economy would work, they argued, in the long run.
Keynes famously replied that, in the long run, we're all dead.
He contended that aggregate demand needed a boost.
If the business community could not supply it, there was another institution that could,
government.
If the government increased spending, even if it meant running a temporary deficit, that
extra demand added to the economy, if big enough, could pump enough life into the economy
to restore it to its former healthy state.
Between the New Deal programs and the spending for World War II, the stimulation generated
by governmental spending created enough new demand in the economy to nudge it away from
its depressed equilibrium and back to its normal place.
While there are different points of view since those times as to whether the Keynesian approach
that focuses on aggregate demand or the monetarist approach of Milton Friedman, which focuses
on aggregate supply is the better choice for policy, what Keynes did was to change our
understanding of what the nature of reality is when it came to fiscal matters.
The classical view presupposed that the large-scale picture of the economy was determined by small-scale
relations which were based on rational, self-interested agents.
Keynes showed that the macro-level picture has emergent properties.
He suggested the need to talk about macroeconomic phenomena in a macroeconomic language which
cannot be reduced to microeconomic happenings.
Money supply, interest rates, unemployment, inflation all occur on a level that influences
the micro-level and is influenced by it but remains non-reducible.
Economics is not like physics, it's more like biology.
We need to study the molecular level to understand why an organism is the way it is but the importance
of molecular biology doesn't mean that ecology is pointless.
If we want to understand the full evolutionary history of a species, the genetic map will
only get us so far.
There's another level that works above the molecular.
We need to understand how the species interact with their large-scale environment to see
why certain traits are selected instead of others.
In the same way, microeconomics is important but macroeconomics necessarily remains a study
to itself in order to augment the more focused view.
So the middle of the 20th century forced us to reevaluate our second of the two presuppositions
that the working of the small could account for the workings of the large in the economy.
But the end of the 20th and beginning of the 21st century saw the challenging of the first
presumption that of homoeconomics, that we are rational, self-interested beings in the
marketplace.
Now, there's little doubt that we are not fully rational in all the elements of our
lives.
It's also certainly true that we are not entirely self-interested.
But the notion of homoeconomics functioned in microeconomics as one of Max Weber's ideal
forms.
It was an idealization that was close enough to reality, the argument went, that it could
be used as a meaningful lens through which to make sense of what we see in the marketplace.
Now, empirically, it was contended this idealized idea of rational homoeconomics worked well
enough that it's how we ought to think of ourselves.
But do we really like that?
That's a scientific question.
Modern psychology has shown that oftentimes we make decisions based on completely non-rational
basis.
Our amygdala will lead us to instinctively act and our rational brain catches up later,
filling in blanks in the story about how we reach the decision to act through thoughtful
deliberation.
The truth is that we've often acted before we thought.
There's certainly no reason why, at the checkout length of the grocery store, they're filled
with candy.
Humans have shifted gears in order to catch up with psychological research, giving rise
to what's called behavioral economics.
Humans do not make rational decisions when it comes to financial matters.
Indeed, we're programmed not to.
In 2014, lottery sales of the United States topped $70 billion.
Now no one plays the lottery because it's in their rational best self interest.
You are more than likely going to lose your money.
The odds of winning are such that the payoff for winning is almost always less than you
should get in a fair bet.
The lottery is stacked against you.
Indeed, that's the point.
States have lotteries to raise money.
They know it's a bad bet, which is why they let you make the bet in the first place.
What we play, again to the tune of $78 billion.
Advertising, as we've discussed, is not based in rational argumentation.
What gets you to choose one brand over another is not based on rational calculation.
And once you've selected a particular product one time, odds are you're going to select
it again.
Brand loyalty is a real phenomenon.
We are creatures of habit and if someone can help us establish a certain habit, we will
turn to that product even if it makes rational sense to switch.
We make charitable donations.
We give our money away.
Surely that isn't self-interested, even if we do claim a tax deduction.
When and to whom will we give?
Do images of starving children really lead to more donations?
We will violate our self-interest out of principle or out of spite.
There are times when we will forgo an economic exchange because we object to something the
other party has done or stands for.
We boycott sellers whose shops we would otherwise frequent.
We steer clear of shops whose owners we have a legitimate or illegitimate bias against,
even if it would be in our own best interest to buy from them.
The effects of social psychology, groupthink, cognitive biases like the fundamental attribution
error which causes to stereotype those unlike us, and comparative optimism which makes us
irrationally expect positive outcomes are all in play when we look at financial activities.
Sociological aspects are involved as well.
The personal savings rate in the U.S. in 2014 was 4.1%.
In Switzerland, the rate was 13.1%, more than triple the American rate.
What accounts for this difference in national financial decision making?
Surely we can't explain that difference using a universal model of humans as rational self-interested.
Behavioral economists set up controlled experiments.
Something not usual in the field, using computer simulated economies, they can see if certain
sorts of behaviors recur with what frequency and in what populations.
For example, computers can be used to set up an eBay-like marketplace where test subjects
are given fictional products and an amount of money to spend.
Participants will be told that the results in the experiment will have actual financial
effects.
The walk away from the experiment having been paid for their time and the amount they are
paid will be determined by how well they do in the fictional marketplace.
Economists make the test subjects truly self-interested and goes a long way in guaranteeing that the
subjects will take the experiment seriously.
In these setups, behavioral economists look for effects like the status quo bias.
We will often forego rational risks in order to play it safe, to protect what we already
have.
It seems that we have an innate bias to protect against loss, even when we are giving up better
opportunities for likely gain.
We resist change out of fear that the unknown will be worse, even if we have good rational
reason to believe it will be better.
Another bias is the availability bias, in which events that are vividly imaginable are
deemed more likely to occur than they actually are.
Now, if you watch television detective programs like Law & Order or movies like Dirty Harry,
you are affected by intense visions of crime.
One effect is that you make irrational financial decisions based on a false notion of how likely
you are to be a crime victim yourself.
How do we account for these effects in our understanding of markets?
Do they play roles in real life events like the dot-com bubble of the 1990s or the bank
runs of the 1930s?
The ideal form of Homo economicus was nice, and that it allowed us to set up a situation
that was easily modeled and from which we could generate equations that govern economic phenomena.
In this quantified way, economics was deemed a real science.
But as science has progressed, we realize that the world it describes is not our world.
Science itself, social psychology and sociology, have provided new data and a new picture of
the human.
This is a more complex creature, and that's a better representation of us.
It does away with the idea of a perfectly rational and completely self-interested human
that classical economists thought was essential to make economics a science.
It replaces that with a picture of a human being that's messier, more complicated and
often mistaken.
But while this new picture may be less flattering, it also gives us a more accurate sense of
the reality of markets, both local and global.
