In asking about the reality of human nature, we separated the social optimists from the
social pessimists.
The social optimists are those whose theories began from a foundation according to which
people are intrinsically altruistic and care about the greater good.
The social pessimists, on the other hand, are those whose theories originate from a
position in which humans are innately selfish, concerned only with maximizing their own best
self-interest.
This seems to be a serious difference, but interestingly, when the long view is taken,
both groups agree on the direction of the trajectory of humankind.
Both the optimists and the pessimists buy into a picture of human progress.
They differ on the mechanism driving the progress, but both have an unchallenged belief that
if you follow the history of the human race from its origins to the current day, things
are getting better and will continue to do so.
Positive human development, human evolution, social advancement and growth are necessary
features of reality.
We can see why social scientists during the first half of the 20th century would buy into
such a view.
Industrialization led to modernism.
The world was a radically different place.
Technology was emerging that completely transformed the ways humans lived.
Agricultural technologies from tractors to new chemical fertilizers and better seeds
were making each acre of land produce bounties that previous generations of farmers couldn't
even dream about.
More food could be produced with less effort and significantly fewer people.
People could therefore think about leaving the farm, looking for other ways to live where
this wasn't even a live option for their parents or grandparents.
The abundance of food in the markets and the diminished need for field labor meant that
possibilities became available for other ways of life.
Mass migration to urban environments followed since new jobs and manufacturing were being
created at an incredible rate.
The factories churned out goods for the markets and paid wages that were spent on factory
made goods.
Blankets, for example, used to be handmade and would be passed down or given to special
wedding gifts.
Now, they could be mass produced with mechanical looms.
With multiple companies competing in this new marketplace, the ready supply and the competition
drove down prices.
For many, the concerns of modern life did not resemble those of pre-modern agrarian
life.
Now, people were no longer concerned with mere survival, but came to be worried about
what to do with leisure time.
Medical advances were increasing human lifespans.
Transportation advances were making the world smaller.
It seemed like there could be little doubt that the history of humanity was one of triumphant
growth and development.
Jean-Paul Sartre, in his essay Existentialism as a Humanism, quotes the French author Jean
Cachtos around the world again in 80 days.
Cachtos' work was a parody of Jules Verne's Around the World in 80 days.
Instead of having misadventures traversing the continents, Cachtos' protagonist merely
flies over them, trouble free in an airplane, proclaiming, man is magnificent.
There was no doubt that human progress was a feature of reality.
Again, this was a view shared by optimists and pessimists alike.
Perhaps one of the most influential cultural optimists was Karl Marx.
Now, Marx inherited a view of history from the German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich
Hegel.
Hegel thought that all of history was following a predetermined path that would ultimately
lead to the final perfect state of human freedom.
This path was determined by a process called the dialectic.
In each era, the reigning state of the world would create a fundamental opposition.
Now, for Hegel, this dialectic was the mind of God coming to understand its own being.
At first, God is the subject, the thing that thinks.
But then, to think, you need an object that is something to think about.
So, God is both the subject and the object.
One state always creates the opposite.
You can't have a master without having a slave.
Since without the slave, the master wouldn't be a master.
But when you put a thing and its opposite together, the two would clash, each wanting
to be free of the other, the thing that exists in and of itself.
Ultimately, this conflict between them destroys them both, leaving only the core commonalities
they share that would then become the basis for the next higher stage of reality.
This too would create a fundamental opposition, and on and on the process goes until ultimately
the universe ended up where it needed to be.
Marx kept this picture of reality as a historical process working itself out.
But, instead of everything being an immaterial mode of God's consciousness as Hegel thought,
Marx claimed that the universe was made of material things rather than abstract states
of being.
Marx suggested that the dialectical process of cultural and economic development was the
result of class-on-class struggles.
Each new socioeconomic stage would provide both the advancements in human life as well
as the seeds of its own destruction.
The revolution that would destroy the state of socioeconomic being was necessary to allow
humanity to advance to the next stage.
So, slavery, for example, was a necessary evil.
It was by owning slaves that people began to create the physical infrastructure of true
culture.
But, while the institution of slavery was necessary for human progress, it was also necessary
that the slaves would revolt.
Their freedom and humanity had been stripped from them, and the tension between masters
and slaves would lead to a revolution, which would destroy the entire social system and
leave a new one in place, feudalism, in which people were not owned by others, at least
not directly.
The workers labored in the fields owned by the lords.
These workers were at least nominally free because the lords couldn't dictate their
every action.
But they did control the land that produced the food that was needed for survival.
Eventually, there was a peasant revolt, and the result was a capitalist society, in which
it wasn't landowners who controlled society, but the factory owners who controlled the
means of production.
While we often think of Marx as an opponent of capitalism, Marx did not think capitalism
was an inherently evil or bad system.
Indeed, he thought it was a necessary step in economic history.
Capitalism has to occur, and it serves a very important role in human development.
Capitalism is driven by the desire to maximize profit, and this leads to the minimization
of labor and resources in the process of production.
The cheaper and easier you can make something, the more profit you get to keep.
As a result, the capitalists are trying always to figure out how to make much more stuff
than we need at how to make it quickly, easily, and cheaply.
The result is the elimination of scarcity, whereby human beings thus have everything
they need.
But in making this happen, the laborers have become alienated, dehumanized, and removed
from meaningful relations they have with each other, themselves, and with the things
they create.
Eventually, they will have had enough.
We are now set for the next step, and the revolution of the workers.
Moving through a time of collective ownership, we ultimately arrive at the communistic utopia.
In the utopia, because the capitalists have figured out how to satisfy our needs using
a minimum of resources and effort, we can spend relatively little time tending to them.
We can therefore spend the bulk of our time figuring out what activities will allow us
to be truest to ourselves, and to flourish.
We have the luxury of doing what we really love, whether it's fishing, making music,
writing poetry, studying the universe, or making people laugh.
The fundamental picture here is that human beings are essentially social animals.
We live in community, and we use that community to figure out how to solve our problems.
But the structures needed to solve one set of problems ultimately cause another set of
problems until we finally figure out how to live together problem-free.
Packed within this view is a presumption that history is following a path whose endpoint
is a social structure guaranteeing universal human happiness and fulfillment.
Now, there have been thinkers throughout the 20th century who have followed this line.
Some have been explicitly Marxist in their approaches to history, class, and the effects
of capitalism on people, but others not.
Some adopted this optimistic picture of human development while rejecting the Hegelian picture
of a necessary course of history.
So take the American sociologist Talcott Parsons, for example.
He argued that there are sociological evolutionary universals, that is, social structures, beliefs,
and institutions that are so advantageous that every culture everywhere eventually develops
them.
The incest taboo, for example, is found in all societies.
Similarly, the notions of kinship and social stratification are universals.
Now, they may change over time, they become more or less central to life in the society,
but they're a step in the cultural history of every society.
Now, sometimes this development is independent.
That is, cultures on their own come up with the same adoption of values or structures.
Other times, the ideas are spread or borrowed between cultures.
Unlike biological evolution, where the genome of each species is contained in the organism's
genome of the species, here social genetics can be spread around through contact.
As a result, we observe cultural patterns that are replicated around the globe.
Now, for an example, suppose you were dropped from an airplane somewhere on Earth but you
don't know where.
Parsons argues that wherever it was, you would find bureaucracy.
As much as we complain about red tape, standing in line at the Department of Motor Vehicles,
soulless men in suits who enforce pointless rules just because they're rules, bureaucracy
is an essential element for human progress.
Power is distributed in all cultures, and as a result, some have it and some don't.
When the power rests with a particular individual, let's say a king or a dictator, and it's
not infested in the office apart from the office holder through an established governmental
structure.
This leads to civil instability.
Now if you become king by killing the current king, then the result is constant changes
in power, universal suspicion, and the lack of an ability to create the sort of cultural
institutions that lead to higher cooperative tasks than the division of labor.
But once we take the power and invest it in the office, in the position and not the person,
now we can establish rules by which a peaceful transfer of power occurs.
Power can then be distributed so that the society can acquire specialists who focus
on solving specific problems for the society as a whole.
Bureaucracy creates levels of authority that insulate the culture from special interests
at the top and allow jobs to be done by those with specific competencies.
So we see that bureaucracies are social evolutionary universals.
Parsons argues that others include money, taxes, police, and markets.
Of course the minute you have both bureaucracies and money, you get questions of improper influence,
and so every culture has some sort of cultural norm that establishes a line between legitimate
lobbying and corruption and bribery.
But this line is meaningless if it's not taken seriously.
As a result, there must be some culturally created body which is given the authority
to enforce these rules.
The result is the formalization of norms into laws and a legal system that provide a negative
incentive to those contemplating violating them.
So what we see according to Parsons is a development of culture in a predictable way that leads
to better and better standards of living.
It's not the Marxist picture, but it's similar to it in that it starts with an optimistic
picture of human nature and posits a set of steps that all lead in the direction of human
progress.
No matter where you go, when you look in the large scale, things are better now than they
used to be.
Sure, there will be blips and backward steps from time to time when Ruffians temporarily
seize power, but overall the flow of history is progressive.
Again, this sentiment is not limited to social optimists.
Social pessimists also see culture as progressing.
We saw this in Andrew Carnegie's Gospel of Wealth, right?
We see it in all the social Darwinists and their intellectual offspring.
One name that's often invoked is the Russian-born American emigrate, social theorist and novelist
Alyssa Rosenbaum, better known by her pseudonym, Ein Rand.
According to Rand and other thinkers of the middle of the 20th century, the marketplace
is as brutal to ideas as nature is to organisms.
As a result, we see the free market and the democratically elected government always producing
the best results.
Humans are rational and self-interested and will always look for an edge, an advantage,
a new and better way of doing things.
The field isn't static, it's not always the same game.
The competition causes adaptation, new developments that were unforeseen, the ones that work radically
transform the landscape, and the society thereby moves forward.
The key, they argue, is for people, especially the government, to stay out of the way of
the progress.
Don't step in and try to even things out.
It's the unevenness that provides the incentive to innovate and the innovations that make
life better for everyone.
There will be inequity, there will be suffering.
But when we take the long view, the suffering will be much less as a result of letting the
process run its course.
We must not take the battery away from the engine of innovation by removing the differential
of wealth and power.
Those are the motivating factors for rational, self-interested beings, and they must remain
in play.
And they do the result of social progress, technological advancement, and wealth creation.
It's a tide that will lift all boats.
Do not handicap the great for the sake of the mediocre because the great are the ones
who will create, out of whole cloth, the advancements that will drive human society forward.
In the first half of the 20th century, the modernist mind, whether it was optimistic
or pessimistic, bought into the proposition that social reality is progressive, that human
society over time is getting better and better, the structures under which we live are responsible
for laying the groundwork for individual human flourishing.
Those structures are becoming more complex and better adapted at solving the problems
that plague us.
And then those problems changed.
In the 1930s, we saw a worldwide economic collapse unlike anything that could ever be
imagined.
This was an intricate, layered, interconnected economy with institutions that seemed just
a decade before to churn out amazing wealth.
The Great Depression saw it all implode, leaving a smoking hole of human despair and desperation.
The desperation ended.
The Second World War began.
Suddenly, we not only lost faith in the stability of our financial markets, we saw human beings
at their genocidal worst.
We not only discovered that 20th century humans were capable of horrendous acts, we also saw
that those very same humans were capable of developing weapons of mass destruction.
We discovered we were untrustworthy.
Just as we discovered, we could construct doomsday machines.
The result was a Cold War, in which every corner of the world was a pawn in a global
chess match, and every neighbor and friend a possible spy for the enemy.
The exuberance of the roaring 20s, the avant-garde of Berlin, Paris, and New York all seemed culturally
juvenile.
The thought of human progress was a naive fairy tale.
Some thinkers tried to argue that it was a detour in the long-term progress of humanity,
or maybe even a time that showed us what we needed to do in order to safeguard human progress.
The American political scientist Jean Kirkpatrick argued that the Cold War provided a roadmap
for cultures that were ready to advance.
It was true that much of the world was in the hand of violent dictators who cared little
for the well-being of their people, and who were perfectly content to act viciously to
protect their own wealth and power.
It was also true that these horrible rulers were being supported, in some cases completely
propped up by the Americans and the Soviets.
But as on the same level as it might appear, to aid those who are perpetrating atrocities
on their own citizens, it was considered the best approach in the long run, according
to Kirkpatrick, as long as we selected the correct brutal dictators.
If we select brutal right-wing regimes to keep in power with our superior force, we're
setting the stage for the eventual development of democratic society, which brings freedom
to its people.
In Kirkpatrick's words, given time, propitious economic, social, and political circumstances,
talented leaders, and a strong indigenous demand for representative government.
You can see a right-wing junta giving way to a representative democracy with the freedom
and prosperity that accompany it.
If however, we select brutal left-wing regimes to support, we will be dooming the country
to wallow in terror, instability, dictatorship, and incompetence.
In the dark fog of the Cold War, there still could be human progress, we just had to make
sure to plant the seeds in the proper form of evil.
In the following generation, the American political scientist Francis Fukuyama continued
along Kirkpatrick's line in his work, The End of History and the Last Man.
He argued there was a Hegelian process at work, that is, a necessary path that history
was following, but not the one that Marx would have predicted.
Liberal democracy, he contended, was the end of history.
In the rough and tumble world of geopolitics, liberal democracy had knocked out all challenges
and shown itself to be the last man standing.
All other alternatives proved themselves to be inferior.
As a result, once the country made it to liberal democracy, it would cease to have a history.
Not that there would be no events to chronicle, but that there would be no further development
of the culture.
There might be wars with those nations who have not yet made it to the end of history,
but ultimately, those smaller nations would be defeated by the more powerful nation states
that had completed their journey.
In defeat, the smaller neighbors on the block would continue their path until the whole
world was a happy collection of liberal democracies.
The U.S. had made it, Europe got there, Japan shed its old imperial ways, Russia and China
were on their way.
Once everyone gets there, and it's only a matter of time, then we will live in a world
without history.
Human progress.
Human social evolution will have ended for everyone the way it's ended for all of us
in the West.
Yes, events in the middle of the 20th century should give us pause, but we've always been
on the right path.
Of course, not everyone has been so optimistic.
History is filled with great civilizations that have collapsed.
Maybe all of them do eventually.
All of us want to be immortal.
We would love to not have to die, but individually we do.
We have finite lifetimes.
We're born, there are certain phases we go through, and eventually those phases wrap
up with our death.
Maybe human cultures are like that too.
Human anthropologist Joseph Tainter explores such cataclysmic views and categorizes them
into 12 basic explanations for why societies collapse.
11 of them, he says, are wrong.
The 12th view?
That's his.
Looking at the fall of the Roman Empire, the fall of the Western Chao Empire, the fall
of the Egyptian Old Kingdom, the fall of the Minoan civilization, the fall of the Olmec,
the fall of the Mayans, not to mention the fall of the Mycenaean civilization, we see
interesting trends emerge.
It's not that Malthus was right and cultures outproduced their resources.
It's not that catastrophes, like the meteor that doomed the dinosaurs, also wipe out society.
It's not that they fail to rise to circumstantial challenges they face or are replaced by more
complex societies.
They're not destroyed by intruders from outside or conflict and mismanagement from inside.
No, Tainter argues.
It's that they sputter and die from a lack of energy.
What human societies and political organizations do is distribute resources.
And this takes energy.
Now, by energy, he doesn't mean electricity, but rather human effort.
The more complex a human society becomes, the more energy it requires.
And as Malthus argued, this is not geometric growth, but an exponential one.
Now, if a society doubles in complexity, it needs much more than twice the energy to keep
itself rolling, that is, more energy per person.
We begin with the presumption that the job of human society is simply to solve human
problems.
Now, why do we have societies?
Because life is hard.
There are dangers.
There are needs.
There are threats.
When we join together, we can avert the dangers, meet the needs, and subdue the threats in
a way that we might not have been able to do individually and certainly could not do
as efficiently.
As a result, we change social structures.
We create institutions whose job it is to take care of needs and threats so we don't
have to think about them.
The society solves our problems with amazing efficiency, to the point where we often lose
track of the fact that there was a challenge there to begin with.
Maintaining this requires energy, requires resources.
Think about what we do to maintain the society we've created.
We send our kids to school, not just a little, but for 12 years of primary education and
then frequently for at least four years of higher education.
This is what's needed to simply join the society, understanding what's happening and
contribute to its running.
The educational system we have was constructed in the Middle Ages when we suddenly needed
people who could read, write, and do arithmetic in order to serve as bureaucrats.
We kept records.
We made reports.
We took inventories.
We had a treasury.
We wrote down laws and regulations.
In order to solve problems, we created specific organizations with well-tailored protocols
and processes in order to solve these problems.
But now we needed people with the skills to fill the positions.
So what did we do?
We created another institution, the school, in order to create the bureaucrats.
And we created then the need for teachers and teachers of teachers.
You see how the societal job of solving collective problems mushrooms out, creating the need
for significant resources from everyone.
We all have to spend years going to school.
We all have to pay the taxes necessary to keep the school going, whether we have children
there at the time or not.
The institutions we use to solve problems generate a need for resources, a need that
increases and increases the load on all of us.
No matter the time, no matter the place, there will always be new problems, new challenges
we face as a collective.
And what do we do when these concerns pop up?
We create a new organization to deal with it.
We create new complexity.
It'll work.
The new bureaucracy will take care of the problem for us.
But the added complexity comes at a cost.
The burden of the increased weight of the culture has gotten heavier on everyone within
it.
Eventually, Tainter argues, we reach a point of diminishing returns.
The additional resources we put in are larger than the problem-solving power we get out.
At this point, the society has layer upon layer of intertwined institutions, all of which
keep themselves going, all of which pull energy from the society.
But the amount of energy is finite.
It's limited by the resources available.
It's here that we reach our cultural tipping point.
Eventually, the beast we've created becomes too expensive to feed.
When we've created too much complexity, we can no longer afford it.
Every previous major civilization in human history in every corner of the world has collapsed,
Tainter argues.
We can look back and understand it by looking at the degree of complexity within these civilizations.
The complexity they achieved before things started going south for them.
There's not a single common point which began a collapse.
Different societies fell at different points, but the archeological data suggests that the
cause of all collapse is bureaucratic complexity.
We see this portrayed in the 1980 South African film, The Gods Must Be Crazy, possibly the
most delightful movie ever made.
The plot centers around a field biologist seeking a PhD from a prestigious British university
doing doctoral research in Botswana, when he and his local assistant discover Key, a
Bushman from an isolated tribe that lives in the Kalahari Desert, a careless pilot flying
over the desert, threw his empty Coca-Cola bottle out of his window, and it was found
by Key's son.
The introduction of this unique object, the only thing of which there is but one in their
lives, completely disrupts the otherwise simple and satisfying life of the clan.
Having adapted to their surroundings, Key's family, living in the traditional ways, have
minimal complexity to sustain, and as a result, are blissfully happy.
Well that is, the arrival of the Coke bottle.
Now there's competition, now there's jealousy, now there are new problems.
The choice is either to create institutionalized social structures to deal with the problems,
or to simply remove the source of the problem.
Key decides on the latter, and sets off to find the end of the world in order to throw
the Coke bottle away, thus returning it to the Gods, who carelessly left it for them.
Along the way, he leaves the Kalahari, and enters the rest of the world with its complex
society run by rules and bureaucracies.
He gets arrested for killing a shepherd's goat.
He was hunting as he always did, but in a society like this, now there's private property,
and rules about taking that which is not yours.
He's tried, even though he doesn't understand the laws, the language, or the concepts on
which the entire structure is based.
He's found guilty, and serves his sentence doing public service with the biologist and
his assistant.
In contrasting his way of life with ours, the simple barbarian with the modern and sophisticated,
we begin to see that the energy that our social structure drains from us to simply be cultured,
energy that does not always seem well spent when we look at the alternative.
We see how people burn out, and how human relationships suffer from the stress of maintaining
the level of energy needed by the enlightened, technologically advanced world we've constructed
around ourselves.
So, does this mean that Western culture is doomed to collapse under its own weight?
Does all cultural progress have increasing costs?
Are we actually progressing?
What we need to consider is how to judge the standard of living for people in the culture.
These are empirical questions that need empirical answers.
The people who provide them are economists.
We'll need to see what sort of reality we therefore get from economic research.
