Modern technology has forced us to re-evaluate what we mean by death.
But what it's done for end of life questions, it's also done for start of life questions.
Modern technology has forced us to re-evaluate what we mean by birth and parenting.
At first glance, it would seem that notions of birth and what it is to be parents would
be entirely uncontroversial.
Father makes his contribution, mother makes hers, after nine months their child is born
when it emerges from the mother's body.
What could be more straightforward?
That is, until technology steps in.
All thought that all things were a combination of form and matter.
His theory of human procreation was that the father contributed the form.
For Aristotle this meant the soul, that is the information that led the offspring to
develop as a member of the species.
The matter was contributed by the mother.
The mother took the soul and produced a physical body that would house it.
The mother's womb was the place where the offspring took matter from the mother's body
and used it to form itself into a material being.
After birth, the mother's nursing of the child continued this process.
The baby took in the milk and converted it to bone, muscle, skin, hair, all the elements
that the growing newborn had to create in order to grow into the human being whose plans
came from the father.
The mother is essential to have a growing healthy child and the body of the child is,
in a derivative sense, made from the body of the mother.
While this was once the dominant view, we've seen their problems here.
Genetic information is encoded in the offspring's DNA.
We now know the DNA plays a role Aristotle assigned to the soul as the body's internal
instruction manual for growth.
It comes from both the father and the mother.
But the material aspects of the baby do come from the mother's body during and after pregnancy.
Aristotle is correct that the mother's body provides the raw material used to create the
new person.
But contemporary research has showed some very interesting effects of breastfeeding.
The most notable of these is the jump start that the baby's immune system receives from
the breast milk the baby receives.
The colostrum, the thicker creamier milk that's produced by the mother's first day
after birth, is very high in immunoglobulin A, which is an antibody produced by the blood.
Immunoglobulin A is found in the mouth, nose, ears, intestines, any place where the inside
of your body is exposed to the outside environment.
Immunoglobulin A is a protein with a Y shape and it works by creating a layer of mucus
that traps harmful bacteria and uses the ends of the Y to bond to the harmful invader.
It works as a red flag identifying the threat and working as a marker for the proper immune
cells to come by and destroy it.
Immunoglobulin A proteins are the well-trained scouts in your immune system and the nursing
mother passes along the intelligence gathered through her decades of interactions with the
environment to the still forming immune system of the newborn.
The Immunoglobulin A molecules are programmed to recognize specific types of harmful bacteria
that the mother has been exposed to.
When we get sick, our body learns to recognize the harmful invader and makes Immunoglobulin
A designed to spot that specific threat.
In transferring the Immunoglobulin A to the baby, the mother's biological history, her
acquired bodily experience is being programmed into the newborn's body through the breast milk.
As a result of breastfeeding, the newborn can now spot, mark and destroy infectious agents
on its own even though the baby may never have been exposed to the threat.
The newborn's body has become the body it is because of its relation to the breastfeeding
mother.
The result is that the breastfed children are significantly less likely to suffer from
stomach viruses, respiratory illnesses, ear infections and meningitis.
Breastfeeding literally creates a differently functioning body for the baby.
This therefore leads us to our very first question about birth, reality and technology.
Possibly the oldest technology we've used with our youngest children is the wet nurse.
New mothers would use the breast milk of other women to feed their own child.
But food is not just food.
Food, as Aristotle pointed out, is what we use to make the matter that is our body.
We now see that it's not just the stuff the body is made from, but actually plays a role
in how the body functions.
The wet nurse has shaped the way the baby's body works, created an aspect of the newborn's
immune system on her own.
The biological mother's DNA is certainly responsible for significant features of the
baby's biological functioning.
But now the wet nurse is too.
The wet nurse is a part of the baby's biology, along with the birth mother.
Not everything biological is genetic.
In this case, we have a technological choice affecting the newborn's biology.
So if the mother is the mother, because the baby's body works according to an internal
instruction manual, and that internal instruction manual has some chapters that come from the
mother's DNA, but other chapters of this internal instruction manual now come from the feedings
the body received as a newborn, is the wet nurse also a mother of the child?
The body of the wet nurse has made a lasting and important contribution to the structure
and functioning of the child's physiology.
Given our contemporary understanding of what it means to be a parent, doesn't the wet nurse
now count in some small way as one of the parents of the child, because the child's
body will function and develop in part because of the wet nurse's biological contribution?
If this ancient practice makes us pause, just wait until we start thinking about modern technology.
In 1978, the world saw the birth of the first test tube baby, and there was much ringing
of hands that this would force a redefinition of what it is to be human.
Some believed we may have just opened the door to Dr. Frankenstein.
Although we've seen many ways in which science and technology have forced us to redefine reality,
this technology by itself was more bark and less bite.
The sperm of the father and the egg of the mother were combined in a petri dish and then
re-implanted in the mother.
This process has been a wonder for infertile couples all over the world, and has rightly
become entirely uncontroversial in itself.
It has, however, given rise to other technological advances that are more interesting from this
metaphysical point of view.
Once you have fertilization outside the body, it means there are controls and possibilities
that were not options before.
The most obvious is that the implanted zygote may not include the sperm or egg of the parent
or parents who intend to raise the child.
Sperm donation gives rise to a number of interesting issues.
Sperm donors contribute their part to the process, often completely unaware of the where, when,
and with whom of the life that will be created.
This is frequently intentional.
The donors can donate without any concern to the ultimate result of their donation.
From a purely Darwinian standpoint, this is both an advantageous and disadvantageous practice.
In this way, the use of your DNA in creating multiple offspring with multiple partners
without the energy and investment of courtship and parenting is a sure winner from an evolutionary
perspective.
On the other hand, there are not only natural selection pressures, but sexual selection
pressures.
Mates are chosen for properties deemed desirable.
In a sense, sperm donation is the ultimate blind date.
The donor has no idea whatsoever of the fitness of the person who will make use of his genetic
information.
Because survival of the fittest requires not just the most, but most likely to survive,
sperm donation ought to seem a bit problematic.
Further, human children are unlike those of other species.
The infantile stage is incredibly long.
It takes many years of intensive, resource-demanding work to create a successful adult human.
Parenting is crucial to our species in ways it's not for most others.
As such, the very notion of sperm donation makes the genetic father absent from the process
and leaves him with no confidence at all that his offspring will successfully reach pro-creative
age in a functional way.
The drive is not only to create offspring, but offspring who will then themselves have
offspring.
The second step becomes one the donor has no control over, a concern evolutionarily.
We can build on this idea to see the cultural non-biological concerns.
If a man impregnates a woman in the normal way, there are legal means by which he will
be held responsible for the well-being of the child.
The idea is that being the genetic parent of a child implies certain responsibilities
towards that child's upbringing.
With sperm donation, however, the genetic father is contractually removed from these
obligations.
If this removal meets with society's approval, then this means that father's obligations
to their offspring are contractual and not necessarily care-based.
This should strike us as a bit odd, since we picture parenting as a paradigmatic case
of care-based relations.
We see this contractual nature in the selection process as well.
The sperm bank will keep a profile on the donor for use by the recipients.
On the one hand, this is something directly out of Darwin.
Mothers want the fathers of their offspring to be maximally fit and can browse the list
of possible donors for the one deemed most genetically desirable.
This is just sexual selection made one step more abstract.
But on the other hand, it's making a commodity out of genetic material.
And this is a step towards the concern of creating designer babies.
Selective breeding has been used for centuries by livestock farmers, domesticated dog breeders,
pigeon enthusiasts.
We have thoroughbreds made for speed and draft horses for heavy work.
There seems to be no problem with this when we're talking about farm animals.
But the minute we're engaging in husbandry without husbands and humans, the questions
become a bit uncomfortable for us.
We have a conflict between the biological pressures to prefer certain properties in
our children and the cultural and political imperative to consider all individuals as
of equal value, regardless of their physical or genetic properties.
Just as the sperm may be donated, so may be the egg.
Once the egg is fertilized, it can be implanted.
The woman who receives the fertilized egg doesn't have to be the woman from whom the
egg was taken.
The egg may be from a donor and implanted into the body of the woman seeking to be the
mother raising the child.
Or the egg may be implanted in a surrogate who will then carry the fetus to term and
give birth to the little one.
While the surrogate may have no genetic influence on the development of the child, she will
have considerable effect on its health and well-being long after the birth.
In a previous discussion, we saw that exposure of a fetus to alcohol or a lack of folic acid
in the mother's diet can lead to significant cognitive problems later on in the child's
life.
Similarly, there are a large number of substances that will be in the carrying mother's body
that will be conveyed by umbilical blood to the developing fetus.
A study by the Environmental Working Group identified 287 different chemicals that were
found in the blood samples from newborn infants.
180 of these chemicals having been identified as known carcinogens.
This baby could grow up to die of cancer or survive the disease in one of its most life-forming
challenges as a result of biological factors that come from the environment created in
the carrying mother's womb.
The body of the baby is formed by environmental as well as genetic factors.
And the environment is created by the choices of the surrogate as well as the surrogate's
history of exposure to all sorts of substances that were in environments of her past.
But these are just the chemical factors.
There are also what scientists call epigenetic factors as well.
Our genes produce proteins that perform various functions in the body, but those genes need
to be triggered.
Epigenetic factors are the triggers.
They're genetic in that they require action according to the internal instruction manual,
but they are non-genetic in that they are the environmental factors that cause the instructions
to be engaged.
Then genes need to be switched on and off, and this often has to happen in particular
ways at particular times, in particular orders, for things to function properly.
We see connections to obesity and heart disease later in life that are determined by epigenetic
factors in utero.
What the mother eats.
How much exercise she gets.
Even how frequently she laughs.
All have subtle effects on the development of the fetus in utero.
As such, even if the surrogate is not a part of the child's genetic makeup, she becomes
an integral and significant part of the child's bodily workings.
Who the baby grows up to be is determined in part by factors within the body of the
surrogate.
Even if she provides no genetic information.
This scenario gets even more intricate when we see that we can do more than merely fertilize
the egg.
We can also insert mitochondria from another egg called cytoplasmic transfer.
We can correct for problems in a woman's eggs if she wants to use her own eggs, even
if they have problems at the cellular level.
We can thus take eggs from woman one, insert mitochondria from woman two, fertilize the
egg and re-implant it in woman one.
Recall that there are two different kinds of DNA in all of ourselves.
There's the nuclear DNA inside the nucleus of the cell and then there's the mitochondrial
DNA outside of it.
Where the nuclear DNA is the result of contributions from both parents, the mitochondrial DNA is
passed completely from mother only to the child.
In this case the genetic information, the nuclear DNA will be partially from woman one
and partially from the father, but the mitochondrial DNA will be from woman two when we can call
the mitochondrial mother.
So we've now moved from a situation that we thought was entirely straightforward in
which for each child there's a single mother and a single father, but in the extreme
case we could have a mother and a father who want to raise a child, but who find themselves
unable to have a baby on their own.
They could find an egg donor and a sperm donor, require a mitochondrial donor and a separate
surrogate to carry the fetus to term.
If the couple then hires a wet nurse to breastfeed the newborn and we use the broadest notion
of parent, the child would then have two fathers and five mothers for a total of seven parents.
Boy.
The most radical version of IVF however is when we take a donated egg and instead of
fertilizing it, we hollow out its contribution of genetic code and implant a fully contained
genome into it and then implant the zygote to be brought to term.
That is, we remove any genetic contribution from the egg, from the mother, and put in
a genetic internal instruction manual completely from another individual.
The word we use for this procedure is cloning.
When we clone an animal, we implant the entire internal instruction manual from one being
into the egg so the child will be genetically identical to the donor, identical in terms
of nuclear DNA.
Now, without a cytoplasmic transfer, the mitochondrial DNA will be that of the egg donor.
In this way, the clone will be slightly different on a cellular level than the being that was
cloned but not a difference that will express itself in the observable properties of the
clone.
To great fanfare, Dolly the sheep was born in 1996, the first clone mammal produced by
researchers at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland.
While watching Dolly grow up to be just another sheep in the herd, it was widely thought that
the age of cloning had begun.
The possibilities seemed mind boggling.
We could perfect domesticated animals and mass produce the exact designer cow, pig,
or chicken as many times as we wanted with precisely the properties that maximized profits
for the farmer.
We could use the process to keep our pets for all of eternity.
If Fido passes away, keep a sample of cells, and the next thing you know, you'll get to
enjoy them as a puppy all over again.
It's a myth perpetuated by movies that the cloned offspring will be an exact duplicate
of the genetic donor, like putting the donor in a photocopier.
As we've already seen, genetic identity does not guarantee full identity.
Genetic factors are relevant to how the genes are expressed and thereby how the body develops,
as are certain environmental factors.
It's not enough to have the same internal instruction manual.
The instructions have to be applied in the same way, at the same time, to the same situation.
But cloning has been much more difficult than scientists had thought.
Only about 3% of cloning experiments succeed, and of those that are successful, serious
problems are observed.
Cloned animals have extremely high rates of birth defects.
Obesity, enlarged organs, undeveloped lungs, developmental delays, kidney problems, joint
and liver issues, brain and immune system malfunctions have all been observed at significantly
higher rates in cloned animals.
When the genetic information of the adult cell is inserted into the egg, there are problems
with the egg reprogramming the DNA.
In a sample of cloned mice, researchers found that about 4% of the genes were malfunctioning.
That means that the genes did not express at all, expressed at a lower rate than they
needed to, or over expressed.
As we've seen, the important thing is not just having the genes, but having them dance
their role flawlessly in the complex choreography of life.
Ordinarily, the egg has months to assimilate the genetic code into itself, but when cloning
occurs, a rapid taking in of the DNA by the egg causes problems in the molecules.
The egg gets the new internal instruction manual, but in trying to flip through it much more
rapidly than it's programmed to do, pages get ripped out and the instructions are unable
to be followed.
The question is, whether this is indicative of the cloning process, or if it's just a
technological speed bump that can be navigated.
Is it that we're now using a chainsaw where we need a scalpel, or is the problem inherent
in the process itself?
In studying what happens in the development of the cloned embryo, will we eventually
figure out how to keep the genetic material from being damaged?
It certainly seems that when we talk about the ethics of human cloning, this is a relevant
factor.
If there is a significant chance that the person who would be created through the cloning process
would have serious health problems, if we knew beforehand that we were creating a life
that would be hampered in its ability to create and achieve meaningful goals, then surely we
should avoid these procedures as long as other means of having human children are feasible.
But what of non-human animals?
If there are other means of creating these other animals that do not come with these
likely defects, then surely that would be preferable.
Does that mean that all cloning research on domesticated animals is problematic?
That's tricky.
If progress is to be made, then it requires tests.
It requires further work on cloning.
There are those who will contend that cloning itself is problematic, that even if the wrinkles
are ironed out, there's something inherently problematic with cloning in itself.
Cloning removes the chance associated with combining genetic information from the parents.
It refuses unique genetic identity to the offspring.
Some have argued that we have a right to be genetically unique.
To refuse this is to play God in some way, to dictate the terms of life to a being who
should have the right to determine his or her own path.
We ought to find it repugnant, they argue, to seek such control over nature over our
offspring.
Now, while these arguments may or may not be cogent to the end, there remains a most
interesting case.
What about cases in which we have made it impossible for some animals to reproduce without human
assistance?
What about animals that are presently extinct?
If there are suitable egg donors, animals that are genetically similar enough to animals
that have gone extinct, should we use cloning to reintroduce them into the ecosystem in
which they had been embedded and which developed to include them?
The question cannot but bring to mind Michael Crichton's 1990 bestseller, which was made
into Steven Spielberg's classic 1993 thriller, Jurassic Park.
In this case, we have the cloning of dinosaurs, perhaps the ultimate on the cool scale, but
clearly problematic on a number of non-aesthetic grounds.
The age of the dinosaurs has passed.
The planet is no longer the same as it was in their time.
One may try, as the character John Hammond does, to recreate an entire ecosystem in
miniature, but as we know, ecosystems are not the collection of macro flora and macrophana,
the large-scale plants and animals one sees, but a fully integrated web of life from the
microbial on up.
The dinosaurs are gone, and bringing them back would require, as it did in the novel,
making sure they did not reproduce, keeping them from reproducing bent they could be controlled
and that the lack of full integration into their ecosystem did not lead to their becoming
rather sizable invasive species.
That and who wants to be eaten by a Tyrannosaurus rex, but what of more recent species whose
habitats and fellow species of the ecosystem still exist?
What of the dodo, or the awk, or the woolly mammoth?
These are species whose disappearance is a result of human interference.
We hunted them to extinction.
But the system of which they are a natural part, their prey, their predators, other
organisms that evolved to exist in concert with them, still exist.
Do we owe it to the larger system to replace them?
In the case of the American Bison, there were a scant couple hundred left in the world when
we undertook a project to recreate herds that could return to the plains of the American
West and sustain themselves.
It took decades and lots of devoted work and resources, but the buffalo are back wandering
the parklands of Wyoming and the Dakotas.
It's a great success story accomplished because we got to them before they completely disappeared.
Couldn't we do the same thing with the mammoth?
There are still miles and miles of frozen tundra in Alaska and Siberia that could support
them.
They went extinct less than 5,000 years ago, a blink of an eye in evolutionary terms.
The land they left is still pretty much the same.
Unlike the dinosaurs, their ecosystem remains intact, smaller in size, but not so small
that it could not support a new population.
Mammoths are sufficiently close to African and Indian elephants that we could use the
eggs and wombs of captive zoo elephants to give birth to these long-gone cousins from
a colder climate.
Because mammoths lived in the frozen north, preserved DNA exists.
The remains of one woolly mammoth was discovered in a chunk of ice on Mali-Lechovsky Island
in the Arctic Ocean in Russia.
We may have the genetic material to do it.
There are concerns about having enough of a population to guarantee a healthy genetic
diversity.
Of course, we face the same problem with the bison and overcame that.
Elephants are very social animals.
They need to grow up in groups.
We know that elephants that grow up away from a herd tend to develop psychological problems
and become rogues who are prone to violence and not good members of a herd when they find
others.
So if a population were to be rebuilt, we'd need animals who modeled the social elements
that kept the population healthy.
The question is simply, should we try?
Do we have a responsibility to restore the species and thereby complete the deprived
ecosystem of its missing parts?
And if we were the ones who caused the destruction?
We surely think so when it's simply a matter of conservation, but is this a step too far?
Is this conjuring of an animal from something other than the same animal a step towards
overreaching our authority over the natural world?
Should we find it repugnant, or should we think in our responsibility to right the wrongs
we as a species have exacted upon the planet's ecosystems?
Is the problem that we're playing not at the macro level with living beings, but focusing
on the micro level, the genetic level?
Is that realm morally off limits to us?
How do we know if it is or it isn't?
If it isn't, then we're led from questions of cloning to those of genetic engineering.
And that is a completely different topic.
