All right, we've got a really big box.
Well, this is an upside-down IBM 36050 front panel.
All right, there it is right side up and it's mostly complete actually.
A few lights missing this one and that one which is amazing considering how poorly they have been glued.
Most of the switchwork, those are supposed to be that way.
This is the only one who is not returning because it's missing the blades on the back.
All the address switches work beautifully.
Most everything is working.
The only two things I found is this has no pot at the back but all the other ones have.
And the switch I have to repair.
So I took it off its frame and removed this one which was bent and cleaned it.
And interestingly enough, that allows me to date it.
It's January 69.
The year men went on the moon.
Here is the backside and most of the switches are there.
I have to remove this.
The rollers are there.
They've cut all the cabling which is annoying.
And all of the lights have been cut and removed also.
So I was afraid they had cut the lights but they didn't.
They just took the outer part where the light goes and out and then they glued it very crudely.
So what I need to do is to make a 3D print or order to find something that can go on top and make a light out of it.
Many many many times.
So you can tell what the problem trials are.
It's all the rotating commutators.
They have taken the beatings.
There is almost nothing left of this one.
This one is gone.
This one is intact.
And at the bottom also this one is gone.
This one is gone.
This one is gone too.
So probably the most fragile ones.
Here is the switch that doesn't work very well because it's missing the top.
So I have made some progress here.
For now I put this nicer protection of an IBM 360 front plate.
Somebody made a 3D version of it and offered it on eBay.
So why not?
I found all the lights.
So those are apparently easy to find.
I got several of them on eBay.
So the panel is cosmetically intact in the front.
Then I reinforced the frame so I can have it as a static display.
And then some parts I bought like the lights.
So I got some actually are slightly different there for the 370 and some for the 360.
But I got also some donated.
Thank you Vincent from France.
So I got a few rotators.
Unfortunately they are by 10.
And the 360 panel uses either by 14 or by 6.
This one might be a 14.
So I might have one that works.
The switches look exactly like the right ones.
So I'll be able to repair my one switch.
Look at that.
Beautiful hardware.
And then the buttons, those will come handy for the tape.
I intend to get the tape drives from the same vintage vacuum tape drives that would work.
So this is the switch that doesn't work.
Because it's missing the contacts on top.
But it looks like this guy is the exact same type of contacts as this one.
All right.
There you go, it works.
Okay.
There.
I think they will have to do for now.
Okay, so this is an imposing panel by any measure.
The Model 50 was a rather big machine at the time.
And the panel has over 250 lights in it.
So let me try to give you a little tour of what every section does.
The panel was mostly used for debug of the machine.
And not very much interaction during regular operation.
So this here is the power section.
And it has all the pots for margining.
So there is 10 voltages that you can tweak.
There's little pots with a little center switch on it.
And you can choose any of the 10 and monitor them over here
and try to create a fault by getting the voltage too low or too high
if it's an intermittent fault.
And actually the 36050 was known to be a machine with a lot of intermittent faults.
So much so that they had a joke about it.
They say that if you threw a Model 50 in the Hudson River,
it would probably sink intermittently.
Anyhow, so you have those 10 voltages that you can margin.
So you can tweak them around their nominal value.
And there's also 10 other voltages here that are fixed that you can monitor.
DC off, turn voltage to CPU and there's a few thermal overloads
and no breaker and power problem slides over here.
So that's the power section.
Next to it is actually an interesting section over here.
This is the storage test.
So you have this button here allows you to write all ones, all zeros,
worst patterns. I have no idea what the worst pattern is
or the reverse of the worst pattern into memory.
If you press the right button, it will write you continuously
and if you have also this stop on check,
it will stop where it finds the memory error.
And there are no some other optional buttons here.
So that's for the memory check.
Then there's the famous emergency pole switch.
So this one, I'll just do it for you.
Once you can pull it, but you cannot push it back without calling IBM.
It stays stuck in that position.
Actually, you have to unlock it from for the back.
So beneath here is another power section, which is optional.
So apparently this came from a bigger machine
and this is for the auxiliary storage power.
So you have four more, four more powers
and that's because this machine was equipped with 512K.
We had an extra 256K auxiliary storage, I guess.
I haven't double checked that, so don't kill me if I'm not exact.
But probably this machine was maxed out with 512K of core memory,
which was quite a lot at the time in 1964 was when the machine was announced.
So over in the little corner here is the channel test.
And basically that allows you to test channel instructions one by one
and you have the choice between the selector channel here or the multiplex channel
and you would just enter instruction one by one manually.
So channels are IO and instructions are defined by this portion here.
So that's the main portion.
Well, let's zoom in on one of them.
This is 144 lights that display all the CPU and channels terrace
and the two tops are channels and the two lower are mostly CPU.
And since 144 lights weren't enough, they made the rollers out of it
and they're controlled by those buttons on the side.
Let's see if I can activate one.
And so these are multiple position 8 per roller.
So you can display 8 times 144 bits on that thing.
And there's a little cheat sheet over here that tells you what status registers
or data channel registers you are looking at.
So that's the main diagnosis to look at the bits in the machine.
Down there in the middle is where you have the entry for data and addresses
and that's of course for manual operation and debugging.
So you can manually enter an address.
Actually, no, this is data.
So data is 32 bits, 4 times 8.
And you see that the indicators have an extra light that's parity.
So every byte has a parity byte and there's a weird button here.
And that's called actually parity reverse.
So parity is generated automatically but for some weird reason for debugging purposes
you can push this one and it will change parity.
And data can be either red or input and you see the lights on top.
And at the bottom you have the address switches which can also be used for operating the channels.
So you see some white markings here and there are special channels, addresses
when you use the blue button that I showed you before.
And the row of lights at the top, these are all the air lights.
So this row here, so the most important light is that fellow over here, the master check.
So if you have an error, this thing stops and then you have to figure out what went wrong.
So there's all kind of air lights.
And towards the left here there is the FLT, the fault location test lights.
We'll talk about them later.
Here you can select which memory location you work on.
And apparently there are four of them.
Main memory, local memory which I suppose is cache or equivalent to cache.
And multiplex and something that's called protect which I don't know yet what it is.
I haven't read enough.
Over here is a little cheat sheet to work the channel addresses which are hardwired mostly.
And then down here is a series of interesting switches here where you can do, that's for deep debugging here.
You can do tests and stop the machine or sync a nosoloscope on some special conditions.
So this is the instruction address match.
So normal is in process but you can have it stop when it matches an address that you have set in the address switches.
So it's the equivalent of setting a debug point in your software.
Then you can do the same trick with the micro instruction.
That's the set of switches next to it.
And you can do the same trick by matching a storage address compare.
So you can basically put stop and break points manually by combination of those switches.
And then it will match the address that you have put in the switches over here and stop the processor.
And then there's a few more I'd like to show you.
There's of course the lamp test.
But my favorite one is the force indicator.
And I wanted really hard to be, for that to be the Star Wars switch when everything else fails you use the force.
But no it has to do with the FLTs which are the fault locator tests.
And so it's not as fast as I thought.
And so this controls how the fault locator tests work and which we are going to talk more about when we move to other section of the panel.
So here we have the counters.
So two counters. One when it's in regular mode when your machine runs and that's the one that IBM makes you pay for.
So this one has 9000 something on it and we don't know how many times it went over.
This is the CE key, customer engineer key switch that will switch it to the maintenance counter for which you won't be built.
And next over here are some of the main manual operation buttons.
So you have start and that's the button you will use to load some memory.
You push start and you load what you had put in the keys into the memory.
And then you can run the processor in the normal mode in single step.
So one instruction at a time or single cycle which I suppose is a micro instruction or part of a micro instruction at a time.
And then you can stop it and bring it in manual mode which gives you access to the other keys.
Once in stop mode so this becomes active so you can do a system reset.
You can do a PSW restart. Basically it's a reset and it starts at address 0 and loads code from there.
Check reset and that's a switch we have on the 1401 also that clears the errors.
Set IC that's one you use to set the instruction counter.
So you would put addresses over here and then press set instruction counter and it would force a jump to that instruction.
Store if that's if you want to store in a certain address.
You would put the data over the switch at the top and press store and it would load the data at the memory address at the bottom.
Displace the inverse when you read it.
And log out if I understand well is to do a dump I suspect on the printer or something like that of the state of the machine.
And here a few of the control knobs, the process control in normal, disabled stop or channel stop.
So it basically defines what the processor will do when it encounters an error.
And then there's this other one I talked about which is the FLT which is default location test.
Where you can have the machine if you put it in the FLT mode.
You can have the machine do a series of tests and you can have repeat the tests stop if it encounters a problem and other modes like this.
And what will happen is that it will go through a series of hardware hardwired tests and display the result is a pass or fail light here.
And which test it was operating etc.
So I understand it has a whole suite of hardware tests that it can do.
And then finally we are at the bottom right of the panel and that's the one the regular operator would use and not the IBM customer engineer.
And it has a big power on button and power off.
And here are the rollers or the rotary controllers for entering the address from your start device.
So which channel it is and which address on the channel and you would start your disk or your magnetic device on which you have your boot code.
And you would press load and it would boot but IBM doesn't call it boot it calls it IPL.
Initial program load and here you have the main indicator lights system when it's running.
Manual when you have stopped it.
Weight when it's in the weight state.
Test when any of the test switches like the memory or the FLT is on.
And load when it's doing IPL.
And that's it there you have it.
Of course the whole difficulty here is to understand what the registers do and there are so many of them.
It's just mind boggling.
But when you had a machine made of hundreds of thousands of parts that could and would all fail.
You needed to have that degree of test lights in them and to be able to maintain them easily.
And therefore the blink and light front panels which are still very pretty today.
So give a hand to the IBM 360 model 50 from control panel and the deal here will be to try to make a replica of the IBM CPU
and try to bring this panel to life.
And that's of course going to be a very major and long project so it's a multi-year affair here.
So for now is just a static display just for looks.
