So a few years ago me and a friend were attending a college. It was the end of the
semester and we had a big final project. Create a business pitch and show it to
some investors. Now this was an early computer engineering course and I was a
terrible student. My friend said hey do whatever you want so I waited a few weeks
until the the final day and I was gonna start the project. I came up with my
dream idea. It was called VR funzo or something stupid like that. Keep in mind
VR was barely relevant at this time but it sounded cool to investors right? It was
a large grandiose spanning an innovative social network where users could live a
second life. You get it? I think you played ping-pong to mine cryptocurrency or
you could just get money by watching an ad. You could use this money these fun
bucks to buy cars, buy things for your house, just buy things. You could hang
out with other people and show them your cool things and out of the 20-page
paper 15 pages were just bullet points that described the various cats that
you could buy in the game. Beneath that was the various hats that you could buy
for those various cats. It wasn't the most original idea. This is permeated
fiction for a good while but you know I always liked that idea. Maybe not the
mining for crypto part but having a place where you can you can just hang
out with people and VR and have your various hats in your various cats.
Alright perfect. Oh hi Mark. Oh oh oh no. The word meta is obviously in reference
to the metaverse. That's what Facebook's doing here. And in many ways this has
become the new buzzword for tech companies and journalists, investors. Pretty soon
we're gonna have the Fortnite metaverse and Microsoft announced its own
metaverse for business. And Facebook is this. It's all very corporate. It's all
very cringy. But is there something there? No but but I'll get to that. What
exactly is the metaverse? That's something that a lot of people seem to
misunderstand. We've called it a digital living world where you can socialize,
make money, hang out, do anything you want. But there's a key factor that people
seem to forget. Well a lot of factors. One, it has to be in VR. So no, regardless of
what you've seen on Twitter, Second Life and MMOs and all this stuff is not a
metaverse. The internet itself is not a metaverse because it has to be in VR.
Secondly, it's got to be open source. Nobody can be in control of it, not owned
by a singular entity. In this way it is like the internet. But finally, and most
importantly, it's not real. It's literally a work of fiction. The metaverse is a
place in the world of Neil Stevenson's 1992 novel Snow Crash. That's it. That's
where this word came from. It's a book. I won't go too in-depth in the story here
because there'll be a whole video on that at some point. But in short, the
metaverse is an entirely open VR platform and in this place people are
represented by avatars. They can communicate with others, go to various
locations, buy a house, earn a living, whatever. It's the direct inspiration for
every VR world story you have ever heard. In the story, the metaverse is so
important because the outside world is awful. It's a chaotic dystopian
landscape where various corporations control limited city-states across the
nation. Hyperinflation makes a billion dollars useless. You're going to need
trillions to buy a lightbulb. The core concept of the metaverse is intended to
be escapism. Your status in society is more so defined whether you know how to
write code, make programs, create models, or contribute to the larger metaverse.
It's entirely open in nature and hobbyists can contribute whatever they
want to make the metaverse a better place. The story is meant as part speculative
futurism, social commentary, and a parody of many of the cyberpunk tropes. Our
main character is a pizza driver for the mob who happens to be a hacker. His
name is literally hero protagonist. But the humor right now is that the top
corporations in our world are interested in creating their own metaverses. As
TechRadar points out, this concept is literally the antagonist's plan in
Ready Player One. The only difference here is that there never is a free
metaverse. It starts broken. Now I'm not going to lie, I love the idea of the
metaverse of a VR world. Disruptive Tech is disruptive for a reason. It will never
be obvious when it's coming. And most people won't think it's a good idea.
I've talked about on this channel how in the 90s the internet was deemed a fad.
The rhetoric surrounding the smartphone was that people were too addicted to
technology. The television was seen as a cesspool of culture, something that would
ruin America. This is human nature. New things are scary. The technology made
before you were born was flat out unusable. Everything going forward is
unnecessary, and only the time in which you grew up will be just right. With that
said, yes, I love the idea of the metaverse of a VR world, but Facebook is
fucking evil. I have the utmost respect for Oculus and its engineers and the man
from it himself. But even the best product can be ruined by upper management. And
Facebook does nothing but ruin things. I'm not even going to go into all the shit
they've done because you probably know about it. It is not a hot take to say
Facebook bad. It's simply factual. So why is Facebook doing this then? Why are
they the ones that are heading up this giant push for not only VR, but the
metaverse? Well, that's actually quite simple. In recent years, VR has gone from
massive, bulky headsets tethered to computers to standalone devices to
goggles. In many ways, it mimics another market that was fledgling for decades
before it exploded, the smartphone. By 2017, it had sold 8.5 billion times, more
than one for each person on the planet. Media itself shifted to cater to this
market. Now, I believe this might happen to VR, maybe at least a fraction of this
kind of growth. But even if that's the case, that's more than a billion units.
Facebook seems to see this too. And there's a real chance that in 10, 15
years, head mounted displays will become the successor to the smartphone. If that
happens, the power dynamic between these massive corporations will shift once
more. All of these companies have other products that can survive regardless of
whether the smartphone or VR is the most popular computing method. But Facebook
just has social media. Social media doesn't cultivate users based on features
and quality. It's a snowball effect. If your friends and family are on this
platform, you will use that. You likely joined Facebook in the first place
because your friends were on there, your family. Remember that MySpace was
actually pretty big when Facebook took the reins? It had about 100 million users
at its peak. But it was the disruptive technology of the smartphone that made
Facebook become what it is today. And this is Facebook's biggest fear that VR
will make all of its existing services irrelevant. Users will gravitate towards
VR social networks or even the traditional phone apps of those services.
And Facebook does not want to be behind the curve. So now they're betting on
this. Whether this manifests into something of quality or value, that's
another question. But yeah, Facebook's metaverse. It's not really a metaverse.
As I said before, that would have to be an open platform. Without this, unless
they're connecting Facebook's metaverse and Epic's metaverse and Microsoft's
metaverse all together and allowing anybody to make their own and jump in,
this is not a metaverse. This is PlayStation Home in VR. 2018 documents
laying out the metaverse from Facebook leaked. This included plans to buy out
game developers to fuel this and the sole goal of crushing competition. They
don't care if it's good or the best. They just don't want anybody else
getting in. The metaverse is not ready. It will not be ready for years. But
Facebook wants to discourage somebody else from trying to make their own. This
whole story is written like satire. It's big evil corporation wants to build the
thing from a 1990s novel that was criticizing big evil corporations.
All right, perfect.
