Well, thank you so much, Man, for taking the time.
Yeah.
Well, thank you for having me.
Yeah, we're excited to dig in.
And we can just get started.
So I know, Man, you started off with your working trauma
surgery as a physician.
So I'm curious, maybe if you can touch a bit on your background
and how you got interested in bioelectricity.
Yeah, this is a kind of a long story.
So I was trained as a trauma surgeon
in China after graduate from military medical school.
And I worked with one of the founders of maybe trauma
surgery in China, Professor Wang.
And that time is mainly under what
we call the blast injury.
It's like explosives and severe damage.
And to see how that caused damage
and how the tissue repair.
And then after that, I went to London
to work with Jeff Bernstock, a molecular biology
and biochemistry at the University College of London.
I still think I would go back to China
to continue my clinical work.
So I kind of tried to look around for a job,
look for a more project which is more kind of close
to our idea.
Sorry.
So I found Professor Colin McCake and John Forrest
at the University of Aberdeen.
And I went there.
And that time, Colin is working on tissue regeneration
of the central nervous system.
So he's using electric fields to guide neuron growths,
like neurotic growth.
And John Forrest was working on cornea wound healing.
So it's a kind of perfect combination for me looking back.
And I combined the electrical signaling together
with the wound healing research.
And it works well.
So I think I should avoid getting other people
So that's why it brings me to this electrical regulated wound
healing.
And at the beginning, we were only
trying to understand whether this is one of the factors
in healing of the wound.
But eventually, we found out that the electric signal
can override other guidance magnets.
And that kind of prompted me to think more.
Not this is only one mechanism, but could
be a predominant mechanism, maybe a conserved nation one.
If you look at the wound healing,
you think about the single cell molecules
plant or animals from salamanders and others lower
organisms to us as a human.
And we're all healed of the wound.
And what is the conserved key thing
is that the breakdown of the barrier of the inside and outside.
And the immediate effect is the communication
between the inside and outside.
And we know that the inside and outside of the animal
have this chemical gradient as well as an electrical gradient.
And so this electrical breakdown of the barrier
is the same mechanism for wound implant in single cell
and for all the animal species and to us as a human being.
So this electrical communication might
be the initial signal that telling the organism
that there's a breach of the barrier and we need to repair it.
And when the barrier recovers and this communication stops,
this wound electric current will stop.
So at that time, I'm thinking I probably
need to move to a bigger place to understand
the fundamental biology of it.
And then to use these mechanisms to help wound healing.
So that's kind of prompt me to move to University of California
of Davis.
And even before that, Mike and I knew each other's work.
And I think this really is a fundamental mechanism,
not only for wound healing, but as Mike showed for many,
for developmental biology, for cancer,
and for many other biology too.
So this is probably, I don't want to go too long,
but this is a short journey of why I get here.
That's fascinating.
Well, thank you for sharing that.
So we want to dive a bit into the history of the field.
And well, we certainly want to understand the history of the 1900s
and how the field has developed.
I know you've written a bit about some of the origins
of bioelectricity as well, going back to Galvani's days.
Could you touch a bit upon the origins of the field?
I think Mike is a much better person
to talk about the origin of bioelectricity.
So Mike, maybe.
Yeah, I guess maybe to put it another way,
as you were developing your work in wound healing,
because I think actually your work in wound healing
is quite unique.
It's very different from what we do.
And it's very different from what other developmental biologists
who do bioelectricity in the field do.
And you can talk about what are the inspirations?
As you think about the bigger questions of how is wound healing?
How is it controlled?
What are the evolutionary?
Do the different types of wound healing
that you find, for example, in amphibia and mammals and so on,
are they the same?
Are they different?
What kind of background in that field informs your thought?
How do you think about these things?
Yeah, so if we're talking about general wound healing
in human skin or mammalian skin, and this actually went back
almost 200 years ago about this newborn remound,
a German physiologist, he was the founder of the modern
electrophysiology.
He actually measured action potential.
And that time, it's not a single axon action potential,
but it's a bundle of axon together.
And if you stimulate one end, the action potential
will propagate to the other end.
So he is the first one to discover that.
But almost at the same time, he's trying to see
whether there's any current flowing in and out
of the skin, bridge, or wound.
And he found that.
And so it is not a new discovery.
If we go back to Gavani's time, and indeed,
those kind of the caught nerve and a piece of frog skin,
and at the wound edge, there would
be this wound electric current.
And Gavani used this as a source.
But at that time, the understanding is very limited.
So he thinks that this animal electricity
is kind of an imaginary vitalism.
But now we understand it's like blocks of irons.
And actually, the tissue cells pumping irons
and generate and maintain this electric current.
So if we go back, and you can see that although the understanding
is not really as correct as we see it now,
but the phenomena or the discovery or observation
were there, they found out that wherever you bridge
an organism, there will be a kind of flux of irons.
And eventually, we see this as a kind of flux of specific irons.
This is a kind of different from the electricity we use every day
in our electronics and in our appliance.
That's the electricity generated by the power plant.
And actually, the drive of the electron
flows through the conductive metals.
But in human biology, more flux of irons are different,
like sodium potassium.
So while the understanding getting more and more detailed
scientific, but the observation of the electricity
in wound at wound actually went back to hundreds of years ago.
And as Mike just mentioned, if we look at the wound of single cell,
if we have a single cell, if you punch a hole,
do we have electricity there at the hole?
The wound, the primitive wound.
And there are, we measure them, and other people measure it too.
So early days, probably last century,
about nearly 100 years ago, people used this big axons.
They make a cut, and they can measure this injury current
flowing out and in.
And we know now because you have a membrane potential,
and you cut it, and you can measure this current flowing in and out
while this flux of iron in and out.
And this is a genuine injury current.
And with a small, what was like a frog with frog skin
and many other type of skin.
And if you make a wound, this flux of irons happened.
And this would generate electricity.
And now to human beings, this electricity
generates more or less in the same principle.
But if you look at the, so this is the question
I go back to early days where I started
to work with Colin McCake and John Forrester.
And I'm always wondering, is this true?
And many other people question about electricity.
What is it?
And how it would happen at a wound?
Is it really important?
And I kept asking myself too.
But if you look at the single organism,
evolved multi-cellular organism.
And to us, there's a barrier inside and outside, always there.
And if the initial bridge to the single cell membrane
happened, and the cell either re-sealed or the cell will die.
And so this would be a cue or signal that happens.
So ancient in biology.
And I think biology, the evolution
would take the cues from the nation
and say, oh, we're developed by mechanism
to use this signal to develop, to heal.
And so the biology can evolve when the complex organisms
originate.
So although specifically with skin wound or the epicyclic wound,
we have this electrical signal happens.
But if you go back to the evolution
to the very start of the life, and this bridge
of the membrane or the barrier happened at the same time
when this flow of ions happens.
And that is intrinsically related to the electricity
generation at the world.
And so I would think if the biology doesn't take that
as a mechanism, it doesn't go well with Darwin's evolution.
And we know the evolution is just
biology will take any cues to get it better to survive,
to repair, and to evolve.
So that makes me believe this is fundamental mechanism.
Although we focus on healing, but I
think many are the aspect of life.
It would be hard to imagine that the life doesn't really,
while you ignore this intrinsic aspect.
So I guess if we go back to when you entered the field,
and this might be more of a general question,
but how would you describe the state of the field then
in terms of the major thinking in the field
or the experiments that were being worked on,
or just even the excitement around bioelectricity?
I guess probably this field is like many other fields that sometimes
it seems it developed quite fast and well.
And sometimes you need to overcome many hurdles,
like those ideas were already well established in the field
and to get people to look into this direction.
And sometimes I'm quite optimistic.
And sometimes I'm a little bit skeptical
that it might take time for people to appreciate this mechanism.
So specifically to the wound healing field,
and I think people tried to use electro-stimulation
to enhance wound healing long time ago
and with many different approach.
And the mis-concept is that you stick electro there
and then you would stimulate the wound to heal.
But the biology itself is far more complicated than that.
So I think one of the argument supporting you
using electro-stimulation healing or regeneration is that it's cheap
and a few hundred dollars and you can stimulate the wound to heal.
I think we need to think carefully about that statement.
Nowadays we know that if you develop a drug,
you need millions and millions of dollars to develop,
to understand what is really happening behind the biology system
about this chemical.
So if we just want to spend a few,
much, much less amount of money and develop effective therapy,
that is not right.
And also because electro-stimulation is so easy to implement
in clinical context,
although not correctly in most of the case,
but people publish different results and some say,
well, this is a magic treatment and the wound never healed
or stayed there for many years and after stimulation healed.
And some people say, well, this doesn't really have any effect.
So if you think about the wound complexity and this is quite,
I think this is quite understandable,
the wound is geologically complex,
chemically complex and physiologically complex.
And this is kind of three-dimensional volume conduct.
So when we understand the electricity,
we always have metal wires and the electricity flowing from one side
in direct direction to the other side.
But if you're thinking about the 3D-conducting media,
the electricity go every direction.
So, and this is a much less wound-stirred
and it's very difficult to study.
So I think the promise is there,
but at the same time, the community and the society need to understand that
this is a new type of therapy and the funding agency
needs to spend time and money and effort rather than just think that,
oh, this is a magic thing, so you stick the electrode there and the wound heals.
Magically, you only spend a few hundred dollars and the magic stuff will happen.
But we start to gradually see people,
well, the funding bodies are willing to,
well, it becomes more willing to invest more.
But I would think there's still not, maybe, enough.
So I think part of what you're saying is that initially,
when people started understanding that electrical currents could heal wounds,
they thought there's some magic formula here
where if you just apply electricity, it's going to heal.
But a lot of your work is involved in understanding
how these electrical signals heal the wounds
and it's a lot more complex than simply applying electricity.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And as Mike's work already shows that
this electricity carried by ions, the charge,
because the charge carrier in biology is ions.
And the ions, we have so many different types of ions like sodium, potassium,
calcium and chloride, all those things, and they can change.
And they are, the biology system itself
are trying to control it in many ways,
use ion channels and pumps and tight junctions.
So the equivalent would be the battery, the resistors and transistors.
And so this biological electronics need to be understood first
before we really try to manipulate it.
But wow, so what is the advance of the electronics?
And as Mike is leading the way by electronics
and I think we will get much better understanding of the bioelectricity itself.
I think bioelectricity, the name is being punished somehow by charlatanism.
Some magic things happens and the dead body and the move.
And there are some signs in it, but it's more than that.
And it's like Michael Faraday many years ago showed this electricity and magnetism
somehow connected by this swirling needle with a torch.
And you start thinking about that,
how can you actually make those things work together as a system?
And the biology found a way, and as Mike leading the way to understand this,
the biology behind it, and not only for development of biology,
but also offers a kind of complete new understanding of other aspects of biology,
including wound healing and regeneration.
I'm interested in talking about other prior work and all of that.
What's your take on some of Becker's papers?
So Robert Becker, he made some pretty striking claims about the rat limb regeneration
and things like that.
What's your take on all of that?
And he had quite a different model actually, of how it worked.
What do you think about that?
I think, yeah, Becker's work is pioneering and also,
I think it's quite important, it's kind of like somehow part of the foundation of our work now.
But as I said, that some of the understanding may not be as simple or as accurate
as we hope, hope for, wish for, although, so I think this need to go into direct,
well, in parallel direction.
First is to apply it as a Becker's work, and the other thing is trying to understand it,
and they're going in parallel.
I think at his time, the tools and the method, methodology, are probably not the yet to really make this.
Yeah, with that, we can understand, we can still try that.
And the many things in medicine is just trying to error.
So for example, you try something that works and that's fine.
Maybe if we understand it, that would be better, but if we don't understand it works, let's do it.
But nowadays, because we develop such a powerful mechanism about way or technology to understand
things like my way and other people are doing now more and more.
And I think we can understand more.
But I think for his early limb regeneration, the repair work,
what lacks over there is is mechanistic or well, understanding the also
a well controlled approach that is other people or other lab can easily reproduce
and develop in a more scientific direction.
And I think probably now it's a better time in that time.
And we know when we see this develop at that particular time, probably we don't have those
techniques or technology to understand or to get a better control.
On this point, who are some of the other scientists you drew inspiration from in the field
or you built your work upon?
I think this can go well for the person I actually met.
And I think Lionel Jeffy is certainly the one I still remember when I was kind of the
junior young postdoc in London and the other day we met and I always get so excited.
But about this work and he always say calm down and you need to really able to explain things
clearly and make other people excited.
So you become a scientist at the moment.
You are just a technician and you do a nice experiment.
You got nice result, but it's very difficult for them.
So this is one of the examples.
He's a pioneer of the next level of the new era of biorelectricity.
And he did really some pioneer work and I keep going back to read his papers.
So he's one and later on I met like Ken Robinson, Richard Nusseteli and also Richard Borgans.
And I think that all are contributing many important ways to this field,
including developing the technology to measure the electric field or any type of
electricity associated with biological specimens.
And then measured the electric field at different type of wound and kind of lay the
foundation of the future work.
And also there are the other people to show that the other ones moving pool and the heat.
He stopped working in this field anymore, but they are the first few among the first few people's
demonstrate that they are electricity in biological system.
And you can actually measure them.
You can map them.
And the second thing is that the cell do respond to such an electric field.
And the other ones, Claudia Sten.
And this is probably more relevant to what Mike has been doing in biological systems that
they use this modern technology to map or measure this electricity around the developing
embryos and then see how that relates with the developmental process.
So, and of course, Colin McKagan, John Forrest, and we're talking about this from the clinical
observation of the patient eyes, this swirling movement of the epicyclic layers in the cornea
during healing process.
And if this pattern is disrupted and the woman is not healing well,
and how this special movement pattern happens, there's many kind of hypothesis.
And one includes the electromagnetic guidance of the cell movement.
So, and as Mike mentioned about the burger's work,
I haven't met them, but I know the work.
So, this field's kind of, of course, you know, Mike's work is leading the way and I read his
paper again, again, trying to understand.
With my clinical background, I'm not very well known very well about genetics and molecular
biology.
So, I learned a lot of the molecular chemistry in genetics from his work.
So, those work are the foundation and keeps inspiring me and my lab to push this forward.
I'm curious.
Do you know who were the people working in bioelectricity before Lionel Jaffe's era?
As you said, Lionel Jaffe was sort of the new era in bioelectricity.
Yeah, and at the beginning, as I mentioned, that the
the bioelectricity, when it first emerged, it's like people see this magic effect in the
piece of tissue twitch and the piece of muscle contract and that, I mean, it will start to
move and even the cops move.
So, the sensation was there, but it's the real development didn't come as like Michael
Farad's discovery showing that this this need always attach at the start to move.
And Michael Farad's work actually revolutionized while leading to the
revolution in the revolutionized whole society.
Now we see it everywhere.
Without him, we would not be here.
And then James Clark Marx, well, he really connect this electricity with everyone, everything.
And as Einstein said, that James Clark Marx, well, is the giant.
He stand in the shoulder and develop the relative theory.
So those are also great people on the line, our hopes, human society move forward.
I kind of forgot what you asked.
No, no, no, that's fine.
I think that answers it.
I was curious who some of the pioneering scientists were before Lionel Jaffee.
But I think you answered it.
Okay, yeah, more broad sense.
But in biology, there are many other, like Mike mentioned, more clean,
people like Becker and he's a clinician and tried many things.
But it's kind of hard that when people looks at
like more fundamental biochemistry, genetics, and so cell biology and
then, but now I think it's probably a good time that the bioelectricity
gets more connected with what traditional understanding of biology sell.
I mean, do you want to go through a few examples?
I mean, your work is really extremely impressive and very close.
I think maybe you're the closest to clinical application in this field.
And I'm just curious if you could go through a few, you know,
well, skin, cornea, all of the, like you've done some amazing things.
So like, what are some of your favorite stories so far that have come out of your lab?
Yeah, so this can go a little bit further in detail.
So when I, as I said, when I left London to University of Aberdeen
in very north of Scotland, and I was thinking that maybe after a few years,
and I finished my postdoc training, I went back to be a trauma surgeon again.
But I remember the first thing is the cell movement in the electric field.
It's so dramatic.
And that time when I talked to the people in the lab and I said,
we don't have a video recorder.
We don't have computer recorded.
And what I did is that I took a photo at a different time point,
like zero hour, one hour, two hour, and I print them out on the,
on the photo paper and compare them to see whether they move.
And the first experimental worked.
And I see the cell move directionally.
I was so excited.
So, and that kind of made me stay there a little bit longer.
And then we start to ask, well, at the wound, there are so many
mechanisms we accept that stimulate and guide the cell into the wound to heal.
So, now you say electricity and how important this is.
And there was, there was a postdoc in my lab here.
So we tried to make a wound and apply electric field across.
And I remember that time we stopped to have the video recorded.
We can see the wound edge move.
For example, this is one side of the wound.
The other side of the wound.
And he, what people normally do is to measure the area in the middle about the wound
and to see how the wound becomes smaller.
And she, after a few months, she never told me the result.
And I keep asking her and they tend out that she thought that I want to see the wound getting smaller.
But what she, her result is that when she applied electric field across the whole field
and the one side moving, the other side move away.
So the wound area didn't really become much smaller than the control
because the control wound actually moving in the heels.
So she was quite hesitant to tell me the result.
So I said, well, after this two or three months,
experimentally, I would like to see the result.
So she bring the video to me and I start to see this one side moving
on the guidance of the electric field, the other side being guided away.
And I said, wow.
So it looks like this isn't more important because at this experimental wound,
we have all other work except guidance cubes.
But applying this electric field, you override them.
So one side actually move away.
And this is more important than I thought.
So I said, well, this is not just make it go smaller, but they actually override.
The guidance magnets like injury stimulation, contact inhibition release,
the population pressure go into the wound, or the chemical release at the wound to attract the cell in.
So this is not just the one of the magnets.
It seems that it override in the being a predominant or master signal
guiding the cell into the wound, mobilize and guide the cell into the wound.
So that time I start to thinking about this.
This is more because at the wound, you have so many different chemicals,
like growth factors, you could have hundreds of them.
And if you add each of them there, you will see some sort of effect.
But none of them are able to really make this piece of tissue actually go away or in
as you change the guidance direction.
And then we ask the question whether the electricity causes such effect is physiological.
And we look into the literature and we see the measurement from Ken Robinson's lab
and Nussbaum's measurement and Richard Borgens' measurement.
And the measurement, I mean the field stress, are using that you can measure at the invulnerable wound.
So this physiological electric field are able to guide to have this overriding guidance effect.
So I start thinking, oh, maybe this is not just one of the mechanisms.
It could be a predominant or master signal to mobilize and guide the cell,
at least in the simple healing, wound healing model.
And we tested it in kind of like an organ culture system.
And this shows the absurdity of the same effect.
So that gets me more kind of excited.
We talked about the fundamental mechanism, but this experiment
made me thinking about this could be very important mechanism.
And then so this is kind of like a second discovery.
And at that time, nobody actually is able to use other guidance mechanisms
like chemotaxis or duotaxis or any other guidance could cause a massive cell movement.
So this is the other, I think, I remember well, what come out from the lab.
And then we started thinking about, okay, there are many genetic and molecular
mechanisms regulate the cell movement.
Does this electric field or electric guidance actually use those mechanisms or
or or intersect with those genetic and molecular mechanisms?
So I start to get in touch with like Peter Dubotis at the Johns Hopkins and Henry Bond at the UCSF
and a Joseph Panninger that time at the University of parental because they all
study this chemotactic effect and they use a molecular and genetic approach to see
how cells migrate directionally in chemical gradient.
So I'm trying to work with them to see.
And funny thing is that at the beginning where contact them about this electric field,
guidance cell migration, they are very skeptical and we're thinking, well, very electric field.
And all the other ones are weak small in Vienna and that time was in Scotland,
it's closer, closer in distance.
And they're trying to do similar experiments.
It's very hard to repeat because they are most of the lab members are trained in biochemistry
and molecular biology.
They are very, very good leading expert manipulate the chemicals.
But with electronic electronics is less is probably less familiar to them.
So in the lab, it's it's difficult to repeat.
But I said, well, I can come over to do the experiment in your lab.
And I went there and that we reproduce this electric guided cell movement.
And then we start to use a different model organism, like a dictastelium.
We knock out the genes.
And with new to the field in Henry Bond's lab, we block out certain signaling pathway.
And with with Joseph Panninger, we he has this expedition knock out the genes in
mice, and we can use this cell tissue to test and see how the cells actually sense or
transduce this electric signaling into cell directional response.
And that time we found out that the key molecules like the ps3 kinase
or p10 those like important intracellular signaling mechanisms kind of participate
in this electrical field guided cell migration, I mean, wound healing too.
So let's bring our with with their help.
And together with them, we start to understand more about this
important mediators or molecular mechanisms underline this electrical guided
cell tissue movement and wound healing.
So those are, I think, the early experiment I remember in the in the lab.
This is still bringing back a lot of
well, very good memories to working in different place and working with different people and
people start being very skeptical and later on becomes very, very
unsusastic.
And like Peter DeLautis, we're still working together trying to understand how this,
for example, one of the signals, one of the project work together is that the cells now are
in an environment.
They have a chemical environment, mechanical environment with Wolfgang Lucid and the
University of Maryland and also electrical environment and how the cell integrate them
and into a kind of cell behavior response.
Although we are able to understand them in separation one by one.
But the integration is a key.
I think we are not there yet.
But I think probably with this integrated approach, we eventually are able to combine
biochemical, biomechanical and bioelectrical together to see how cells are
collectively, well, make a collective decision and respond to such a diverse
environmental cues.
And we were talking about
mechanical mechanism and Donald Ingeberg is another person who inspired me.
And I remember we spoke at the meeting and he said,
don't keep going because at the beginning when he was working on mechanical things and
people were always wondering, well, the mechanical force out there, the cells always
get the chemicals and they bounce something and signaling and so respond.
When you're talking about mechanical, how do cell do it?
And so he's a big source of inspiration for me as well.
And what are some of the questions that you are exploring currently?
Yeah, so when I moved the lab to the U.S. from the U.K. and I was thinking
just kind of three directions I would like to pursue.
The first is that, I mean, we talk about the wound, we can measure the electric field.
So how the wound actually produces such an electric field and regulates it.
And we know that our tissue or the wound are composed by the cells and the cell form a tissue
and the cell have this ion channels and pumps and those ion channels, pumps together with the
type junction and the former biological, electrical circuit.
And this circuit actually generated this electricity and it come into being when the
barrier is broken down to change a long time and then when the wound healed it disappeared.
So a fundamental question would be how the wound actually produces and regulates such a signal
to best achieve wound healing. And so we're trying to see
whether we can find the what we call the molecular generator is like a little power plant in the
tissue that actually generates this electricity and in response to injury.
So this is the one direction and the other direction is that how the cell actually sends
such an electric field and this is a long-standing question and many people in the field are working
on that too. Because when I first see the cell movement I talked with a traditional electric
physiologist and very disappointed to me is that most people say oh no they won't do anything
because the field is so weak because if you need to induce action potential you need a much
large field, much stronger field and they don't do anything. But if you look at the video
of the cell movement and the wound healing process the cells certainly respond to it and
although as I said that working with Joseph Penninger, Henry Bond, Peter Davides we discover some of the
important molecule and genetic element but we were not we have not found a sensor yet.
So for example we can see light, light is electromagnetic waves and our retina detected
and we can start to see them so the cell sends it but for such a small DC nature electric field
we don't know what the sensor they are. We have some clue, we have some indications
and we found out some of the mediators but the sensor
have largely been elusive. We have so this is another direction we're trying to
to see whether we can we can eventually find the sensor but maybe sometimes I'm thinking about
Donald Ingevers say about how the cell sends the mechanical force and I remember one of his
words is that the whole cell is a sensor so maybe that's true. So this whole cell just sends it
as a whole unit it's not the traditional ways like we have a molecule and it has a ligand and
the sensor so the sensor could be more complicated in just a single molecule. It could be a set of
molecule, it could be the cell as a sensor but it was still as I said working with Peter Davoutis
and we're trying to manipulate genetically the molecule to see whether we can find the sensor.
So this second direction, the third direction is like working with Marko Rolandi and other
colleagues from Santa Cruz and the Rift-Izorov Clinician Scientist here at UC Davis and
together with Mike we're trying to see whether we can we can develop some treatment
to precisely regulate the wound electricity and deliver chemicals electronically to help
wound to heal. So this is another direction is that if we even if we don't understand fully
the mechanics how the cells sense the electric field, how the wound generally electric field
but who possibly can use it and develop technology to enhance the wound healing
well at the same time we're trying to gain more fundamental understanding so those are the three
directions my lab can see. You know one of my one of my favorite papers of yours is the one with us
I think the first author is Sun where you've got the the entire cells are going one way in
electric field and if you fragment them into pieces all the pieces are going the other way.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. That was incredible. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I remember this experiment was
conceived many years ago before we actually are able to do it. I remember I tried it with Henry
Bourne so this this was back in Aberdeen and when I saw paper about the fragment of cells
so where a fragment of cells means that the cell doesn't have nucleus just part of the
cytoplasma calmed down and this this this our biological significance to platelets is
such a kind of structure and if we now exosome those are membrane circled structure with a
little bit cytoplasma inside and what Mike mentioned about this is that when we are reading
this neutrophil actually release part of this cytoplasma as a little particle or little fragment
to in combat the infection so I went to his lab and I'm trying to to do that the experiment
it turned out it's quite difficult to get enough self-fragment from neutrophil
so we never been able to get a conclusive result and later on when we were in Aberdeen and the
Julie Theoret lab has this from the other lab at the show the other group showed that
the fish cretocytes are very big so when you treat them with certain chemicals the part of
the cell body comes off and this little fragment is still able to move around so we were thinking oh
so this this is a good example and together with Alex Munguna that time he was at University of Aberdeen
oh no University of California Davis later on moved to NYU and so we we talked with Dr. Sun
and they said well let's capture the cells and to see generate this fragment put them in
electrocute and the result is kind of we never expected so the fragment to come off actually
move in opposite direction from the mother cell and so this so it looks like the the sensor and
the response and decision making are kind of different part of the the whole process so the
cell can sense it and the cell can respond it to to to electrocute field but the cell also can
make a direction to see whether they want to go left or right or to grab the work acid so this
this makes me thinking more about that what Donald Ingevers saying that maybe the whole system is
a sensor it just doesn't use a single piece of molecule and I sense it I responded it's like
it's it's coordinate itself and make the decision to go to the cassette or to the
anode so yeah thank you Mike for bringing that really mind boggling experiment up you know we
could never ever sort the result like this we would just think the the the the fragment come
well move together with the mother cell but no they didn't move to the opposite direction
yeah for me you know we spend a lot of time thinking about collective intelligence and how
the preferences of the collective emerge from the preferences of the parts you know how the
scaling works and here you showed us a great example where the parts have a certain preference but
the collective once you put them together the the collective actually has a quite different
quite different preference for its action so I think that's a I think that's a powerful
example yeah well thank you thank you so much you know I this is this is a real pleasure I mean
Min you and I have known each other for a long time but I really I think your work is amazing I
think it's the closest probably to the clinic of any of us in the field right now and yeah it's
it's just yeah it's beautiful well thank you so much well thank you so much man really appreciate
you taking the time this has been amazing yeah yeah much appreciated well so it's a great pleasure
and I hope this field keep moving forward in something we'll see a kind of a new horizon
