Lecture 2 Politics, Economy and Society
Welcome to lecture 2 of the Terror of History.
In the previous lecture, I tried to present the idea of the Terror of History, the changes
that took place and how humans, from the very beginnings of history, dealt with this
Terror and tried to escape history.
I also wanted to discuss the concepts of time, the manner in which in an earlier period
humans changed from a view of time as cyclical to one that is linear.
In this lecture and in the next one, I want to provide a very broad context to an examination
of mysticism, of millenarian movements and of the witch-crace.
I want to provide a political, economic and social context in lecture 2 and in the next
one I will concentrate on the cultural and religious context to these developments.
Please understand that we cannot understand at all, we cannot make sense of the mysticism
of someone like Bernard of Clairbourg in the 12th century or of the writings of Hilda Garde
of Bingham in the 12th century or of the work of St. Francis of Assisi in the 13th century
unless we place these ideas and the thoughts within a specific historical context.
What I am going to present here today and tomorrow in the next lecture are really very
broad visions, provide a kind of running account of these developments over time between 1,000
and 1,700.
I will revisit all these ideas, I will revisit these historical events again when I speak
specifically about individuals or events.
So for example tomorrow I will do a great deal on religious history but when I do the
witch-crace I will go back and present a more detailed account of the historical context
of this phenomenon.
So please with that in mind I think let us begin and I begin with the economic and social
transformation of Western Europe in the period between 1,000 and 1,700.
This is what the anal school, what the school does anal, calls la longue durée, the long
period of time in which we can see change over time which is precisely what the historian
does to trace and to document transformation over time.
When we place ourselves in Europe in the year 1,000, a year of transformations although
most Europeans did not know when the year 1,000 began, when we place ourselves roughly
around the year 1,000 there are all kinds of changes taking place.
If we look at society in the year 1,000, if we look at the economy in the year 1,000 we
know that in the year 1,000 society is organized according to social orders, that we have society
which is thought to be divinely ordained, which is thought to be the work of God divided
into very specific social orders.
Those who work at the bottom composing 95% of the population and in the year 1,000 they
are mostly peasants.
In Western Europe in the year 1,000 most of the people who work are peasants and the majority
of them in the year 1,000 or around the year 1,000 are people who are tied to the soil,
that is to say they are serviled labor, they are served and the conditions is hereditary,
is passed through the mother.
There is another order which is the order of those who fight, the people whom we call the
knights who are not yet in the year 1,000 aristocrats, who are people who will not acquire
the sense of nobility which is a cultural construct as well until the 12th century and
who have a monopoly of weapons, a small elite at the top, that because they have a monopoly
of weapons, because they wield weapons and because they fight are thought to be the defenders
of society, that's how they define themselves as the veladores, the fighters, also as the
defenders of society, put there by God to defend this Christian world and because they
are the defenders of society and because they have a monopoly of weapons which they will
maintain until the 14th century, they also do not work, they live from the toil of those
at the bottom of the peasants who work for them and generate enough income to allow them
to pursue arms, a career of arms as defenders and then we have those who pray, those who
are of a ecclesiastical state, the members of the church and because they pray for the
world and they pray to keep the terror of history at bay because they continuously engage
in the work of God, they also do not work, they pray and they also support it by those
at the bottom who work for them, this is the classical tripartite division of society
which we find in the 11th century and which has been constructed and which has precedence
going as far back as the 4th century and which has been slowly emerging and which acquires
this ideological content in the 11th and 12th century when people begin to think of this
social order as one in many respects organized by God and protected by God, the king when
kings come to play a significant role in the political life of western Europe, the kings
are the ones that in a sense glue together these three social orders, I do not have to
even begin to explain to you because it I think is a common knowledge, the staying power
of this social organization, it remains as an ideal until the French Revolution, it
remains as it were the kind of ways in which you think of organizing society, we know that
it is also a society which is essentially agrarian that most of the people live on the
land and work the land, that is a world of woods and forest and a few farms spread out
through the face of Europe, a world around the year 1000 with very few cities, with very
few towns, with little urban life, with really very little development, with some small amount
of trade and communications, people who come by the villages to sell salt and some spices
but it is a world of isolated villages where the peasants are tied to the soil and where
the horizons do not extend far beyond the borders of their villages, it is not that
they are kept there behind chains and fences because none of that happens in the Middle
Asia, these people are not the slaves, the serfs are not slaves who are persecuted but
it is their no place to go, this is the world, the work lands which essentially belong to
them as long as they do so to serve the Lord, by the 12th century this well ordained and
should we say idealized tripartite division of society begins to break down because by
the 12th century we have the emergence of towns and cities and with the emergence of
towns and cities in the 12th century then we have the beginnings of a new social class
and I could call it perhaps now a social class although it is perhaps not appropriate to
do so yet and we call that social group the bourgeoisie, the bourgeoisie is part of that
first sort of social order of those who work but the bourgeoisie is very different from
the people who live on the land, they live not by the toil of the hands on the earth,
they live by trade and commerce or by the making of things, by being craftsmen and artisans,
by essentially engaging in trade and they bring to the medieval world an extraordinary
social dynamics, they are essentially free men, the air of the city makes free is the
German saying, start Luftemach frei, if you are a serf and you escape to a city or a town
and you live in a city or a town for a year and a day you become a free man, free from
the kind of feudal obligations that are imposed upon you in this survival world and therefore
the cities become centers of liberty where new concepts of man and his relation to the
world arise, the city has a different concept of time, the city has a different concept
of God, we cannot explain the mysticism of someone like Francis of Assisi unless we understand
that he comes from an urban environment at the beginning of the 13th century and that
he articulates a great deal of the ideas, the ideals I should say of this bourgeoisie,
of bourgeois mentality, it is a bourgeois who becomes the enemies of the high nobility,
it is a bourgeois who will ally with the nascent crowns around Europe as in a continuous
struggle against the power of the nobles and the rapacious behavior and the selfishness.
This nobility which only becomes a nobility with the emergence of certain cultural ideas
and cultural constructs in the 12th century is a violent nobility that terrorizes the
countryside from the little castles all around Europe and they go into the countryside and
terrorize the peasants and extort money and impose of them brutal extractions and customs,
make no mistakes about this, this is not an idealized and mythified world but it is a
bourgeoisie in the cities in the 12th century who discover new meanings to time, it is a
bourgeoisie who begins to think of time as money, who begins to measure the work of people
by the time, by clocks that begin to appear in the 12th and 13th century so that the expires
of the cathedral are soon to be replaced by the spires of the gill holes where you will
have a clock that will toll, the first clocks appear in the early 14th century but there
are all the kinds of clocks and ways of measuring time, so you have a contraposition on the
one hand god's times, the church time and on the other hand the merchant's time and
compare the way in which a peasant works, he works up in the morning with the sunlight
and he goes into the fields and his day is dominated not by a clock but by the movement
of the sun and the setting of the sun and by the canonical hours, the tolling of bells
in a far off monastery, telling him the different canonical hours, the different hours of the
day in which the monks and the canons engage in prayer, matins, vespers, cestors, all those
different canonical hours in which you make pious prayers to god and you move to the
town and in the town, your day is marked, you work so many hours, it does not depend
on the sunlight, you know when you have to go to lunch, it is a completely different
way of organizing your life and an organizing time which in a sense it tells us about a
new world that is being aborn here which will have drastic consequences in the emergence
of heresies, in the emergence of millennial movements and so on.
This economy which slowly becomes commercial and artisanal suffers a tremendous blow at
the end of the 13th century and through the 14th century.
This is the onset of the so-called lay medieval crisis.
The population of Europe and the economy of Europe have been growing.
More people were being born, more people survived because there is a series of technological
developments in the countryside, the introduction of new plows, the introduction of the three
field system which divides the land, the introduction of a collar to use horses for
plowing.
So all these things lead to greater production of food, the opening of new lands, the clearing
of woods and the establishment of peasants in new lands no longer as survey labor but
as free laborers because the lords who have no loss for the peasants think that it would
be more profitable for them to settle peasants as sharecroppers or paying a rent for the
land than to have them as survey labor.
So that there is that dynamics that begins in the 12th century and continues into the
late 13th or early 14th century and in the 14th century everything comes crashing down.
One because there is probably some Malthusian pressure in some part of Europe.
That is to say that the population grows too fast, too rapidly, there are too many people
on the land and therefore you need to put marginal lands on the cultivation, there is
a decline in the production of food and it leads to a kind of demographic decline.
Two because the weather changes dramatically by the beginning of the 14th century.
The summers get wetter and colder and therefore you have the beginnings of widespread famines.
In fact there is a famine in 1315, 1317 which might have killed as much as probably one
third of the population of certain parts of Europe, certainly in France and in England
as much as one third of population is either killed or weakened by this famine.
We have even reports of cannibalism during 1315, 1317 famines.
We have reports of waves of crimes.
I want to point out that there is a very close correlation between economic decline and social
upheaval and millenarian movements and that they go hand in hand.
In times of trouble people begin to dream of the millennium.
But the famine and the Malthusian pressures are only part of the story.
You have a series of revolutions that begin in the 14th century, a revolution in Flanders,
the great Jacquerie, the great uprising of the French peasants.
You have the great urban uprising in Florence.
You have the great peasant uprising in 1381 in England.
The peasants have now had it with the oppression of the lords and with their inability to defend
them against the excesses of other nobles.
And so they took arms, they armed themselves with pitchforks and knives and glaives and
they went out and burned seniorial castles and raped noble women.
And even as François tells us in the accounts of the Jacquerie, force some of the noble
women to eat parts of the flesh of their husbands.
They will be paid in kind by the nobility who will crush them in a series of campaigns
against the rebellious peasants.
And then, of course, there is the Hundred Years' Wars, which begin in 1337 and which
lasts late into the second half of the 15th century, more than 100 years, which devastate
the center of France and which becomes a European-wide war and which bring untold miseries to Europe.
And finally, of course, in 1348 and 1350, and then returning every generation until
the 17th century, the plague.
Please understand, again, that there is a connection between the plague and such movements
as a flagellant movement, which we will look at later on, or the persecution of Jews, or
the kinds of, should we say, cultural and religious manifestations that are deeply associated
with that.
And finally, there is a recovery at the end of the 15th century and the beginning of new
economic systems, what we call the decline of the British community and the beginnings
of capitalism.
It is not a coincidence that the wish craze coincide with these economic shifts and that
as we shall see when we explore Essex Chire and the social history of Wishcraft, we shall
see that there is an incredible connection between the social affiliation of the people
who are accused of witches and their economic status.
That is, in fact, there is a relationship between one and the other.
The rise of capitalism, new attitude, so was the poor, in a sense the pejorative representations
of the poor, the growing sense that this is a world which no longer follows this kind
of harmonious communal world of the Middle Ages, creates extraordinary anxieties which
are reflected and articulated into all kinds of millenarian movement, mystical trances,
apocalyptic witches, and of course, the wish craze.
When we turn from the economy and the social to something else, to the politics of the
period, we have the same kind of drastic and dramatic transformation.
We begin in the year 1000, again, around the year 1000.
I want to say something here because I think it might be useful and informative to those
of you listening or viewing these tapes, which is that the year, of course, in Europe began
a very different date depending on the location.
The only day that the year did not begin was the 1st of January.
The year could begin on Easter Sunday, which is a movable feast.
So you could have a 5th of April in the same year.
So it's very difficult sometimes to calculate what year we are really talking about, which
is when I give some dates for some of the mystics, I will say born in 1190, 1191, because
we are not really certain which 1190 or 1191, I mean what April it is, in which year it
is.
In parts of Europe, the year will begin on Easter Sunday, in other parts it will begin
in September, in other parts it will begin in November, the feast of San Michael, the
feast of San Martin, it could begin at Candle Mass, which is the 2nd of February.
The year really, the year of the Middle Ages, follow the agricultural cycle, follow a cycle
which was older than Christianity, the times of planting, the times of harvesting, and
so on, so that I should say that when I say the year 1000, what I really mean is around
the year 1000, because the majority of Europeans had no clue when the year 1000 was.
They know that the millennium was around, but they couldn't pinpoint it as a very specific
day.
It's not all of us waiting for the 12 o'clock midnight to enter the new millennium, no one
knew about this.
So around the year 1000, having made that explanation, if we look at Europe politically,
we see that the Lords are now transformed themselves.
This is called by a great historian at Harvard called Tom Bison, a feudal revolution.
The world is organized, as I said to you, in these three orders, these social orders,
and there are kings in Europe in the 11th century, in the early 11th century, but these
kings wield very little power indeed.
They are figureheads, ruling over a very small piece of land, having very little authority,
in a sense having an authority which is vested on the relationships with other free men.
The point that I'm trying to make here is that around the year 1000, Europe is a place
where the relationships are personal and private.
That is to say the relationships between kings and his vassals, or between a great Lord and
his vassals, is a private relationship between two free men of the military class.
There is no sense of the public, there is no sense of public authority.
There has been a sense of public authority in the former Carolingian Empire, but it came
crumbling down after the death of Louis the Pious in the 9th century, and it enters into
that dark period of invasions by the Vikings, the Saracens, and the Magyars, which wreck
European society.
Around the year 1000, a few underlings, that is to say a few lords, not the top lords,
but the middling kinds of lords, began to operate from castles, began castles, and impose
a new order in society, and this order, as I pointed out to you before, is based specifically
on the use of force, and the imposition of force on those below you.
So around the year 1000, we have a society which is private, in which there is no sense
of public authority, and in which the relationships are fluid and depend to a large extent on
the use of force.
There is a whole ritualized way in which this society works, and the church desperately
tries to create and bring some order to these types of relationships, by ritualizing the
relationships between lords and vassals, by insisting that you take oaths of fidelity
to your lord, that you promise not to do certain things, by establishing such things as the
peace of God, in which forbids certain noblemans to fight in certain days, or to terrorize
the peasants on certain days, but in reality is an often failed attempt to curb the incredible
violence of this age.
But by the 12th and 13th century, a very transforming process begins.
Kings in places like England, which is ahead of the game by several decades, when William
the Conqueror comes from Normandy and conquers England in 1066, he imposes a fairly centralized
feudal system on England, and he begins to develop the tools of government, the tools
that will lead slowly and inexorably to the kind of centralization of power that is going
to take place not all over Western Europe, but in certain parts of the West, in France,
in England, in Castile, in the Crown of Aragon, and in some localities in Italy.
So what you have here is new kinds of social relations that are established, and new bonds
of loyalty that are established between certain kings or certain lords and their subjects,
and on the line all this is of course the role of money, the beginnings of a monetary
economy, and the kings and the great lords' efforts to monopolize the use of money and
to control trade and to benefit from it, so that a great deal of the way in which the
kings, the fledgling kings in the medieval West, come to this power is by aligning themselves
with all this rising nascent bourgeoisie in the cities that see the kings as the guaranteeors
of order, as the preservers of peace against a ruthless nobility.
So by the 12th century we have a growing alliance between the church on the one hand, the bourgeoisie
on the other, and the crown, forming a kind of loose alliance against the nobility, and
we have the slow processes by which in some respects the crowns begin to centralize power.
We could look at the late 13th century and at the early 14th century as the periods in
which the kings of France, the kings of England, the kings of Castile make the crucial leap
from feudal monarchies to the very embryonic beginnings of what we call the nation-estate.
And this is a process which is both a political and a cultural one, because it means also
the creations of national identities, and I will discuss this in some detail when I
talk about the birth of the Inquisition and the creations of oddness.
The creations of oddness is also a company in the early 13th century throughout the early
13th century and 14th century by the consolidation of an idea of a community, of a nation, joined
together and responsible to the king.
In some places, like England and France, the king do this by appealing to sacred authorities,
by being anointed with holy oils, by being crowned, by claiming to have the power to
heal by the touch, by being taumaturgical kings, and by being taumaturgical kings, they
are for covering themselves with the mantle of sanctity and sacredness, and by developing
in the phrase of Cantorowitz, the king's two bodies, by differentiating between the things
that belong to the king as a human, as a person, and the things that belong to the king as
king.
That is to say that by the late 13th century and by the early 14th century, we have the
emergence of the concept of the public, of the corporate, the nation, the kingdom as
a corporation, the crown as something that lives on.
Therefore, we always say the king is dead, long live the king, meaning that there are
two kinds of kings, one, the human body that dies, and two, the other king, the crown,
the mystical crown that lives on, that never dies, that continues.
And with that also comes, in the 14th century, the first formulations of the idea of sovereignty
in the West.
We are, in many respects, on our way to the rational state.
It is indeed very clear that the rise of the rational state, that the formulation of the
national state, in that lapidary phrase by Max Weber, the legalized monopoly of violence
by kings, by government, at the end of the 15th century, that we are in a new world altogether,
that the governments will now have the power to tax and to conscript and to surveil, and
that these new forms of coercion that come into being in the early modern period, prisons,
mental institutions, torture, standing armies, bureaucracies are all the kinds of things that
create, again, more anxieties, and that such things as the great person uprising, the millenarian
person uprising in 1525 by the German peasants, or that the witch craze itself is intimately
linked to the emergence of these new political institutions.
So in a sense, between 1000 and 1700, we have experienced, we witnessed this extraordinary
transformation in European society, from one which was private and loose to one that is
centralized and public, in which the power of those on top is severely exercised in new
ways, in new manners, over those on the bottom. Thank you.
