Lecture 3 Religion and Culture
Welcome to lecture 3.
In lecture 3 we continue what we began in lecture 2, which is to provide a very broad
and almost impressionistic context for the topics that we are going to discuss later
on, mysticism, heresy, the millennium, and the wish-grace.
In the previous lecture, in lecture 2, I examined, as I said very briefly, the social and economic
context for this, and in this lecture we will look at religion and culture, and I will conclude
with a kind of discussion of the relationship between high and low culture, between popular
and elite culture.
Many of the topics that I covered in this lecture, I will essentially revisit in later
lectures when I provide a specific context for some phenomenon.
One of these cases, of course, is the Protestant Reformation and the life of Martin Luther,
but I want to provide a very broad view, a kind of eagles view of the entire process.
Let's begin essentially with religious history, with the history of the church, the history
of Christianity, in the period between 1000 and roughly 1700 or 1650.
I let me begin with a quote from Abo of Fluri, written around the close of the 10th century
and so on.
It begins soon after the year 1000, all over the world, and especially in Italy and France,
people began to rebuild their churches.
Most of them were well-constructed and in no need of alterations, but all Christian
countries were rivaling each other to see which should have the most beautiful temples.
One would have said that the world was shaking itself and throwing off its all racks to reclote
itself in a white robe of churches.
What Abo Fluri commented at the beginning of the 11th century is essentially a process
by which the church renew itself.
From the year 1000 or in the previous century, in the 10th century, the church has fallen
into very dire straits.
These problems that beset the church came in three different ways.
One, the church has implicated itself into the feudal world, the world that we discussed
in the previous lecture, the world of lords and vassals.
That is to say that the church and ecclesiastics sold ecclesiastical offices.
We call that simony, that is to say the selling of ecclesiastical offices.
People will buy the position of bishop, the position of abbot.
This of course threatened the church because the church was a corporation and it threatened
to make it into a kind of hereditary church, a hereditary priesthood.
One of the things that tormented the church was its involvement in the feudal world.
The other problem was of course lack of education.
Many of the priests and monks were illiterate.
They could not perform the liturgy well.
They could not in a sense serve the population.
Now remember as we said to you in the previous lecture, this is a society that is constructed
by orders.
There are three orders.
Those who fight, those who pray, those who work.
The society can only work in this organic view and perspective of society if each of
the order, of the members of the orders, do what they are supposed to do.
That is to say the priests are supposed to pray for the world and to keep the terror
of history, to keep the problems at bay by the way in which they intercede with the sacred
and they protect the entire population from evil.
Now if the priests don't know how to read or write or if the positions in the church
are purchased for money, then there is very little that this priest can do in a sense
to protect the world.
And third, that many monks and priests did not keep the vows of celibacy.
This is what's most obvious at the center of the church in Rome where the papacy in
the 10th century, before the great reforms that begin in the 10th century and which carry
on into the 11th century, the papacy was in the hands of Roman aristocrats and popes
essentially engage in all kinds of atrocities.
The papacy became the plaything for these aristocrats and they committed grievous sins.
Nonetheless, the pressure was such on the church that by the beginning of the 10th century
and continuing through the 10th and the 11th century, there is a great reform movement.
This reform movement took three different, so we said, personalities.
One is monastic reform and it begins in night tent at Clooney when the Lord of Aquitaine
donates lands to Clooney to be a monastery in which essentially the monks will do what
they are supposed to do.
That is to say, a study, work, pray for the world.
And he exempted this monastery from any local jurisdiction and put the jurisdiction in the
hands of the pope.
That is to say, someone far away and remote who could not interfere in the life of Clooney.
Me and other monasteries such as Clooney, like Gorsi and others, became focused for
the reform, became the center of a reform movement.
That is to say, if you are a Lord and you have a monastery under your jurisdiction and
in that monastery the monks are not behaving the way they should behave, then you call
a monk from Clooney who will come and either forcefully or by example will reform the monastery.
The second reform is lay reform.
That is to say, it follows from this, that lay lords and emperors and kings will name
to important positions like bishops and abbots, men who are committed to the idea of reform.
And finally, the papal reform.
This is a great movement.
This is an extraordinary change and reformation, a revolution, in fact, in the way in which
the church is organized, when in the 11th century, beginning with the pontificate of
Leo the Nine, the popes, as it were, make claims as being the supreme ruler of the church
and they begin to make even further claims, which is that the church does not belong to
lay lords, that lay lords do not have the power to invest priests with their offices.
This is most obvious in the wonderful and dramatic moment in which Leo the Nine comes
to ramp for the translation of the relics of San Remigius, the patron saint of France.
He carries them, this old frail man, carry them, the bonds of the saint, the relics of
the saint to the new church and instead of placing them into the open tomb that had been
created in front of the main altar, he places them in the main altar and turning to the
congregation as those in the congregation who have accepted the position from a lord,
that is to say, who have been invested with the spiritual symbols by a lay lord to resign
because he equates lay investiture, that is to say, the giving of an ecclesiastical position
to a churchman by someone who is not a member of the church with simony.
This will lead to a conflict between the pope and the emperor.
The high point of this is the confrontation between Gregory VII and the Roman, the Holy
Roman Emperor, the German Emperor Henry IV in the 1070s which led to the excommunication
of the emperor and eventually to the submission, that is to say, the asking for forgiveness
by the emperor at Canossa in 1077.
Now the truth of course is that the emperor again will come down south into Italy and
will drive the pope away from Rome and into the Norman lands of the south, but the actual
victor of this conflict was of course the papacy, was the church because it made the
claim and it sustained it that the church, that is to say, that the administering of
the spiritual elements of the church was to be only in the hands of the churchmen and
therefore at the end of 11th century and at the beginning of the 12th century, the church
had quiet the special leadership of Christendom.
This leadership is of course most manifest in the crusades which are indeed great movements,
military attacks against Islam, against the East, great movements of men which are organized,
sponsored by the church, by the pope and in fact become an expression of the new papal
power.
There are all the consequences to the so-called investor controversy.
One of the consequences is of course the fact that the pope now becomes an absolute
ruler and that the pope becomes the undeniable head of the western church.
Another consequence is the split between western Christendom and eastern Christendom.
The patriarch in Constantinople is not willing to accept the supremacy of the authority of
the pope and therefore you have the first split between what we call the Orthodox church
in the east and the western church which we are going to call the Catholic church.
The name itself, Catholic of course, shows you already the claims and ambitions of the
popes, of the pontiffs who reside in Rome, Catholic meaning universal, that is to say
that they are indeed a universal church.
The third consequence of this, of the investor controversy is a war of propaganda, that is
to say in the struggle between the emperor Henry IV and Gregory VII, you have a good
number of learned men who write pamphlets on one side or the other.
This pamphlets which indeed are quite ferocious in the ideas that they advance, advance ideas
one on the side of the emperor, one on the side of the pope.
And the question which they are trying to deal is what is the nature of power, where
does power come from and who should hold the power?
Some argue that power comes from God and descends down, this is a descending theory of power
and is given to the pope.
All this argues that power comes from below, this is a Germanic tradition, therefore the
power comes from the people and it results in an elected kingship, that is to say that
power ascends from below.
Some say that the power was given to the pope and that the pope relinquished the temporal
sword to the kings, but that temporal sword is essentially the possession of the pope
and that he can withdraw it.
Some other says that the king is in fact the representative of Christ.
The fact of the matter is that the most important consequence of the investor controversy is
that the church, the ecclesia, Christendom which have indeed been composed of everyone
within society, laymen and clergymen, where all part of the mystical body of Christ becomes
now divided between the secular world, the world and the temporal world and the ecclesiastical
or the spiritual world, that is to say kings in Europe are essentially shown apart and
they are forced over the next 3, 4, 500 years to seek for philosophical, theological and
practical reasons to explain the nature of their power.
Now I am compressing this tremendously and I am going at a very fast pace here, but I
think that what we have to realize is that by the end of the 11th century and by the
beginning of the 12th century, the laity, those who held secular power, kings and counts
and emperors will be forced to redefine the way in which they rule, will be forced to seek
a way of legitimizing the rule.
Over time, over the next 2, 300 years, this is going to lead essentially to the formulations
of ideas of sovereignty, to the creation and eventual rise of the nation-state, to in a
sense a world which will be very different altogether from the world that we see in the
11th century.
Now if we continue with the history of the Church, the other great, of course, important
level is the other important event occurs in the early 14th century when the King of
France, Philip IV, Philip the Handsome, leads or sends his troops to attack the Pope again
on a question of jurisdiction, that is to say who has the power to rule.
The King of France, following his previous ancestors, will declare that in his kingdom
he is the emperor, emperor in Regno-sur, in his kingdom he behaves like an emperor, that
is to say that he admits no higher jurisdiction than his own.
When the Pope challenges this, at the beginning of the 14th century, Philip will send an armed
contingent to pursue the Pope to Anagny, will humiliate the Pope, will take him prisoner
for a few days, will steal his treasure and there will be almost no reaction throughout
Europe.
To say Anagny in some respects is the counterpart of Canossa, a period in which in fact the
Kings now exert their political and secular power over the Church.
This is followed, of course, by the move of the papacy in 1305 to Avignon, a period which
is called the Babylonian captivity and the way in which the Church is indeed begins to
lose out, begins in a sense to become a slowly, not yet, but a slowly over time will become
subordinated to the political needs and political programs of kings and emperors.
I am compressing this tremendously, but of course we could see the moment in which in
the 11th century the Church is supreme and then slowly it begins to give in, give in,
give its power to the secular governments and it is marked by the emblematic events
of 1303, Anagny, the humiliation of the Pope, then the papacy begins to, in a sense, lose
its control and by the 16th and 17th century will become, as it were, subordinated to the
political needs of the rising nascent state.
There is, of course, another important development that takes place in the 16th century and which
will have an incredible importance in the development of this cause and that is, of course, the Protestant
Reformation.
I will revisit Martin Luther and the Protestant Reformation and the impact of the Reformation
and of the counter-Reformation in the 16th and 17th century when we deal not only with
the German person uprising in a much later lecture, but also when I deal with the Wish
Grace.
But of course, very briefly here, what the Protestant Reformation did at the beginning
of the 16th century in the 1520s was to sever completely Christianity into two branches.
On the one hand, the Protestants, the Reformed Christians, as they called themselves and
on the other hand, Catholicism and this is split between Protestants and Catholics.
It is also a split which is geographical.
The north of Europe becomes mostly Protestant with some exception and the south of Europe,
Mediterranean Europe, becomes Catholic.
One of the things that happens as a result of the Reformation and counter-Reformation
was also the way in which both camps, Protestants and Catholics, after the Reformation and the
counter-Reformation, began to define orthodoxy in ways which have never been done before
throughout the Middle Ages.
That is to say, they began to map boundaries of orthodoxies and they began, in a sense,
to monitor and to patrol those borders and to enforce orthodoxy in ways which have not
been enforced before, which, in many respects, is partly the result of this new enforcing
of orthodoxy and the intolerance of the kinds of behavior which were common throughout
the Medieval Church.
Before I leave the question of the Church, I want to, in fact, indicate something which
will be reiterated in later lectures, which is that, of course, religion in Europe operates
at two levels.
On the one hand, the lofty, incredible, sophisticated, ethical systems of the Church, which is observed
by very few at the top and which is known, the kind of schools of theology in places
like Paris, and on the other hand, the popular beliefs of the masses.
And there is a great gulf between the top and the bottom.
And so, in many respects, the articulation between those on top and those on the bottom
is one of the questions of this class.
And when we look at these lectures, when we look at mysticism and heresy and so on, we
will see the manner in which the top articulates its views and imposes its views on the bottom
and that there is always a resistance from below to this imposition of a new order of
new interpretations of doctrine.
Now, from the Church and from religiosity, we move essentially to culture.
That is to say, the reform of the Church is also a company by a very broad cultural revival.
We call that the Renaissance of the 12th century.
In the 12th century, there are two different kinds of developments.
One is autotonous.
That is to say, one is the recovery or the reinterpretation of Latin culture.
It's manifested in the writing in Latin of Christian poetry, very sophisticated and hard
gripping Christian poetry.
It is manifested in the writings of chronicles and histories.
It is manifested in the writings in the vernacular, the epic poetry, troubadour poetry and so
on.
It is also marked by new philosophical interests, by the recovery in the late 12th century of
Aristotelian works.
In a sense, what we have here is a broad cultural phenomenon, which leads not only to the emergence
of Gothic as an architectural form, but it leads essentially to a new culture.
Something is more significant in this cultural transformation for our purpose, for my purpose
here, than the development of courtly love.
Courtly love is a phenomenon that I will, in fact, explore in greater detail later on
when we talk about the Cult of the Virgin and mysticism of the 12th century.
But very briefly, courtly love is the ideas that are developed at the court, which is
why we call it courtly love.
It's also a literary device.
You guys define it as the way in which women, and I will come back to this later on in greater
detail, in which women are now made the center of men's life.
Now, these are the women at the court, the high-born ladies, and in which you create
a semi-fictional, but in sometimes very real program in which the women come to replace
God and the Lord.
Now think about the way in which loyalties and allegiances are shifted here.
When we are in the 11th century, your first allegion is to the church and to God.
This is also in, so we said, in contradictions to the loyalty that you owe to your feudal
Lord, that is to say the relationship between Lord and Basil that we explored in the previous
lecture.
But now in the 12th, among a small elite at the top, this is replaced by the Cult of
the Lady.
The Lady becomes a person who gives you salvation.
You live a life, and the Lady, of course, is never your wife, is always a wife of someone
else, usually somebody who is your Lord.
Remember the story of King Arthur and Weneviere and Lancelot.
It is someone that you adore and you do deeds for.
And therefore, this brings about a culture which is marked by the rise of new ways of
eating, new ways of dressing, new ways of behavior, new ways of addressing your Lady
in a language which is charged with religiosity in which religious ideas are now transforming
to a kind of sexual romantic play.
Why is this important?
Marina Warner, post-modern critic, today calls, calls for love, the most important development
in the history of Western civilization.
Because what we have here is the way in which the civilizing process, quoting Norbert Elias,
a great German sociologist, begins to influence the behavior and manners of the European elites
at the top.
It also leads to the writing of romances, of beautiful romances written in the vernacular.
Stories, the whole story of the King Arthur's Court of the Search for the Grail, in which
a great deal of Celtic ideas and Celtic folk lore is incorporated into the literary culture
of Western Europe.
So courtly love has a tremendous impact in the sensibilities of Europeans at the top
and it will, in fact, determine the manner in which mystical language is articulated
in which, in fact, the Court of the Virgin is organized.
I would like to add here that courtly love is, of course, condemned in 1215 at the Fuller
Lateran Council as heretical, and indeed it was many aspects of courtly love were deeply
anti-Christians, were deeply heretical, and the Church understood that and condemned many
of the doctrines of courtly love as heretical at the beginning of the 13th century.
The other great cultural transformation I already mentioned was, of course, the translation
of Aristotelian works, because the other influence in the 12th century Renaissance comes from
outside.
It's the great medical, scientific works, chemical works which the Arabs have brought
to Sicily in the 9th century and to Toledo and Spain in the later period, and which in
the 12th become, in a certain way, translated.
The reception not only of Aristotelian corpses, half of Aristotle was not known in the West
until the 12th century, but the reception of Aristotle and all the scientific works,
gallant, Hippocrates, all medical works had a tremendous impact on the culture of the
West.
It led to the emergence of universities, a places in the 12th century which will become
the repositories of a formalized and important way of producing knowledge and of creating
cultural artifacts.
And therefore, in the 13th century, the great Aristotelian corpus is incorporated into the
western tradition of learning by someone like Albert Magnus and Thomas Aquinas.
Now, this is an important development because Aristotle's embracing of the material world,
Aristotle's idea of the estate will provide, will underpin the new theories of sovereignty
that are going to, in a sense, emerge at the end of the Middle Ages and which are going
to be the foundations for the rise of the nation-estate.
It also, the universities, provide a fertile ground for the training of bureaucrats.
One of the things that is recovering in the 12th century is, of course, law.
And Bologna, the University of Bologna, becomes the great center for the study of law, and
law will provide also, underpin also, the processes by which the estate will be formed
and by which the members of the middling source, the children of the bourgeoisie, the people
we discussed in the previous lectures, are going to gain access to the centers of power.
The Renaissance of the 12th century, of course, is quite different altogether from the other
Renaissance.
In a later lecture, when I talk about the mysteries of the Renaissance, I will discuss
in greater detail the development of the Renaissance in Italy.
But of course, the Renaissance in Italy was a very different kettle of fish.
It was a very different kind of animal, because beginning in the middle of the 14th century,
Italy, which had never been medieval, which in a sense had never gone through the changes
and processes which the rest of Europe had undergone in the Middle Ages, in a sense claimed
that it had claimed again the great traditions of antiquity, the great achievements of the
classical past.
Renaissance, Renaissance, the Renaissance of the 12th century, no one in the 12th century
thought of it as a Renaissance.
They thought of it as a kind of a new opening to new knowledge.
The people in the Renaissance in Italy in the 14th and 15th century were historically
conscious of the fact that they were reclaiming the great tradition and the great inheritance
of the past, and that in doing so, they were in a sense creating a new world.
And they looked at the Middle Ages as a time in between, a place of barbarity where nothing
has happened.
And they shifted the emphasis from metaphysics and certain kinds of learning that went on
at places like Oxford, and Paris, and Cambridge, and Auclain to a new different kind of learning,
one that emphasized humanity, one that emphasized certain disciplines like rhetoric, grammar,
literature, that is to say what we call today the humanities.
And from that, humanism is born with this part of a very broad process which is taking
place in all of Europe, the process which is in fact the most extraordinary and important
process in European culture we call that secularization, the way in which Europeans slowly in the construction
of the state, in the way in which they formulate their own self, in which they identify their
own self, the way in which they construct culture, the way in which they paint, the way
in which they think of economic relationships becomes secularized, that is to say a world
that slowly begins to move away from a world dominated by religion into a world that is
essentially secular, that is grounded in the world, in the material world, and in the production
of culture which is no longer tied to the church and to essentially the spiritual.
The last great development is the scientific revolution and between the beginning of the
16th century because of the coming of a skeptical traditions from the east to the enlightenment
itself, Europe is European, some Europeans on the top rethink the way in which the world
is constructed, move from an earth-centered universe to a sun-centered universe, think
of ways of knowing, move from deduction to induction, that's what bacon and others do,
they invent new ways of knowing, they also talk of a world that can be defined, that
can be explained in terms of numbers, they in fact secularize knowledge as well.
In the minute and a half that I have left, I want to in a sense discuss something else
which is part and parcel a very integral part of this course and that is a relationship
of course between high and low culture.
This course is divided into three mini courses that I have explained before, mysticism is
a highly esoteric pursuit, it is freely part of high culture, you cannot be a mystic or
at least one that we will identify unless you write, very few people wrote in the Middle
Ages and in the early modern period, very few people have access to books, so mysticism
is a practice of high culture, it in a sense move into the popular realm because people
admire the mystic, someone like San Francis, they see it as an example and imitate him
even though they might not be able to read.
Heresy and the millennium are two phenomena that move between one and the other, that
is to say they move into the realm of high culture, so heretics are very much part of
high culture and other ones are part of very broad based popular movement.
The first phrase is really the way in which the ideas of an elite are imposed on the masses
and it becomes a popular phenomenon.
When we discuss the distinctions between high and popular culture, we are in very tenuous
ground here because essentially they did not understand in the 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th
century as being a distinction between high and popular culture.
We know about high culture because we can essentially retrieve the knowledge through
the books through what they wrote.
Popular culture is very difficult to retrieve, we only see it through the eyes of those who
wrote, it's a mediated culture, it belongs essentially to people who have disappeared
from the earth, who are no longer with us and we hear their voices only as an echo,
an echo that is repeated and conveyed to us by the bias and indeed by the prejudice
of those who recapture it, who wrote it down, who inform us and so throughout the course
we will move back and forth between these two ways of seeing culture.
Thank you very much.
