Lecture 4 Mysticism in the Western Tradition
Welcome to lecture 4 of the Terror of History. In the previous lecture, which was lecture
3, I tried very briefly to provide a summary of developments within religion and culture
between 1,000 and 1,700. I will return and explain with some detail some of the things
that I just touched on briefly as we provide a specific context for certain movement. What
I want to do today is really to try to describe what mysticism is. And I must begin by saying
that describing what mysticism is is incredibly difficult because the mystics, when they tell
us about their experiences, when they relate to us what they saw and what they felt and
what essentially happened to them, often use the term in a family's est. It is ineffable.
It cannot be expressed or articulated. And the analogy that they most often use is that
of sexual intercourse in a spiritual sense of the marriage of the soul to God. So we
could begin by saying what is mysticism and what are the roots of it and how it is manifested
in the period between 1,700 among Christians and Jewish mystics. And there are differences
in the way in which Jews experience the Godhead and the way in which Christians do. And I
will point them out later on in all the lectures. What are the roots of mysticism? What is mysticism?
Well, I think that the roots of mysticism has to be found not only in that Apollonian
Dionysian dichotomy between the human soul or the human heart, but also in that oceanic
feeling that I describe on the first lecture, as described by Freud, that sense that there
is a world beyond us. I like to make a point here, which is that this particular brand
of mysticism, which is centered on the idea of God and so on, is very peculiar. And that
is to say, it is peculiar to the West. It is in many respects set in the webs of significance
that makes Western culture. My students always have difficulties understanding the fact that
the idea of God and the idea of one God or of many gods is not necessarily universal,
that this is not a universal idea, that they are entire civilizations today, but certainly
in antiquity as well, which had no experience of God, in where there is no Godhead, in which
there is no God, in which there is no personal God, as it is the case in the religions of
the book, Judaism, Christianity and Islam. So we are not talking about here something
that is universal, but that it is particular to one cultural tradition. And in that particular
culture, it is a sense derives from all the things that I created because of a specific
social and economic and political and cultural transformations. So what is mysticism? Let
me not answer the question, but show you how it works. I think that one of the most fundamental
questions in the West has always been the question of reality. What is real? How do
we know the real? It is an epistemological question. And there are many different answers
to this question. A question that is essentially Western, which is not required to be answered
in all the cultures, certainly not in certain parts of the East, where reality is seen as
illusion, where it is all Maya as it is among Hindus. But in the West, philosophers and
religious figures have a struggle with how you get to know what is real. One answer to
that is, of course, the Aristotelian of material is one. The real is that which I can touch
and see through the senses. That is real. This table is real. The table behind me in
the studio is real. And therefore, what I see with my eyes and what I feel with my hands
is what gives me a sense of the real. But we know today through modern physics that
this is not so. That it is not so indeed, because we know that tables and material objects
are composed mostly of empty space. We know that we see the sun moving across the horizon
and we know that that is not so. That our senses deceive us and that our senses do not
provide us with the real, with true reality. We are on a road and we see water ahead of
us and it's a mirage. Our eyes have deceived us again. Our mind has deceived us. So that
is a dead end pursuit. And then we have another answer, which is that of the idealist, the
platonist answer, that is to say that in order to know what you know is ideas, you know intellectually
that the world of fact, that the world of matter is indeed an illusion and that the only
way to know is to know idea, to know the forms. But that of course also leads us through a
dead end. Saint Jerome, a great saint of the late four and early fifth century said, Plato
located the soul in the head, in the mind, Christ located it in the heart. And then there
is a third answer. The third answer is that of the skeptic, that is to say there is nothing
we can know. I have to doubt everything that is supposedly to be known. The mystics, the
mystics whom we know, answer us differently. The mystics speak with an authority which
is in many respects very disconcerting. They say to us that they know what the real is.
Not only that they know what the real is, that they have tasted it, that they have been
one with it. And they tell us, follow us, and I will show you a different way.
Now please understand that when I began this lecture and I began to talk about my experiences
in the mountain in Galicia, in that old Celtic site, I am not a mystic and I am very hard
nose and a skeptic about these matters. And what I am interested here is the way in which
mysticism plays an important role in religion and history. And the way in which the mystics
in a sense empower themselves by the claims that they have been one with God. And even
if they tell us that they know the real and that they have tasted of the real, it does
not mean at all that they can actually convey or articulate to us what the real mean because,
as I said before, it is ineffable. But there is ways in which we can make analogies to
what they say they felt and what they tell us with greater authority they know. And I
will make those analogies as we go along. Think essentially of what the problem is in
the West, in Western tradition. The problem is the self, the problem is the I. How are
we going to get out of ourselves? How are we in a sense go beyond the small limitations
of our contained self? Think about the world, think about our own individual lives, how
immersed we are into the I. We are continuously hearing in the radio and the television that
we have to get in a sense some kind of programs to build our sense of the ego when essentially
what it is unique about Western civilization and our Western culture through our history
is essentially the excess of ego and the excess of the self and the I. And that is
and so in a sense a great deal of the mystic way, a great deal of the mystic voyage is
one of removing oneself from the world, of going into introspection and withdrawal, not
withdrawal into the self itself, but withdrawal from all the kinds of things that we built
around us to distract us from thinking. I always ask my classes, my courses, when I give this
course through the last 28 years that I have been given this class, I always tell my students
the 18 and 19 year olds how much they are with themselves. And it is remarkable how in
modern culture we do everything possible to distract ourselves from looking within what
Augustine the people have said, man go to the top of mountains to see the ocean and
they go to all places to see the beauty of the universe and they forget to look into
the most important and most beautiful of all things, they forget to look into the self.
It is because looking into the self and it is a way of getting out of yourself. I always
ask my students, how do you study? They study with disc mans on their ears blasting music
away and when they get into the car the first thing they do is they put the radio or the
music and the moment they walk into their apartments they turn the television and essentially
what it is is they use to round yourself with chatter, with noise so that it will prevent
you from thinking and I ask them and I ask you, the viewer and the listener to make an
experiment, walk in the same street way you have always walked and then clean your mind
up of all those things that you think about continuously, work, weather, sports, politics,
clean it and see the world, concentrate and focus on seeing the world as it is and then
you will discover that though you might have been walking in this street for 20 or 30 years
of your life, you will see in it things that you have never seen before because essentially
there are different ways of seeing and what the mystic tells us is that they see things
differently that by introspection and withdrawal they can see the world that we can never really
see. So in many respects it is these processes of introspection and withdrawal that lead
us along the way. Now mystics perceive the other reality of the Godhead, perceive God
in two very distinct ways. One is called emanation. What is emanation? Emanation postulates the
idea that God is so far removed from mankind that it can never be perceived directly. So
what we see essentially or what the mystic sees is the emanations of God. An example
of this is Kabbalah mysticism and when we talk about the Soha, the book of Esplender,
which I see that what the mystic perceives is not the Godhead itself but the manifestations
of God. God is unknowable and unreachable. It is beyond human experience and therefore
what you do is that you move up through these ladders of emanation to the final union with
God. I have some examples of what this is. Emanation, Augustine of Hippo writes in the
Confessions which is about his mystical experiences and also about his psychological state. We
ascend thy ways that we be in our heart and sing a song of the Greece. We glow inwardly
with thy fire, with thy good fire and we go because we go upward to the peace of Jerusalem.
So in a sense emanation is the processes by which you go out of yourself and look at the
manifestations of God, the emanations of God on earth in the world of matter and then you
move up through a ladder up to God. Most of the Christian mystics practice some form of
emanation and then there is the other one, imminence. Imminence means that God is within
you, that you don't have to go out of yourself to look for God. So Plotinus, a philosopher,
a pagan in the third century who is also a mystic, the founder of Neoplatonism, a man
who transformed Plato's philosophy from a philosophical, in a sense, way to a kind of
semi-religious, religious manner. Plotinus says, God is not a sternal to anyone but it
is present with all things, though they are ignorant that he is so. The spirit of God
is within you. It is as if the world is immersed in God. Santa Teresa of Avila, one of the
few Christian mystics whom we will visit later on in these lectures, thought of the simile
for this, or the metaphor for this as a sponge, that is to say God is like the watery sponge,
is all in there. Now, imminence is a bit suspect because of course as we shall see later on
when we look at some heretical movement, one of the things that imminence will do, which
will be to in a sense make you believe that you are God. So, pantheism, autotheism, the
idea that you believe that you are self are God, something which is quite common in western
culture for people to believe themselves to be Gods, is essentially one of the dangers
of imminence and as I said to you before, there are few mystics in Christianity who
practice imminence and so on. Where are we? We are here still trying to define what mysticism
is. I'm telling you what mystics do or how they practice the mysticism but I am not
yet telling you what a mystic is, really, of what mysticism is all about. We know that
mystics deploy certain symbols, that the language, that the way in which they articulate their
experiences is filled with certain metaphors and symbols, that one of them is the idea
of pilgrimage, of a journey, that the mystical experience is a form of a journey, that we
are always traveling, that of course is also a metaphor for human life, that our entire
lives is a kind of a pilgrimage and in fact most literatures, all literatures is divided
into two kinds of literature, which are essentially one and the same. One is the quest literature,
the search for something, the search for the grail, the search for yourself and the other
one is the Bildun's roman, the coming to age, the growing up and in some respects they
are both one and the same. We are all engaged even though we might not admit it, even though
we might not even know it. We are all engaged in some personal pilgrimage, in some kind
of journey, a physical journey from birth to death but also a kind of journey in which
we seek certain things. Sometimes we forget what we are seeking along the way. The mystics
therefore always speak of his journey, of her journey as the most important one because
what the mystic seeks is the journey that leads him or her directly to the union with
God. The other thing is love. Love plays an extraordinary role in the language and symbols
deployed by mystics and I will read to you later on The Dark Knight of the Soul by Saint
John of the Cross and you can see how laden with amorous terms, with sort of in a sense
hardly disguised sexual language, the experiences of the mystics are. It's not that it's erotic
because it is not erotic but on the same time when the mystic grasps for words to explain
what it means and what it is because it is after all, and I repeat again, ineffable,
it cannot be articulated, it cannot be expressed because it is ineffable, the mystic nonetheless,
the way in which they think he thinks of sexual intercourse and climax and I would like to
point out to you how true this is, how limiting words are because if any of you who are listening
to the tapes or viewing them think of being truly in love, which is an experience that
in a sense approaches what a mystic feels or tells us he feels or she feels, then you
know that there are moments in which you love someone so very much that the only way to
tell this is through silence because all the words you will say, all the haggney words
which we have been using for time immemorial, love you, want you, wish for you, adore you,
all of them are limited, they do not begin even to convey for a second what it truly
means to feel this, that there is a certain moments in our lives and I hope all of you
have experienced those moments in which we are shattered by emotions and we cannot convey
them, we cannot even begin to articulate them and the only way to do it is to remain silent,
that they are on a spoken moments in our lives which are the moments that give total and
complete meaning to them, that is to say that things that are so deep and passionate that
cannot be articulated or expressed, the mystic says that that is what they are, that is what
they are at a higher level than that of physical union or physical love or human love, that
it is a very different kind of experience and I will talk about this and explain some
of this in some detail and then the other third great theme is a desire for perfection
that the life of a mystic is essentially a long journey, a long journey of love to get
to some point where for a brief moment he or she will feel the perfection of God, something
which is unachievable for most humans and so on and so there we stand, so what is mysticism?
The truth of the matter is that I do not know because I have never experienced what a mystic
feels or claims that he or she has felt so the only way for me to get at this is to think
for a moment and to reflect myself and all of us together in certain experiences of being
in love, I mean of being truly in love, the kind of almost painful feeling that arises
from love or the side of a beautiful place, there are places that absolutely in a sense
remain with you, places that are so magical and touch you that you carry them with you
through your entire life because you know that at a specific moment in time you stood
there and look on the desert or on the ocean or on a mountain top or on a city or on a
canals in Venice or and then you know that you will carry this with you forever because
in that moment you were touching ways in which you have never been touched or listening to
music which can be transforming something that you hear that it is so beautiful that
in a sense moves you and touch you and that the melody runs through your head and is always
with you or standing in front of a painting that it is very special for you not as a critic
or as a pursuer of education but one that is an organic feeling one in which you and
the painting become as it were one. Now the greatest historian of mysticism was Evelyn
Underhill herself a mystic and Underhill has described five stages in the mystical experience
that is to say that there is a mystic way certain stages through which most mystics
but not all of mystics go through. I want to emphasize here that each mystic has his
or her own peculiar way to the encounter with God but that these stages are present at least
some of them are in the experiences of most mystics in the West between one thousand and
seventeen hundred. These experiences are five. The first one is called or Underhill calls
it the awakening that moment in which all things are made new and we have many examples
of this and I would like you to read to you a very brief introduction of the panse by
bless Pascal one of the great 17th century philosophers and mathematicians who led us
in into what his awakening was like in the introduction to the panse and he writes like
this is a very short paragraph the year of great 1654 Monday the 23rd of November the
feast of Saint Clement and all the saints from around 1030 in the evening to 1230 midnight
fire God of Abraham of Isaac of Jacob not of the philosophers or of the learned certitude
sentiment joy pay certainty sentiment of feelings joy peace and in that moment we get a sense
of what this is is a kind of awakening to the world and to the realization of God's presence
in one's life which in fact transform the individual all together so what do you do after
the moment of awakening what do you do in this awakening which is a moment of joy the
realization of your place in the world and your relationship to God the second stage
on the hill tells us is so-called Pugation or purification is the processes by which
the mystic tries to clean himself or herself from all the things that tie him to the world
to prepare himself for the sight of God it is an intense process we see this as a process
of oscillation between pain and joy the joy of the awakening the pain of the purification
we all go through some process of purification when we see our lives change we discover
that there is a new self a new eye that has emerged and we want to change ourselves to
in a sense become worthy of the new eye we have become I can give you many many examples
from people who decide to change their lives and to begin a long process of exercise and
diet which of course are not the perfect analogies for what the mystic goes through or think for
example some of those Scorsese movies which are deeply religious like taxi driver or mean
street which have a great deal of Franciscan elements and which I'll see later on how mystics
undergo this process of awakening and then the processes of Pugation it is something
that is deeply embedded in the Christian tradition the idea of asceticism the idea of asceticism
of withdrawal from the world of the desert the idea that you will punish your body and
this is again part of that dramatic transformation about which I will discuss later on in which
in the west there is a clear dichotomy between the soul which is like God and the body which
is a prison of the soul so that second stage of purification is that unique stage in which
the mystic begins to in a sense prepare himself or herself for the reception of God and then
we have the third stage which is of course illumination illumination is somewhat related
to the experiences I refer to or I describe to you at the beginnings of these lectures
is that brief moment of awareness of the existence of a whole of an entire world around you of
which you are part Dante's first vision of life is an increased perception of the physical
world Plato calls it the saving madness. Augustine had one of his experiences as a
Neoplatonist is a brief perception of the Godhead of the divinity it is what in a sense
is not a union with God yet is not a spiritual marriage it is a sense of the beauty of the
world William Blake someone whom you might never think of as a mystic the great romantic
writer of 19th century early 19th century England is explains it to us describes it to us as
to see a world in a grain of sand Santa Rosa of Lima a Peruvian mystic of the 17th century
describes it as the whole world was like a fairy land this is a period in which the mystic
hear voices see visions and it's a period which is also identified by automatic writing so
people like Muhammad writing the Quran and others this is a brief period which give you
a sense of what the final union may be and that is followed by the fourth stage of the
stage which is a stage of introversion the dark night of the soul and this is a period
of quiet of withdrawal of painful contemplation of prayer as the soul in a sense begins to
withdraw into itself into the very center of his being in preparation for the union
with God doing all these things will not get you to the end however but it is indeed a
pre-requirement contemplation is the only way to see things really so that the mystic
prepares himself or herself by this withdrawal by this period of quiet sometimes it is the
period of complete and total withdrawal we shall see this in some of the mystics whom
we are going to explore and that of course leads you to the union and the union many
mystics agree is not a process to which you can will yourself to the union with God the
marriage of the soul with God and it is always articulated and presented to us in terms of
the physical marriage the soul of the mystic is the female God or Christ is the bright
groom and we shall see this in Bernard of Claibor the place where the mystics and God
meet is the wedding chamber is the matrimonial bet and there there is essentially human love
use as an analogy a ravishing of the soul of the mystic by God a moment in which and mystics
do not agree on this and say that the eye always remain and some say the eye is utterly obliterated
by being immersed in the Godhead when they come out from this experience when they come
out from this experience there is a moment of extraordinary pain but it's an experience
though they put it to us in the language of human love they all agree is an experience
which is in fact ineffable which cannot be described and this experience the unit of
experience has specific physical and psychological aspects one in many cases it coincides with
the so-called mystical death the mystic as Saint Catherine of Siena did in the 14th century
remains insensible to the world for hours and hours there is a withdrawal of consciousness
from the outside to the center of being it is also a kind of monoidism a psychological aspect
which we can test in laboratories where the alpha waves of the brain are transformed in
which every part of you withdraws to the center of being and therefore you are changed and
for the mystic is also a joyful immersion in the presence of God this art the five stages
and which I'll see in the next three or four lectures how a specific mystics experience these
five stages thank you very much
