Lecture 6 Mysticism in the Thirteenth Century
Welcome to Lecture 6 of the Terror of History.
In lecture 5 we look at the mystics, visions and at the lives of Hildegard of Bingham and Bernat of Clea IV, two 12th century mystics.
Today in this lecture I want to do three different things.
One, I want to look at the great transformations that occurred between the late 12th and the early 13th century,
and how in a sense they created a very different context for the articulation of mysticism.
I want to look in great detail at the life of Francis and at his great mystical experience at the end of his life,
and then I want to conclude by looking very briefly at Dante Aligieri as one of the mystics of the age as well.
We have to place ourselves here in the late 12th and early 13th century,
and many of the things that I discussed very briefly in lecture 2, the economic changes, the growth of cities, the rise of a monetary economy,
a path essentially creates a context for a new ways of thinking about God and for thinking about the relationship between man and God.
The rise of a commercial culture has really brought about questions about the meaning of poverty or how Christians ought to relate to wealth.
After all, we move from a society which is rural in which most of the income comes from the countryside to a society of mercantile activities,
of trade, of banking, of usury, of interest in which, as I said to you and as explained to you before, time becomes money,
time becomes to be measured, it becomes merchant's time.
Francis has to be located in that culture, and the expression and articulation of his spirituality has to be placed within that specific culture.
Second, the early 13th century also witnessed important changes in the way in which Christians experienced their religion.
These changes are extraordinary, and in fact mark a watershed in the history of Christianity.
They are, in many respects, they revolve around the decisions of the Latin and Council in the early 13th century,
to which I have made references, and to which I will make references again in later lectures when we talk about heresy.
Let me explain to you what I mean by that.
In the early 13th century, the way in which the Mass was performed changed completely.
Up to the 13th century, up to the Lateran Council, the Mass was performed from behind the altar.
If you are Catholics, or if you know or are familiar with the Catholic religion, that will be the way in which the Mass is performed today.
But the way in which the Mass is performed today only dates back to the Second Vatican Council in the 1960s.
In fact, until the 12th century, the priest, the minister, celebrates the Mass by standing behind the altar.
He stands behind the altar, and he faces the congregation, and the most sacred moment of the Mass, which is the moment of the consecration of the host.
When the priest elevates the cup, the chalice, which contains both the body, the bread, and the wine, the body and the blood of Christ,
and transforms them through the recitation of some sacred words, that is now completely, in a sense, transformed.
The priest now comes in front of the altar. He gives his back to the congregation.
And the sacred moment of the Mass, that central moment of the liturgy, becomes obscure from the observation of the congregation.
Essentially, what we are really talking about here is the creation of a wall between the church, between the celebration of the Mass,
between that sacred moment and the congregation. The performance of the Mass, the minister, the priest who performs the Mass,
in a sense serves as a shield between the sacredness of the body of Christ and the blood of Christ and the believers inside the church.
Moreover, Latin becomes the official language of the liturgy, and at a time in which Latin has become incomprehensible for the majority of the Masses,
who now speak and communicate among each other in the vernacular.
So what we're really talking about here is a growing distance emerging between the Mass of Christians, the lower classes, the people in the street,
the people in the towns, and the church itself. This is further complicated by the fact that the church has become exceedingly wealthy and powerful,
and that priests and the papacy spend a great deal of time in luxury, in lavish dress, in lavish buildings, investing in all kinds of new enterprises,
which in fact have turned them back to the simplicity and to the sense of, shall we say, poverty, which had inspired the early church and early Christianity.
Here again, there is the problem of poverty and the problem of the poor in medieval civilization.
Christians, medieval Christians, medieval merchants, have a very ambivalent attitude towards property and towards the idea of property and towards poverty.
There is a passage in the Gospel, a passage in the Gospel which as we shall see later on when I discuss heresy will inspire heretical movement,
but which also resonates very powerfully among Christians. There is a passage in the Gospel in which Jesus is sitting with his apostles, with the disciples,
and a young man comes to him and asks him, Rabbi, master, how can I obtain the kingdom of heaven? And Jesus turns to him and says, obey the law.
That is to say, follow the 612 laws of Deuteronomy. And the young man says, Rabbi, I already do that. And Jesus says, well, then if you already do that,
give up everything you have and follow me. And then the young man thinks about this and says, what do you mean? Give up my BMW, my DVD player?
No, I cannot do that. Sorry. And he leaves. And Jesus turns to the disciples and says to them, see that? A camel shall go first through the eyes of a needle before the rich man enters the kingdom of heaven.
So that there is in medieval society this extraordinary ambivalence and antagonisms and contradictions between the ideal, the apostolic idea of poverty.
That is to say that you owe nothing. Like Jesus and his followers, you walk through the fields of Palestine carrying nothing, living for the day, and the accumulation of wealth.
The accumulation of wealth, which have become now the main and most important preoccupation of the middling sorts. This is the world in which Francis is born.
This is the world in which Francis will come to provide an answer. So in many respects, you have to see Francis of Assisi as someone who actually buttresses the church.
Francis is one of those flying buttresses of a Gothic cathedral holding a church which is in the point of collapse because of his message, because of the incredible power and prestige of what he does on how he lives and of his mystical experience.
And the phenomenon of Francis of Assisi is an extraordinary one and we cannot even begin to comprehend the impact of this man.
And it is precisely his mystical cold and his mystical experience that provide him with this mantle of holiness and authority so that he could indeed transform the world.
Who was Francis? Where was he born? How did he live?
We know that Francis was born around 1182 in the city of Assisi in an area of Italy called Umbria, a very beautiful city to this very day which one can visit and see and follow on the steps of Francis.
We know that his father, whose name was Pietro Bernardone, was a rather prosperous merchant and that his mother might have been French in origin, which explains the name Francesco.
That he grew up like all other children and young adolescents of his social order, enjoying the good things in life, interested in the romances of the 12th century, in courtly poetry, in troubadour poetry, not with a great deal of education, with a joyful life.
And we know that he was the case throughout most of this period and in this age he was called to arms quite early in life to go and fight against a nearby city, the city of Perugia, another beautiful place where they made those wonderful chocolates.
Perugina is the name of a factory that makes these chocolates and he was wounded in this struggle against Perugia and he came home and he was transformed and here we have in the act of being wounded in the pain of his wounds the moment of awakening and his life is transformed.
And he withdrew from all the activities and pleasures of his early youth and became a young man who spent his time walking outside the city in the countryside around Assisi, meditating and thinking about what to make of his life.
We know because we are told not only by the official biography but about a wonderful collection of stories about Francis entitled The Little Flowers of Francis written much later as part of the writing down of an oral tradition that as he stopped to pray in an abandoned, ruined church, the church of Sandamiano, as he prayed there for guidance as to what to become of his life.
There he saw the hands of the Christ in the crucifix pointing to him and saying to him Francis rebuilt my church and he understood this message as that physical church and so he began the process of in a sense rebuilding the little church.
And you could still see that church which in a kind of slap in the face of Francis the Franciscans rebuilt inside the huge basilica which dominates all of Assisi.
So that humble church which is so much part of Francis' life was rebuilt into a fashionable and expensive huge cathedral which was built in Assisi in honor of Francis after Francis' death and which Francis would not have a proof of at all.
And so he begins with his hands the process of rebuilding that church but that is not enough for Francis realize that he is committed to the idea of poverty, to an idea of an apostolic poverty that it is wealth that in fact corrupts mankind.
And so he begins to give a great deal of his wealth or should we say the wealth of his father to beggars in the street and he in fact sometimes even traveled to other cities and they exchanged his clothing with those of beggars and went out begging himself.
Because it is a long tradition in Christianity that the act of begging is an act of humbling oneself, of humiliating oneself and putting oneself essentially closer to God that the more that one humbles oneself the closer one comes to God.
And there is a story told that is told to us in the little flowers of some Francis that once returning with his lavish clothing back from begging in the streets of another city where his socialist standings will not be compromised by this act he found someone suffering from leprosy.
One of the things that has happened at the beginning of the 13th century was not only the liturgical changes but it was also the way in which people suffering from physical maladies or Jews or other will be now identified that the maladies, the pollution, the sinfulness will be inscribed in the bodies as well.
So that this leper went around with the bell so people will get out of the way and in modern society, in our society, in advanced societies we no longer see people who suffer from leprosy.
But I have seen lepers before and of course it is a very disfiguring illness, your face rots as it were at the very advanced stages of it and Francis gave a coin, gave arms, gave charity to this man suffering from leprosy and continue on his way until he realizes that this was not charity.
That charity is not about giving but about loving and getting off from his horse, descending from his horse, he approached the leper and embraced and kissed him which is what charity was all about and returning to his home shortly afterwards he began to give away everything he owned.
And that was not what his father expected and his father imprisoned him in his house because he was essentially giving away all his fortune rather than doing what the father expected him to do which is to follow him in his trade and to become essentially a prosperous and wealthy middling source in Assisi.
And he is released by his mother and then we have this extraordinary event which is the trial in the cathedral where the father sued Francis for mis-spending his wealth and Francis is standing in the cathedral in front of his father says to him you are no longer my father the only thing you think of me is material things and he takes off his clothing which his father has given him
and naked stands right in the center of the cathedral and gives his clothing to his father back and the bishop covers him with his cloak and he goes out of the cathedral singing songs to his lady and his lady is poverty and there he begins his preaching
and his message is a simple one love each other love God a style away from the world he in fact brings a different kind of Christianity to the cities he brings a different kind of Christianity he brings the church and Christianity now down to the level of the masses
and they go Francis and twelve followers twelve followers and I think the number is very critical here because one of the things that is going to happen later on is that Francis is going to be identified with Jesus
he is going to be seen as the second coming of Jesus and throughout the 13th century and even into the 14th century Francis will be seen as the second incarnation of Jesus as the second coming of Christ and this is going to have important consequences for heretical movements, for the flagellants, for the millenarian ideals of the late 13th and early 14th century
and here comes Francis with his twelve followers to visit the pope this is the most powerful pope of the entire middle ages this is Innocent the third we are going to meet him afterwards when we talk about the cata heresy he is the man who has presided over the entire remaking of the church in the second letter and council he is a powerful and authoritarian man
and the first thing he says is who are these people as Francis has permission of the pope to create a new order to have a rule a very simple rule that the friar minors the people we call the franciscans will hold no property will go on the roads preaching the good news
preaching to the people as he has been done before by Jesus and his followers and the pope dismisses this collection of ill kept and unwashed monks or monks to be and that night as the story tells us as the legend tells us the pope has a dream
and the dream of the pope is the church collapsing and Francis holding it and you can see the representation of this dream in the most extraordinary paintings by Giotto in the arena chapel and in Florence in Santa Croce where you could see Giotto representing the very different
stages of Francis life and he has also innocent dream of Francis holding up the church which is collapsing and so the pope calls them back and gives them the rule and there goes Francis and his followers on the road begging and working because they are called mendicants
and they can people who beg for their food who beg for the sustenance but they also work and it is in some respects a glorious and beautiful and moving a story because these monks who have in a sense recovered and discovered a new world for themselves will walk on the roads with no aim or direction
and they will get to where the roads before Kate and they will stand in the middle of the road and then they will begin to dance and where the dance ends that's where the road that they will take there is not tomorrow for them there is only the now here the moment and the moment is a moment dedicated to Christ
I can go on telling you about stories about some Francis and weaving them into a very colorful tapestry but let me tell you in some detail what his message meant
Francis message which is not philosophical which is not complicated which is not written down except for one small beautiful poem from which I will read a few stanzas
it's about the way in which you can connect the human to Christ it is Francis the first one who indeed celebrates not the first one but the first one who does so in such a dramatic fashion
who celebrates nature as a representation of God as an emanation of God as the beauty of the universe is to be found essentially in the work of God
it is Francis who preaches to the births and who celebrates the beauty of the world and who goes to the wolf at Gubio a wolf who goes around eating people in the town and he goes and talk to the animals all of them part of God's universe of God's bounty
and therefore by embracing nature by embracing the world and the beauty of the world Francis stands against a tradition which was by then almost 800 years old that the world was damn that the world was sinful that nature was sinful
that man this is the preaching of Augustine this is the hold that Augustine had on Christian society that you must essentially give up the world because the world brings you down and the case of Francis is the contrary you must embrace the world you must embrace the beauty of the world
you must become one with them you must talk to the animals they are all the children of God it is Francis who also preaches and introduces to some respect in Christianity the idea of the manger
that which has become emblematic of Christianity is truly in a sense created by Francis Jesus not as a powerful icon on the cross with a crown not as a figure of power as we see in the central Middle Ages but as a helpless child in the manger
someone that you can identify with and love not in fear but in love this is a tremendous break but it is also a response to the catars who deny and we will talk about the catars in three lectures about the catars who deny the incarnation who deny the physicality of Jesus
and here he presents to us Francis presents to us the cult of the child as a helpless baby whom we should protect and love it is Francis who in a sense preaches a new kind of Christianity
it is Francis who speaks of a crusade which is not a military one don't kill those who do not believe like you love them and he goes to the east and he preaches to the sultan about love not about the superiority of Christianity over Islam
not about the fact of mighty armies of crusaders going there to kill thousands of people on the mount of Solomon but about loving and the sultan doesn't know what to do with this man so sends him back cover with gifts and it is Francis first and foremost who receives the greatest markings of God's favor
because late in life he was defeated as he preached all these things his own order was betraying him his own order embraced the world they began to build monasteries they became interested in teaching in universities
they became interested in building some tourist churches they became in many ways part of the world and in 1224 the order the rule of the order is transformed and Francis is defeated by the order he has lost out and so in some respects Francis begins a process of withdrawal from the world
we know from the little flowers these little stories in which Francis is sitting by the side of God and the last judgment and they are come these people all dressed up and one says well dressed up with incredibly lavish clothing and he says who are you
I am a friar minor I'm a Franciscan and Francis says no we don't dress like that I'll with you to hell another one comes in with books expensive books who are you I am a Franciscan you are not I'll with you to hell
another one comes in with plans for beautiful churches and great cathedrals who are you I'll with you and finally someone comes in who is humble and he says who are you I am a sinner I am a terrible person I don't deserve salvation
that's a true Franciscan Francis will say and so he withdraw through a mountain is isolated place and he engages in contemplations and prayer and on the 14th of September of 1224 as he is in contemplation he receives the astigmata the first recorded reception of the astigmata
the wounds of Christ not the movie that played a year or two years ago the wounds of Christ in his hands in his feet and on the side and for the next two years he will walk through the roads of Italy with the marking of astigmata on his body
and people are said to have told to have touched the wounds and to have touched the head of the nails and they are in 1226 singing a song he has composed which is entitled a canticle to the song which is a great him to nature
to sister son to brother son and sister moon to our mother earth to the our sister bodily death touching the ground he died but his impact will last in Europe because he has transformed the world because the Franciscans will become an important force
and those who continuously follow the message of Francis were faithful to this message will come to play a significant role in our story later on the Frati cellis the friar minors the third orders the people who lived in the world and a part of the world and yet at the same time they are also faithful to the message of Francis
I'm sorry that I have taken so much time with Francis and that I will give so little time to Dante and I know that there are other courses in the series about Dante and I just want to mention something very brief about Dante about his life but also about his mystical experience because we do not identify Dante as a mystic and yet here it is the greatest poet of all of the Middle Ages one of the greatest writers in the western tradition and ends his life essentially as a mystic
and we know that Dante was born in 1265 or so we know that he's a member of one of the patrician families in Florence we know that he enters deeply into the political affairs of Florence we know also that when he is nine he sees for the first time this young girl named Beatrice and it transformed his life
we know that later on in the late 13th century his exile from Florence and that he will never return to Florence again he will live in exile and as he tells us the bread of exiles always tastes salty
and we know that he's lost and when Beatrice dies he writes in a great work entitled La Vita Nuova he tells us about this encounter with Beatrice and the way in which his life is totally transformed and having heard about Beatrice's death and he being lost in the middle of the road of his life
in the middle of the road of our life he was lost in the dark woods and there comes Virgil the great writer of antiquity to guide him through hell and purgatory and up to paradise and he takes us in this pilgrimage which is indeed a kind of awakening at the age of 35
the middle of the road of his life surrounded by lost and despair and he's taking in this journey in this pilgrimage through hell and we see all the politics of Italy and we see the fractional wars of Florence and we learn about the culture of the age and we come down to the very last circle of hell
and there he emerges out of that on Good Friday which is the day in which he begins his journey and emerges out into purgatory and led by Beatrice he comes and rises up to Paradiso and this poem which took 21 years to write begins essentially with his vision of hell and with his own prugation
with his own cleansing and the slow rise through the mystical stages through the mystical way all the way to the contemplation of God and the poem and one ought to read this poem for what it is which is also besides being a great poem besides being a romantic poem also a mystical journey which ends with a vision of God
a vision of God which is Aristotelian all the circles and the light within the circle and the love that moves the world without itself being moved and having gotten there and having gotten to this ending which he sees the face of God and the light of God in front of him
he put his quilt down in 1321 and gives his soul to God. Thank you.
