Lecture 8 Mysticism in Early Modern Europe
Welcome to lecture 8 of the Terror of History.
In lecture 7, we look very briefly and in some detail at the mysticism of the Kabbalah.
The mysticism as contained in a book entitled the Sohar, The Book of a Splendor.
A book written in Iberia, in Castile, in the late 13th century.
Today we jump several centuries and look at the developments of mysticism in the early
modern period.
No longer a medieval kind of mysticism, but one grounded on the realities, on the political,
economic and social realities of the 16th century.
I think it is very peculiar that as Europe enters into a world of secularization, as
there is rapid economic and social change, as we see and contemplate the rise of the
nation-estate in early modern Europe, certainly in places like France, the Iberian Peninsula,
England and in some of the city-estates in Italy, at the same time that all these developments
are taking place, at the same time as life becomes desacralized and secular, there is
a reaction to that.
The reaction is a voyage within.
The reaction is, in many respects, the kind of interiorization of spirituality, so that
the mysticism of the early modern period is quite different altogether from that of the
Middle Ages.
It has known of the wildness of people like San Francis of Assisi, known of the, we might
even call them excesses, of saints and mystics such as Caterina of Siena in 14th century
Italy.
It is an interior voyage.
It does not mean at all that the mystics withdraw from the world completely.
That is to say, in some respects, the mysticism empowers them into action, as the case of
Santa Teresa of Avila, whom we are going to examine later on.
There is also another point which is important to make here, which is of course that in the
early 16th century, Christianity, as I have mentioned before and as I will mention again
in a later lecture, is a split into two contending factions, on the one hand the Protestants,
on the other hand the Catholics.
And even though Protestantism, the Reformation, in a sense, presents a very different kind
of Christianity, and though there are varieties of Protestants, there are Protestant mystics
as well as Catholic mystics.
Both of them follow along the same line in that process of going within the interior
voyage, which is a counterpart, a flipside to the outward voyage of Europe into a new
world, into a new science, into new secular structures, so that there are great similarities
and differences between Protestants and Catholics in the manner in which they, in a sense, experience
their Godhead.
In the 16th century and through the 17th century, we have what we call quietes and pietes, very
highly charged spiritual groups among Protestants and Catholics as well, but they are, for example,
a group called the alumbrados in the early 16th century, Castile, who are in many respects
quasi-Protestants, people who passively receive God, who passively wait for that interior
voyage with God into themselves.
So in many respects, we have these kinds of distinctions growing up between Protestants
and Catholics, but at the same time, both of them embrace the vision of God, the kind
of contacts and union with God in fairly similar ways, and both of their reactions, even when
they differ, for example, on the emphasis on Mary, on the emphasis on the host, Catholics
mystics in the 16th century, will develop great devotion for the Corpus Christi, which
is, of course, absent among the Protestants, but both of them, in a sense, react to the
growing secularization of the world, to economic change, to the growth of capitalism.
It is a reaction.
It shows, in many respects, the complexities of history, because we tend to think of this
period as one of unimpeded secularization, one in which we move from a medieval world
to a modern world, but elements of the Middle Ages, elements of the religiosity and spirituality
of the Middle Ages, stay with us.
It is not a contradiction that one of the most popular books of the late 15th century
is a book entitled The Imitatio Christi, The Imitation of Christ, written by Thomas A.
Kempis, and that it was a favorite book not only of pious men and women who were engaged
in a religious life, it was also the favorite work for merchants who spent a great deal
of their time reading devotional works, while on the other part of their life, they accumulated
wealth and make money.
So in a sense, we are in a complex world, and what I would like to do here, essentially,
is to look at two mystics in Spain in the 16th century, two mystics who are considered
to be among the most important mystics in the 16th century, and who wrote very powerful
works which became, as it were, models, became guides for other peoples' search and voyage
into their own spirituality.
I refer here to Teresa of Avila and John of the Cross, and I would like, in a sense,
to begin this lecture or this discussion by asking you to think and to try to visualize
in your mind, those of you who are listening to these tapes, and to go after the lecture
and try to find a print or a picture of the great sculpture by Bernini of the ecstasy of
Santa Teresa.
It is a Baroque sculpture, one of the high points of Baroque art.
It shows Santa Teresa receiving, as it were, the revelations of God, the union, is the
ecstasy, is the last of the stages of Santa Teresa's mystical way, the mystical experience,
the mystical trance.
It is an extraordinary sculpture.
It is an sculpture in which Santa Teresa, or Teresa of Avila, is represented as a woman
almost in a moment of ecstasy, an ecstasy which is both a spiritual, anerotic, and sensual.
Her mouth is open, she gives into a space, and her heart is essentially being wounded
by the arrows of love, of love, of God's love, and in many respects, it points out to
us the highly erotic character, how highly eroticized this mysticism of the 16th century
is, evened among some of the Protestants, that the way in which it is articulated, which
follows in many respects the kind of languages it is used in the 12th century by someone
like Bernadette of Claiborne, is nonetheless, in the 16th century, which is a century highly
charged with sexual elements and with highly eroticized, then you could see how that enters
the language of the mystic.
Before I even begin with Santa Teresa, I want to make a very brief mention here of another
Spanish saint, Saginacius of Loyola, who is also a mystic, who has a mystical experience,
a soldier, a man who abandons the world by reading the desert fathers, by reading those
accounts of the monks who went into the desert in the 3rd and 4th century to escape the world.
Loyola, Saginacius, or Ignacius of Loyola, the founder of the Jesuits, the most important
of all teaching orders in the early modern period, was born in 1491 and died in 1556.
He wrote, and this is why I am introducing him here, he wrote a book entitled The Spiritual
Exercises, which became not only a must read for Jesuits, for those who join his order,
this kind of militarized society of Jesus, but it also became a guide to the spiritual
life as well.
If I may be allowed a personal comment, one of the things that I have to do in my youth
was essentially to not only read, but practice the kinds of admonitions found in the spiritual
exercises by Ignacius of Loyola.
I bring Ignacius here because there is not only a highly eroticized element to the Spanish
mysticism of the 16th century, but that there is also a highly military element, martial
element to this mysticism, and as we look at the life of Teresa, as we look at the life
of Lesso of John of the Cross, then in a sense we could see how this military element enters
into the mysticism.
Now what about Teresa of Avila? She was born in 1515. Her family was of Converso origin.
Her grandfather has been someone who had been brought in front of the Inquisition at Toledo,
accused of Judaizing, and because essentially his name has been already stained by this association,
he fled, like many other Conversos in Toledo did, to the city of Avila, and there in a
manner which was not unique to the period, or which was not unique to Conversos, he
refashioned himself into a Castilian and a Christian, so that when Teresa writes her
own history, when she writes her own autobiography, which is one of the greatest works in the
Spanish language in its simplicity and power, there is no mention whatsoever of her Converso
origins. Her father has been able to marry into a very aristocratic family, became an
exceedingly pious Christian, died a very good Christian death, and therefore she only sees
the Christianity of her father, the aristocratic lineage of her mother, and her Converso origins,
as was the case in many other families throughout Spain, was essentially put aside, ignore,
cover over, made up, and disappear. So in a sense what you could see is that, a friend
of mine asked me the other day, can one detect Jewish influences in the thought of Teresa,
and my answer to that is that you can't, because it is very probable that she herself did not
know, that there was an effigy of her grandfather in a church in Toledo, that there was a dress
in a church in Toledo, identifying her grandfather as a Judaismizer, as someone who practiced
Judaism in secret. We know from her own autobiography that early in life she loved as her mother
did to read romances, those very popular books of the late 15th and early 16th century, those
books that are going to inspire Cervantes to write Don Quixote and to mock them, and
that she thought in a heroic vein, that she thought of going to go on a crusade against
the Moors, and her brother and Teresa are caught on the road as they are trying to go south
in essentially to enlist in the great battle against the Moors. So we know that there is,
in her background and in her life as an inspiration, both chivalrous tales, chivalrous stories,
romances on the one hand, and on the other hand, a kind of crusading spirit, and we must
place her also historically. She lives in imperial Spain, an imperial Spain which on
the one hand is the master of the world, and in imperial Spain on the other hand, which
is slowly deteriorating from within. She lives in Castile. If you have traveled to Castile,
if you have been in Abila, you know how in fact on yielding the land is, how barren the
high plains are. You can travel through that countryside, and you are always struck by this
darkness and sheer asceticism of the land. You know, we always identify Spain with color
and music and so on, but you have to in a sense imbibe the countryside and the landscape
and to see what it means. A world without water. A world in which water is very precious,
which is very rare, which seldom falls on the ground. The land is infertile. The people
have to work very hard to produce things. And so we know that she has essentially, she
is the daughter of that context. She is the daughter of what she reads. And we know that
at the age of, she enters into a monastery at the age of 21, and she enters a monastery
of the Carmelites, an order which is in great deal of trouble, which is corrupted, which
the nuns lived in great fashion, very aristocratic. And she is, as she tells us in her memoirs,
exceedingly conscious of her own lineage and her own aristocracy. Her converso pass, as
I said, does not exist. To be a noble in Spain in the 16th century meant essentially to be
of pure blood, to trace your ancestry back to a bisigotic pass. But you could see in
Teresa in her own autobiography, wonderful book, to be read, not only for what it tells
us historically about the period and this woman, but about the interior life of this
woman who is filled with doubts, who is, in many respects, someone who does not yet know
what she wants to do. A nun at 21 is quite late in life. To become a nun at 21 means
that she has waited a great deal. You really enter a monastery much earlier. You become
a novice much, much earlier. And not only does she enter the monastery, a monastery which
is in many respects, an order which is in many respects, can be described by its lack
of discipline and lack of order by its excesses. But she also suffers through her entire life,
a long life of illness. And it is this woman who is ill, who begins to have these experiences,
which she thinks immediately are the work of the devil, that they cannot be the work
of God, that she is being tempted by the devil. And she goes to her father confessor and
she tells her father confessor and there is incredible parts of her books in which she
talks about the confessor and chooses the right confessor and of corrupt priests. And
she is told to, in a sense, write down her experiences. And she becomes a reformer of
her order. And she travels back and forth through the plains of Castile and through
the entire kingdom of Castile with an iron hand and in a combative manner, transforming
her order, changing everything, making the life of the nuns austere. You could follow
her way, you could follow the manner in which she walks, she walks back and forth from one
monastery to another, trying to instill a sense of discipline and reform. It is a new
church that is now here in Spain. It's the Church of the Council of Trent. We are talking
about the period after the 1550s, the way in which the church is becoming reformed as
well, in which is an answer to the reformation. The church is reforming itself as well. That
is to say that there is new ways of perceiving orthodoxy, that it is necessary in many respects
to create a front to oppose those protestants, reformers who claim that the church is so
corrupt. So Teresa is in, as Ignatius of Loyola and the Jesuits will be, they are the vanguard
of the answer to the challenge of Protestantism, to the challenge of the reformation. And she
reforms her order, sometimes against the authority of the Inquisition and the crown, sometimes
with the support. But it is her mystical experience. It is the way in which she tells
us about her mystical visions, about her suffering, about her reception of God, that allows her,
that empowers her to do this. And in some respects, and this is something that I want
to mention here prominently and which should have been emphasized earlier, it is mysticism
that allows women in a world that does not give power to women to in a sense become important
voices for change. That is to say that mysticism plays a vital role in empowering women to
occupy a place in society which the agenda will never allow them to have. So in many
respects, you could see how for women like Hildegard and Catherine of Siena and the thousands
of mystics, which we can identify in Christianity, these women occupy a place in society which
would otherwise not have been available to them. And why? Because the majority of the
people truly believe that they have been one with God, because someone like Bernini could
represent Santa Teresa in a magnificent marble sculpture as someone receiving all of God
into herself. And she tells us the stages of her mystical experience, and the metaphors
she uses is the metaphor of water. And she says, think of how we come to God, and we
come to God gradually in a stages. Think of this, think of a garden that you have to water,
and think of this metaphor in terms of Castile, of a place where there is no water or very
little water. And so what the first thing you do is that you have a garden, and then
you have a well, and the well has water. And you go there with your bucket, and you pull
up the water, and you bring the water to the garden. This is indeed very hard work, and
it's very trying. And this is a kind of dedication to your mission. So you go and fill it with
water and bring it to the garden. And the second stage is when you get a windlass and
you bring the water without, in a sense, having to pull it from the well. And you move your
wheel, and the windlass, and you bring the water up, and you water your garden. But then
you think, and it becomes easier. But you are still working, and you build a kind of
canal, and you irrigate your garden from water that is being brought up by what the
Spaniards call in Oria, a wheel that brings continuously water up from the well, and then
put it into the canals, and you, in a sense, irrigate your garden. And yet you are not
there yet, because you still need human ingenuity to do this. But it's finally when it rains,
and the garden gets soaked with rain. That is the equivalent, the metaphor for the reception
of God. The garden has been, in a sense, completely watered by the rain. And in some respects,
think of rain. I mean, let's place this in a kind of personal level. Think of rain today.
When it rains, we always run, or cover ourselves, and open our umbrellas. But think what it
would be if you live in a place where it never rains, to just simply stand there under the
rain, naked, and allow yourself to be completely soaked. And in a sense, you are doing nothing
except receiving this rain. And so in some respect, you have to see how, in a sense,
the mystical experience is presented to this very beautiful metaphor of water. It is such
a powerful metaphor that one of the greatest writers of the 19th century, a woman who took
the name of George Eliot to write her novels. In her wonderful novel Middlemarch, her main
character, Dorothea Brooke, wants to be a new Santa Teresa. She wants to reform the
world. And the entire book, the entire Middlemarch by George Eliot, is in many respects a kind
of takeoff on the life of Santa Teresa. And it ends with a reflection on the fact that
not all women could be like Santa Teresa. Santa Teresa was also exceedingly influential
on the deepest and perhaps the most mystical of all 16th century people. His name was John
of the Cross. Well, that was not his name, really. That's the name we know him for. He
was born in 1542, an orphaned. He was sent to an orphanage. He was utterly inept about
doing anything with his hands. He was sent to a carpenter's shop, and he proved to be
completely incompetent. He was then sent to a hospital to take care of syphilitic patients.
And there, a priest saw that he was exceedingly intelligent and creative, and they sent him
to school. And then he came into contact with Teresa of Avila and joined Teresa in the attempts
to, in a sense, change and transform the chandelier order. And he was detained by the Inquisition
in Granada. And he tells us that there in the Inquisition, suffering and in fear, he
heard someone singing of love outside the prison walls. And that that was, in a sense,
the kind of trigger that awakening that led him to his mystical experience. And the song
he heard, and he tells us about the song when something along the lines of this, he who
knows nothing of pains in this valley of sorrows, nothing knows of good things, nor has tasted
of love, since pain, pains are the garments of lovers, which remind me some one of Rilke,
the German poet who says, love is good because it is difficult. And so in many respects, John
of the Cross, through his painful experiences, through his suffering, also suffers an awakening.
And that awakening sends him to write some of the most beautiful poetry that has ever
been written in the Spanish language, in the Castilian language, some of the poetry which
is also highly eroticized. And what he does is that he writes a poem, and then he commends
on the poems, he creates glosses and exegesis of his own work, all of which leads him into,
in a sense, the mystical trance. The titles tell us all, the Ascent to Mount Carmel, the
living flame of love, the dark night of the soul. He died in 14 December 1591, a still,
a fairly young man, while a monk read to him verses from the Song of Songs. For him,
for John of the Cross, there are five ways to God. The first one is the practice of self-knowledge,
that is to say, trying to live and act like a Christian, the imitatio Christi, the imitation
of Christ. Self-knowledge is to imitate Christ, to be like Christ. Second, consider the creations,
consider the world around you, which are the manifestations of God. Seeing the world,
its flowers, its trees, the beautiful things in the world, which are witness to God's creation,
to God's greatness. All nature, he writes, is drawn towards God, like a flower turns
towards the sun. Third is faith, believing, faith as the substance of things hoped for,
things that cannot be understood by reason, faith as an affirmation, and then fourth, the
being a negativa, the negative way, we cannot know God. So we must, in a sense, we must
go beyond everything that we have ever known, we must go into the unknowable, and five,
the union. God, in a sense, comes in, the soul is passive, and is ravished by the hand
of God. Love is old. Let me read to you a bit of this poem, which is entitled, The Dark
Night of the Soul, and I will read a bit of it in Spanish, and then I will read at least
some of the translation in English, but I will not read the entire poem. It begins, essentially,
with a lover leaving his place, and going to meet the beloved, and then laying on the
beloved's chest, and being wounded in the neck by the beloved's love, and then falling
asleep on the beloved's breast. The language of this reminds us of James Joyce Ulysses,
of some of the parts of the final monologue, en una noche oscura con ansias en amores inflamadas,
odious aventura, salí sin ser notada, estando ya mi casa sosegada. Salí sin ser notada
is the feminine, is the soul that is feminine, abandoning it. And then, of course, at the
end, que de mi olvideme el rostro recline sobre el amado, cesó todo y dejeme, dejando
mi cuidado entre las azucenas, olvidado. Forgetful rap, I lay, my face reclining, on
my love one fair, all things for me that day cease as I slumber there amid the lilies
drowning all my care. So, in a sense, you could see how this leads the mystic to that
kind of place where he loses all sense of self and becomes one with God. With John of
the Cross, we conclude our section, our first mini-course, mini-series of lectures on mysticism.
Please, I have tried to present mysticism as a way of escaping the terror of history,
as a way, in a sense, to withdraw oneself from the oppressions of history, from the terrors,
the tremendous nightmare of history. In many respects, you could say that Santa Teresa and
Saint John of the Cross are escaping from the extraordinary problems of imperial Spain
and the great conflicts of early modern Europe. But that is perhaps not a fair assessment
of what the mystics are and what mystics do, because in many respects, one of the things
that mysticism does is to empower the mystic after you have the mystical experience, then
you go out into the world and do things, as Bernard did, as Francis did, as Teresa did.
It is not just contemplation, although in the 16th century, as I pointed out, mystics tend
to be far more contemplative, especially protestant quieties and pieties than Catholics are.
So, in a sense, mystics are active in the world, and as I point out to you, mysticism
also, in a sense, erases class and gender distinctions in a world which is highly hierarchical,
in a world with a society of order determines who is what, by claiming and by being accepted
by those around you and by the church, most of all, that you are someone who can see the
face of God, therefore you come to play a role in that world that your class or your
agenda would have never allowed you to play. So, in that respect, mysticism plays an extraordinarily
important role in the making of the European culture and European consciousness and European
history. And again, as I said to you before, there is a very thin line that divides the
mystic who is orthodox from those who are heterodox, and it is to those who are heterodox
to the heretics and those who believe in the coming of the millennium that we now turn.
Thank you.
