Lecture 10 The Church Under Attack
Welcome to lecture 10 of the Terror of History.
In lecture 9 we look at the context of heresy and the millennium, the different type of
heretical movements, the different type of millenarian movements.
In this lecture, in lecture 10, I want to look at three heretical and one heretical and
millenarian movements in the 13th century, in the late 12th and 13th century.
And I want to contextualize these movements within the particular geographical, social
and economic setting of one European region.
I speak here of an area which in the Middle Ages and by historians today is called Ossitania,
an area running roughly from northern Italy, the area of the Acoddassur, all the way into
the Languedoc and then south into the area of Catalonia and Barcelona.
This is an area which in the 11th and 12th century had a cultural unit.
They spoke a language which was called Ossitan, of which Catalan is somewhat related to.
It was the land of the Ossitan, it was the lang de oc, that is to say they spoke something
which was similar to French, was not French, in which the word yes was oc and lang de oc,
the Languedoc, the place or the land where people spoke Languedocian.
And if you travel through the south to this very day, this area of southern France, you
could see everywhere, this is Catalan, this is the land of the Catars.
I was there last summer traveling across Ossitania as it were and it is extraordinary the historical
presence of the heresy of the Catars, one of the heresies I'm going to discuss today,
in this area to this very day, is a tourist attraction obviously.
It is an area which was not in the 11th and 12th century French, that is to say it's not
part of the kingdom of France.
It is an area which is autonomous, semi-independent.
It's an area of lawships, of great lords, of powerful lords who rule over the countryside
from castles, which you still see to this very day, perched in very high hills.
It's a beautiful area, it's a wonderful area, it's an area which is perhaps among the most
beautiful areas along the Mediterranean coast.
This area in the 11th and 12th century was an area which was also lax in its religion,
that is to say the Catholicism, the Christianity of Ossitania in the 11th, 12th, 13th century
was one that was not necessarily very orthodox.
The priests were more interested in living a good life than in pious or orthodox life.
It is also the region where courtly love was found, it was the strongest region for the
practices of courtly love.
It, courtly love in fact, originates in Ossitania.
The first Troubadour poetry in Ossitan, in the language which you also call Provençal,
is where the first poems are written.
So it is a world which is very different altogether from North and France, in language, in culture,
in religious practices and in political organization.
And it provided in many respects a very fertile ground for the emergence of heresies and to
a large extent also millenarian movements as well.
The first one I want to consider here is what we call the Valdencian heresy, the heresy
of the Valdencians.
Valdencians are heretics from the 12th and 13th century and there is still to this very
day a Valdencian church in Italy, in northern Italy, which is now integrated into the Protestant
denomination, but which is still very faithful to the practices that were developed in the
late, I mean in the 12th century and in the 13th century.
So the Valdencians play a significant role in the religious culture of the West in this
period and even later on as well.
The founder of the Valdencians was her rich merchant, probably a moneylender, named Valdes
or Valdes of Lyon.
He has been awakened to his new beliefs by hearing the history of St. Alexis, who had
given all his wealth and who had become assain by the denial of his wealth and property.
He went to consult a theologian and the theologian and the priest and the priest guided him to
that passage in Matthew, which I quoted when I spoke about Francis.
Early on the passage in which Jesus said, a rich man will go first through the eyes of
a needle and a camel will go first through the eyes of a needle before the rich man enters
the kingdom of heaven.
Therefore, what we have here is, as it was the case with Francis, a reaction to the growing
materialism of the age, to the making of money, a kind of turning point in which Valdes and
people like him feel in a sense turned off from the growing secularism and materialism
of this world.
If you are truly a Christian, then how could you be a rich merchant?
How could you accumulate wealth?
Are you not placed in your soul in mortal danger?
And thus, in one of those acts, which in many respects parallels the life of Francis or
Francis later than Valdes of Lyon, he gives up his wealth and he places his two daughters
in a famous monastery, Pont d'Abreu, where Henry II and Eleonore van Coutain are buried,
and he takes on the road to preach this new message.
His message is one of apostolic poverty, imitation of the way in which the apostles lived, traveling
from place to place.
They travel in groups of two, two Valdencians, and they go and preach, and they think of themselves
as orthodox.
They are preaching the news, they are in a sense doing the right things.
They come under the suspicions of the church because one of the things that Valdes does
before he gives up his fortune is in a sense to have the scriptures translated into Provençal,
to in a sense make the scriptures available to the people.
And here we come to a very important point, a very important moment in the history of
the West because it is a question of control of language.
If the Bible is in Latin, and Latin is a language which is only accessible to an elite, to an
educated elite, therefore what we have here is a monopoly of knowledge.
By translating the Bible, something that Luther will do later on in the 16th century, what
you do is you take that control of language from the established church and in a sense
dispersed among the people.
So the Valdencians insisted on the idea that they can in fact break the control, the monopoly
of language which the church had over the scriptures and preach the scriptures to the
people in their own language.
Clearly this is going to lead him into very serious troubles.
By 1179, Pope Alexander III opposed the preaching of the Valdencians.
Essentially you should not go around, people who have not been given the sanction of the
church should not go around preaching absolute poverty or apostolic poverty or indeed translating
the Bible into the vernacular.
By 1182 or around 1182 Valdencians was excommunicated and declared a heretic.
I want to in a sense go back to the kinds of things that I said in the previous lecture,
which is of course that the line between orthodoxy and heterodoxy is a very thin one.
Francis is an orthodox, a mystic, a saint of the church because when forbidden to preach
early on by Innocent III he is still a chiesce to the witches of the church.
Valdencians is a heretic because he refuses to accept their actions of the church which
forbid him to continue with his mission.
And therefore we see how heresy in a sense is dictated by the moment that we have to
locate them within the specific context of the time and the actions of individuals.
The Valdencians once they are excommunicated take on a radical position.
Going around the fields of certain France two by two they espouse ideas which now go
counter to those of the church.
The first one, they attack the authority of the priests and of the monks.
In many respects they are similar to the Donates, an earlier heresy of the 4th and 5th century
which says that a priest or a monk who is not a true Christian cannot perform his office.
This is one of the most serious heresies in Christendom.
The idea that if a priest is sinful the sacraments that he performs are not valid.
The church of course will have none of that because if you are going to disqualify all
the priests who are sinful then how many priests would be left?
It's the same as disqualifying all the politicians who are crooked.
How many politicians are we going to be left with?
Clearly there is a separation which the church will insist on to this very day between the
individual and the actions of the individual and the performance of his or her duties within
the church.
The first Valdencian attack on the church is that the priests have no authority.
We should not accept the authority of priests.
We should accept only the authority of exemplary Christians.
The second one was the denial of purgatory and we already talked a bit about the birth
of purgatory in the 12th century and the Valdencians correctly identified purgatory as an entirely
bourgeois creation.
That's a way in which the rich could have their cake and eat it too, meaning that they
could accumulate wealth and that they could still escape the fires of hell by doing a
few pious deeds, by buying masses, by in a sense engaging in some practices which come
into being only in the 12th century.
Purgatory is really an invention of the 12th century.
We know the great book by Jacques Legault entitled La naissance du purgatoire, the birth
of purgatory, which tells us how purgatory is constructed and it is of course the creation
of an intermediary place between heaven and hell in which now people can escape and wait
for liberation or entry into heaven and you can buy that entry into heaven with money.
You can negotiate for your salvation, bourgeois will do this, they will negotiate for the
salvation by buying masses, by paying people to go on crusades for them, by paying people
to go on pilgrimage for them, by making donations to the poor, by ritualizing and formulating
donations, but those that in a sense are ways of bargaining for salvation.
You don't really have to be a good Christian now because, well, if you have money, you
can now purchase your way into heaven, which is in many respects a denial of the Christian
ideal of apostolic poverty.
So the second thing that Valdencia does is to deny the idea of purgatory and finally
they embrace a radical evangelical morality.
That is to say that those who engage in this religion, and that is by the way the case
of all small heresies, that is that the heretics who embrace this belief are taking an extraordinary
risk. They are placing their lives and wealth in great danger.
So therefore they are truly committed people. There is something in history which historians
sometimes fail to take into account, which is the deep passions, the abiding passions
and commitment that some people have for their beliefs.
And I am a social historian and I sometimes ignore the importance of these elements in
the making of history. There are people who will do irrational things because they believe
in them. And that is a force which is very difficult to pin down as a historian. It's
the same as leadership or charisma. How do you pin it down? How do you explain it?
So by adopting a kind of radical evangelical morality, the Valdencians of course preach
by example. These are people who live the life they preach, who live in poverty, who
go out, who give the consolatum, the kind of only sacraments the Valdencians have, the
consolation of entering into this deep-seated belief in apostolic poverty, in the denial
of the world, in the denier of the authority of the church to determine who you are. In
some respects these are forerunners of the great Protestant reformation of the 16th
century. It is a kind of priesthood of oneself. You live your life as a Christian, as a true
Christian and then there you are. The Valdencians of course will be persecuted in the 13th century,
will be ferret out by the inquisition, as we shall see in the next lecture, but will
survive, will survive as an active force and will become intertwined with all the heretical
groups later on, with the radical Fraticelli, with the radical Franciscans, with some of
her flagellants, to create a kind of latent but always present, kind of on the ground
anti-establishment, anti-Christian. Not anti-Christian because they think of themselves as a true
Christian, but anti-church groups throughout Western society, which will create a kind
of revolutionary ferment from which millenarian movements will draw a good number of their
followers. From the Valdencians we talk, we shift to the Catars, and the Catars is a very
different kettle of fish, because the truth of the matter is that though I am calling
the Catars, or Catarism, or the Albigencian heresy as they were called in the late 12th
and early 13th century, a Christian heresy, the truth of the matter is of course is that
Catarism was a very different religion from Christianity, was not really a Christian heresy,
but a religion into itself. Catarism has very ancient roots. It goes back to the preaching
of Manis, or Mani, again another one of those Persian, Iranian thinkers in the early centuries
of Christianity, who was a dualist. He was a dualist. He posited in some ways following
from Soroaster, a world divided between two opposing forces. One, a forces of good, and
the spirit, and light. Two, the forces of matter, and evil, and darkness. And these
two forces are in continuous struggle, one with the other. I cannot even begin to tell
you how extraordinarily important Manichism, that split between the body and the spirit
is in the Western tradition. It is something that we have inherited, and that we almost
unconsciously feel to this very day the tremendous importance of the Manichian dualism. Dualism
plays an extraordinary role not only in religion, but also in our philosophical outlook. Perhaps
the greatest of all Church Fathers, Augustine of Hippo, in the late 4th and early 5th century
spent a time before his conversion to Christianity, actually before his conversion to Neoplatonism
and then to Christianity as a Manichian. And it was only meeting a Manichian elder who
was not very bright that convinced him that this was not the way to go. But Manichism
provided a very good explanation for the existence of evil, one of the most troubling questions
within religion and certainly within Christianity. That is to say, if there is a God who is good
and fair and loves mankind from where does evil come? Where is the origin of evil? Because
of course you cannot attribute evil to God, otherwise what kind of a God is this that
allows all this evil to exist? And therefore Manichian was very attractive. There is a Manichian
religious experience or practices which we call also the Bogomil religion in the east
of Europe and it makes its way to slowly, to not in Italy and then to Southern France.
And Caterism prosper tremendously in Southern France for many reasons. By the way, Caterism
is the name of the catars. And the catars are the pure ones. That is to say, the ones
who withdraw from the world, they don't eat animal products. They restrain from sex. They
live pure lives as a way of, in a sense, withdrawing from the world and coming close to that one
of the dualist elements, the elements of the good, the elements of light, of the spirit,
to be as spiritual as possible, to escape the body, the body conceived as a prison.
But they did not insist, which is what makes this religion so attractive, they did not
insist that everybody lives like this. You could, in some respects, lead a normal life.
And if you lead a normal life, but you believe in the catars and cooperate with the catars
and attend the services, then you might also be saved. You might escape from the oppressions
of the world. So that the catars rejected all sexuality and procreation, no meat, no
eggs, no milk, no cheese. In a sense, it's a way in which you escape the world. You become
pure. Now, sort of pinning down catars, believes is very difficult. Because what we know about
the catars, we know essentially through mostly the text of the enemies of the catars. And
this is something that I was saying on the first lecture, that is to say that we are
reading hostile accounts of catar beliefs. There are several catars documents, and I
can read from you because I have them with me here, although that might not be necessary.
There are some catar texts which show some of the ideas of the catars. But essentially
most of the information we have about the catars is from hostile sources, from inquisitorial
trials, from attacks against the religion. We know that the catars have certain sets
of beliefs. We know that the catars believe that the world, since the world is matter,
that the world was made not by God, but by Satan. This is a way in which Christianity
serves as an overlay over Manichaean beliefs which dated back almost to the beginnings
of Christianity. So in a sense we impose certain Christian terminology over ancient beliefs.
The world is made by Satan. God, in his, her, or its, in a sense, love for mankind, sends
Christ, who is not a human, but a vision, an illusion, to redeem humanity and to save
humanity from being enthralled by the material world. So God, in fact, sends an image, which
is the Son of God, down there, to, in a sense, save mankind. Jesus does not die in the cross,
which is why the catars hate representations of the cross and they hate churches as well,
because they are representations of the material world, whereas the true world is that of the
spirit. So they believe also that, and this is unclear too, that one of the ways in which
man, well man is created by the devil, of course, and God, in pity for them, gives them a soul.
And it is not clear about where these souls come from. Are these the souls of fallen angels,
or do they believe also in the transmigration of souls, so that there is a belief also in
transmigration as well. So you could see how this, in fact, differs tremendously from Christianity
as well. Satan as the evil God, and then the question is to free oneself from the flesh,
so that the perfect refuse to kill, to take oaths, and since they stand apart, we also
know that socially, a good number of the catars are people who know how to read and write,
that they come from the kind of middling souls, the lower nobility, the mercantile classes.
We know also that the catars allow women to play a role in the religion which is forbidden
to them within Christianity. So in a sense what we have here is a religion which is quite
open, which allows people to come in and to play a role in it which is not possible in
the highly hierarchical world of the Catholic Church. And they span, and the truth of the
matter of course is that the Catholic Church in the south doesn't really, in the Languedoc
in Ocitania, doesn't really worry about this. Okay, you live, we live, we all have wine,
this is Provence after all, the weather is wonderful, the wine is terrific, the Mediterranean
is right there, why worry? But, but some people are going to come through Ocitania on their
way elsewhere, and they are going to worry. And this is what happens. A man named Dominic
of Guzman, a native of Castile, we know him in history as Saint Dominic, comes through
as do all the priests and monks traveling through the south and are shocked by the way in which
the area is essentially in the grip of heresy. And they come to the Pope and ask permission
to go and preach to these heretics and try to bring them back into the fold. It is then
that the mendicant order, a second mendicant order, that of the Dominicans is created. Dominicans
not because they are the followers of Saint Dominic, Dominicans because they are the hounds
of the Lord, Dominus Canis, the hounds of the Lord. And they come there to convince, because
as we shall see in the lecture which follows this one, this is a period in which the church tries to bring heretics
back before they are excluded altogether and sever from the religion by preaching, not necessarily
by violence. And so the Dominicans come into the south to preach Christianity to the heretics
and are not very successful. And in fact there are some encounters between Dominicans and heretics
leading to the killing of one of the Dominicans, one of the papal legates who is in the area
representing as it were the position of the Pope. And thus something unique in the history of the West
takes place here, which is that the Pope, innocent the third, preaches a crusade against the Catares.
This is a golden opportunity for the people in the north of France to embrace a religious cause
and to come south and attempt to extend the power into the south to integrate this area for Zitania
which was not part of France, that is to say politically not integrated into the kingdom of France
and to bring it into the kingdom of France by using religion. It was not lost on the people of the south
that this crusade preaching the name of religion and as a way to combat heresy was in fact a political move as well.
And Catholics and Catares fought side by side against the invaders and the king of Aragon and Catalonia
the king of the crown of Aragon, Peter, who was known as Peter the Catholic, came to defend the south
against the invaders from the north and he died at More in 1213 fighting on the side of the Catares.
The story is told at Abesie, one of the towns in the area, after it is conquered by the northerners
they are told, how do you distinguish between the Catares and the Christians?
How could you tell them apart? And the leader of the occupying forces put all of them to the sword
God will know his own when they get up there, kill them up, God will know who is right and who is wrong
and therefore the Catares is squashed by these invaders from the north and essentially by the papal crusade
It is the first time in which a crusade is preached not against quote-unquote infidels in the east
but a crusade is preached against people who are Christians but heretical.
In the next lecture I will describe in luxury of details how you deal with the Catares who still remain alive
after a fashion, after the invasion and that will be by way of the inquisition.
Let me point out to you very briefly how Cataresm survives.
If one read Emanuele Roiladourie great book Montailleu which is the promised land of error
you could see that how in this small village in the Pyrenees or close to the Pyrenees Montailleu
Catares believes survive so that almost half of the population of this village are really people who still practice Cataresm
who travel back and forth across the Pyrenees, who go back and forth and who maintain this network of heretical views
how heresy survives 100 years, 150 years after the defeat of the Catares in Languedoc.
The third and final movement that I want to look at is very briefly is that of the Fraticelles and the Flagellans.
Francis as I pointed out to you was a great watershed in the history of Christianity.
Everyone, not everyone but most people specifically the people at the bottom were certain that Francis essentially was the second coming of Jesus.
He had received the astigmata, he has 12 disciples so that essentially the order that splits between two groups
one the radical Franciscans whom we call Fraticelles and two the observant or regular Franciscans
who have the new reform order about which I spoke in the past.
The Fraticelles see Francis as a sign that the end of time is at hand.
Together with the ideas of Joachim of Fiori everybody thought that 1260 will mark the end of time, the beginning of the millennium.
And because it was the beginning of the millennium and all the signs were there that the millennium was at hand
you have the development of the Flagellans movement.
People who will go around beating in groups of 33, beating their backs into a pulp by their suffering in a sense
bringing about the end of time, the end of history which has been foreshadowed by the life of Francis.
The Flagellans, the Church doesn't know what to do with the Flagellans because after all they are on the one hand Orthodox
and then at the end they are condemned also as heterodox and they are forbidden because they represent a great threat
and the Orthodox view of the millennium is of course that you cannot usher it in
and that you cannot predict when it will happen, that you cannot say I know when it will happen
that it is only in the mind of God who knows when the millennium will take place. Thank you.
Thank you.
