Lecture 11, The Birth of the Inquisition
Welcome to Lecture 11 on the Terror of History.
In lecture 10, I tried to present three different heretical and small millenarian movement in the late 12th and 13th century.
I want to revisit the Catarrhism and the Valdencian movement and the Frati-Cherri agitation and even the flagellants from a very different perspective.
Then I want to look at another heresy which prospered in the 14th century, which is called the heresy of the Free Spirit.
When I was finishing the previous lecture, lecture 10, I was discussing how the Crusaders come and crush Catarrh resistance in 1213.
That's the famous battle of Muguet.
Nonetheless, even though the Catarrhists have been defeated and that no tend power, although in fact I must say that accurately the Languedoc, the areas of Provence, do not become officially part of France until the late 13th century.
Nonetheless, by the beginning of the 13th century, French authorities begin to press and essentially accept the power in the area.
Nonetheless, though the Catarrhists have been defeated, they have not been essentially removed from existence.
As I pointed out to you when we talk about Montailleux, the village described in Luxury of Details by Emmanuel Leroy-Ladourie, you see how Catarrhs believe remain alive into the 14th century and even beyond that.
How heresy, in a sense, continues to play a vital role in the making of individual and collective identities in this area.
So that violence between Catarrhs and Christians remained part of the life of Ocitania in the period after 1213.
So new methods of dealing with the Catarrhs have to be created.
And what the Church is going to come up with is the Inquisition.
In the 1220s and 1230s, the papal and diocesan Inquisitions come into being.
It is a period in which, let by the Dominicans, who will become, as it were, the main officials of the Inquisition,
the Inquisitorial Apparatus, which is going to play such an important role in the stories that I'm going to talk about, which Grace and Heresy later on comes into being.
Please, the Inquisition is, in many respects, not a new institution.
It follows from very ancient practices, from the practices of Inquisitio, a Roman inquiry.
What the Inquisition does is it attempts to, in a sense, find out the truth about certain types of behavior and so on.
So in that respect, institutionally, the Inquisition is part of a long trajectory in Western history, which goes back to a world before Christianity.
It's a judicial procedure of finding truth, of finding what has taken place.
But in some other respects, the Inquisition marks a dramatic shift in mentality in the medieval West.
An incredible mental change in the way in which you deal with descent, with heterodoxy.
And I have to place Inquisition within a certain mental and cultural context.
I want to place Inquisition in the context of a series of changes that are coming upon Christianity at the beginning of the 13th century,
that are paralleled by the growing sense of a national and collective identity.
By the growing sense of people that they are different from others.
By whole systems of representations which lead people to imagine themselves, to use Benedict Anderson's wonderful terms in his imagined communities.
That communities are created in the mind, that they are imagined in the mind before they become actual reality.
And that one of the ways in which you imagine communities and construct identities is essentially to the creation of otherness.
And that the early 13th century is a period particularly keen in creating otherness, in creating difference.
In articulating discourses of difference that are going to separate not only Jews and Muslims and heretics and those suffering from leprosy from the rest of society.
That these are discourses of inclusion and exclusion, which become not only articulated in the south of France, but throughout the medieval West.
That Inquisition in a sense follows from the Lateran Council that condemns courtly love as heretical.
That follows from the Lateran Council that forces Jews to wear and identify a mark that will in a sense segregate them from society.
That Inquisition also follows from the Lateran Council that defines the leper as polluted and sinful.
And forces those suffering from leprosy to engage in a ritual, in a ceremony in which they are declared death to the world.
They are declared dead and they have to go and be buried in a sense that they become the other who cannot be touched, was polluted.
That the marks in their bodies is essentially a sign and symbol of the sinfulness.
So that in a sense Inquisition comes about as a very broad movement which leads to the separation of some people from others.
But that Inquisition also functions as a kind of social and political and economic barrier, a monitoring device.
That Inquisition is a way in which you can confiscate the properties of those who you believe to be heretical or who you believe to be your enemies.
And therefore the diocesan and papal Inquisition comes into being in the early 13th century as a way of monitoring and controlling populations.
But there is more to that.
The way in which Christianity had handled heresy before was by in a sense attempting to convince them.
This is what Saint Dominic does at the very beginning of the preaching in the Languedoc.
He tries to convince them. He tries to bring them back into the fold.
He tries in a sense to persuade them as to the truth of Christianity.
What we see now is that persuasion or segregation of the heretic from the Christian community, the banishing of the heretic from the Christian community,
is now replaced by physical forms of punishment, torture burning at the stake.
Now please understand, torture is as old as history.
And torture has been practiced in Western Europe all throughout this history.
There is torture in the Middle Ages as there was torture in the Roman world.
It is a proper and legal and accepted form of inquiry.
That is to say it is suspected that you will torture prisoners to elicit truth from them.
And burning at the stake was also known and occasionally from time to time.
There is people who are burned as a form of punishment.
But it was never, never before so prevalent, so widespread and so supported by the population as a whole.
What we are really talking about here is a dramatic mental shift.
An extraordinary transformation which leads people to embrace these public events.
These are spectacles of power in which someone is burned for being a heretic as an integral part of a civilization.
And this support, and we must call it that, it is support from below for these kinds of tortures and punishment.
Reveals the way in which the mass of the population, led by mendicants, in a sense embraces these spectacles
as the appropriate form to deal with those who are different from you.
Which is what lead historians such as R.I. Moore, or even someone like Carlo Ginsberg
in the introduction to his work, Ecstasy, to describe this as the rise of persecuting societies.
It is not as if there have not been persecutions before. Of course there have been.
But it is that now we have the development of a persecuting mentality
in which the budding national identities are being articulated through the persecutions of those who are different
and who can be exemplary punished in front of everyone.
And that it is a way in which you bind the community in the capture, torture and execution of someone
who by his, his or her deeds, by his betrayal of orthodoxy
is in a sense damaging the very lifeline of Christendom.
You have to understand what is at work here.
It is the belief that a heretic or a witch or a leper or a Jew or a Muslim
or later on all women are people who are engaged in a willful attack against Christianity, against the Christian world.
And that their execution, their punishment, their torture is a way in which you rally around all the people
and give them a form of a common identity.
So that it is perhaps incorrect to place the beginnings of persecuting societies on this particular age
and some of the historians, David Nirenberg among them in communities of violence have argued the contrary
that each persecutory stage in our long trajectory as Westerners has to be placed within a specific local context
within the moment, the locality, the geography.
But even if that is so, even if there is not a teleology of violence leading inexorably to the horrors of the 20th century
even if that is so, it is very clear as well that there is something that changes dramatically in the 13th century
in the way in which people think of themselves and think of those who are not like them within their own societies
and that the inquisition is the instrument of the church and of the estate in a sense to ferret out, to identify
and to bring to trial and to punish and to execute those who in a sense have failed to meet a certain criteria
of orthodoxy, of religiosity, of behavior.
So in a sense what we have here is a dramatic shift, a tremendous sea change
in the way in which Christianity deals with dissent, in the way in which Christianity deals with plurality in its midst.
Now what about this inquisition? How is it organized? How it deals with people that it persecutes?
I want to point out to you first and foremost that as dark as I have painted here the inquisition,
inquisitors in the 13th century or in the late 15th in Spain, a different kind of inquisition which we call the Spanish inquisition
are babes in the woods compared to the horrors that would be perpetrated in the early modern period.
Wait until we get to the witch craze in these lectures and you shall see and that the witch craze or the inquisition
are babes in the woods when we compare them to the kind of persecutory techniques of our previous century,
of the beloved 20th century which is probably the most horrible century in the history of the world.
Talk about the terror of history, think about the 20th century, it's one genocide after another,
one after another through the entire century so that in many respects the inquisition,
the number of people who actually are physically killed by the inquisition is relatively small
when you compare it to other circumstances, to other places, to other periods.
Probably in the Languedoc most of the people who are found guilty of heresy and are quote-unquote executed
are people who either have fled and run for their lives or who were already dead
but who nevertheless the inquisition brings to trials even though they might be dead or even they might have fled
and have a trial for them and then when they are not they are physically present will burn them in effigy
or sometimes take the bones from the earth, from the graves, the bodies from the graves
and they will be ceremonially and ritualistically burned as an example to others.
Why would the inquisition do this? For two reasons, one because power is articulated in this theatrical,
the theatres of power, the theatres of torture and execution
because you in a sense are providing a lesson to others as to the power of this institution
that can reach out after death and in a sense ceremonially and ritualistically burn you at the stake
and two because doing that it allows inquisitors and French royal officials now moving in greater numbers into the south
to in a sense claim and confiscate your property.
And one of my students have been working on confiscations of property
and you could see how greater states and domains are built on the confiscation of the properties of heretics.
This is a way in which we in a sense get to them economically.
Inquisition works very simply and I think it's a good moment for us to learn how the inquisition works
because we are going to find them at work interviewing benedantes in the Friuli or witches in Germany
so that we know how it works.
So the inquisition works very simply.
You are accused by someone of being a heretic.
You, the inquisitions are always in secret.
You never confront those who accuse you.
But you can make a list of all your enemies and if the people who have accused you are among your enemies
then you, the accusation is not taken into consideration.
You are brought in front of the inquisition.
You are questioned.
You are expected to give the right answer and we know what the right answer is.
I am guilty.
That's the right answer because it's very difficult to prove your innocence in such systems
and in some respects the kind of questionings that go on to this very day throughout the world
in coercive police states or political systems is not very different.
We assume all together that you are guilty.
That's why you are here in front of us and since we assume you are guilty anyway
then what we want you to do is to make it easy on us and on yourself and confess
and we will get that truth from you any way we can.
We will break your arms.
We will break your fingers.
We will torture you which is the most legal and acceptable way of handling it.
Confessions on the torture are not valid.
So we want you to recover and tell us out of your free will that you are guilty
and if you do that and if you are decent enough to confess that you are guilty
then we are going to let you go.
We are going to forgive you the first time because we are Christians here
and then we are going to let you go.
But of course we are not really letting you go are we?
We are not letting you go because by having come to the attention of inquisition
we are already marking you as someone who is suspicious within the community.
By marking you we are already giving notice to your community
that you stand as it were as a traitor to that community and to Christendom.
And by accepting your guilt and accepting your confession
we are also making sure that the next time you relapse
the next time we catch you going back to the kind of things you confess to
you are a relapsed heretic.
Now you die.
So in a sense it is a kind of world and system
in which very little leeway is given to you
which is why the inquisition works very well
as a kind of deterrent to certain actions
as a way in which you begin to monitor your actions
and your behavior and your language
so that you can never really be truly accused of saying things
which is why when we look into the future
as someone like Dominico Scandela called Menocchio
the man that Carlo Ginsberg examines in the cheese on the wombs
having a free mouth is very dangerous in this society
because people listen and people will essentially confess you
but I want to say to you as well
that although the inquisition in the Languedoc
faced tremendous oppositions from Cathars
a popular heresy in the area
overall throughout Europe the inquisition
had great support from the mass of the people
because the number of people who are brought in from the inquisition
are very small
a very small percentage of the population as a whole
and for the population as a whole
into the early modern period
the inquisition is one of those institutions
that guarantees orthodoxy
that a great deal of the phenomenon that I have described here
of this exclusionary discourses
is also part of the processes by which
these people gain an identity
and therefore they support the mechanisms
that lead to this kind of exclusion
and use and the finding of conspiracies
and the construction of otherness and so on
so in that sense this is a watershed development
now in the last part of the lecture
I want to turn to another topic
this is a heresy which again
heresy named by the enemies as heresy
a constructed heresy
which we call the heresy of a free spirit
which in a sense is found in the very late 13th century
and in the 14th century
and which emerges in some respects
out of the prohibitions of the Lateran Council
of the new attitude of the Church
which forbids in 1215
the organization of new religious orders
a way in which people sought to express
and to articulate the new spirituality
of the late Middle Ages
what art?
who are these people whom we call the free spirit?
Norman Corning his great book calls them
a moral superman
what we get is also the kind of descriptions
that come from the enemies
they are accused of pantheism
of believing that God is everywhere
they are accused properly
not of pantheism but of autotheism
that is to say to believe that they themselves
are God
and anti-nominianism
that is to say that the soul becomes one with God
and in becoming one with God
one is no longer bound by moral law
that whatever you do is sacred
and therefore the heresy of the free spirit
is associated in the mind of the enemies
in the people who persecute them
is the bringing together of two important themes
on the one hand heresy
on the other one fornication
and so the stories we hear about
the heretics of the free spirit
are very racy indeed
the statements we hear the free spirit
is guilty of
is the kinds of things that
it's like reading a type-loid
newspaper in your
shopping malls or in the shopping center
when you go to the market
and you have the
the inquirer or the son or whatever they are called
and nobody of course ever buys these magazines
for all I know so I don't know how they live
but everybody reads them as they wait to pay
for their groceries in the store
and they always have these incredibly racist stories
which are on the edge of prudency
and so on and so we have these stories as well
and what we are talking about here
is something that is almost an archetype
the preacher, the religious figure
who is also lecherous and sexually active
the preacher who tells you
that you should lead this great life
and then he is found in some corner
engaged in the Elmer Gentries
the con man
so it is told of the story of a begat
and I will talk about the begats and the beguins
in connection with the free spirit
it's a begat in Constance who is walking on the road
and he meets three women
and the three women ask him
please explain to us holy man what is the trinity
now I am quoting
so please don't be angry with me for these stories
and the begat throws them into the ground
and ties them up
and rapes them
and he says that's the trinity
or that they will argue
that having sexual intercourse on the altar
was the equivalent of transubstantiation
or the case of someone who comes through the window
and whisper in the ears of a sleeping woman
I am the holy spirit come to impregnate you
with the savior
essentially what you could see is that these stories
are told not by the free spirit itself
but by the enemies of the free spirit
are really stories which teach us
which serves to us as lenses
about the mentality of the age
one that these people who claim to be so religious
are clearly people who are engaged in fornication
two the way in which women are depicted
and represented in these stories
which is women always as their victims
or the easy targets
for the corrupt and for the evil man
we shall see a replay of this
when we look at the wish-craze
and three the way in which you represent the views of these people
as being unacceptable in your society
these stories are so good because of course
these stories play
people are attracted by these kinds of stories
or by hearing about the promiscuous Adamites
and other people who are associated with the free spirit
people who dance naked in the woods
we're going to find this again when we talk about the wish-craze
or a story which is told to us by a chronicler
John of Winterthur
who says that he has seen
he tells us he has seen the Luciferians
the worshipers of the devil
gathering into a clearing in the woods all naked
and then grasshoppers jump into the mouth
and they go into Francis
and they engage in this promiscuous kind of communal sex
we're going to hear these stories again
these stories have a permanence
the accusations of sodomy
or fornications are part and parcel
but who are the free spirits?
truly, who are they?
we know who they are
they are the people we call beguins and beguards
they are the people who
after 1315
after 1215
could not enter religious orders
they are the people who are meddling swords
they are people who are literate
they are women
these are the people who join together in houses
and lead a spiritual life
religious life
these are women who do not follow the rule of men
and who go to church and who lead pious life
and who become a thorn on the side of the church
because they are an example
in the 14th century of what the church is not
and so in a sense
these beguins and beguards
the secular people
leading a kind of a spiritual life
which is very common to the late Middle Ages
people who in a sense have broken all together
from the world of the church
they have not broken from the world of the church
they are pious Christians
but they are no longer under the control
of the established church
they have not joined regular orders
they have not entered religious orders
they practice a secular kind of religion
which is very peculiar to the late Middle Ages
and they have the leaders
someone like Margarit Porret
a beguin from the hen old
between 1296 and 1306
wrote a book
The Mirror of Simple Souls
60,000 words
a very long book
a dialogue between love and reason
which shows the seven stages of grace
leading to the union of the soul
something that you could do
a woman without a spiritual director
who is a male outside of the church
who can engage in the language of mystics
and who is at the end executed in Paris
and condemned as a heretic
executed publicly in Paris
with one of her followers
who calls himself the Angel of Philadelphia
you could see the kind of
effervescence that exists in this world
where heretics in a sense
think of themselves not as heretics
but as the true orthodox
following closely on the teachings of Christ
Thank you
