Lecture 12, The Millennium in the 16th Century
Welcome to Lecture 12. In Lecture 11 I discussed the Inquisition and the way in which otherness
was created in the early 13th century and we ended the lecture with the heresy of the
free spirit. Today we turn to a very different topic all together. I want to look at today
at millenarian movements in early 16th century Germany and specifically at the great German
peasant uprising of 1525. And what I would like to do is, as I have been doing throughout
all these lectures, is to put this phenomena within a specific social, economic and cultural
context and in this case, in this particular case, in a religious context. One of the things
that I am going to try to deal with in this lecture and later on when I talk about the
wish-craze is to look at the linking of religion and in this case millenarian beliefs with
political agitation and the kind of results that are brought out because of this. When
we get to Germany in the early 16th century we see also very important economic and social
changes. There is growing pressure on the peasantry, the kind of destruction or should
we say the evolution of the village community, which I discussed very briefly in lectures
two and three. Now come to fruition in the early 16th century. There is growing social
distinctions within the village, there is growing pressure upon the land and there is
a movement of enclosure which in a sense sends the peasants out of the land or which makes
the peasants who until then had access to the commons, had some kind of property in
which they could cultivate certain of the producers and grain and now they are becoming
landless peasants, that is to say members of a kind of agrarian proletariat. The enclosure
movement which is of course found also in England and in other parts of Europe as well
is one that puts a great deal of burden, a great deal of pressure on the peasantry. Together
with that there is a kind of an economic crisis that makes the lords squeeze the peasants
harder for income. That is to say the lords are caught into a changing economic conditions
and one of the things they try to do is to impose greater financial burdens on the peasantry.
So in a sense there is all kinds of transformations that are taking place in Germany which are
of great importance in serving as context not only for the peasant uprising but also
for the great German reformation. The other important aspect of course is a religious
change and that is ushered in by Martin Luther who in a sense transformed the entire world
of Europe in the early 16th century. I cannot even begin to emphasize the importance of
the reformation in a sense unleashing. It is a great watermark that unleashes all kinds
of social and economic and cultural changes and you have to see the German peasant uprising
and the radical and abaptist beliefs, the kind of millenarian expectations of these
peasants within the context of the reformation. What is the reformation and who was Martin
Luther? Martin Luther was born in 1483 in Saxony. He was essentially destined for a
life as a jurist, as a lawyer, one later in life when he was in his late teens. He was
caught in a lightning storm in an open field. He was terrorized and terrified by this. He
promised to become a monk if he would survive. This took place in 1505 and he joined the
Augustinian order. It is very significant that he joined the Augustinian order because
of course this is an order based upon the teachings of Augustin of Hippo who emphasized
predestination over free will. He came to in a sense through a series of personal crises,
the great crisis in the choir. He came to questions the beliefs of the Catholic church.
The reformation was not about the selling of indulgences. It was not about the power
of Rome. The great Protestant reformation, which is a veritable revolution, was about
all the things. About a way of conceiving religion, of conceiving the church very differently
from the way in which the church was in the early 16th century. In the early 16th century
the Catholic church had become extraordinarily corrupt. There is a great deal of movement
within the church itself for reformation, that is to say for a reform of a church. It
is emblematic of this church of the early 16th century, is the great power of the popes
in Rome, the great luxury of the palaces, the patronage of the arts, their involvement
in the material world. But it is not just that that Luther combats in his 95th thesis
or in his later pronouncements. Luther has a very different way of looking at Christianity.
This is not a lecture about Luther so I will not essentially spend a great deal of time
talking to you about these things. But I want to emphasize a few points. One, the emphasis
of Luther on the priesthood of all believers. Meaning by this, that every Christian was
to read the scriptures in self or herself and determine essentially what was the truth
in the scriptures. In a sense the priesthood of all believers removed the priest, priesthood
clergymen as intermediaries between the sacred and humans. All Christians, all believers
are to in a sense take the scriptures into their hands, read it and they are for interpreted
according to their conscience. This is a revolutionary idea which in a sense is a way in which Luther
believed he was returning to the very early and pristine church of the first two centuries
of Christianity. Luther also emphasized the importance of reading the Bible and they afford
one of the things that he undertakes right away was a translation of the Bible into German
which becomes in fact a literary language because of Luther's translation and this translation
makes the Bible available to all the believers in the vernacular and forces them essentially
to read. Luther also denies the efficacy and importance of the sacraments. Of the seven
sacraments which have been seen by the Catholic Church as the ways leading to salvation, Luther
retains only two. First baptism and second communion but communion now for Luther does
not involve transubstantiation. This is a tremendous break because it is a break against
the dogma of the church and we have learned in the previous lectures about heresy and
what dogmas are and this is essentially saying that what happens when the priest elevates
or when the pastor elevates the host is not that it becomes the flesh of Christ and that
the wine does not become the blood of Christ but that this is a symbolic remembrance of
the Last Supper in Jesus' last days on earth. So in a sense the priesthood of all believers,
the abolition of sacraments, the fact that Luther himself marries, the ending of priestly
celibacy, the attack against transubstantiation and far more important the idea that we are
saved not by good deeds but by faith alone or by faith and good deeds which is the possession
of the Catholic Church but that in fact no one deserves to be saved, that it is God in
His great wisdom that has chosen to save some people and not others, that in a sense although
Luther will not push, will not emphasize predestination as much as Calvin will do, nonetheless Luther
will argue that we are saved only to the grace of God, not by good deeds, not necessarily
by faith, that God has decided before the beginnings of time who will be saved and who
will be damned. Clearly this is a tremendous break, this is a theological break not just
on the questions of indulgences and German money going all the way to Rome but this is
a theological break with the basic tenets, the basic dogmas of the Catholic Church. Complicating
the situation is the fact that in 1519, in 1520, the young king of the Iberian kingdoms,
the young king of Spain Charles I becomes Holy Roman Emperor as Charles V and he throws
something into the political equation. Charles V is a man who unlike all previous emperors
of the so-called Holy Roman Empire has behind him a great deal of power, he has not only
the fable Castilian armies which by the 1520s are the best armies in Europe, he also has
after 1521 the extraordinary resources of the New World, all the bullion, the gold but
mostly the silver from Guanajuato and Potosi, therefore he is a political player in ways
in which no other emperor before him has been, he has a great deal of power and he can exert
his authority in Germany in ways in which no one else has done until now. This raises
all kinds of questions which also explains why the German princes, many German princes
supported Luther in his conflict against the Catholic Church. That is to say religion here
as we shall see later on in many other cases offers to these German princes a legitimate
way of opposing the power of the emperor. It allows them on matters of faith, of matters
of belief, of matters of principle to break the loyalty oath, to break the oath of filter
to the emperor and to seek another way to claim independence from the political power
of the king of Spain of the New Holy Roman Emperor which is why Luther survives politically.
He is able to withstand the power of the emperor and the power of the church because
he counts not only with the support of a good number of people in Germany who in fact embrace
in a kind of devouted manner the new religion but he also has the political support and
the armies of the princes to back him up in this struggle against the Pope in Rome. This
is the context. This is the beginning for the radicalization of peasantry in early 1520s
Germany and for in a sense the kind of struggles that ensue in the next 10-15 years. All tight
end with a kind of millenarian expectations which sweep Germany and other parts of Europe
the sense that the end is at hand that here is the beginning of that thousand years when
satan will be chained in hell and there will be peace and prosperity all throughout the
earth. The brains behind should we say the ideologue of this peasant uprising is Thomas
Munzer who was born probably between 1488 and 1489. He also was a priest who was a saint
who was initially converted to the new Protestant denomination by Luther's preaching. He was
born in Stolberg and in the 1520s he joined Luther until he broke with Luther and he began
essentially to move to the left of Luther if we can say that to adopt a more radical
biblicism one in which was a literal reading of the Bible and began to preach a kind of
millenarian religion, a kind of expectations of the coming to the end of the world which
found a very receptive ear among the peasantry. So on the one hand we have the peasants who
have become essentially disenchanted, disfranchised, were being squeezed by the lords. On the other
hand we have this very radical biblicism which has been preached by Munzer and other preachers
throughout Germany and it is Munzer who begins to encourage violence and rebellion as a way
of ushering in this new world of the millenium, this new millenarian world and there is together
with this continuous agitation of the peasantry, Munzer's preaching and Munzer's preaching
is indeed quite radical. First of all he believes in the direct revelation that is to say that
God has revealed to him the new truth. He believes in the millenium that the millenium
is at hand. He also believes in something which is called psychopathicism that is to
say that the soul falls asleep after death. He rejects infant baptism. You are only to
be baptized when you become an adult and in the Prague manifesto he advances very clear
ideas about how this world is going to be in a sense organized. He believes in direct
revelations to dreams and visions. He believes in a spirit possession and he tells the flocks,
he tells his flock, look at the world of the early 16th century. Around this period
around 1525 the Ottoman Turks are reaching the gates of Vienna. The Ottoman Turks in
the early 16th century are seen as the great menace as a sign of the end of times and therefore
he predicts that the end is at hand and in his speeches and in his sermons he attacks
directly those in power. I want to quote from Munster here because it gives you a sense
of the radicalism of this man. Harvest time, he said, is here. So God himself has hired
me for his harvest. I have sharpened my sight for my thoughts are most strongly fixed on
the truth. On my lips, hands, skin, hair, soul, body, life, curse, the omnipotence.
And believers standing in front of the Duke of Saxony, he says, the world now is nothing
but the devil's empire. Priests, monks and godless rulers must all perish. The ungodly,
Munster will say, have no right to live. In a sense what he is calling for is the killing
and destruction of the rich, of those in power, of those who do not, in a sense, follow
his radical vision of what Christianity ought to be. Well, the peasants heard this because
a great deal of his preaching coincided in a sense with a kind of folk millenarian leveling
feeling that there was there present in Europe, which was widespread throughout Western Europe,
which we find in the peasant uprisings of the 14th century, which we find in the preaching
of someone like John Ball in England in 1381, when Adam and Eve were in paradise, one digging
the earth and the other one is spinning wool. Who was then the gentleman if we are all the
children of one couple of Adam and Eve? How is it that there are now noblemen and great
ecclesiastical dignities? And then on the other hand, the poor peasants living lives
of complete and total misery. And therefore on 23rd June, not a coincidence, it's the
Feast of St. John the Baptist, a very important day as we shall see in which great fires are
built throughout Europe. On 23rd June of 1525, also a year which was expected to be a year
of great trouble, as we shall see later when we look at astrology because it was a great
conjunction of the planets. The peasants began a wave of violence. They began to attack
monasteries. They began to attack Jews, which was also something that Munzer had advocated.
They began to burn castles, to burn documents. They formed themselves into an army and in
a sense challenged the power of the aristocracy, challenged the power of the rich and of the
ungodly. An aristocratic army was put together and attacked the peasants and they were defeated
in the field. And then the peasants organized on the, so we said on the ideological influence
of Munzer presented 12 articles, 12 demands to those in power. These demands were at the
beginning, should we say, not that radical. They wanted the right to elect their own pastors.
They wanted the right to elect their own religious leaders. They wanted access to the commons,
which shows to us the way in which the peasantry is in a sense caught up in a declining economic
situation. The rights to the commons, which was a very essence, the very heart and soul
of what peasant life was all about has been lost and they want, as in a sense, a return
to the past, a past in which they felt secure. But as they gain in power and as they begin
in a sense to feel that they are people who have to be counted with, they begin to claim
such things as the formation of a peasant parliament. That is to say, they wanted also
a chair in the politics of the realm. They wanted a chair in the politics of Germany.
I don't have to tell you that the end of the story here is, of course, the same ending
of everywhere else. That is to say, the aristocrats feel threatened. They organize themselves far
better. They organize and put together a very large army. They meet in the field of battles
and there they destroy the peasants. For the next 10 years, those who were part of the
uprising and we now know a great deal about the social composition of those who participated
and they were not necessarily the very poor. They were also people who were caught in between
in a changing economic circumstances. People who had something, but who were afraid of
losing that. We know that almost 100,000 peasants were either killed in battle or persecuted
afterwards and destroyed. There is a painting by Dürer. There is an engraving by Dürer which
shows essentially an ox which is so emblematic of the life of the peasant, the docile beast
of burden, being a slaughter and the peasant being a slaughter together with the ox as
a symbol of the defeat of the peasantry and the victory of the nobility. Luther himself
wrote a ferocious pamphlet against the rebellious peasant entitled against the thievish murderous
gangs of the peasants. For Luther knew where his bread was bought in this issue. He sided
with the princes against the German peasants in revolt. Munzer died in 1525, one of the
victims of this rebellion, one of the victims of the reprisals of the nobility. I would
like to add a bit sort of note here, a footnote to this, which is that in modern historiography
Thomas Munzer has been seen by Marxist historian as a kind of proto-Marsist, someone who argued
for the kind of leveling of society, for the kind of communism and in truth he did so
as will do many of the people who will prosper in Germany in the next 30 years, where you
will have this, to we say, outburst of millenarian ideas, cities like the city of Munster, which
would become a kind of city, the heavenly city, descended upon earth, but he was not
a Marxist in the sense that a great deal of his ideas really emerged from a deep religiosity,
from a radical biblicalism, from the clear reading of the Bible. These are the radical
Anabaptists and the echoes of the rebellions and the echoes of the beliefs are still in
a sense resound or sound all around us. What I want to do here in the last few minutes
that I have left is to see the history of this millenarian politics, a political milleniarism
that in a sense prosper in a place like England in 1640, a hundred years more or less after
the radical Anabaptists uprising, England is also a place where many of the combinations
between politics and religion come to fruition in the so-called Puritan revolution, except
that in England, of course, it succeeds. In 1640, the Puritans in a sense rose up against
constituted power against Charles I, and after a civil war between the supporters of
these more radical Protestant beliefs and the crown and the aristocracy, and here again
is the social and economic element, they will defeat the forces of the crown, they will
defeat the royalists, and eventually take the king prisoner and execute him, because
what is taking place in Europe in the 1640s, and not only in England but all the parts
of Europe as well, is the realization that the making and the organization of the rational
state, that is to say, the unimpeded progress and evolution of the nation-state which we
saw at the very beginnings in the late 15th century, that monopoly of legalized violence
brings about a reaction, and this is the kind of reaction which is, in a sense, prompted
by the construction of the Christian self, by the idea that the individual, in a sense,
has a tie with Christianity and with God, which is independent from organized religion
and so on, this is what the Protestant Reformation did, bring Christianity to the individual, and
the rise of the Christian self, which is, in theory, apolitical, that is to say, that
is not part of the political world, nonetheless, lead to this reaction against the secularity
of the world, the secularity of power, it is the thought expressed in the 17th century
by English radicals, that there is no king but king Jesus, so that in a sense, the Puritans
will deny the secularity of royalty, will in fact go as far as executing the king, because
for them the only true king in this godless world in which they are moving into in the
17th century, the only true king is King Jesus, but the Protestant Reformation, I'm sorry,
the Puritan Revolution of the 1640 also, in a sense, lead to even more radical forms
of political religiosity, that is to say, in the 1640s and 1650s, England is crawling with
people who have views which are only radical in terms of religion, which are radical in
terms of politics as well, the levelers who want to level the world and make it everyone
equal, a kind of primitive communism, the diggers led by Gerard Winstanley, who in a sense
preached of returning to the land and all working the land in common, the abolition of private
property, the fifth monarchy man, who in a sense talk about a monarchy of Christ on earth,
the kind of the heavenly city, the diggers, the levelers, the fifth monarchy man, the quakers
who are at the beginning, even though later on they become a very different kind of
religious sect, a kind of very radical form of biblicalism and political participation.
So in a sense, all this agitation in England lasts for 20 years until the restoration of
the monarchy on the Charles II, and in many respects all those ideas, all those very radical
forms of biblicalism and so on, are brought to the United States. You have to realize that
the first people who settle, they're not east of the United States, the people who settle
in Massachusetts colony and in Connecticut and so on, are in a sense religious dissenters,
they belong and they emerge in some respects from that context, not only of the radical
anabaptists, of which of course the Amish in Pennsylvania are sort of distant descendants,
but also from the cult room of agitation of England in the 1640s, and that they lead
in fact to a kind of radical interpretation of what politics is, and a kind of millenarian
ideas about not only the place in society, but of America itself, so that Puritan society
in Massachusetts Bay Colony, or the early pilgrims, which are part of another radical
religious movement, and so on, see America as a kind of city upon the hill, that is to say
the dissent of the heavenly Jerusalem on earth, and the religiosity, which is in fact quite
intolerant of all the forms of religious expressions, is linked together with a sense of politics,
of the politics of the millenium, of the politics of America as a kind of utopian place. This
is something that resonates throughout the history of this country, which is voiced in
the period just before the American Revolution, with someone like Henri de Crevecoire, a Frenchman
living in this country, could speak of America as an asylum for the poor, a place where people
will flee, and it is indeed present to this very day in the politics of this country, where
religion, in fact, has a tremendous and plays an important role in the making of political life.
So we should not be, in a sense, surprised by the kinds of pronouncements, by the kind of
rhetorical devices that are used in political discourse in this country, because in fact they
are linked and tied to the world of 400 years ago, of 300 years ago, to that kind of radical
puritanical ideals of the world as one in which there will be no king but King Jesus.
So it is not surprising that the present attorney general of this country, speaking at a university,
not very far from the studio from which I am giving this lecture, will in fact quote this
sentence, perhaps without knowing that it was said first, not by his preacher in his hometown,
but by someone essentially opposing and resisting authority in the 17th century.
Thank you.
