These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled The Terror of History, Mystics, Heretics and Witches in the Western
Tradition, Part 2, Lecture 13, Jewish Millennial Expectations.
Welcome to Lecture 13.
In Lecture 12, we look at the radical Anabaptist Revolution, the German peasant uprising, and
then we trace very briefly the life, should we say, the discourse of radical biblical
politics, not only in England in the 1640s, but also in the United States to this very
day.
I want to turn to a very different topic altogether.
This is our last lecture on the millennium before we enter into a discussion of the mysteries
of the Renaissance and the witch craze.
This last lecture is about Jewish messianic beliefs, the idea of the Messiah, the millenarian
ideas among the Jews, in the late 15th and 16th and 17th century.
Jewish messianic beliefs are very ancient indeed.
They go back to the oracles of Balaam, the struggle of Israel against his enemies, the
destruction of Gog and Magog.
In fact, the very idea of the millenium is one that has its roots in Jewish history and
in Jewish practices.
There is, through the history of Judaism, through the history of the Jews in the diaspora
after the destruction of the temple, continuous appearances and reappearances of false messiahs.
It is a very long history and impossible to trace in a 30 minute lecture.
So what I want to do is to concentrate on two very specific people, one in the very
early 16th century and the other one in the period after, to we say, 1620s.
And I want to provide a kind of context, because both of these figures, Isaac Abrabanel, the
first one, and Sabatai Sevid, the second one, are also part of a great phenomenon, which
is of course the spread of Sephardic Jews, people from Sepharad, from Spain, into the
wider Mediterranean world after 1492.
What is the context for the teachings and sayings and events of these two people?
Of course, the great context is Jewish life in Iberia.
The Jews have lived in Iberia for almost 1400 years.
Since the beginning of the Christian era, they have prospered there and they have suffered
persecution on the both Islam and Christianity.
But nothing had prepared the Jews for the events that will transpire around 1391.
In 1391, there was widespread violence, pogroms against Jews and thousands upon thousands
of Jews.
Some historians have calculated that as many as 60 percent of the entire Jewish population
of Iberia, especially of the kingdoms of Castile and of the crown of Aragon, converted
to Christianity.
Many of these conversions were, of course, prompted by violence, where it ascends a choice
between life and death.
Other conversions, however, were voluntary.
In 1390, to give one example of this, the great rabbi of Burgos, under no pressure whatsoever,
converted to Christianity, went to Paris, took a degree in theology, came back to the
city of Burgos and became the bishop of the city.
His children, whom he had before he became a Christian, all became bishops and one of
the most important families in Castile.
But nonetheless, in 1391, for whatever reason, you have essentially this unbelievable destruction
of Jewish life in Castile and in the crown of Aragon.
As many as I said, as 60 percent of the Jewish population converted to Christianity.
In the disputation of Tortosa, which took place between 1412 and 1413, another wave
of conversions followed as well, so that after the 1410s, 1420s, in most of the kingdoms
of Iberia, most of the Christian kingdoms of Iberia, you have two very different populations.
On the one hand, Jews who have refused to convert to Christianity and who, as a result
of the great difficulties they face, economic and social, because they are displaced from
the great cities, because they lose a great deal of their power in financial affairs,
because they are marginalized, completely marginalized, after the 1420s.
Jews who have returned to the faith, who have embraced stronger, with the strongest seal
their ancestral beliefs, on the one hand, and then the great body of conversors on the
other.
I would like to point out too that, of course, we must make distinctions here between conversors.
That is to say, they are conversors who are of great rank, and they move crossover into
Christian society, they become members of the nobility, they marry noblemen, they become
great lords, they become dignitaries of the church.
They have no problem whatsoever.
There is another group of conversors, the middling sorts, who also cross over with our great
difficulties.
They essentially begin to monopolize municipal offices, they monopolize ecclesiastical offices,
and they also do not face a great deal of problems.
And then there is a mass of conversors who are artisans, petty merchants, and so on,
who remain in the same neighborhoods, who in a sense marry endogamously, they marry within
each other, within their own circles, and who still practices some vestiges of the religion.
We could never really know what, in a sense, was the true belief of conversors, because
we do not have the direct evidence, the personal and private evidence, which will tell us exactly
what the religious beliefs were like.
What we do know, however, is that in the period between 1410 and 1492, when we have the edict
of expulsion of the Jews, there is a period of great confusion.
In many cases, conversors did not know themselves, whether they were Christians, or whether they
were Jews, some practiced Judaism in secret, or some form of Judaism, because in a sense,
the relations have been severed with the Jewish communities, others essentially were
Christians, but not great Christians at all.
One of the reasons that have been given by Jewish historians of why this wave of conversions
is the fact that many of the Jews, especially the elite among the Jews, had embraced philosophical
doctrines, have embraced the works of people, radical commentators of Aristotle, such as
Averroes, they have been so swayed, we say, so enticed by philosophy that they, in a sense,
have ceased to be believers.
The other, of course, argument that has been made is that they have been so successful
in assimilating within Spanish society that, in a sense, they have lost the sense of marginality.
This is not to say that Jews were not persecuted, or indeed put into situations which placed
them on the margins of society, but that well-to-do Jews spoke the language of the country, they
dressed like the people on top, they lived in whatever neighborhood they desired, if
they could afford it, in a sense that they play an important role in the life of this
Spanish world.
In 1480, the Inquisition comes into being, and the Inquisition is directed against those
conversors who are thought to be still practicing some form of Judaism.
The Inquisition, which in a sense had a great deal of support from the mass of the people
in Spain, was an instrument to ferret out those people who were suspected of not being
true and good Christians, and it had drastic consequences for many conversors.
The Jews, I want to emphasize this, are not under the jurisdiction of the Inquisition,
only conversors who are thought of as heretic.
But between 1480 and 1492, when the edict of expulsion was written, it is a period of
uncertainty in which many conversors, in fact, flee Spain, go abroad, because they don't
feel secure, where many are brought to trial and executed, and again, executions or trials
by the Inquisition are not a way in which we can determine exactly what the relation
of these people were, because many refuse to accept the charges, many refute the charges,
they die as Christians, some others, of course, accept the fact that they have been practicing
Judaism and died as Jews.
It's a very difficult historical question to determine what these people were.
In 1492, in March 31st of 1492, the Catholic Monarchs, 39 and Isabella, passed an edict
in which the Jews are given three months in which either to convert or to leave the country.
Essentially, Henry Cayman, in a very famous article published around 10 years ago, on
the expulsion of the Jews, has argued that this edict was an edict of conversion, that
it was not an edict of expulsion.
But it was prompted, and again, the reasons why this came about, whether it was a sense
that Spain wanted to become an orthodox and monolithic, I mean, homogeneous country, religiously,
or whether some conversors saw themselves threatened by the presence of Jews, or whether
it was an attempt to bring the Jews into Christianity.
For whatever reason, the fact of the matter is that it gave the Jews a very few choices.
One, of course, was to convert, and the other one was to leave.
We know, according to some new figures, that in 1492 there were around 80,000 Jews in
Iberia, or at least in Castile and in the crown of Aragon.
We know, according to Cayman, that 40,000 of them left, and 40 other thousand converted
to Christianity.
And we know that a good number of those who left in 1492 returned to Spain, returned to
Castile or to the crown of Aragon, and reclaimed their property after conversion to Christianity.
Regardless of what the number of conversors was, of those who converted and those who
left, 1492 was a catastrophic moment for the Jewish community of Iberia.
For them, it was bitter exile, and I want to tell you that the exile was bitter indeed.
It was an exile so bitter they fled either to Portugal or to Italy or to North Africa,
and from there, slowly, they filtered into the east, into the lands of the Ottoman Empire.
The loss of Seferat, a place where they have lived and prospered, where they have reached
incredible cultural heights, was a moment which was compared by many as the 9th of Ab,
as a destruction of the temple, one of those days of remembrance in which a whole life
and a whole culture came to an end.
And that you could see the divisions and the anxieties could be seen in the court itself,
depending upon some of the most important Jews of the land.
In fact, the two advisors to 39 and Isabella, the two richest and most influential Jews
in Iberia, Abraham Senior and Isaac Abrabanel, took very different courses.
Abraham Senior converted to Christianity and became a nobleman and one of the most influential
men in the kingdom.
Isaac Abrabanel, even though he was essentially tempted by the Catholic monarchs and offered
all kinds of positions and privileges, refused to accept these bribes and went into bitter
exile.
It is Isaac Abrabanel, the person that I want to talk about here very briefly.
He was born in 1437.
He was a man who played an important role in the finances of the kingdom, his family
farm taxes.
He was already preoccupied with millenarian ideas even before 1492.
And he wrote treatises which deals with the question of the millennium and the rehabilitation
of Israel.
This is part and parcel of the atmosphere that prevails in Castile in the late 15th
century, an idea which was all about the coming of a new age, of an idea which in Spanish
is referred as el encubierto, the hidden one, the fact that there is someone who we cannot
recognize now, but who is a man who is going to usher in a whole new age, a new age which
would be different altogether from the age that preceded, an age of peace and so on.
We know that he had double in the cabala, that he had some knowledge of cabala, and
of course cabala, mysticism specifically, the sohar, was also a Castilian product, had
been written in Castile in the late 13th century.
So born in 1437, in 1492, when he got into exile, he is already a man in his middling
years.
He will die in 1508, almost essentially some less than two decades after his exile from
Castile.
Isaac Abrabanel begins to think of himself as the Messiah, and he writes about this,
and he tells us how in a sense the end is going to be brought in, how it's going to
happen.
He begins by describing to us the reasons why this is going to take place.
He also emphasizes that Jews, if they want to usher in the Messiah, if they want to create
the setting and the conditions that will lead to a messianic redemption, they must then move
away from reason.
They must go back to the Torah.
They must move away from Aristotelian rationality, from the commentaries of Averroes, which
have already corrupted the Jews in Spain, and they must embrace essentially the basic
tenets of Judaism.
He looks at history, since Judaism is such a historically dominated religion.
He looks at history and he looks at the seven ages of mankind, and he looks at the wise
and way of thoughts of redemption, and he sees that the world is coming to a moment,
it's coming to a head.
At the beginning of the 16th century, he sees the world moving precipitously to a great
encounter, to a great battle between the Turks on the one hand, Islam on the one hand, and
the Christians who identified with Rome, Rome on the one hand, and the sublime port that
is to say Istanbul on the other, and these two great powers will meet and destroy each
other.
And from the destruction essentially, Israel will emerge as the winner, as the only true
power that exists.
But in order to usher this, he adopts a Kabbalistic idea, one that is present not only in the
Kabbalah and the Soha, but also in the Torah, Teshuba, repentance, that is to say, what
he's asking the Jews not only to cease the political moments, to move away from reason,
but to engage into a life, a religious life, of repentance that will usher the Messiah
in, and of course he is to be the Messiah.
The rivalry between Turks and Christians will lead to a conflagration at the end from which
there will be a restoration of Israel as a political entity.
So in a sense we have here a kind of Zionistic idea, the restoration of Israel not as a spiritual
idea, but as a political one, the Jews will go back to Palestine, will go back to Jerusalem,
and recreate the Kingdom of Jerusalem, but this Kingdom will be a messianic one, presided
by the Messiah.
Now it's not always clear in Judaism who the Messiah is, whether it is a human figure
who in a sense ushers in a new time, or where it is a divine intervention from above.
And so here are the ideas of Isaac Abrabanel, in 1508 of course he dies before any of this
can ever be put to fruition.
In the next century and a half, the Sephardic Jewish communities that populate Europe from
Amsterdam all the way to Palestine, all along the Mediterranean, in Rome and in Venice, in
North Africa, they are all convolved by continuous messianic agitations, the sense that this
man is the Messiah, and then of course is always discovered that he is nothing but a
false Messiah. This expectation which is in a sense, should we say, fed by the idea
that the destruction of Jewish life in Sephardic was such a dramatic moment, such a catastrophic
moment that only divine redemption can in a sense redress the great evils that had taken
place. So in a sense what we have here is a longing for a restoration of a different
kind of life, which comes out of the miseries of exile and exile that people keep into the
heads and into the culture for hundreds of years, so that into the 17th or 18th century
you could still go to Palestine and find people who have and carry in their pockets, or have
in a prominent place in their houses, the keys that open the houses which they once
owned, that ancestors owned in Iberia, a sense of the continuity of the life which is preserved
of course by the language, the spoken Castilian of the 16th century which turns slowly into
a different language which is now called Ladino. So in a sense, even though a century passes,
the idea does not die, remains very much alive, and it is within this context, within this
life that Shabbatai Sebi, one of those descendants of Sefarad, is born in Esmirna in the lands
of the Ottoman Empire in the 9th of Av, that is to say the day of the destruction of the
temple of the year 1625. There is a voluminous, huge biography of Shabbatai Sebi, a study
of his rule and of his life, written by the great 20th century Jewish scholar Gershom
Sholom. It is a massive and masterly work which of course I will do very little on or
to by discussing it in just a few minutes, but it is quite an extraordinary piece of
historical research, and he thought that Sholom argues that Shabbatai Sebi was essentially
probably someone who suffered from some kind of mental problems, kind of manic depressive,
but he could be also incredibly passive and be let by others. Nonetheless, by the 1648
or so, he begins to be revealed as the Messiah. Still as a young man, he begins to be thought
as the Messiah. We know that he studied Kabbalah, the mysterious doctrines which emanated from
the teachings of the Torah, but also from the Sohar, and we know that he finds someone
to in a sense provide for him the kind of propaganda machinery that will make him very
attractive to the mass of the Sephardic Jews who are seeking redemption, who are in a sense
hoping for someone to bring God back into the lives, to re-store for them Jewish life.
In 1665, under the continuous propaganda of Nathan of Gaza, Shabbatai Sebi becomes, to
we say, a worldwide phenomenon or a Mediterranean worldwide phenomenon among Sephardic Jews.
It is well-known and everybody understands and accepts that he is the long-awaited Messiah
and that he will lead the Jews out of slavery, out of bondage, out of exile, and restore
Jewish life for them. People begin to sell their properties. All throughout the diaspora
of the Sephardim, they begin to sell their properties and they begin to flock into Palestine,
expecting the moment. This is a movement of such dimension that Christian rulers and
even Ottoman rulers become preoccupied with the movements of Jews who begin to flee from
Amsterdam and from Italy and from North Africa and from the lands of the Ottoman Empire,
all flocking into Palestine to be their present in the moment in which Shabbatai Sebi finally
declares himself completely as the Messiah. In fact, it calls such attention to these
disturbances and so on that in 1666 he is imprisoned by the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire
in a tower on the east side of the Dardanelles. This tower becomes a beacon, a center, a focus
for Jews who continue to pour into the lands of the Ottoman Empire to be there and to in
a sense encircle this tower and wait for the divine intervention to free Shabbatai Sebi.
On the 16th September of 1666 he is brought in front of the Sultan. Shabbatai Sebi is
brought in front of the Sultan and there in front of the Sultan he converts to Islam.
You could imagine, you could in fact think of what this meant for the people who in a sense
have sold their properties and abandoned everything in the hope that this was the true Messiah
and afterwards he spends the rest of his lives in the care of the Ottoman Sublime port.
But it is very hard to allow a dream to die so that a new idea begins essentially throughout
the diaspora of the Sephardim that in many respects the Messiah must come as a Marrano.
That is to say that a Messiah must go and undergo the trials and tribulations of living
as a non-Jew before he can reveal himself as a Messiah. But in many respects the great
disasters that befell Judaism after the betrayal or after the conversion of Shabbatai Sebi
had repercussions because in a sense it leads to new forms of spirituality, to new forms
of religiosity which in a sense provide an alternative, a kind of different way of seeing
Judaism. In many respects the right of Hasidism has to be seen to some extent as that kind
of response to Messianic beliefs. They are moving away from the great idea that the Messiah
will come to the kind of sanctification of everyday life, to the kind of acceptance of
the world as it is, and the joy of that. And if one reads the poetry of the Baal Shem Tov,
the founder of Hasidism, or the little stories that are told by the Baal Shem Tov and then
collected and then printed and edited by Martin Buver in the 20th century, stories which
in many respects are not very different from those told in the little flowers of San Francisco
we discussed in an earlier lecture. You could see in a sense a move away from the importance
of one ought to be or soon to be Messiah to a very different kind of religiosity, one
that is ground in the sanctification of the routines of everyday life. What Shabbatai
Sebi and Hasidism and Isaac Abrabanel have all in common is in a sense the unique role
and place of Israel in human history. I want to also add to you that this millenarian
beliefs and so on are still alive and well. And if you read the newspapers or if you
go to New York and to go to Brooklyn, you will know that, for example, one of the Hasidic
sects, the Lubavishers, have divided, are really split because there are some people
who truly believe that the late Rabbi, the late leader of the Lubavishers, Rabbi Schneerson,
was a Messiah and there are people who actually wait outside his tomb, waiting for him to
emerge out of the tomb as a glorious Messiah. But the point that I was making before, which
I want to in a sense reiterate and re-estate here, which is that sense not only of the
messianic element within Judaism, but also, in a sense, that belief that Israel plays
a redemptive role in human history. If one reads something, a book such as a painful book,
The Last of the Jaws by Andres Schwartz Bath, which is about the Holocaust and the concentration
camps, and which is a bitter and powerful book, one sees how in Andres Schwartz Bath,
The Last of the Jaws is this idea, this concept within Judaism that they are men, they are
Jews, certain Jews, chosen by God to this task, not because they have chosen it themselves,
who carry on their shoulders the entire weight of the world, that they carry upon themselves
all the miseries and pain of the world, and that by doing so they keep the terror of history,
the chaos, the anarchy of the world at bay, by assuming and carrying upon themselves all
that is painful and evil, and that this is such a burden, but that they cannot refuse
it, they cannot do anything else. And so in that sense, I want to end this whole discussion
of millenarian and messianic movement before we move to very different things all together,
with a story, with a very beautiful story, a beautiful legend, which illustrates in a
sense a special role of Israel in human history, and which is told in Andres Schwartz Bath,
The Last of the Jaws. A king was once provoked to anger by his population, and this was the
day he entreated the prince to intercede in the behalf. When the prince had reconciled
his royal father, the people had hastened to the palace of the king to sing his praises.
Then exclaimed the king, Is it to me that you sing praises? To my son are praises due,
for were it not for him who entreated me, I would have laid waste the entire land. So
dost the verse, read, all nations, clap their hands, said the holy one, blessed be he. Is
it to me that you sing praises? You owe them to Israel, for were it not for Israel, this
world would not exist. Thank you.
