Lecture 14 The Mysteries of the Renaissance
Welcome to lecture 14. In lecture 13, we concluded the discussions of millennial movements.
We ended with Jewish messianic movements, and we look in brief detail to two messianic
figures. Here we make a complete shift. We move to very different matters. It's essentially
the course changes. There are three parts of this class. One, the mysticism and heresy.
Mysticism, then heresy, and millennial movements, and now we enter into the period of the mysteries
and of course we conclude with the wish-craze. I want to do this by emphasizing the aspects
in which we link high and low culture. Many of the things we are going to be discussing
in the next three lectures, or in the next two lectures, really deal with esoteric doctrines,
that is to say ideas and beliefs which we are only open to the very few. Then we move
to wish-craze, which is essentially a kind of popular belief, and one of the purposes
of this course is essentially to look at the link between the two. What I want to do here
in this lecture is to talk about the mysteries of the Renaissance, of the Italian Renaissance,
of Renaissance Europe, and the new awareness of deep time, and what that awareness of deep
time brought to the elite, or the learned elite on top of Renaissance Italy. The context
for this, of course, is the Italian Renaissance. It is that great movement that begins in the
middle of the 14th century and really reaches its high point around the late 15th century,
or the very early 15th century. Tragically, as the Renaissance reaches its high point
and begins to spread through the rest of Europe, Italy as a political entity comes to an end,
and I will talk a bit about that later on. The revival of learning in Italy is unique
because Italy itself was unique. That is to say that in some very deep sense, Italy was
never, quote unquote, medieval. If you travel to Italy to this very day, if you go not only
to the great cities of Italy, but if you go to the smaller towns, which are in many respects
far more attractive, no matter where you go, you will see the presence of the past all
around you, so that you don't go to Italy to look for Gothic cathedrals, except at Milan,
the Duomo, because in fact, the Italians were very, very well aware of a different kind
of architecture, which harken back to Rome, which in a sense, they kept always this continuous
link with Rome. We call it the Renaissance because the Italians themselves, Italian scholars
themselves, call it that. Renascita, a rebirth, and they saw themselves in a moment of historical
consciousness as in a sense being reborn, but what was being reborn was classical culture,
and they branded a period between the demise of classical civilization and their own time,
Mediubim, the Middle Ages, the time in between, and they look at that period incorrectly,
since I am a medievalist, I will add, as a period of barbarity, a period in which the
great civilizations of classical antiquities have in a sense been dismissed and sort of
deteriorated. Gothic itself is a term invented by Renaissance scholars, and it means Germanic,
barbaric, different from that sense of aesthetics which Italians had. This is quite ahistorical
for me to say, and I don't want to be quoted on this, but there is also to be said about the
climate of Italy and the sense of the quality of light, about the atmosphere and the climate
and the topography, because it is a place of extraordinary beauty, and places of extraordinary
beauty can also produce things which are also extraordinarily beauty. What I mean to say is
that the presence of the past, of the classical past in Italy, but also the context, the geographical
and climatic context in which this cultural movement took place, have a great deal to
do one with the other. We could actually place ourselves on a moment, select a man, Petrarch,
Francesco Petrarcha, in a great essay entitled on my own, on the people's errors, he tells
us about going up Mount Ventus to look at the view. This is the first literary evidence
we have of someone looking at a view and telling us in writing about it, and he carries with
him significantly enough a copy of Augustine of Hippos Confessions, and as he is on top
of the mountain overlooking the great panoramic view that he sees from there, he opens a book
at random, and there of course is a passage from Augustine that says, people go to the
side of the ocean to see the seas, and they go to the top of the mountains to see the
view, and they forget to look into the most wondrous of all things, they forget to look
into themselves, and that is in many respects characteristic of the Renaissance, that kind
of introspection in which Renaissance scholars and writers, Petrarch first of them, begin
to look into man, into man. So for Petrarch, it was not what scholars did, a scholastic
philosophy at the University of Paris, it was no metaphysics, it was not cosmology.
The proper study of man was essentially the humanities, which why we call this movement
humanism, rhetoric. So the great first, great master of the Renaissance, the great influence
is Cicero, the study of rhetorical devices, ethics, how men ought to behave, so that from
that building of the study of the humanities, and the turning their backs on Aristotle
and metaphysics, and cosmology, and all the kinds of philosophical preoccupations which
were at the center of learning at places like Paris, or Oxford and so on, Renaissance scholars
who are eminently secular, turn to a very different kind of learning, which is the learning
of humanities, is the learning of what makes man human. It begins with Petrarch, and it
continues. If one reads the great book by Jacob Buchhardt, which is now close to 150
years old, no more, 150 years old or more, published in 1860, and it's the civilization
of the Renaissance in Italy, one can see the unbelievable ways in which Buchhardt described
someone like Leon Battista Alberti, so significant, so emblematic of Renaissance, a man who writes
poetry, who is interested in architecture, who writes great treatises of architecture,
who is a great writer, who plays music, a man in a sense who is interested in all those
fields of knowledge that have to do with mankind itself, not with philosophical questions, which
in a sense separate man from the reality of his world. So in a sense, what we have here
is a very different way of conceiving the world, which is unique to Italy in the late 14th
and 15th century, which is manifested in the way in which there are organized political
life in Italy, a world because there is no Italy in the 14th and 15th century. What we
call Italy is a geographical term divided into warring, often warring, great political
units, Florence, Milan, Venice, Naples, the Kingdom of Naples, the Papal Estates, and
a myriad of other political units, Ferrara, Bologna, Mantua, all of them in conflict often
with each other, but all of them constructing the estate as it were, or as Buchhardt described
as the work of art, that is to say, made by the hands of man, something which is not
derived or in a sense descends out from heaven, but which is the world of the people who make
it, often tyrants who in a sense legitimize the rule by the patronage of the arts. So
politically we have the secularization of politics in Italy, the end result of which
of course is Machiavelli's The Prince, the divorcing of political life from the world
of Christianity. In art we have a different kind of art, it's not just that the Italians
knew how to paint by using perspective, it is that the selecting of certain, the choices
of certain topics, the way in which they represent humanity is very different, that you study
anatomy, that you study the way in which man truly art, so that you can represent him
or her in ways which are realistic, which are less allegorical than medieval paintings.
For medieval artists it was in a sense a travesty to represent a three-dimensional world in a
two-dimensional canvas. Medea Renaissance artists take risks in the way in which they
represent reality, in which they represent the human form. So in a sense what we're talking
about here is a great and unique transformation that takes place between the middle of the
14th century and the end of the 15th century. This of course leads eventually to making
Italy the model for all cultural production and cultural development, not only in terms
of this art in which Italian artists go to other courts to paint, Leonardo is a very
good example of this, in terms of thought, in terms of ideas, essays and so on, but also
in terms of manners. The high point of this is in the early 16th century when Baldasar
Castiglione writes a courtierre, which is in a sense a way in which you behave, in which
you become what we call today a Renaissance man, which is not only certain kinds of knowledge
and certain participation in cultural production, but it is also a manner in which you eat,
you dress, you speak, you in a sense stand as a model of the true courtierre, a man who
is courteous, who belonged to the court. All that of course by the end of the 15th century
begins to spread throughout the rest of Europe, so the Renaissance culture is adopted and
transformed in places like the Abidian Peninsula, England, France, even the Netherlands, that
is to say, some artistic forms like the Sonnet, which have been invented by Pietrar, travel
outside. Now clearly it's very difficult in a few minutes to describe to you the world
of the Renaissance and that there are other courses in the teaching company that will
explain in luxury of detail what the Renaissance was and so on. What I want to do here with
this brief introduction is to in a sense challenge the idea that the Renaissance is in the Wiggish
way in which historians work, another to we say a step in the progress of mankind. Wiggish
historiography sees history as progress, as progressing always onwards and they afford
in presenting history to a class or in writing, we always point out to the landmarks, Pietrar,
the great man, the great architects, the great monuments and we see them as part of the progress
of the human mind as that achieving of great points and so on. Nothing could be farther
from the truth. This Renaissance, which in a sense created such exquisite works of art,
this Renaissance, which led onwards to the secularization of arts and politics and culture
itself is also filled with mysteries. We must dismiss altogether the kind of Wiggish interpretation
of history and see that history always has two faces. It's like the great temple in Rome
with two doors, janus, two face, war and peace. So in a sense, there is the on the belly of
the Renaissance, the on the belly of the scientific revolution. And this is what I want to do for
the rest of the term to look at that on the belly because two things are very important
about the Renaissance. The first one is that, of course, they didn't look forward at all. For
people who are so often represented as emblematic of progress, Renaissance scholars and Leonard
Mann always look backward. It is in fact the realization of time, of the age of history, of
that moment of historical consciousness, which is so unique to the Renaissance when Renaissance
scholars can begin to identify themselves with the most recent past with Rome, that they spend
time collecting stones with epigraphic notices, that they collect and copy epigraphies, the monuments,
someone like Colla de Rienzi in the 14th century, who goes and collects evidence for writing,
Roman writing, that cities begin to, in a sense, become almost obsessed with tracing back the
historical ancestries, going back as far as they can, inventing, in many ways, mythologies
about their past, always, in a sense, pushing the past as far as they could. Of course, they were
aware from reading Roman classics and from reading some Greek classics in translations
of the long history of what we call today Western civilization. If you read Herodotus,
which, of course, they knew by this time, do you know that Herodotus' histories,
when mentioning Egypt and Persia and Caldia and so on, tells the Greek about the great age
of mankind, that before the Greeks and before the Romans, they were all the civilizations that were
essentially very ancient and very old. It is a story told by Herodotus, which resonates in
this lecture. It is so long traveling through the eastern Mediterranean and going to Egypt
and telling them about the age of Athens, how all Athens was, and the priests, and Egyptian priests,
takes him by the hand and shows him a stellar, where there are 3,000 years of an interrupted
list of priests who have served in that temple. The Italians, Western men, knew that in the 14th
and 15th century, but what they did not know, it was that there was essentially an older and deep
time, which became incredibly important to them. Now, this discovery of deep time
has extraordinary importance and consequences for the making of the mysteries, for the creation
of a very different culture, from the one that we usually associate with the culture of the Renaissance,
for the way in which we read that history, we read those texts. By the 15th century,
after the first wave of Renaissance scholarship, which concentrated on the precise reading and
writing of Latin, so that the medieval Latin, which was a living language, becomes, because of
Renaissance scholarship, because of Renaissance philology, a kind of language which is no longer
accessible to the majority of the people, a very learned and cultural language, so that they could
write precisely as the Romans did. All that essentially is replaced in the 15th century
by new concerns, by new interests. One of the things that we notice is that in the 15th century,
Italian scholars are no longer limited to Latin, they begin to read Greek. Why? Because
Greek works are coming slowly into the West, are essentially being taken out of the Byzantine,
of the dying Byzantine Empire, and brought back into the West. We know that they learn Hebrew,
we know that they learn Syriac, and Chaldean, that they have masters, we know that they learn not
only Hebrew, but that well-known scholars such as Pico de la Mirandola and others, we have teachers
who will teach them not only Hebrew, but will teach them Kabbalah, that they are, in a sense,
involved with different kinds of esoteric knowledge, which are very different from reading
Cicero and so on, and that all is that related to the new awareness of time, and to the belief,
the deeply set belief, that the farthest back you go, the closer you get to the very sources
of truth. This is very important, because Renaissance men did not believe that greater
knowledge lay in the future, they believed that the greater knowledge lay always in the back,
and if they could tap, if they could really touch and reach out into that very deep past,
into very deep time, at the very beginning of life, then they will receive and acquire
a knowledge which was undiluted by centuries and millennia of corruption and deterioration.
This is in many respects something borrowed deeply from Greek myth and from Roman beliefs,
the idea of a golden age. How do you get back to the very beginnings of time and get that
knowledge? In some respects, this is what physicists do today. They want to go back
to that very first second of the big bang where you create the world, and if we can get that
knowledge, then we will know everything that is to be known about the physical world.
So, in a sense, it is replicated, this interest in deep time and going back to the very sources
of knowledge is replicated in urban genealogies, in family trees, in which you always try to go
back as far as you can in recreating your own life cycle. It is the recent past which is Rome,
which is all about you, all around you, but there is something else that search for a very
different kind of knowledge. Now, Renaissance men, medieval men and medieval men really had
access to esoteric knowledge which told them of a very different kind of belief, which told them
of a very different kind of world. Astrology is mentioned very frequently in the works of
Augustine and other Christian fathers of early Christianity. Alchemy had come into the West
through the Arabs, had prospered in places like Spain, like Toledo. It had been translated,
but all these works had indeed very little circulation. It was essentially the monopoly of
a small elite at the top which kept these ideas about astrology and alchemy as a kind of mysterious
knowledge which they kept for themselves and which did not spread or in a sense moved down
to the popular level. In the 15th century, a very different kind of knowledge comes in
into the Renaissance first and then into the rest of Europe. I want to tell you this,
that this knowledge that I'm going to be discussing here and in the next lecture
is far more important to learn at man than any other kind of knowledge until the 17th or almost
the end of the 17th and early 18th century. That some of the most famous names, people like Boyle,
some of the most important scientists, the people who we do not associate with the kind of things
that we call today superstition, were indeed practicing alchemists or practicing astrology
and that as we shall see a great deal of the cultural production of the period which we call
the Renaissance and the early modern period is really all intertwined with these kinds of knowledge.
Something dramatic took place in the middle of the 15th century. The city of Constantinople
which has withstood the honest slot of many powers for more than a thousand years,
felt in 1453 to the great armies of the sublime port, to the Ottoman armies. They battered the
walls of the great city with the new perfected artillery and they moved and conquered the whole
area and they established the rule in that great city which until then has been as it were a heaven
for Greek culture in the east. The great shrine of Hagia Sophia was turned into a mosque.
Because of this, because of the fall of Constantinople, a good number of Greek scholars fled to the west
and they came to Italy first and eventually to other parts of Europe but mostly to Italy and mostly
to Florence and they brought with them manuscripts, books that have lay as it were in the great
libraries in Byzantium, in Constantinople waiting for the reading by another eye. Knowledge which
was not in a sense known in Byzantium at all which had been neglected and in a sense put aside
but which was received in Italy with open arms. Works on astrology, works on magic,
works on alchemy, works on the Hermetic tradition. In a sense this works when they arrive to a
literary elite, to a learned elite which was already quite well predisposed for this type of
knowledge because in fact they have already been gearing themselves to this idea because they have
been concerned with the idea of deep time. This works that come now in the middle of the 15th
century is in many respects a validation, a vindication of the kinds of ideas and thoughts
they were having. Think about this when in the middle of the 15th century there several works
come to Florence. They come to the Platonic Academy or what will be called later the Platonic Academy.
They come into the hands of the Medici ruler of Florence who gives them to one of his men,
to one of his so we say educators or literary types who lived in his court and who is under
his patronage, a doctor in fact named Marsilio Ficino and think about this they come among the
works the great corpus hermeticum about which I will say a great deal later on and the esclepius,
two works of hermeticism and it also comes one of Plato's greatest dialogue the symposium
and the question is which one you're going to translate first from Greek to Latin and the
decision of course is made immediately the corpus hermeticum is far more important than Plato
because it is older no one today in the general public has ever heard of hermeticism
no one today or very few people unless you are in the field ever read the corpus hermeticum
which I will describe to you in the next lecture and yet at this precise moment in the middle of
the 14th and the 15th century it is no question about which one is closest to the truth and that
is of course the esclepius and the corpus hermeticum so in a sense what I'm going to do in the next
lecture is to go in some detail on this four traditions what I call the mysteries the first
one of course is astrology which is and I will describe it in greater detail later on but we
I want to introduce to you now astrology the idea that there is a link there is a bridge between the
human soul and the stars between the macrocosm of the universe and the microcosm of humans then
alchemy or alchemia or the ancient chemistry which dates back to chaldean and Babylonian
ancestries which is transmitted by the Arabs who are very adept at alchemy which enters Europe
through the Arabs in the 10th and 11th century and which becomes widespread among a small circle
elite of learned man and which seeks more than just a transmutation of metals which seeks in many
respects to discover the very meaning and essence of life the anima mundi the soul of the world
then magic which of course has both elite as well as popular sites to it although the high
magic the good magic not to be confused with malefic magic the magic of the picatrix the use
of amulets and so on is also a well-known lower amount a small elite and finally the one to which
I will give most of my time in the next lecture the hermetic corpus hermeticism a whole mumbo-jumbo
of several doctrines which acquired extraordinary influence and extraordinary importance in Europe
because it was believed that it was the work of someone who was a contemporary of moses
so in the next lecture we are going to look in detail at hermeticism and in some detail
at the other three thank you
