Lecture 15, Hermeticism, Astrology, Alchemy and Magic
Welcome to lecture 15. In lecture 14 I look at the Renaissance and the awareness of deep
time and I introduce a discussion of these four esoteric forms of knowledge. Astrology,
Alchemy, Magic, which I will do later on in Great detail and Hermeticism, which I want
to essentially dedicate most of the time today. Now please understand and again I emphasize
that these are knowledges which we dismiss today as superstition or which we think of
them as insignificant, but that there is no European court or indeed no papal court in
the 15th and 16th century that did not have an astrologer, that did not have a magus.
The figure of the magus dressed in a robe with planets and stars and a pointed hat was
a very common figure in the Europe of the late Renaissance and the early modern period. He
played a very significant role. No pope, no great ruler will go around without having his
horoscope erected. Today we dismiss it. It's the kind of things in the back of the paper which
people read for fun. I hope that no one really truly believes in it, but it has been dismissed and
in a sense defeated by science. There is however a connection between astrology and astronomy and
I will talk about that later on. Astrology of course goes back also to the beginnings of times.
The Sigurads, the great towers that we find in Mesopotamia, were really observatory towers
to see and trace the movements of planets and stars. It went on into Greece where all the
constellations and the signs of the zodiac are given names, Greek names and so on and from there
it passes on to the Arabs. It in a sense, it is one important element of a stoic philosophy
that is to say the sympathy between the world of man and the world of the cosmos. The link,
as I said in the previous lectures, as Ficino discussed, the link that exists between the
macrocosm, that of the cosmos and the microcosm, that of the soul of man and in that Ficino will
argue in his theology Platonica, it is something that makes men and women the equal of angels,
because we have the same link between ourselves and the world of the stars and planets that the
angels do. Augustine of Hippo, the great Christian doctor of the church, was in an earlier stage
of his life before he converted to Christianity a believer in astrology, but it is in the Renaissance
where astrology acquires a very unique place, where astrology becomes essentially all important,
because it is Ficino, among others, who develops a doctrine. Ficino, who argues that he does not
believe in astrology, nonetheless, he develops a doctrine about the twelve natures of men
that correspond to the twelve houses in the Sodiak, that there is a relationship that you
must lead your life according to the sign on which you are born or the sign that dominates your life.
It is also that there are superior natures attached to these spheres, to these twelve spheres,
and the way is how to connect with them through the use of certain amulets, through the eating of
certain fragrance, the smelling of certain fragrances, through the eating of certain substances,
very much as today people will carry a stone, which would be the birthstone, a stone that is
associated with your astrological sign, which is supposedly bring some of the powers of above
into you. But there's a serious problem here, of course, because astrology, though accepted
throughout Italy, though popes themselves were a great patrons of astrologers and magus,
nonetheless, astrology denies free will, and therefore it is always a contradiction in terms
that astrology is so popular in this period, which is of course at the same time such a
Christian period. Let me talk to you very briefly about two astrologers, to give you a sense of
the power that these astrologers could achieve, the kind of prestige that they will have, and we
will go back to astrology when we talk about hermeticism, because hermetic beliefs in a sense are
shot through and through with astrological lore. Let me talk to you about Luca Waricco,
born in the middle of the 15th century, one of the most important astrologers of the late
15th century. He predicted the fall of Giovanni Bentivioglio, the tyrant of Bologna, was in
prison because of his predictions, but it came to happen. That is to say, he was shown to be right.
Then he predicted that Alessandro Farnese would become pope, and when Farnese became
Paul the Third, became pope and took the name of Paul the Third, he, as a reward for this
accurate prediction, made Luca Waricco into a bishop. So here you have a bishop of the Catholic
Church just a few years before the Reformation, so which gives you a nice sense of when we were
talking about Martin Luther and the climate in which the Protestant Reformation took place,
then here is an important astrologer who is turned into a bishop. That is to say, he gets the
income of a bishop and the title of a bishop because of his predictions. He predicted the manner
and the date of the pope's death and it came to happen too. In 1493, Waricco announced that Giovanni
the Medici would be pope within 20 years and that he was and became pope in 1513. He then predicted
that Giulio the Medici would have, who also became a pope, would have many children and he had 26
bastard children. That was the pope, which gives you also an idea about the climate in which these
people work. Clear Luca Waricco is on a roll and he's doing exceedingly well. In fact, he's doing
so well and he's so attached to the Medici family that Catarina the Medici takes him to France with
her when she becomes Queen of France. And there, his first prediction was that Henry the Second
King of France will live a long and prosperous life. Soon afterwards, he died in a tournament.
So much for Luca Waricco. Obviously, he was not altogether correct all the time. In 1524,
just before the Great Pesant uprising, there was a great conjunction of the planets and there was
great fear throughout the West that this might, in a sense, indicate some great catastrophe.
An astrologer called Nifo wrote on 24 December 1519, 1519 predicted that there will be a conjunction
in February 1524 and that that conjunction, because it took place in the sign of Pisces,
will bring great floods into the world and the world will suffer complete devastation.
When in 1524, it began to rain in the month of March, great rains, people, in fact, began to
pay attention to this prediction and many people began to move into high ground or to build arcs
as a way of escaping this great flood. Of course, it happens that, of course, around 1524,
a new illness began to spread quite rapidly through our Europe. That was the Morbuz Galicus
or Syphilis, which had appeared in the early 16th century and which was seen by many as a result
of this planetary conjunction. I would like to point out that, of course, the flood did not come
and it was shown that it was, in fact, an inaccurate prediction, but that there are people at the
University of Salamanca and other universities who have spent considerable amount of time
trying to show that this was incorrect, that this was not so. So much for this prediction.
It is not until the 17th century that there is a true reaction against astrology, that there is
an attack in astrology and as we shall see later on, some of the most important works of literature
in this period are really attacks against astrology. I am thinking specifically now of Julius Caesar,
where Julius Caesar, Shakespeare's Julius Caesar, who will say it is not in the stars,
but in ourselves, that we are not dominated by the stars, that our life is not, in a sense,
shaped by the influence of the stars. That is astrology. I would like to conclude this
discussion of astrology by pointing out that some of the most important physical work and some of
the most important astronomical deductions and works were really the result of essentially
astrological observation. One of the most important astrologers was Tico Brache, the man who made the
clearest and most accurate observations of a star and planetary motion before the invention
of the telescope. And it is Tico Brache's calculations, which were used to erect horoscopes
for which he was paid immense amounts of money, that would be used by Kepler to, in a sense,
enunciate his planetary motion, planetary laws on planetary motion. And it is not that he did
this observation, but that he used the observations of Tico Brache. And so in many respects, it is a
way in which the careful observation of the skies, light and the skies in the 16th century,
look very different from the way in which the skies look now. And I want to make that point and
emphasize that point, because it is very difficult for us to understand what the skies meant for
people who live in the 16th century or the period before that. We barely see a star now, because
either light pollution or general pollution prevents us from seeing the skies as they did
look to people in the 16th and 17th century. So in a sense, there is this preoccupation
with the heavens, which is perhaps less so today, where we cannot really contemplate
the magnificence of the stars. Alchemy is a very different pursuit altogether. Alchemy is also very
ancient. It goes back to Chaldean formulas to Babylonian traditions and so on. It is said that
in the Great Library of Alexandria, which was burned long ago, there was the greatest collection
of alchemical treatises. And that if you can get your hands into one of these alchemical treatises,
you can really do what they pretend to do. Now, we associate alchemy essentially with the idea
of the transmutation of metals, that is to say, with the turning of lead into gold.
But alchemy was, in fact, far more than that. Alchemy was probably, in many respects, a kind of
religion. It was a way in which the alchemists, this mysterious esoteric figure working in his,
we could call it laboratory, though they call it something else. They call it in language, which
was impregnated with religious symbolism. It was the altar. It was a crucible. And there he will
torture matter until he will bring out of that matter the essence, the water, the divine water,
which they identified with the soul of the world, with the anima mundi. And this, of course,
was related to a great platonic dialogue entitled the timeus, in which the soul of the world,
the anima mundi, serves as a link between the unknowable god and mankind. So essentially,
what the alchemist was all about, at least some alchemists, they were about the discovery of
that essence of the world, which is extracted by torturing metals in the crucible, which will
essentially contain that ingredient that sold of the world, the anima mundi, which was in some
respects an essence, which went beyond the four known parts or components of matter. It was not
either earth or fire or wind or water. It was a different kind of essence, which contained in
itself all the meanings of the universe. In many respects, what the alchemists are all about
is to grasping, by grasping this, by reaching the philosophical stone, acquiring all the knowledge,
all the wisdom of the world. And the language they use is essentially a religious language.
It's a mysterious language. It is also, as Dune has pointed out in his great alchemical studies,
a language which is filled with references to hermaphrodites. In that respect,
what they are trying to do is a conjunction of opposites brought together into one. Therefore,
the hermaphrodite, a figure which is very important in antiquity, but which disappears
altogether in the Middle Ages, that human that has both male and female genitalia, becomes an
important ingredient, an important component of all alchemical elements. Alchemy remains alive,
as I said to you in the previous lecture, as a pursuit very late, as late as the 18th century
in Europe, where people in a sense continue to be preoccupied with a way of reaching out and
discovering a form of knowledge which will open to them all the wisdom of the universe.
So that some very important men, including Newton and Boyle and others, are really people who dabble
and are very concerned and very interested in questions of, in a sense, alchemical research
and alchemical studies. The third ingredient is magic. And again, I want to point out that all
these traditions, astrology, magic, hermeticism and all that are all linked together, and they all
essentially have elements of one and the other. The magus is an astrology. The magus is also
someone who has certain knowledge of magic, of certain incantations and formulas which allow
them essentially to have control over the world. In the next lecture, I will talk about magic and
religion. But the magus plays a very important role in the late Renaissance and in the early modern
period. There are two great magical treatises. One is the Picatrix, which is name and referred to
in documents of the period, but which there are very few people who have access to them.
It contains all kinds of formulas, ways of constructing amulet. There are two different
kinds of magic. One, of course, is malefic magic, demonic magic in which you contact and link with
evil spirits. And then there is a benefic magic. And magic, of course, is one of those traditions
which, in a sense, bridges the gulf between high and low. Because also part of that magical
tradition, and very popular throughout Europe, are healers, the old women who lived on the edge of
town and who, through herbal medicine and through certain potions and so on, can cure, or by the
touch of her hand, can cure illnesses. Remember this, because these people are going to be a very
particular target of the wish-grace. These are people who are going to be identified, not as
magicians, practicing some kind of benefic magic, but practicing a malefic form of magic, and they
are going to pay with their lives for that. The Wolf's Turn Book, also a great collection of
magical incantations and so on, which circulates among a small intellectual elite,
and which is supposed to be of great importance. It is calculated that in the Paris of the 16th
century, 30,000 people identified themselves as either astrologers or magicians or sorcerers
or some kind or another, which gives you a sense, although I think this is an exaggerated figure,
which gives you a sense and an idea of how relevant and important this is. In Castile,
I know from looking at documents there, that there is a sort of people who go around little
villages selling their services as people who will bring rain in terms of drought, or chase
hailstorms, or chase locus plagues, and some people who certain in a sense way in which they
will say certain incantations will alter and control nature. And I want to point out to you
that the ongoing importance, or should we say, or the magic tradition in our society as well,
of the popularity of such books as Harry Potter or The Lord of the Rings today in the New York Times,
there is a story about the popularity in the U.S. today about the popularity of the Lord of
the Rings, which in a sense points out about the attraction of the magician, of the magus,
to this very day. And finally, of course, to hermeticism, which is what I want to spend
the thread of this lecture. If you visit Siena and visit the Duomo, the Duomo is of course the
name we use for all the cathedrals, the Duomo of Mila, the Duomo of Florence, the Duomo of Siena,
which is a very beautiful church in a very beautiful town. And you enter into the
portal of the church, into the vestibule, the entrance to the church. There on the floor of the
church, in graffiti, which is a form of mosaic work, there are two figures. On the one hand is Moses,
and on the other one is a representation of Hermes Trismegistus. Hermes, the three times great.
Dress as a magus, dress in a long robe covered with the stars and moons,
and wearing the pointed hat of the magus. When the Duomo was built or rebuilt,
the people who are essentially thinking this building, who are constructed in this building,
had no questions or doubts that Hermes Trismegistus was the equal of Moses. And they place him in
this sacred Christian place because they believe, deeply believe, and will believe so until the
beginning of the 17th century, and even beyond that, that Hermes Trismegistus has written works
which contained a kind of learning and knowledge which was equal to that of Moses. I already told
you the story of how the corpus Hermeticum, the body of Hermetical writings, come together with
the Sclepius, which is another important Hermetical writings, come to Florence into the hands of
Marsilio Ficino in the middle of the 15th century, and how it's translated ahead of Plato's symposium,
because it is considered to be a work of greater antiquity, a work far closer to the sources of
truth, close to the very beginning of human existence. In reality, the corpus Hermeticum was
written between 100 and 300 AD, or of the common era. In reality, the corpus Hermeticum was a
mumble jumble, a collection of sometimes even contradictory texts, mostly of Gnostic origin,
Gnosticism being a pseudo philosophical religious movement emerging out of Christianity and of
the decline and collapse of ancient philosophy. It combined philosophical, astrological,
magical elements brought together, including in the Sclepius a story about the creation of the
world, which paralleled Genesis. Of course, it did because it was borrowing from Genesis,
but which Renaissance men, scholars, those who read and translated this and studied this,
thought to be essentially a description of the world written by Toth, an Egyptian priest,
or a great god, and transcribed by Hermes, the messenger of the gods, who is here represented
to us as Hermes Trismegistus. This collection of works, the corpus Hermeticum and the Sclepius,
contains both optimistic and fatalistic philosophies of points of views. In some respects, these
optimistic and pessimistic views, which we find both in the corpus Hermeticum,
lead or yield the same result. Either you have to find some substance that will, in a sense,
protect you from the nefarious influence of the stars, or you find some substance that will bring
down the beneficial aspects of the stars and the planets. The world is an animal according to the
Hermetic tradition, according to Ficino. The stars and the planets are living animals as well.
That which links one world to the other is by certain products, by certain things,
by eating sugar and cinnamon. Sugar is very important in the culture of the 16th century.
It's a rare and costly commodity. So sugar, eating pure sugar, or eating cinnamon, spices,
or smelling roses, in a sense, allow you to connect. But what you are really seeking here
is to find that link between the material world and the spirit of the world,
and for the corpus Hermeticum and for Ficino. That link was, of course, ether, which they call
la quinta essencia, the fifth essence. That which, in a sense, serves as a bridge between
matter and the world, between the microcosm and the macrocosm. You listen to music because that's
the way in which you get, essentially, to that moment in which you can bridge the difference,
you can bridge the space between one and the other. Plato and Pythagoras have argued
that the harmonic qualities of both the macro and the macro are one and the same,
and that if you can, in a sense, link through music, because for ancients music was, essentially,
mathematics, mathematical proportions, octaves, then you can, in a sense, understand the meaning
of the world and grasp the beneficial aspects of that world or prevent its negative aspects.
And the most important of all music is what's not orfic music, but a different kind of music.
This is actually my favorite part of Maserio Ficino, one that, since I was a young man,
I was always attracted to, and which finds echoes in the culture of early modern Europe.
Ficino argues, this is not in the Corpus Hermetical, this is Ficino's invention,
that as the stars and the planets rotate in the orbits, in the circle of the orbits,
in the kind of Ptolemaic conception of the universe, which is going to be dethroned in a few years
by the Copernican revolutions, as the stars and the planets move and the sun and the moon,
they produce a music, and that this is the music of the spheres, and that if we can, in a sense,
collect or hear or attune ourselves by, as I said, the eating of certain substance,
to listen to that music, then we have discovered the meaning of the universe.
In many respects, the planet and the stars still produce music. We can collect that sounds
in our radio telescopes. It is the music that the universe makes as it turns and gyrates and moves
into endless space. Think how powerful this idea was for the culture of the age. Think of people
like Botticelli, that great painting, Primavera, which you can see in the Uffizi Palace in Florence,
which is written because a friend of Botticelli, of Sandro Botticelli named Girolamo Benibeni,
wrote to him a letter which included all this about the mysteries of the Renaissance,
and which he conveys to us in that extraordinary painting, which is filled with allusions about
magic, hermeticism, and astrology. Think of the work of Shakespeare. Think of the tempest,
which is nothing but a rejection of magic when Prosperos drowns his books. When he drowns the
Picatrix, you could say, when he drowns the books of magic, he is joining the world and rejecting
magic as all the works reject magic and astrology. Think of the alchemist by Ben Johnson,
which tells us about essentially the world of the alchemists and the magicians. Think of John
Donne's poetry, specifically a very beautiful poem entitled The Balladiction Forbidden Morning,
in which he, in a sense, calls in all kinds of references about the movement of the spheres,
about sub-lunatic worlds, which reflects that world which was so powerful and so intense
that dominated European culture, and which was, as we speak, as we describe it,
almost in the moment of his death, before it would be, in a sense, should we say,
marginalized, thrown back into a world of superstition, before it would be replaced
by a new religion, which is growing the horizon, and that religion was, of course, science. But
the science of the 16th and 17th century, that great scientific revolution was grounded and based
upon these mysteries, which gives us a very different side of the Renaissance, a very different
picture of what those on the top believed, wrote, and practiced as they went to the business of
understanding and grabbing and grasping the meaning of the world. Thank you.
