Lecture 17 Religion, Science and Magic
Welcome to lecture 17. In lecture 16 I try to provide a kind of overall view of the development
of wishcraft and the beginning of the wish grace. In this lecture what I would like to
do is to reverse in a sense the order that I have been following or that I follow in lectures
two and three and look in greater detail at the context, first the religious and cultural
context of the wish grace and to do so with a specificity. That is to say to look at a
specific developments in Europe in the late 15th century and the beginning of the 16th
century and see how these developments led to this wish grace. I also want to do is to
point out that these developments serve only not only as context for the wish grace but
that they are also explanations of why this happened and at the same time that these developments
while they led to the wish grace, eventually led to the end of the wish grace. That is
to say that we are talking about here a long term development, what the Anale school called
la Londe Jouret, a long period of time in which changes in culture, in society, in politics,
in religion then itself led essentially first to a process which we call the wish grace,
this persecution of people who are believed to be in consort with the devil and then eventually
to the dismissal of these ideas and the triumph of the enlightenment. I don't want to take
here a wiggish position in saying that there is essentially a linear movement from beginning
to end. It doesn't happen that way but what happens essentially is that there is the anxiety
created by the birth of modernity and this anxiety that is created lead to persecution
and eventually as that anxiety wanes the persecution ends. There is no sort of dramatic moment
that ends the wish grace. In fact we will go to the very end of it which is Salem in
1692 in the New World but nonetheless it sort of wanes eventually because of the settling
of all those conflicts, religious, political and social that we see at the very beginning
of the wish grace. I want to begin this by presenting a kind of theoretical model here
and I want this model essentially to be kept in mind as we travel, as we journey through
the wish grace and it is of course a distinction between belief and knowledge and the relationship
between magic, science and religion. To the first one, knowledge and belief are two very
different things. Throughout the Middle Ages the philosophical position was that you believe
in order to understand, that is to say that belief comes before knowledge. Belief and
knowledge are two very different things. In the great formulation by a Salem of Canterbury
in the late 11th century, early 12th century and Salem has indicated that you believe in
order to understand, that is to say that the way in which you get to knowledge is first
by believing and then moving to specific knowledge. Throughout the next two centuries there is
a process by which belief and knowledge are separated. By the time that we get to the
late 15th century and we enter into the kind of pre-scientific revolution, the great transformations
of European society, the coming of a stoic knowledge from the East, the acceptance and
reception of a stoicism and of course of a skepticism. Later on then what you have here
is a breakdown of the relationship between belief and knowledge and they become two very
separate points of view. This is going to lead eventually to the scientific revolution
and in many respects the scientific revolution is going to lead to the end of the wish grace
and then the relationship between religion, magic and science. And this is an important
thing. Think or imagine those of you who are listening to this tape, imagine a rectangular
box and in this rectangular box we have religion, magic and science. And in the period before
the end of the 15th century, from the late Middle Ages, all these three categories overlap
each other. That is to say, religion has a great deal of element of magic. A great deal
of the ceremonies of the church are magical in nature. That is to say the ritual of the
church itself is some form of magic or at least it is perceived by the masses as a form
of magic. Science itself has also a great deal of element of magic. It is very difficult
to separate an alchemist or a magician from a scientist and in fact some of the best known
scientists in the Middle Ages, some one like Roger Bacon and others, are people who dabble
also in magic. So there is no clear definition between one and the other. And then of course
magic is some form of religion as well and a form of science as well. What we are really
talking about here in this lecture, I mean the next seven or eight lectures is the process
by which boundaries, the mapping of boundaries between these three categories, when we begin
in the rich grace, when we begin in the late 15th century, all these three things are put
together as sort of overlapping. When we end in 1650, 1660s in the old world as we are
entering into the pre-enlightenment period as the scientific revolution has finally
triumphed in Europe, all these three areas are now very sharply separated. They are very
sharply defined. Magic which has played such an important role, the kind of philosophical
approaches which were identified with Plato and which magic and so on are now defeated
and they are set to the side and become essentially popularized or something in the popular imagination
which is the role of charlatans and eccentrics. Science in fact becomes a new religion. This
is also part of a much larger process which we call secularization. And essentially what
we are talking about here is the extraordinary anxieties that are generated by these processes
of secularization in Europe. It is only by understanding this process of secularization
and by understanding the way in which different categories of thought and culture are mapped
out and boundaries are set between them is that we could understand the kind of mental
processes that are going on during the rich grace. In a great book by Keith Thomas entitled
Religion and the Decline of Magic which I believe I have mentioned before and I will
mention afterwards, Keith Thomas examines the manner in which the adoption of a new
kind of religion in England but also in the continent as well in the 16th and 17th century
leads eventually to the decline of magic. Now why is this so? This is so because of
many different reasons. The first one of course is the reformation. One of the things that
the reformation does is to challenge all medieval Christianity. The Catholic Church
as it had organized itself, the Catholic Church as it had come to develop throughout the Middle
Ages had received a good number of accretions that is to say forms of worships, cults of
saints, practices, liturgies and so on which represented a given end to the kind of popular
needs, a way in which religion was popularized and became triumphant by in a sense reaching
out to the masses. One could say without exaggeration that the history of Christianity is a history
of a thousand years over a 1500 years to this period in which the very early teachings of
the Church slowly are eroded by popular pressures in which the Church gives end to the kind
of popular need for a religion that is essentially tangential and material. We go back here to
something that I raised in an earlier lecture that is to say the two levels of religion.
One, the level of religion for the elite, a lofty form of religion based upon certain
ethical principles and two, the other level, the level of religion of the masses in which
religiosity has to do with the physical world that is identified with the possession of
some relic, with the touching of something around your neck, with the carrying of metals,
with the kinds of things that one does to in a sense control the world, the kind of
discussions that I was having in the previous lecture. What the Reformation does, what Luther
does is in essentially to challenge not only basic dogmas of the Church which I discussed
in an earlier lecture, such things as the idea of the priesthood of all believers, such
things as the quality or validity of certain sacraments, not only the question of free
willed or good deeds, that is to say Luther presents a complete different picture of how
religion is to be practiced, how religion is to be lived. More importantly, it's a religion
that is deeply personal, it's a religion that is a religion individual sense of the Christ,
that is to say the development of what I call earlier on the Christian self. And that
Christian self is based upon a very close reading of the Scriptures, that is to say
the elimination of all those additions that have been put upon the first edifice of the
Church over certain numbers of years and decades and centuries. What Luther does in the Reformation
and what Calvin does afterwards is to call for a far more strict interpretation of how
one ought to live as a Christian. How is the Church going to respond? The Catholic Church
will respond in a very specific manner. The Catholic Church will not compromise in a series
of councils held at trend in the 1560s. The Catholic Church begins what is called historiographically
the counter-reformation or the Catholic Reformation. While disputing Luther's claims, while standing
in fact very strongly on principle such as the belief of the Church as intermediary between
the sacred and humanity, while arguing that the seven sacraments are ways to salvation,
while in fact denying the idea that there could be a pursuit of believers and emphasizing
the fact that one is saved by faith and good deeds, the Catholic Church underwent also
a process of reformation. That is to say that both in the north of Europe where Protestantism
became the religion of the majority of the people and in Mediterranean Europe where Catholicism
remained the religion of the masses and of the majority of the people, in both places,
in both different forms of Christianity there is now a greater emphasis in essentially policing
deviancy, policing excesses, avoiding all kinds of forms of religiosity that lead to
excess. Now what I want you to think about this is that how was it for Christians in
the 16th century who have lived with the knowledge that the religion was the true one, that all
in western Europe people observe and follow the same religion, the same form of religions,
that there is an authority, that it resides in Rome, that is central and it reaches everyone,
how does it feel, how would it feel that after 1525 there are two forms of Christianity and
that these forms of Christianity are contending with each other in extraordinary struggles,
not only physical struggles but theological ones. Of course there was always the Orthodox
Church in the east but the Orthodox Church was far and removed, it had now fallen into
the hands of the Turks, it did not count, the division between the two churches went
back to the 11th century, it was not in the immediate memory. There is of course other
forms of religions, they are Jews in the midst of Europeans, they are Muslims who are close
enemies yet it doesn't really have the extraordinary impact which the Protestant reformation and
the Catholic counter reformation have on the mind of Europeans, it creates a sense of uncertainty
it creates a sense of anxiety, the feeling, the deep seated feeling that the world is no
longer what it was, that there is no security, that now you are essentially uncertain about
your belief, uncertainty about the fact that there are people who have the same claims
that you have about monopoly of the truth. Now in many respects we have to see the anxieties
generated by the Protestant reformation and by the counter reformation as one of the underlying
causes for the wish craze. As I will say later on when we see the topography of wishcraft
and of the wish craze, you are going to see that in Catholic towns most of the witches
will be Protestant and in Protestant towns most of the witches will be Catholics, that
there is in fact a very close link and connection between religious to we say deviancy as it
will be interpreted by the majority religion and the fact that you may be a target for
accusations of wishcraft or necromancy of other things, that it is a form of heresy in some
respects and it is seen as such and it is seen as in fact being part of the great conspiracy
of the devil that plagues Europe. So there is in one sense that the counter reformation
and the reformation in Europe lead to this level of anxiety and this level of repression
of religious repression, one that still plagues Europe to this very day and in the other hand
that what you have is a kind of clear definition of what it is to be a Christian and what is
not to be a Christian. This occurs both in the Protestant world and in the Catholic world.
So that new practices coming to being after trend by the 1570s, by the 1580s, there is
a greater policing of orthodoxy. The kind of practices which were admitted before which
were overlooked by the Catholic Church can no longer be so. We see that specifically
in the countryside which now becomes essentially the target for enforcing orthodoxy. In a book
by William Christian Jr. on popular religion in Nuka Steel in Spain in the late 16th century
we could see the impact of the council of trend on the way in which religion was practiced
in the Spanish countryside. What you see essentially is a new attention being paid to certain practices,
to certain religious practices which were orthodox until the 16th century and which now seems
to be orthodox. This of course also leads to extraordinary level of anxiety because after
all you have a traditional sort of belief, you have practiced this for many years, your
ancestors have done so and suddenly the church tells you right off the bat that you can no
longer do so. In fact there is an analogy that can be drawn here between the reforms
of the Second Vatican Council in the 1960s and Catholicism because when the Second Vatican
Council at the beginning of the 60s declared that the mass will now be in the vernacular
rather than in Latin many Catholics felt that the world or the rock had been pulled out
from underneath their feet because it was something new. So in many respects the Catholicism
that emerges after 1560 and of course the Protestantism that emerges in the 1520s is
while claiming to be a return to tradition is something new and the majority of the people
in Europe are also afraid of the new. Now that is one of course the religious aspect.
What about the cultural aspects? The beginning of the wish-craze coincides also with the
beginning of the scientific revolution. There is no time here of course and this is not
a course about the scientific revolution. We will require many many different lectures
to really explain the magnitude of the scientific revolution. But I would like to point out
to you that while the scientific revolution is a phenomenon of the elite, of elite at
the top, nonetheless the ideas about science that are held by people at the top also filter
down to the masses and create greater anxiety among them, a great sense of fear of change
of the world being transformed. Now think about this. When we begin this story at the
beginning of or at the end of the 15th century or at the beginning of the at the end of the
15th century, the beginning of the 16th century, it is widely accepted by everyone, science
and people below as well, that the world is organized, that the universe is organized
in a fixed manner. This is the orthodox position which goes back to the linking of religion,
astronomy and philosophy. It is essentially the acceptance of the Aristotelian organic
view of the world. It is essentially the acceptance of the Ptolemaic view of the universe, a universe
in which the earth is at the center and in which the planets and the stars and all celestial
bodies in fact go around the earth in perfect circular orbits. Religion in fact embraces
these two positions for they confirm the centrality not only of the earth, but they confirm also
the centrality of religion. So in a sense there is a, we could call it an unholy alliance
between the science of the Middle Ages and of late antiquity, the philosophy of the classical
world and Christianity. In the 16th century, this view, this view of the world as one is
challenge. It's challenge in the work of people like Copernicus, it's challenge in the work
of people like Descartes, it's challenge essentially by skeptics and scientists who argue against
teleology, against the Aristotelian idea of teleology that is to say that everything has
a telos, who argue against the earth as being at the center of the universe and who posit
and present new theories about how the universe is organized. Now clearly the peasants in
the fields who are going to be the victims and the main protagonists of the wish craze
have never heard of Copernicus. For that matter they have never heard of Ptolemy or Aristotel
of anything like that. There is a wide gulf between the culture of the few who read and
the culture of the many who do not read. But many of these ideas filter down. In fact as
we know from Carlo Ginsberg's great book, The Cheese and the Wound, people even in a
small villages in Italy are able to read a miller, could read and had gather from popular
books on some of these developments, strange ideas about how the world came into being
and is capable of defending these views in front of the Inquisition. What it is is that
who are moving from the an earth-centered universe to a sun-centered universe to move
from the circular orbits of planets and the sun and the moons and other celestial bodies
to move from that to a kind of orbits and a kind of world that can be measured and that
can be expressed in terms of numbers where God becomes a mathematician, someone who sets
the clock in motion and let it run and that nature is ruled by physical law that miracles
can be explained by science must have and did have extraordinary consequences in creating
a kind again of uncertainty and anxiety that serves as context for the development of the
wish-crace. There is this sense of a world in the midst of changes, a search for stability
the birth pangs of modernity and there is a very heavy price to pay for this, there is
a tremendous price to pay for this. So we have here the reformation, the birth of science,
the third ingredient is of course the wars of religion. One of the things that the reformation
does and the counter-reformation does is that it pits Protestants against Christians in
the battlefield. It pits Protestants against Catholics, and not Christians but Catholics,
they are both Christians, in not only in the battlefield between countries but also within
countries themselves. This is clearly the case in England and France which is sharply
divided, certainly England at the beginning, between Catholics and Protestants. This is
the case in France where the Protestants who are called Huguenots fight continuously against
Catholics. This is certainly the case in the European wide theater of the struggles between
the Catholics led by Spain and of course the Norton princes and the Protestants led by
a coalition not only of German princes but also the king of Sweden and sometimes the
king of France who prefers the political alliances with Protestants to being encircled by Spain.
So in a sense what we have here is a period of warfare that begins around 1525, 1526 and
which will last until 1648 at the end of the Thirty Years War when the Treaty of Westphalia
brings an end to the conflict or at least a temporary end to the conflict between Protestants
and Catholics. Isn't that a coincidence that the end of the warfare between the two forms
of Christianity essentially marks also the waning of the wish-crace? Isn't there a coincidence
that the extraordinary struggles that ensue in Central Europe, mostly in Germany, which
will devastate Germany all together at the early part of the 17th century, coincides
also with the places where there is the harshest persecution of witches? That is to say there
are areas of Central Germany which suffer from the wish-crace more than any other place
in Europe. Isn't there a coincidence too that when we look at the topography of wishcraft
we could see that there is a close relationship with places that experience religious wars
and the recrudescence of attacks against witches. So in a sense the wars between Protestants
and Catholics serve as a way in which a great deal of the anger and violence is also articulated
in terms of persecution against the wishes, against people who are considered to be witches
and who are accused of wishcraft. It is a sense of development which occurs in the
other times of history as well, times of strife, times of war, lead to persecutions of some
minority that is selected as a kind of escape goat. So in a sense religious warfare is one
of the ingredients that explained also the wish-crace. As I said before, in towns which
were a Protestant, Catholics are usually selected as witches. In towns where Catholics, Protestants
are the target for persecutions of wishcraft. Moreover, one of the results of the piece
of Axburg in 1555 is that the prince essentially determines and selects what is the relation
of his subjects. This would be confirmed at the Treaty of Westphalia that is to say that
the ruler determines who is, what the people in his possessions are going to be, what are
his subjects' relation going to be, which means essentially that not only do we have
a more, should we say, enforcement of orthodoxy in Protestants and Catholic countries, but
we also now have the way in which those who hold political power, in fact, ally themselves
with the established church within their own realms and kingdoms to enforce this orthodoxy
so that the kinds of behaviors which were loosed and allowed in the Middle Ages come
to an end. So in a sense, there is a close relationship between these three ingredients,
the reformation and the great mental change, the rise of science and essentially attacks
against witches and, of course, religious war. That still does not explain the fact
that witchcraft or, at least to say, accusations of witchcraft and accusations against people
who are believed to be witches and the witch craze is not European-wide. There are whole
areas of Europe that either do not experience the witch craze or which, in fact, do so only
in mild forms and those areas are areas in the Mediterranean. Those areas are areas such
as Spain, for example, or parts of Italy, areas where the Inquisition has the greatest
power. Why this is so? One of the things that occurs is extraordinary, is that the beginnings
of the witch craze coincide chronologically with the setting of the Spanish Inquisition
in Iberia. So what we have here is places where clearly the mechanisms that lead to
attacks against witches in the North are not put in place in the South because they are
already there and they are already other targets. In fact, when there is a big witch craze case
in the Basque country, the Grand Inquisitor is called to examine this and he dismisses
it as hysteria. He dismisses it as the fantasies of children, something that he was not going
to pay any attention to. But, of course, in the Spanish possessions of which Italy is
one, the Inquisition has other targets. The Inquisition has already found ready-may-escape
goats, first in the late 15th century and in the early 16th century, converse. Then later
on, protestants and then, of course, also demoriscos. So in some respects, the mechanisms
of persecution, the rise of a persecutory society, the use of certain techniques to identify
those who are outside the normal who do not belong to the society are employed in different
areas of Europe against very different targets. The result, of course, is one and the same.
Essentially, it is the attempt to bring conformity and orthodoxy within the lands of one specific
ruler. Thank you.
