Lecture 19 – Fear and the construction of Satan
Welcome to lecture 19. In lecture 18 I completed sort of presenting a very broad panorama of
the social and economic and political reasons and we ended up with the spectacle of the
wishes being burned or hung from the necks as a kind of theater of power. In this lecture
I want to continue to essentially examine some of the causes for the wish grace but
also attempt to explain why this happened. And I am going to essentially look at two
very specific things. One, the question of fear in the West and how that fear is used
by those in power to create escape goats and two, the role of Satan or the devil in wish
craft and of course in the wish grace and how the devil has changed from the middle
ages into the early modern period, the new concept of the devil. And we will sort of
trace the history of the devil in the Western tradition up to the early modern period.
I want you to begin essentially by asking you to think about the kinds of beliefs that
the majority of the people had in the early modern period in the late 15th and early 16th
century, the kinds of expectations they have. First of all, think about this. They believe
culture people as well as those who were illiterate. They believe that there was this
vast conspiracy which was presided by the devil, which joined together people from every
part of Europe, but mostly from Northern Europe and mostly from Germany, and that these people
were in a kind of conspiracy against Christianity and against order. That these women for the
way are mostly women, this all women for the way are mostly all women, wrote to great nocturnal
gatherings in the back of devils, that they engage in sex with the devils, that they
in fact perform all kinds of atrocities, which I will discuss later on in greater detail,
child murder, sacrifices, orgies, all kinds of other things that they did at this nocturnal
gatherings. In Lorraine alone, a region between Germany and France, there were believed to
be 800 meeting places for this nocturnal gatherings. It is said, and people believe this to be
so, that at the great wish-gathering at Endia, a town on the border between France and Spain
and the Basque region, 12,000 witches flew or were transported in the back of devils to
this gathering. Think about this, it is as if now we will have a great convention of
historians, the American Historical Association meeting or the MLA meeting, and all the participants
come riding in the back of devils to attend these meetings. This was of course even further
affirmed by the eerie, should we say, quality of confessions, confessions extracted on the
torture, the torture that we began to discuss in the previous lecture, or confessions which
we are given voluntarily without torture, for in England torture was not allowed. All
these confessions have an eerie similarity, they all say the same, these women, mostly
women, but sometimes men as well, confess to the same kinds of activities, of attending
these nocturnal gatherings, which I will describe in detail later on, of performing certain
evils, of paying homage to Satan and so on. What we are talking about here is a kind of
conditions which lead to some extraordinary sense of fear in society. Now there is some
explanations for this. The culture of the Middle Ages was a culture of the cities, it
was a culture of the plains. Parts of Europe in the late 15th and early 16th century had
not yet been fully Christianized. The Christianity of some mountain regions in areas of Europe,
the Pyrenees, the Hearts Mountains, the Alps and so on, where practices, that is to say
there was a kind of religion, was a kind of Christianity, that was still intertwined
with all kinds of superstitions and so on. It is only in the late 15th century that
mendicant orders, that is to say Franciscans and Dominicans, come to these mountain areas
in the process of proselytizing or indeed bringing Christianity to these regions. When
you join this with the fact that you enter areas which have not been fully Christianized,
with all kinds of folkloric details about nocturnal gathering, with about folklore,
about animals, or men turning to animals, or werewolves, or all those kinds of things
which are part and parcel of European culture and which I will discuss in the last lecture
of this series of lectures. All those things and you tie that to the new enforcement of
orthodoxy by both Protestants and Catholics after the 1550s. You have here the makings
of a pathology. And how does this work? It works in various specific ways. It works in
the following manner. You select a group. You essentially direct your anger or you categorize
or you stereotype not an individual. It's not an individual Jew or it's not an individual
wish that you are after. It's as a group of people. And then the second step is you create
a mythology out of the need for a scapegoat. Because of all the changes that have taken
place before, what we have here is the creation of a mythology about witches. In 1350, 1348,
during the period of the black play, the black death, the great plague that essentially swept
through our Europe, there were specific scapegoats. There were those suffering from leprosy. There
were the Jews. There were not attacked as individuals. There were always attacked as
a group. By the late 15th century, in some areas, it is a converso in the Iberian Peninsula
who becomes, as it were, the scapegoat. In Northern Europe is the witch. So in a sense
what you have here is the construction of a mythology. Now, this is very important because
this mythology, some historians have argued, it was something constructed from above. That
is to say, there is a dual process. There is fear at the bottom created by all the anxieties
that I have been describing before. And there is a construction of a mythology from above.
That is to say, it's the way in which you link together the anxieties and fears of the
people at the bottom and you bring it together and you link it with a construction of a mythology
from above. As I have said to you before, it was almost a universal attitude of Europeans,
of Western Europeans, the belief that witches existed, that they were essentially in league
with Satan, with the devil, to destroy Christian society. Some of the greatest names, Newton,
Boddan, great scientists, they all affirm the validity and the veracity of this activity.
But it is also fed from below. So what you have here is a way in which a learned discourse
on witchcraft, which we are going to explore in the next lecture, a learned discourse of
witchcraft, treatises and so on, links together with this widespread fear. As I was saying
to you, some historians, most notably a French historian named Jean de Lumon, has argued
in a great book entitled Fear in the West that this fear is part of a process by which
the state, the nascent state, all those institutions that are attempting essentially to create order
and to monitor the activities of Western society, channel all the frustrations and their fears
of the general population, what we might call a kind of mass psychosis, a mass pathology.
And in a sense, directed against one particular target, in this case, of course, all women,
people accused of witchcraft. How does this work? Now please understand that this is something
that works to this very day. It is a process and it's a mechanism that is employed by governments
and those in power to this very day, and which serves specifically the purpose, you know,
it benefits the state in taking the mind of people from other more serious problems.
Now think about this. The people are essentially pressed down. The people are oppressed by
rising taxation, by conscription, by new ways in which their lives are monitored. The people
resist. Resistance in the 16th century, in the early modern period, takes the form of
vagrancy, a scam artist, desserters, banditry. Wherever you go in Europe in the 16th century,
you are in the face, you are facing a general crisis of society, which is demonstrated
in this attacks against the state. In many respects, the people on the margins of society,
bandits, vagrants, picaros in Spain, a scam artist, the kind of people who lived against
the state and who tried to undermine the power of the state. Now, this is paradoxical because,
of course, these people represent the form of resisting the encroaching power of the
state, but at the same time, they, of course, add to the anxieties of the people at the
bottom because, as we well know, the greatest victims of crimes, the people who suffer the
most from these kinds of resistance and activity, are essentially the people at the bottom.
So essentially, while at the same, at one time, these people who are engaged in these
activities are in some, should we say, diffused way, not perhaps very conscious, but unconsciously
resisting the new controls that have been imposed on society, at the same time, they
are creating the conditions that are going to lead to a greater control. So people, instead
of thinking about all the problems they have to face, taxes, traffic in the highways, pollution,
all the kinds of things, is so much easier to blame all this, not on the people who are
responsible for these things, but on someone who is a very vulnerable target and an escape
goat. That is to say that the attack against witches, very much as the attack against
Jews, or very much like the attack against people suffering from leprosy, was something
that had an extraordinary amount of popular support. There is this incredible swell from
below, and this attack against specific groups of people who are identified as scapegoats,
is essentially fan by the mendicants, by the Dominicans and Franciscans, in Catholic countries
or by preachers, Protestant preachers in the North, who in a sense, work or act as tribunes
of the people, as people who in fact articulate this unbelievable fear in society. This is
a wonderful formulation, and I think one that is quite accurate, and it's very difficult
to pin it down because we don't have the sources to say, well, this is absolutely consciously
planned. That is to say, there is a meeting of the ministers in Paris or in Madrid or
in London, and they said, okay, how do we make people not think about, let's see, not
think about the fact that we're going to conscript 200 of them in this village. Well, hey, witches,
no, I don't think that we can pin this down like this, but it works in a kind of unconscious
manner in which the estate throws out all of its weight, together with out of the church,
against an attack against certain segments of the population, and therefore create, as
I was saying in the previous lecture, this kind of theater of power, which serves as
a form of entertainment, but which also has very important pedagogical purposes, because
it teaches people that here is the person who is responsible for all your difficulties,
for all the problems we face. And if we exercise this person from our society, if we in a sense
punish this person, then everything will be all right, that we are as a collective engaged
in a great battle against the forces of evil, that they are the agents of the enemy. Because
the United States went through something like this in the 1950s. It's called McCarthyism,
that is to say, under every bed, there was a communist hiding there to do some crane
of evil things. So you essentially take the people's mind from all problems and directed
against this unseen, undefined menace that is all around you, and it leads you to a tremendous
interest in essentially cooperating and being part and being complicit in the manner in which
certain segments of the population is put to that and executed. Now, clearly, there is a
difference between the 16th century and the 20th century. And the difference, of course,
is that while today we all have our own individual neuroses, in the 16th century,
there is a collective pathology. And that collective pathology was, of course, was dominated
by the figure of the devil. And it is the devil in the Western tradition and the devil that emerges
in the 16th century that makes all the difference. Because it is not that you are cooperating with
a foreign government or with some kind of ideology that is essentially repulsive to your way of
thinking, so to democracy. Here you are cooperating against the great enemy, the great obstructor.
That's what the word means in Hebrew. Satan, the obstructor, the ones who in a sense stands
against society, against Christianity, against godliness, against the good. Now, who is this
devil and how does he come into being? Where is he coming from and how does he change over time?
Well, there is a very important theological problem here. And it's a theological problem
that some of the great theologians of Christianity has essentially dealt with and struggled with.
And that is, of course, where does evil come from? What is the nature of evil? If god is all
powerful and all good, if she is all powerful and good, how come is there evil on the world?
This is one of the questions that Tormented Agostin of Hippo continuously. How do I define
evil? Where does evil come from? We turn and we look around us and we see evil everywhere.
So where does this come from? With the sources in the Western tradition of the idea of evil,
which are peculiar to our culture, are to be found in Persia, in very ancient Persia,
in the world that produced not only Soroastrian religion and divided the world between two
opposed forces, evil and good, but also that produced manicism, a dualistic way of seeing the
world. So, though it is very clear that in the Christian religion or in the Judeo-Christian
Muslim religions, god is superior to the devil. And the devil in some essentially tormented way
acts only because god gives permission to the devil to act. That is to say, the devil is acting
because god essentially permits the devil to do all these things and to corrupt all these people.
Which sounds to me unbelievably sadistic because after all, why should we have to carry the burden
of this test? Nonetheless, what we have here is a very difficult situation because on the one hand,
Christians in the 16th century attribute a great deal of power to the devil,
but on the other hand, they are also aware and they have to maintain theologically to be sound
in the views that the devil operates only with the consent of god. Now, this devil of course
is represented to us in many different ways. I want to, in a sense, read two passages from the
Bible, which are essentially very descriptive of what the devil and how the devil is seen.
This is from Isaiah 14, 12, 15. How have you fallen from the heavens all morning a star,
son of the dawn? How are you cut down to the ground? You who move down the nations,
you set in your heart, I will scale the heavens above the stars of god, I will set my throne,
I will take my seat on the mount of assembly in the recesses of the north, I will ascend above
the clouds, I will be like the most high, yet then shalt you be brought down to hell into the sides
of the pit. Think about this, this is Isaiah, this is an image of the devil falling down,
the son of the dawn, a brighter star to Lucifer. This is the same devil as we find in Milton,
which is an incredibly attractive devil falling down from the skies into the pits of hell,
a beautiful bright angel whose sin has been to try to, in fact, challenge God in his power.
And then, of course, there is the other one from Revelation, from the book St. John's Apocalypse,
and there was a battle in heaven, Michael and his angels battled with the dragon,
and the dragon fought and his angels, and they did not prevail. Neither was the place found
anymore in heaven, and that great dragon was cast down, the ancient serpent, he who is called the
devil and Satan, who leads astray the whole world, and he was cast down to the earth,
and within his angels were cast down. So, in a sense, we have here the devil as a dragon,
as a serpent, the kind of the first deceiver, the first tempter, the one who comes into paradise
to corrupt humanity. So, in a sense, we have these different views of the devil
and the way in which Christianity, borrowing from Judaism, accept this idea of the devil.
See, the problem in the 16th century is that it's not difficult to believe in the devil.
If you are a Christian, then you must believe in the devil, you must believe in the power of the
devil. Baptism is in fact a form of exorcism of the devil. Just what you do when you are baptized,
you exorcise the devil, and one of the things that your godfather does, and your godmother
does too, is essentially to reject Satan, to reject the devil and embrace God. The devil
appears to us in the Gospels, it is the devil who comes essentially and tries to entice Jesus
by promising him all kinds of things. If he will adore him, this is a word, essentially,
kind of phrases that we will find again and again and again in a later period. That is to say,
the devil is the god of the witches. We know, for example, that Mary Osgood in Salem in 1692
declared, not on the torture, but on the questioning by his judges and accusers, that, and I quote,
that the devil told her he was her god and that she should serve and worship him. So in a sense,
what you have here is an image of the devil as wanting to be like God. But then on the other
hand, there are biblical passages. We find the devil sitting by the side of God and in the Book
of Job, which is one of the cruelest books in the Bible. Think about this. There is God sitting
with the devil and look around the earth. Look, oh my, how good my servant job is. You know,
he's really great. He's a terrific man. And the devil says, well, yeah, he's fine. He has everything
going. He has BCRs and BMWs and his wife is wonderful and his children are great. Why she
should not be a good believer in you? Why he should not love you? Okay, well, have a go at him, punish
him and see if he still loves me or not. And so the devil is given permission by God to go down
there and absolutely torture this guy, boils a terrible nagging wife, kill his children, loses
his job, loses his BCRs, his DVD, his BMWs, but he remains faithful. And then of course, because
he has remained faithful, he is rewarded with a new wife and new children. There's something wrong
with this story here. There's something very wrong with the story, but it shows you again that the
very ambivalent way in which the devil appears and it is used and portrayed doing God's bidding,
working against God, opposing God, essentially his servant as well, which of course, lead us to the
again to rephrase this question. Where does evil come from? What is the sort of evil?
Augustine's answer was that evil is there to show us the good as a kind of way. Okay, so this is evil
and so we can appreciate the good that we cannot live in the good all the time. Otherwise, we will
not know the value of the good. That is not a very convincing answer at all. What we know, however,
is that the devil appears continuously, the very early monks, the very early anchorites, the people
who went into the desert were continuously assaulted by the devil. And of course, that devil that
tormented the very early monks and the very early anchorites, the people who went into the desert
to escape the corruption of the world, that devil always have a kind of, shall we say, sexual
connotations. Many of the temptations of the devils were always in the form of sexual enticement.
This is a case of Simon in the desert. This is a case, a famous case of St. Anthony,
who lived in a cave night after night and who is tormented by the devil, who comes to him and
show him very lewd pictures, very awful kind of exciting sexual enticement until he falls by
his extraordinary fear. And I already told this story here in an earlier lecture by tormented by
his desire for this, by his attraction to this unbelievable looted images that the devil presents
to him, hangs a piece of meat from the cave, from the roof of the cave and embraces corrupted meat.
So he is reminded of the corruptiveness of the flesh, of the fact that the spirit lives on and
the flesh dies. So in a sense, what we have here is a very different images of the devil. The devil
is of course always present in the monastery. A good number of the stories and accounts of
monks and monasteries tells us always of the danger of the devil that is again by the side.
And then of course we have Dante's Aligieri in the end of the Inferno, the last canto of Inferno,
which is one of the most dramatic endings. There is the devil in the middle of a pond of eyes,
not fire, but eyes, and he describes it as follows. How chill and faint I turn and then
do not ask, read it, for I do not write it, since all words will fail. I did not die and I did not
remain alive. Think not for thyself, it thou has any wit, what I became, deny both death and life.
The emperor of the woeful kingdom, that is Satan, the emperor of hell, stood forth amid
breasts from the eyes, and I compare better with a giant than giants, than giants with his arms.
See now what that whole must be to answer to such a part. If he was as fair as he is now foul
and lifted up his brows against his maker, well may all sorrow come from him. And how great a marvel
it seemed to me when I saw three faces on his head, one in front and that was red. The other
two joined to it just over the middle of his shoulder and all joined at the crown. The right
seemed between white and yellow. The left had such an aspect as the people from where the Nile descends.
On their each came four two gray wings of size fitting for such a bird. Sales at sea I never
saw like this. They had no feathers, but were like a bat, and he was beating them so that the
three wings went forth from him by which the costitus was kept frozen. Here is a very different
image of the devil, a kind of image that will become engraved in the medieval mind. The devil
as a kind of monster, as an extraordinary monster with wings like a bat in body, in eyes. Strangely
now there is a recent commercial which shows hell as a place which is exceedingly cold,
which is essentially a take off from Dante and is a way in which popular culture incorporates
sort of culture themes or erudite or important themes. Now what happens as we move into the
late 15th century and the early 16th century is of course that the devil acquires a very
different personality, and that personality of the devil in the late 15th and early 16th century
is of course that of the Jew. The stereotype of the devil, the way in which the devil is
represented in the iconography of the period, is the stereotypical representation of the Jew,
and in that sense the kind of representations of the devil taps into the latent antisemitism,
not latent, sometimes very vivid antisemitism of the middle ages, and it in fact brings one
with the other. And so in a sense we move to a very different world and when we look at the
confessions of witches who are tortured or who confess automatically to these matters,
you could see how the devil is described by them. Sometimes in this nocturnal gatherings,
he's represented as a he-goat, and if you look at some of the etchings by Goya of the early
19th century, the very dark etching of the dark paintings that he painted, you could see the
presence of the he-goat associated not only with extreme sexuality, but also with a kind of animal
figure, or he is described not yet that we have to wait for the kind of existential devil for
Goethe's fowls or for essentially Milton's beautiful image, a kind of horrible figure,
a sort of monster-like figure who in his feature, in his nose and so on, imitate the
division of the Jew. In 1645, Widow Bash, a Sophoc Wish in England, declares, having
declared himself as having sexual intercourse with the devil, declares that he was colder than
man. Many people argue that he was neuter, that is to say some kind of aberration, not really human,
not fully anything, a kind of monster which led the armies of witches against Christianity
in early modern Europe. Thank you.
