Lecture 20 The Witch-Craze and Misogyny
Welcome to Lecture 20.
In Lecture 19 we look at two topics, one, the question of fear in the West, and second,
the construction of Satan in the late 15th and early 16th century, a very different type
of Satan from the one that we find in the Middle Ages or in biblical sources.
In Lecture 20 I want to look at also two topics, one, an extended discussion of the explanations
for the witch-craze to be found in misogyny, in the history of women in the Western world,
and the second one, some focusing on the maleus maleficatum, the hammer of witches, as the
kind of normative text that is going to dictate and is going to, in a sense, determine the
way in which the witch-craze is going to be carried out for the next 150 years.
Let me begin by raising one question, which is that you can look at the witch-craze, you
could look at the great event when between 80,000 and 100,000 people were executed in
Western Europe, the majority of them, all the women, between the late 15th century and
the 1660s.
You could look at this topic and you could say this is a topic of women's history.
That is to say that the relationship between different genders have a great deal to do with
the way in which this persecution is articulated, which in a sense forces us, in a very brief
period of time here, to go over the whole context and the whole background of women's
history from the beginnings of history to the late 15th century, but concentrating on
the issues of Western attitude towards women.
I want to say to you that the very first religions of mankind, of course, were vegetation
religion and fertility cults, but the first established religions of mankind were women,
female-dominated religions.
A great revolution took place in the ancient world, not only with the coming of agriculture
around 11,000 years ago or 13,000 years ago, but also with the invasion of the so-called
sea people.
A good number of the religions which were female-oriented or female-centered cult of
prostitutes and temples, goddesses and so on, is replaced by male deities.
One example of this, of course, is Judaism, which replaces an ancient form of religion
based upon fertility cults by a religion which is of course dominated by patriarchy, by
a male figure.
So in that sense, this is a great transformation.
We could see how this is still lingers on in Greek religion, for example, in Greek mythology,
where though the great deities are males, you still have the survival, or should we
say the lingering presence, of female figures like Ceres, the goddess of agriculture or
necessity and so on.
You could see how, in fact, there is a transition from female-dominated religions to male-dominated
religions.
The reality, of course, in the Western tradition is that, and there are exceptions to this,
and I will mention some of the exceptions, but the reality is always that the two great
fountains from which Western civilization emerges, that is to say, on the one hand the
classical tradition, and on the other hand the Judaic tradition, all these two sources
and the normative texts that emerge out of those two cultures and civilizations are profoundly
misogynist.
Now I know that when I say this in class, when I say that the Bible, the book of Genesis
is extraordinarily misogynist, I always get a great deal of argument in my classes from
students who show me, oh but look, there is a representation of Esther, there is a representation
of Ruth, there are good women, of course there are, very much as there are good women represented
in classical literature, Plato and Euripides, yes, to mention two of them, take a position
which could be, in fact, identified as a feminist position in the text, Plato in the Republic
calls for equality of women, but the reality of it, of course, is very different indeed,
that is to say, the consensus is that both classical and Jewish civilizations, certainly
the Bible, provide text, normative texts that are going to determine the role and place
of women in Western society.
Let me give you some examples of this.
For example, in Athens, in the front of every Athenian household, there was an image, a
sculpture of a gigantic father's.
It determined the role and place of women in that society, women in Athenian society,
the society which we always look as an example and as a model of the greatness of classical
civilization as the fountain of our own democracy.
In Athenian society, women were restricted to the interior spaces of the household.
They really were thought by most of the men in a culture which was essentially bisexual
to be unworthy of love because they are indeed below reason, because they are incapable of
rational thought.
And the fallows signify, it's a kind of emblematic way in which you, in fact, assert that Athenian
society was not only a slave-holding society, but was also a phallocracy, a society dominated
and ruled by the fallows.
There is a great book on this by Eva Kules on the reign of the fallows in Athens, which
demonstrates through the reconstruction of archeological data the manner in which this
image has played a very significant role in classical society.
In the book, in the Genesis, in the story of creation, the compilers of the book of
Genesis kept together a series of different stories which coincided and they made no selection.
There are two stories of creation.
The first story, which is the oldest one and which comes first, in fact tells us that
God created men, male and female, He created them and leaves it at that.
And the second story, the one that has become the normative one in Western culture, is the
one with Adam and Eve.
Is Adam and Eve?
But of course, Eve is not co-created with men.
The female comes out of man, woman, which is a Celtic word for of man, essentially something
that has come out of man.
And it reminds us of that great book by Margaret Atwood, The Handsmaid Tale, where the handmaids
get the name of their man who owned them, of Glen, of Fred, and so on, indicating the
subservience and dependence of females on males.
And of course, the most important figure here is Eve, in many respects, and as I mentioned
in an earlier lecture when I was discussing Hildegard of Bingham, what we have here is
Eve as the quintessential woman, a woman who wants more than she can have, who is easily
deceived and tempted by the devil, and who leads not only Adam, but mankind as a whole
into this terrible strait, into being a spell from paradise.
It is the burden of original sin, which carries, carried by Christians throughout the ages.
Now think about that, even the figure of Mary, of course, of the Virgin Mary, is a counterpart
to Eve, an unimportant counterpart, but it does not erase and it does not even begin
to, in a sense, eliminate the fact that women are represented through our biblical texts
and in patristic literature and in the early church and so on, as beneath man.
Now we should take some time here to point out that in the early church there is a sort
of rough equality and that women are allowed in the first years, as the research by Pagels
have shown, the women are allowed important positions within the church, but that ends
by the time the church comes to have control of the Roman Empire and it becomes a dominant
relation within the Empire.
That is to say, women are excluded from the sacred within Christianity.
They cannot minister the sacraments, they cannot do that which becomes the central focus
of Christianity, which is the act of transubstantiation.
They cannot consecrate the host.
Not only do they have this problem within religion, but of course their economic and
social roles also become subordinated to the role of man.
What we are really talking about here is a, should we say, a long standing attitude towards
females, towards women.
They are seen as easily seducible by the devil, they are seen as prone to evil, they are
seen as lossful, they are seen as the enemy, a necessary enemy, but someone who in a sense
bring this court into the world, who brings essentially evil and sinfulness into the world.
They are treacherous, they are inconstant.
Modern literature is filled with pejorative representations of women, they are nagging
wives and so on.
Throughout the Middle Ages, the literature always represented wives as someone who really
you could not love.
Women as being below reason, women as being not worthy of man's love.
There is, however, a moment which is very different altogether and that is of course culturally
loved in the 12th century.
In the 12th century, for a very brief period of time, for a period of around a hundred
years, among the court, among the people on top, there is the development of a literature,
a literary, to we say fabrication, a literary construction, which represents women no longer
below reason, but represent women above reason.
The Cult of the Virgin, as I explained in a previous lecture, is part of this movement
which places women above reason, which gives them a very important role.
Women acquire power, not only a power in literature, they acquire power in a sense in that they
rule the courts and they set the etiquette of the court and the manner in which the night
ought to behave towards his lady.
Now please understand that culturally loved is, in some respects, partly a literary construction
and also that it is restricted only to the very top echelons of society, that it does
not reach it down into the masses.
For example, in the most important text on courtly love, which is entitled The Art of
Courtly Love by Andreas Capelanos, Andreas de Chaplin, he says, well, if you are on the
road and you meet a comely peasant by your means, rape her, because she is beneath you
and therefore an object, a commodity for pleasure, whereas to your ladies you must in fact show
a great deal of distinction and treatment and honor, because she is on the same rank
or on the same sort of social rank as you are.
It will not be until Cervantes Don Quixote that essentially, and Cervantes does this
in a very playful manner in which the honor and respect that is due to ladies is extended
not just to the great ladies, but also to uncouth and a smelly, garlic-smelling peasant
women, which is the case of Dulcinea del Toboso.
So where do we stand here?
We stand essentially on a world in which the position of women is very restricted.
We stand in a world which is ruled by patriarchy, in which religion itself is patriarchal,
like religions in the New World or in Africa or in Asia, where female and male deities,
in a sense, are part of a larger pantheon, or in the case of African cults and religions
where a god can, in a sense, shift sex, could be six months female and six months male,
and essentially have this kind of dual sexuality.
In the West, it is a patriarchal religion which filters down at every level of society.
A counterpart to this is, of course, violence against women.
This is a world, Middle Ages, the early modern period, in which there are levels of violence
against women is extraordinary.
We are not only talking about domestic violence, but public violence.
There is to say, women of the upper classes will never go out by themselves, they will
always need someone to accompany them, because outside, in the outside world, there is always
the fear of rape.
Rape is widespread.
Rape is, in fact, quite common throughout the late Middle Ages and the early modern period.
Thomas Mallory, the great writer of Lemoch de Artur, one of the great literary figures
of 15th century England, was a convicted rapist, twice.
Some of the stories he shows are canterbury tales, specifically the wife of Bath is a
story about a man who commits rapes and is condemned to find what women want.
And the answer to that, of course, that women want dominion, that the women want to have
control, is an answer which, of course, might reflect the realities of what women want,
which is also an answer against women, because it shows them as wanting mastery of a man.
And you could see how trouble and conflicting this representation of women is in this period,
when in a work such as Joseph Canterbury Tales or in The Wife of Bath, the author has The
Wife of Bath voicing opinions about sexuality and about the role of women and the place
of women in medieval society, in which she uses patristic, she deploys patristic and
classical examples to show why women should, in a sense, enjoy sex, have pleasure, have
more than one husband, select, have mastery.
But of course, in doing so, Schosser also presents an ambivalent, so we say, portray
of the wife of Bath as a woman who is, of course, a nagging wife who is exceedingly
sensual, who is exceedingly lustful.
What we're really talking about here is something very deep and very troubling.
What we're really talking about here is essentially the relationship between men and women and
a relationship that is tinge, that it is indeed shape, bisexuality, and by the fear of sexuality.
And it is based upon the superiority of men, of the women, in terms of their economic and
social status, in terms of the way in which they represent themselves, but which is undermined
and underpinned by the biological superiority of women in terms of sexuality.
What I'm trying to say here in using high-falutin words is the fact that, of course, that women
are seen in this world, in this society, and of course, it remains so until the 19th
century and until the 20th century.
Nothing has really changed very much, indeed, in the way in which women are represented.
Women are seen both as commodities, as objects of pleasure, as the object of the gaze, as
something that is seen and watched and perceived and used, and at the same time, as dangerous,
because if they are too sexual, they are too lustful, they might, in fact, bring men down.
Essentially what it is, is that if you look at modern advertisement, or if you look at
movies and so on, you will see that the woman becomes objectified, becomes a commodity that
is presented there for male gaze to look at her.
And the moment in which a woman becomes too, how should we say, forecoming, or becomes
too bold, eventually there will be a kind of sense that this woman is dangerous and
that she is not to be trusted.
Of course, as I tell my classes, and this is a moment in which in my classes I become
a bit, I introduce a bit of levity, it all comes down to one single fact, which is, of
course, that the patterns and the boundaries of sexuality are essentially drawn by men,
and they are very fixed.
And if a woman transgresses over this boundary, she is going to get into trouble.
For example, if a woman desires too much sex, you will be seen as somebody who is, in a
sense, not normal to having some kind of illness to suffering, because at the end, though males,
especially young males, like to think of themselves as incredibly potent sexual beings, the reality
of it is that, of course, any woman who has a certain amount of cruelty within herself
can destroy a man very simply, which is to say, you go to bed and she keeps saying, well,
is that all it is?
Well, I want more.
And eventually the man will have to say, I am sorry, I am terribly, I have this terrible
headache, I must go elsewhere, because, unfortunately, man cannot fake it.
And since we cannot fake it, therefore, we males have determined the boundaries of sexuality,
and the woman has been taught for her own survival to say, no, no, you are great, absolutely,
I must, no, it's fine with me, I don't want any more, because wanting more brings you
into danger.
So there is one kind of representation of women, which is women who are too open about
the sexualities.
Now, in the Western tradition, this is, of course, leads to very ridiculous, tremendously
ridiculous consequences in 19th century England, middle class, wise, were supposed to be incapable
of orgasms, were supposed to be frigid.
So the men of the middle classes went to get their pleasures in brothels, or had mistresses
and so on, while the wife remained the pure kind of representation of the clingliness,
and should we say, integrity of the household.
So this is nothing new, it has continued, and it continues to this very day in the relationships
between male and female.
There is something else, too, which is important.
We're talking, really, of course, of sexually active women.
And all their sexually active women is, of course, the ultimate as transgression in
late medieval and early modern society.
There is a very clear link between lewdness, or lewd expressions, or lewd behavior among
all the women and accusations of witchcraft.
That is to say, cursing, blasphemy, behaving lewdly in public is something that is going
to lead you immediately into the accusations of witchcraft.
Before I was talking to the audience about a very famous play in the Spanish literature
called La Celestina, this is an old woman who is, of course, not only a madam, who lives
on the edge of the town, she engages in the reparation of maidenhoods, she practices and
doubles a bit into magic and so on.
She is, of course, someone who will be seen in no-ten countries as a witch and will have
been brought and burned at the stake for witchcraft, because her behavior would have been intolerable.
And then there is something else that links women to evil.
I think that anyone who has grown in a traditional society or anyone who is as old as I am remembers
that as you were growing up, you will be told, don't go down that street because there is
an old woman who lives down the street who has the evil eye.
And when you went with your baby and that old woman came to see the baby, usually a
woman who lived by herself and who was bent with age and who was somewhat poor, and she
began to praise the baby, you immediately went and got some kind of amulet that will
protect the baby from the evil eye.
That is to say, the association which had entered literature in the form of children's
stories and so on of the age with evil eye, with evil intentions in which you can, in
a sense, attack someone by praising that person if you are an evil person, an all-lady, evil,
all-lady, in a sense, equated here into one formulation, one mythology, the kind of things
that I was talking about, a mythology about a group that you can then attack and dispose
of.
And of course, this is what essentially is the role of women in this period.
Remember that Kultly Love, for example, which is this brief period, is condemned by the
church in 1215 at the Four Latin Council and is declared heretical and that the church
will argue continuously throughout the Middle Ages that indeed to have pleasure in your
sexual relationships with your wife was, to a certain extent, a form of adultery.
That is to say, the, in a sense, privileging of chastity, of a sexuality, the denial of
the flesh, and of course, the women seen always as a tempter and a seducer.
Now, of course, this has always, has always existed and it exists to this very day and
yet we do not go out and burn witches today and nonetheless, we have certainly pejorative
representations of women, we commodify them, we use them as objects, we make them the object
of the male gaze.
What is different about the 15th century?
What is different about the 15th century is that all this tendency, all this latent misogyny,
which was part of the Western tradition, is articulated into a powerful document that
becomes, as it were, the foundational text for the witch-crace.
This text, this extraordinarily powerful text, is called the Malleus Maleficarum, the Hammer
of Witches.
It begins or it appears, it is written by two Dominican monks named Jacob Esprenger
and Henry Kramer, who have members of the Dominican Order, who have been sent, in a
sense, to investigate charges of witchcraft in certain areas of Germany.
This is a bull, a very important bull, called Summa de Siderantes Afectivos, in fact, determined
by the Pope, sent by the Pope, on 9 December of the year of the Lord, 1484.
He commissions these two monks to, in a sense, carry out an investigation of certain activities
that have been reported in certain parts of Germany.
I quote from the Bull by Innocent VIII of 1484.
Quote, it has indeed lately come to our ears, not without afflicting us with bitter sorrow,
that in some parts of Northern Germany, as well as in the provinces, townships, territories,
and dioceses of Maine, Cologne, Treve, Salzburg, and Bremen, many persons of both sexes, unmindful
of their own salvation, and Australian from the Catholic faith, have abandoned themselves
to devils in Kuba and Tsukuba, and by their incantations, spells, conjurations, and other
accursed charms and crafts, enormities and horrid offenses, have slain infants, yet in
the mother's womb, as also the offspring of cattle, have blasted the produce of the
earth, the grapes of the vine, the fruits of the trees, nay, men and women, beasts of
burden, herd beasts, as well as animals of all the kinds, vineyards, orchards, meadows,
pastureland, corn, wheat, and all other cereals, these wretches, these wretches furthermore
afflict and torment men and women, beasts of burden, herd beasts, as well as animals
of all the kinds, with terrible, ambiguous pains and sore diseases, both internal and
external, they hinder men from performing the sexual arc, and women from conceiving,
when husbands cannot know their wives, not wives receive their husbands, over and above
this, they blasphemously renounce the fate which is theirs by the sacrament of baptism,
and at the instigation of the enemy of mankind, they do not shrink from committing and perpetrating
the foulest abominations and filthiest excesses to the deadly peril of their own souls, whereby
they outraged the divine majesty, and at a cost of a scandal and danger to very many.
Although our dear sons, Henry Cramer and James Sprenger, professors of theology, members
of the orders of the friars and so on, have already been investigating the area, I now
send them to make a report. Well, they did. This is part of a confrontation between plain
and mountain. This is part of a confrontation between the fully Christianized Europe and
the half-Christianized Europe, and they go to these mountains and they interview peasants
and they are inquisitors, and they bring them to trial, and they extort confessions from
them, and they come down, and in 1486, they write the Malleus Maleficarum. They write
a book entitled The Hammer of Witches. This becomes essentially the normative text for
the persecution of witches throughout Europe, and it will be used by both Protestants and
Catholics for the same purpose. This, there would have been a persecution of witches without
the Malleus, because Europe was in a particularly nasty, persecutory mood at the end of the Middle
Ages and the birth pangs of modernity, but it would never have taken essentially the
shape that it took under the influence of the Malleus, and if you look carefully at
the way in which this book is organized, it really reinforces the kind of things that
I have been talking about before, the kind of fear of women, the extreme and radical
misogyny. This book is divided into three parts. The first part is treating of the three
necessary concomitants of witchcraft, which are the devil, a witch, meaning a woman, and
the permission of Almighty God, and this is followed by a second part, which is treating
of the methods by which the works of witchcraft are wrought and directed, and how they may
be successfully annulled and dissolved. And third, relating to the judicial proceedings
in both the ecclesiastical and civil courts against witches and indeed all heretics. So
essentially it tells you what witchcraft is and how it comes about, mostly through the
work of women, for example, concerning witches. This is from the first part, which copulate
with devil. Why is that women, they ask themselves rhetorically, are chiefly addicted to evil
superstition or how witches can turn men into animals or how witches can make men's members
disappear. And that is followed again by the second part, which tells you how to deal with
these events. And then the third part that creates a kind of a schema on how to identify
witches, bring them to trial, and in a sense, punish them. This is the book that would be
printed because a printing press has also placed a role in the way in which this is
diffused will be printed throughout Europe will be carried by Protestants and Catholics,
wherever they conferred our witches. And they will essentially use this book to the very
end to bring people to trial and to execute them. And the book is filled with lurid stories
about women, how women will eventually make the man's penis disappear by some diabolic
act. And there is, of course, a very funny story. This is a book that must be read to
in a sense, when you get beyond the scholastical character of it, you get into a story such
as a witch that steals the penis of everyone in the village and puts it in a bird's nest.
And there comes a priest whose penis has also been stolen and looks into the nest and finds
the biggest one and puts it back into himself until, of course, he's discovered doing that
and is taking away from him. What kind of representation of women, one that is accepted
by all those in power, and what are the consequences of this death and burning at the stake? Thank
you.
