Lecture 21, The World of Witches
Welcome to Lecture 21.
In Lecture 20, we look at misogyny in the Western tradition as one of the causes for
the witch-crace.
And then I also spoke very briefly about the Malleus Maleficarum.
In Lecture 21, it's a lecture you all have been waiting for, which is how to become a
witch.
That is to say, the kind of things you have to do to become a witch.
So please take careful notes, because this is your opportunity now to be able to become
a witch and to do all kinds of misdeeds to those people you do not like.
I want to, before I begin this lecture, to show you in very vivid ways how this attack
against women work.
In a village in Trier, in Germany, in 1585, two villages were in fact subjected to accusations
of witchcraft, and only one woman was left in each of the villages, which shows you the
kinds of attacks against women that were perpetrated in this period.
The point, of course, is that by the beginning of the 16th century, armed with the Malleus
Maleficarum, both Protestants and Catholics went into rural Europe and into the cities
as well, and I will show you one example of urban witchcraft in another lecture.
They went into the countryside and into the cities and began to identify and to bring
to trial those who were accused of aborting with the devil.
This, of course, led to a tremendous amount of literature on witches following the Malleus.
The Malleus was the example, the Malleus was the model, and then you have this extraordinary
proliferation of books written some by very learned and important men, some others by
lesser figures.
There are hundreds and hundreds, thousands of books written in the 16th and 17th century,
which describe for those who are interested in this matters how you can identify a witch
or the acts and deeds, the terrible deeds of witches.
One of these books is a book entitled the Compendium Maleficarum, written by Francesco
Maria Guasso in the 16th century.
It is a hostile source and describes in luxury of details how you become a witch.
What I want to do in this lecture is essentially go through that book and essentially show
you how you become a witch, the kind of a stages you have to go through before you
become a full-fledged, card-carrying member of the great community of witches.
The first thing, of course, in order to become a witch is that you have to sign a pact with
the devil.
The pact, of course, plays an extraordinary role in the Western imagination.
The pact is an agreement, a written agreement, which tells us something about the literacy
of the early modern period, usually written in your own blood in which you agree with
the devil to give your soul to the devil, to do evil for the devil, to worship him as
God in return for which the devil will give you, Satan will give you certain things.
What kind of things are you essentially entering into an agreement for?
Self, sex, power, and the sweetest of all things, revenge.
So in a sense, you enter into a pact with the devil or with Satan, in which Satan offers
you something, and of course a great idea of this, or the great example of this is Dr.
Faustos by Marlowe, Christopher Marlowe, also a book about the representations of witchcraft
in which Dr. Faustos gives his soul to the devil in return for knowledge, and eventually
for a vision of Helen of Troy.
So in a sense, you could see the kind of things you give yourself up to the devil in return
for something.
Who will not sell his soul, for example, for the wishes to win in Washington, one championship
of the NBA, or for something like that, and how many times we in our modern society don't
say things like, I will give my soul to the devil if I will get this or that.
So it's part of a common expression.
This pact is written in blood, and it's usually placed in the crossroads.
The crossroads are places in late medieval and early modern Europe, which were thought
to be frequented by devils, which is why in crossroads to this very day, certainly in
areas that have subabious sea crosses, the crusaders in Galicia, the crosses in the crossroads,
which are placed there to, in a sense, scare the devils away from the crossroads.
The pact can be entered for a number of years, 24 years, 41 years, or for a lifetime.
And they are, of course, all written, as I said to you, in blood.
May I point out to you that blood has a very particular meaning in the Middle Ages and
in the early modern period.
It is, in fact, the expression of the most deep commitment.
But remember that many of those of you who are seeing or listening to this, that when
you were a child and you exchanged your blood, something that we will not do anymore in the
world of AIDS, that you exchanged your blood with a friend or a beloved, to mix your blood
to, in a sense, indicate that kind of commitment.
I have an example here.
In 1671, very late at the very end of the wish-craze, Joseph Eggman Schultz of Axburg
in Germany confessed that on 15 May 1671, towards midnight, he placed an illuminated
pact.
This was a very elaborate pact.
It has been even with illuminated letters written with his own blood, where three roads
cross.
In Spain, one of the very few cases of wish-craft, a very notorious one, is the case of Magdalena
de la Cruz, a Franciscan nun in the Combe of Santa Isabel at Córdoba.
In fact, she was a pious nun that she was elected Abbas of the monastery in 1533, 1536
and 1539.
In 1544, she was accused of wish-craft brought in front of the Inquisition and voluntarily
confessed that she had entered in with a pact with the demon named Balbar for 41 years.
She confessed to this, the Inquisition didn't think much of this and put her in a monastery
for the rest of her life in a kind of imprisonment.
So now you have signed the pact, now you have entered into a pact with the devil.
What is the next step?
The next step is the mark.
The devil will imprint his mark on you.
This is an important moment.
The mark of the devil will be branded.
You are branded by this mark of the devil.
This is usually a small mark in the form of a bat or a toad and it is found underneath
your eyelids, in your armpits or in your genitalia.
It is the equivalent of a birthmark.
It sometimes could also be a third breast, a third nipple and I will talk about that
a bit later.
This marks of course are insensitive to pain.
They do not bleed when pierced with a needle.
There is a whole group of people, a rather to we say this respectable group, a rather
shady bunch called the prickers who go around with long needles.
When you find someone who is accused of witchcraft and you find that this person has a mark,
then you put a needle through the mark and if it does not bleed and if it does not hurt,
that of course, that's it, that's a sign that you are a witch.
And these prickers are the experts in determining whether the mark is truly a mark of the devil
or not.
Now you could imagine anyone who is born with a birthmark in some part of your body and
this becomes essentially the target and the emblem of your membership into this covenant
of witches.
A third breast in 1692 Bridget Bishop, 1692 in Salem, Bridget Bishop was found to have
a third nipple.
As we know in nature, there are people who are born with three nipples and it is not
a common occurrence, but it does occur.
The third nipple was supposed to be a nipple which was given to you by the devil not only
as a mark of the devil, but as a way in which you can actual suckle your incubus.
You can essentially feed your incubus with your third breast.
In the case of Bridget Bishop, they are witnesses who testify that they saw a third breast,
but four or five hours afterwards it had disappeared.
Another sign of course, that the devil was essentially acting through this woman.
Now all these things sound so utterly ridiculous that how we are going to believe them, but
the fact of course is that people did believe these things and testified to them and in
fact acted like that.
The prickers essentially always appear in a kind of as a disruptible bunch not to be
trusted and so on and we are going to see a case, the case of Urban Grandier later on
in another lecture in which when he is found the mark and the mark is essentially punctured
by a pricker and it does not bleed, that is the ultimate confirmation of the fact that
he is a witch, that he is a male witch, he is a warlock.
Now you have signed a pact with the devil, you have now been imprinted with a mark and
I don't have to tell you the unbelievable sexual connotations of being branded with
a mark and how branding and marks play a very important role in early modern society because
slaves begin to be branded in this period as well.
So our slaves will have branded in the forehead saying I am the slave of such and such.
This is a very common sight in Europe in this period.
You will see slaves branded in the forehead to indicate ownership by a specific person
but also the kinds of connotations of branded.
The devil brands them or the devil's representative brands them with an iron.
There is an element of pain, there is an element of marking in a society like ours in which
we are into body piercing and tattooing.
We have to recognize the symbolic importance, the anthropological importance of such branding
and such marking.
So once you have done that, you have signed a pact, you have been marked by the devil,
now you abjure your faith, you go through a process, it's a kind of absolute specific
process in which you renounce your faith in Christianity, you denounce God, you accept
the devil and in doing so you also abjure your faith.
Then this is followed by the casting a ways of rosaries and scapularies and all the indications
that you essentially are part of Christianity.
Now the rosary did not play a very important role in the Middle Ages but it's part of the
devotions that emerged in the early modern period and become deeply identified with Christian
spirituality.
Scapularies also are a kind of very late medieval and early modern phenomenon.
Scapularies for those of you who might never heard the term, it's a piece of cloth from
a monk's habit which you wear in the back and in the front of you as a kind of symbol
that you have taken orders, it's usually dedicated to the lady of Mount Carmel and the idea is,
one of the promises that is if you wear an escapulary and you wear so in faith you will
never die in mortal sin, you will always have the opportunity of confessing your sins before
you die, therefore gaining the kingdom of heaven.
Of course by casting away rosaries and scapularies you essentially enter into the realm of Satan
and abandon that of God.
Then you pay homage to the Satan or to his representatives.
This is one of the parts in which those writing about witchcraft spend the greatest amount
of time, meaning that they will talk about this again and again and again because it
is not a simple act of homage by genuflecting and making sects and gestures because it involved
something that was obscene but which nonetheless call attention to the relationship of witches
to the devil and to the rest of humanity and we read this in text all the time.
It is the kiss that is to say and I quote, the witches kiss the devil in his behind while
the devil emits a foul feted and filthy wind.
It still goes on to this very day I am afraid but essentially what you have here is the
way in which the devil is kissed the fundament of the devil.
I have again another quote from Walter of Langton, a bishop of Coventry who was accused
of doing this, when the witches paid homage to Satan, Satan offers his back parts to be
kissed by his vassals.
They kiss and I add the fundament of the devil and the devil of course emits as I already
said a filthy and foul air.
This is a kind of in a sense subservient of the witch, of those who practice witchcraft
to the devil.
Now this is followed by a sacrilegious baptism, you are rebaptised, you are entered into the
church of Satan, you are giving new good parents and you are giving a new name.
Now this is very important.
Now I am not saying that these things happened, please understand this.
This is a hostile source that argued that this is what happened but I am not saying
that this is what happened.
In fact at the end of this course or at the end of the section on witchcraft I will have
my own point of view on this whole thing.
But everyone in Europe believed that this happened.
Now naming is very important because it gives power.
The power of naming is one that is of course already present in the Old Testament in the
book of Genesis.
Man names animals as they parade in front of him, Adam names the animals.
So the devil names those who come to him now, give him new good parents, brings him into
the fold as it were.
Cotton mother writing in New England in the 17th century wrote that the witches were organized
like a congregational church.
Because that is his point of view and his opinion.
Then you cut a piece of your clothing and give it to the devil, a piece of hair.
I want you to think of the importance especially when you were younger, when you lived in a
very different world and the one in which you live now, those of you who are listening
to this or seeing this, that the exchange of a piece of clothing, of an item that is
a personal item or a piece of your hair, something that is part and parcel of the culture not
only of the Middle Ages but of the early modern period of today.
In a sense it's a magical act in which you give power to someone by giving that person
a piece of you, something that is symbolic of you, which the devil will keep and therefore
acquire power over you.
That in a great deal of magical practices what we want to do is steal something that
belongs to someone else so that we can use it for incantations and so on to provide us
with a weapon against this person.
One of the favorite tactics in anti-witchcraft practices is essentially to make sure that
you leave nothing that belongs to you, your nail pairings, feces and so on that you bury
it so that it cannot be used by a witch against you.
So by giving a token to the devil essentially you put yourself in the devil's power.
You become one with the devil and then you enter into the magic circle, the magic circle
which is represented in all the movies about witchcraft and so on, the pentagram, the magic
circle with the stars and there you become one part of this community of devil worshipers
and then finally you promise to the devil to participate or to do some sacrifices.
Now I want to slow down here a bit because of course we have to realize that this is
essentially a hostile source.
This hostile source not only describes how you become a witch but it also describes the
place where witches gather and it describes the nocturnal gatherings which are called
the sabbath and I want to spend the rest of the lecture discussing the sabbath, discussing
the gathering of witches, the nocturnal gathering of witches and their importance in European
society.
There are many books written about these nocturnal gatherings.
The most recent one is of course Carlo Ginsberg's ecstasy's deciphering the witches sabbath which
is again an attempt to create a kind of archaeology of these practices going back to very ancient
and prehistoric practices to link them with cult and agrarian cults and all kinds of vegetation
beliefs.
It was well known in Europe or at least well accepted in Europe.
It was a fact that people truly believe that at certain times of the year, at certain times
of the weeks the witches gather to engage in orgies, to do evil deeds, to worship the devil
and so on and you could see how this works.
You are in a village and there are the people in the distance carrying candles and jumping
in the air.
This is where the idea that witches fly comes from.
They will have a wand or a piece of haze or wood between the legs and I want to point
out to you the phallic implications of this.
The idea that you are jumping with a piece of wood between your legs and that you seem
to be floating in the air and there is a wonderful painting, one of the dark paintings by Goya
which shows this, which shows these people standing or floating in the air.
We also know that a good number of people in early modern, late medieval and early modern
Europe will have access to belladonna and to other hallucinogenic plans and that they
will in fact cover their bodies with them and they will think to be in a trans, will
think to be flying.
They still do that to this very day and therefore it entered into the European mind the idea
that witches gather for nocturnal events in which they did all kinds of terrible deeds.
Now it could be as simple as a group of people in the village getting out into the middle
of the woods into a meadows to do some kind of celebration and having a bit of fun by
themselves and therefore it turns into and is converted into something else.
I was thinking of this when I was thinking, when I was preparing this lecture of the movie
about the witch trials at Salem, the most recent one with I think one on a rider in
which the young women go into the woods to practice some kind of, you know, to have fun
and it's turned into a kind of demonic event, some kind of diabolic event in which they
are essentially from having fun and talking and dancing and doing the kinds of things
that the society represses and does not allow is turned into a kind of their worship.
They pay for the lies for doing that.
Now the sabbat, sabbat is really not related to the Jewish sabbat, it's really something
taken from Sabaeus, a phyringian deity, a kind of god of bacchanalia and excess and
they are great and little sabbats.
They are the little ones which occurred every Thursday, the day before a Friday or something
like that and then they are the great days, the great days that are associated in the
European imagination with great events.
The greatest of all gatherings of witches was believed to be Walpurgis Nack, the 30th
of April.
Why?
Because as we shall see later on when I discuss the importance of May Day and when we talk
about folklore in Europe, Walpurgis Nack is the eve of May Day, it's the great important
day, it's the night of the witches, it is thought that in parts of Germany thousands upon thousands
of witches, we are carrying the back of devils to this nocturnal gatherings, Walpurgis Nack
is the night of terror and the practices of Walpurgis Nack are still in a sense, remember
practice in many parts of Europe today, the building of great bonfires, the burning of
the witch on Walpurgis Nack.
Think about that movie, I'm Accord by Fellini, which has a scene in a little town in which
they burned the witch on Walpurgis Nack.
The end of winter, the beginning of spring, May Day is a very important day in European
culture and so the day before is a day for witches.
The eve of St John's Day, the eve of the 23rd of June, it is also another important
day, the eve of Christmas.
That is to say that all these great gatherings of witches take place precisely on the eve
of important Christian celebrations.
There is in fact a linkage between the liturgy of the church and the agricultural calendar
and the celebrations of witches.
Then you have of course Christmas and then you have the little Sabbath.
Now what is done in these gatherings, what happens in this gathering?
According to the hostile sources and I insist and I can't reiterate that, according to hostile
sources there are people dressed in animal skins, usually dressed as goats.
These are the representatives of the devil.
On a platform, on a stage, sit the representatives of the devil or the devil himself, usually
in the form of a he-goat or dressed like a bear and there he will sit together with
the oldest of all the witches and they will preside over this gathering and at this gathering
they will have great dinners, they will eat great foods, substantial, beautiful food prepared
without salt because salt is a symbol of eternity and all the food they will eat without salt.
They will drink monsi and what was supposed to be an aphrodisiac, a kind of sweet wine
which they thought was an aphrodisiac, they will engage in orgies, in a kind of promiscuous
sexual exchanges where the devil will select the witches he wants for his own.
There at these nocturnal gatherings, the devil will provide the witches with either an incubus
or a sucubus.
If you are a female you wear an incubus, if you are a male you wear a sucubus.
That is to say you will get a spirit that will satisfy for you all the things you want
sexually, that will accompany you, that will take the place or that will take the form
of a cat which is why the association between witchcraft and black cats, it will take the
form of a little animal and it will accompany you and suddenly become a human figure and
will provide you with all kinds of sexual pleasures and these people never get tired.
They are there for you all the time which is more than can be said for the majority
of humans.
So in a sense you could see that and then you also engage in dancing in kind of orgasmic
dances and think of the importance of dances in religious observation.
Think of King David dancing in front of the Ark of the Covenant, think of the importance
of dancing.
I always think of course of dancing in terms of Holy Week in Seville.
I think of the gypsies dancing and singing and sending saetas as the virgins, the different
virgins of the neighborhood go through the streets of Seville, the kind of association
between the sacred and the movement of your body and the sensuality of your body.
There is of course the use of phallus, artificial phallus.
The phallus are quite common throughout Europe in this period.
The church edicts again and again condemn the use of artificial phalluses and they are
another charge that is raised against the witches that they use artificial phalluses
in their performances.
You sacrifice animals, you collect toads and kill them right there or bats and then of
course the worst of all charges that you kill children, that you sacrifice children, that
you meet wives among them, will still children have just born and you will sacrifice the
children and shed the blood and then eat them and make them into pies and then eat them.
There you have it, cannibalism and child murder.
Those are the two great and important charges that are raised against witches.
Now I want to stop here for a second and I want you to think, as you listen to this
or look at this, that these are precisely the same charges that have been used against
Christians at the beginning of Christianity.
We are used against Jews, we are used against lepers, we are used against Muslims and will
be used against the natives in the new world.
That is to say extreme, prurient and lewd behavior, murder and sacrifice of children
and acts of cannibalism.
Those are precisely the charges that separate humans from those who are considered to be
against nature, to be utterly human.
It is a kind of, should we say, permanence of these charges.
These will be the charges that will be raised against gypsies later on.
There are always a way in which you link together anti-Semitic charges of child or ritual child
murder, cannibalism and you use them as a way of defining otherness, as a way in a sense
of identifying those who are different from you, utterly different, who have gone beyond
the boundaries of humanity and who therefore do not deserve to live.
I want to point out to you that we as Westerners, that is to say, we who have been made from
a very particular and unique kind of cultural experience at the very roots of our making
into civilized people, lies always the fact of child sacrifice and that it is indeed very
clear that the very early religions of mankind began with the act of the child sacrifice of
the first born and that the covenant between God and Abraham in the Judaic tradition and
therefore in the Christian tradition and in the Islamic tradition is really all about
that, about the replacement of the child who must be sacrificed to God so he can placate
the anger of God and his replacement by something else, by a different kind of sacrifice.
So at the very roots of these accusations, which in fact branded the wish and which way
are read avidly by people throughout Europe, it's a series of charges that are as all as
humanity itself that go back to the very beginnings of our history and which have been deployed
again and again and again for the purpose of in fact creating all theness, creating
someone who is very different from us for the way, for the purpose of excluding someone
from the community, bring them to trial and executing them, thank you.
