Welcome to lecture 22. In the previous lecture, in lecture 21, we look at a text from the
16th century, which describes how people become witches. In this lecture, and in the
next one, we are going to look at specific cases of the wish-crace. This one deals with
a very famous case, the case of Urban Grandier à Loudon, a city in France, in the early
half of the 17th century. This case not only became quite famous throughout the land, but
eventually it became a case that was used by the Enlightenment thinkers to attack the
church, and it marks in some respects the kind of early waning of the wish-crace. Now
what I would like to do here in this lecture is essentially to first provide a context,
a background to the case, as I always do in all my lectures. And we begin with France
in the early 17th century. France in the early 17th century had just gone through a tragic
process in which the dynasty of, in the late 16th century, the dynasty of the Valois came
to an end, and a new dynasty, the Bourbons, came to power. This was Henry IV of Nabar,
who was indeed a Protestant, and who in order to become King of France, converted to Catholicism.
This famous phrase, Paris is well worth a mass. Now Henry IV was part of an attempt
to compromise, to bring together both Huguenots, the Protestants in France, and of course the
Catholics, and he sort of traversed or moved between these two camps. He was a Catholic,
that's the only way he could be King of France, but at the same time he remained sympathetic
to Protestant courses and so on. In the early 17th century, France was beginning its ascendancy
as one of the great powers in Europe. Until that period, Spain has dominated European politics
and European warfare, but under Louis XIII, and specifically under the very capable rule
of his prime minister, or first minister, the Cardinal Richelieu, France had now become
the hegemonic power in all of Europe. Not only has he become militarily and politically
the hegemonic power, but France has also began to be the great center for culture in Europe.
This is the great period in French history, it is the beginning of a great theater, and
of course it culminates in the rule of Louis XIV, the building of a great palace at Versailles,
the great culture of the Baroque. So this is a kind of overall context to the story
of Urban Grandier and at Ludon. Now the other context is of course the city of Ludon. The
city of Ludon is a small provincial city, a city quite divided between Huguenots, between
Protestants on the one side, they are literate, they are the middling swords, they are members
of the bourgeoisie, an enlightened elite, and then a great mass of Catholics, some of them
of course, well-healed members of the middling sword, but the majority of these people, also
members of the lower classes, illiterate, practicing in Ludon the old religion. That
is to say the changes of the Council of Trent have not yet essentially filtered down fully
to the masses, not only in France, but all over Europe. There is an attempt to monitor
behavior by the new Catholic Church that has emerged out of the Council of Trent in the
1560s, but it had not yet began to filter fully down to the masses. So there is a great yellow
superstition among the citizens of Ludon, those belonging to the lower classes, there
is illiteracy, there is still belief in the old ways. And then our third context is Jesuit
education. By the beginning of the 17th century, in fact, for almost now 100 years, the Jesuits
have been the leaders in teaching throughout Western Europe. Their schools became the best
schools in Western Europe, and to be trained by the Jesuits was indeed something remarkable.
The most important Jesuit school in France was la flèche. Des cartes l'ont à la flèche,
carnail, went to la flèche. It is a school which had Jansenist, essentially leanings. Jansenist
was a very austere form of Catholicism, almost burging on Protestantism. It was also a great
intellectual center. Part of the Jesuit education was, of course, the great end of term dramatics,
the great baroque theatrical education. It was, of course, an education for the elite.
It is to la flèche that a young boy named Urban Grandier, the nephew of a canon Grandier,
comes to receive his education. He has spent 10 years at la flèche, and in 1615 became
a Jesuit novice. Now, the Jesuits, of course, is an order that is well known throughout
Europe by its interest in politics, in learning, but it is an order in which obedience to the
general of the order is all important. And Grandier was a man of extraordinary ambition.
He wanted to occupy an important place in the hierarchy of the church. The church was,
for him, as we shall see later on, a profession. It was not a vocation, but it was essentially
a way in which he could open himself to the world and acquire wealth and power. So he
decided that in the Jesuit order, though he may acquire a great deal of prestige and learning
and so on, he was not going to be able to occupy a position of power. He could never
be a bishop. He could never be an archer bishop. He could never really rise through the ranks
of the secular church as opposed to the regular church. That is to say, the regular church
is the church of monasteries, of monastic orders on the one hand, they obey a rule, and then,
of course, the secular church, the church that is involved in the world. So at the age
of 27, Grandier received a very substantial position. At the church, he was given the
church of Saint Pierre du Marché, a Lodont. He was also made a canon of the Church of
the Holy Cross at Lodont. He was a member of a collegiate church. This, of course, means
a great deal of income. He is drawing two sorts of income, one from his church and another
one from the canon of the Holy Cross. He is 27 years old. He is a man who is incredibly
handsome and is a man who is not shy about his sexuality. He has, after all, grown up
in the culture of the early 17th century, on the extraordinarily sensuous culture of
Baroque. What we have here in the early 17th century, in France and elsewhere throughout
Europe, is this extraordinary dichotomy between, on the one hand, the open sexuality of the
open classes, the awareness of sex. We have autobiographies of these periods who tell
us about bisexuality, sodomy, masturbation, and so on, quite frankly and quite openly,
and then the sexual taboos that are imposed by the Reformation and the Counter-Reformation
upon the lower classes. If we look at Baroque culture, at such things as the Masque in England,
or the private affairs of the Spanish monarchy, which is one of the most austere monarchies
in the period, and of course the French monarchy, we could see how decadent, how in a sense sexually
permissive these open classes were. A grandeur belongs to that world, and indeed, just before
arriving in Lodon, he writes a treatise, a secret treatise, on celibacy, and he argues
in this treatise that it is a promise to perform the impossible is not binding. That is to
say that by taking the bow of chastity, he has promised to do something that is impossible
to do, that a young man can never be truly continent, can never be truly celibate. This
is a treaty that will be discovered later on, and which will be used in his trial and
against him. Now you could imagine this, this is a very sophisticated man, age 27, extraordinarily
handsome, very attractive, a very good speaker, arriving and holding and giving sermons every
Sunday from the pulpit in this rather provincial city. I don't have to tell you that he became
immediately a great favorite of some female parishioners, and that women, the fashionable
women of Lodon, the fashionable Catholic women of Lodon flock to his church to hear this
handsome priest. Now this is almost a theme or a tope in the Catholic church, that is
to say the parishioners falling in love with the attractive priest. It happens all the
time. It happens to this very day and coming to confession and confessing to the priest
about their desires for the priest. The love for the impossible or the love for the unattainable
is always present in relation. But of course, in the case of Urban Grandier, it was neither
unattainable or impossible because he was very willing to reciprocate all the advances
of his parishioners. And indeed, he became a man sort of above town and he made enemies
through all because of course, this led to a great deal of jealousy from men. Now there
are other reasons why this man made himself quite unpopular in Lodon. First of all, he
came to Lodon with the mother, three brothers and a sister, all taking jobs from the local
young men of the town. And therefore, he was an outsider. He was not a son of Lodon. Within
a few months of being in town, he got into a fight, into an actual fight with the equivalent
of the head of the police of Lodon. There is no real police in Lodon, but the equivalent
of that, he also got into further trouble by seducing the young daughter of his great
friend, the public prosecutor, and getting her pregnant. You could imagine that this
was, if he would be condemned, he could be condemned for stupidity and impropriety rather
than anything else. So he is getting deeply into trouble. There was a greatest scandal
because everyone in town knew that he was the father of this baby who was going to be
born. A suitable husband had to be found for these young women. He denied all the charges,
but of course, everybody knew. Not only is he an enemy of most of the males in Lodon,
or most of the Catholic males by now, he also has the public prosecutor as an enemy now.
He also has the head of the police or the so-called head of the police as an enemy now. He still
gets into trouble. Furthermore, there is a very young and beautiful widow named Madeline
de Brón, and she is quite wealthy and quite attractive. And of course, she is the target
for the desires and expectations of all the young men of Lodon. She is an admirer of Urban
Grandier, and Urban Grandier does something which is of course almost fictional. He married
himself to this young widow. That is to say, he performs an act of marriage in which he
engages himself to this woman. Now, clearly, this is too much. And of course, it leads
to a civil suit against Urban Grandier. He is imprisoned in the Archbishop's Palace at
Poitiers, and then he appeals his case to the Parliament of Paris, and he is eventually
released from prison. He has been given a warning, but he still does not get it. I think he
is still continuous in this behavior, which is leading him inexorably into disaster. Now,
there is something even that has happened before he even came to Lodon, which will have
very sad consequences for him. In 1618, there is this ecclesiastical procession in a town,
and because he was a canon elsewhere, he ranks ecclesiastically ahead of the young
bishop of Luson. This young bishop of Luson was a young man on the rise. His name was
Armand Du Plessis de Richelieu, and he humiliated him publicly. Four years afterwards, this
young bishop became Cardinal Richelieu and the Prime Minister, and he did not forget
what Grandier had done to him in that procession. He remembered that name, and that will play
a very important role, because what we are trying to see here is how that heavy combination
of religion, sexuality, politics is translated and is articulated in a political case or
in a misbehavior case, which is what this is all about, into charges of wishcraft, and
how wishcraft here, and in all the many other cases, is used as a political weapon to get
to enemies that you otherwise cannot get. So in a sense, what we have here is the table
is set. This is a man who is obviously imprudent, he is a man who is not well-liked in this
town, he is a man who has offended, the man who has the greatest power in France, Cardinal
Richelieu. Here is a man who in a sense is looking for trouble, and trouble will find
him, and how it will find him. And now we have our last ingredient to the story. The
last ingredient to our story is that in 1627, a small convent of Ursulins opens a l'odonde.
They are 17 nuns, most of them are from noble families, from aristocratic families, but
this is not a well-to-do monastery. These are really the daughters of poor noble families
who do not have enough income to provide a dowry to set them up in better monasteries,
and who obviously do not have enough money to provide a dowry to marry them within their
own rank and status, so that they are essentially dumped into this monastery. This is not unusual
in early 17th century Europe, that is to say monasteries are crawling with people who have
no vocation whatsoever, it serves as a kind of dumping ground for women who cannot be
married because they don't have enough money to keep the status, and who are essentially
placed in monasteries, still in the 17th century. The options open to open class women is either
a marriage or the monastery. So this monastery is created, it is led by a woman named the
priors of the monastery, the abbess, the mother superior, it's a woman called Sister Jean
Desangere, the Jan of the Angels, she is a deformed woman, and she has been described
by one of her contemporaries as a master hypocrite, and she of course also has this extraordinary
liking for Urban Grandier, and he falls in love with Urban Grandier, and the first thing
that she does is to ask him to become the father-confessor in the monastery, to in a
sense come to the monastery and provide a spiritual guidance, well we know what we mean
by a spiritual guidance here, Grandier is not interested in this, why? Because after
all this monastery is not powerful, cannot provide an income, and therefore refuse the
appeal of Saint Jean Desangere, Saint Jean Desangere, and refuse and humiliate her, another
mistake, when Madeleine de Brón comes to visit the monastery, she is mistreated, she
is insulted, war has been declared, and war has been declared in more ways than one, because
now Sister Jean selects an enemy of Grandier as the father-confessor, Gano Mignon, a priest
who is in fact committed and dedicated to the destruction of Urban Grandier. Now remember,
this man that is to say Urban Grandier has already been in front of the judicial body,
he has already been brought to trial, he has already been in prison for sexual misconduct,
but that was not enough, you could not really put him down, because after all many priests
in this period engage in similar or perhaps lesser sexual misconduct, so in fact we need
something else to get him, or at least they need something else in this town to get him.
In this monastery where there are novices, there is a little prank, some of the nuns
dressed in white sheets rattle chains, it's a prank, it's funny, but then suddenly the
women begin to have visions, Urban Grandier begins to appear to some of his nuns, surrounded
by devils, enticing them into sexual situations, it is a highly charged atmosphere with extraordinary
sensuality and so on, then the priest herself, Sister Jean Desange, confesses to Mignon that
there is a collection of devils inhabiting the monasteries, attacking the monastery, this
is a very common thing that happens throughout the 17th century, the devil in the monastery
is a common figure in this period, that is to say nuns attack by devils, in fact falling
into a kind of collective hysteria in which they believe that the devils have entered
So in fact every one of the nuns, including the priors, begin to confess to this devil
possession, to demonic possessions and in the center of all these demonic possessions
is Urban Grandier, an exorcist from a nearby town named Barré is called in and he makes
a very faithful decision and the decision is to open the doors of the monastery to the
public and to perform the exorcisms in public and you could imagine what will happen now,
that is to say from all parts of France including the royal court, people flock to Lodon to
see the spectacle, this is one of the most famous cases of wishcraft that had ever taken
place, Condé, a great member of the royal family who is a well-known sodomite, comes
to see these performances, the nuns on the ground reading with pain and anger as the
devils are extracted from them through exorcism, screaming words, saying things, accusing the
entire town to be in fact in the possession of devils guided by Urban Grandier, they say
that every woman in town is essentially having sex with incubus, that every man in town is
being cook-holded, essentially what it is, it creates this sexual hysteria throughout
the town and Grandier is now accused by the priors, by sore Jean de Saint-Jean of sorcery
of wishcraft and she vomits, now please I am not making this up, this is all in the record,
I am very learned man in the early 17th century, the living light and intellectuals in France
many not all believe that this was so, sore Jean de Vomit, a copy of the pact that Grandier
has signed with the devil, written in his own blood, it was a copy, including the ashes
of a wafer, a consecrated host, including the heart of a child who had been killed in
a witch's sabbat in 1631, including the semen of Grandier, I don't know how they knew this
in the 17th century since it was no DNA yet, testing, but this is what is taking place
there, the real pact by the way, it was told by the priores, was kept in hell by the devil
himself who felt that Grandier was truly his most adept of followers, now Grandier is now
brought to prison, they search his house and they claim to find an anti-Richelieu pamphlet,
now the witch craze is coming slowly to his end and a good number of intellectuals and
Grandier had become a friend of the aristocracy and of the humanists in town, they don't believe
that this could be true, this certainly is not to be believed, this is certainly not to
be believed at all, but all this do, when he appeals again to the parliament of Paris
the case comes in front of Richelieu and of course we know what is going to happen here,
Richelieu is going to say aha, I remember 1618 when you humiliated me, let this man
go, Grandier is brought to trial, he is found guilty, he is found in the trial, they find
a mark, they call a priker, the priker pierces the mark, there is no blood, there is no pain,
he is obviously a witch, now the town is divided, the majority of the Catholics of the lower
classes believe him guilty, in reality of course he is guilty, not of witchcraft but
of order in propriety and of political lack of sense, but nonetheless the way in which
he can be executed and eliminated is by using these charges of witchcraft, so he is brought
to trial, he is guilty, they shave his head, they shave his eyebrows, they remove all
of his bodily hair, they try to take out his fingernails and the surgeon refuses to do so,
they break his legs, they put him in a shirt impregnated with sulfur, they take him to
die, they make a great bonfire, a pyre and there they burn him alive, they are close
to more than 6000 people in attendance to view this, they all rush the pyre trying to
get some relic of Grandier after his death, it is told by the observers that as he died
a huge black fly flew out of the bonfire and they people say that it was the soul of Grandier
going to join his master in hell, we know that he died saying to the people God forgive
them because they don't know what they are doing which is essentially quoting Christ
on the cross so that in a sense proclaiming his innocence there, now the case of course
does not end here at all because with Grandier dead the exorcism continues because the devils
are still possessed, the nuns in the monasteries are more remarkable, the people who were involved
in the case, the people who were active in persecuting Grandier suffer within a year or
two the most despicable death, Barre is dying and in the moment of receiving the stream
auctions he kicks the host, obviously this guy was going to hell, one of the judges who
have presided in the case is traveling in the road and sees the figure of Grandier in
the corner has an accident and died immediately, so in a sense you see the way in which this
case reverberated, the exorcisms continue in the monastery and they become again an
open spectacle, a public spectacle charged with incredible sexuality, charged with extraordinary
power and the thing is not changing, that everyone is still in fact possessed by the
devil, so a real exorcist is called in, a man called Jean-Joseph Zurin a Jesuit and
he begins to in fact exorcise the prioress, they discover that she has seven devils inhabiting
her and the exorcisms continue from the moment of Grandier's death on 18 August 1634 for
another seven years and eventually as the prioress, the devils abandon the prioress,
they become large ensurans in the exorcist, so what you have here is this transferent
of evil between one and the other and it is not in fact until much much later, it's not
until October 1637, so three years, not seven years as I said before, but three years after
that she is finally healed and we know that she is healed because the names of Joseph
and Mary appear by medical on her arms and then afterwards the names of Jesus and François
de Salle and Jean de Sange now cured and healed goes out on tour and she travels through
France, she comes to the royal court, she chose her markings, her tattoos of the names
of Joseph and Mary and François de Salle recently deceased saintly man in France and
of Jesus to the king and to the queen and to Cardinal Richelieu, she returns to Lodon,
she becomes a famous mystic, she writes her own autobiography and she becomes a channel
between the spiritual world and the material world, what are we going to make out of this?
I mean some of the great minds in Europe believe this, but this is of course also the case
that will be used later on to accuse the church of total barbarity, that will be used by enlightened
thinkers almost 50 years afterwards to show that the whole thing was a sham, but this
is a case that resonates in the popular imagination that is continuously quoted, there is a great
book about this case written by Michel de Sartre, one of the greatest of all French historians,
there is a novel written by Ardox Hoxley which is absolutely great, there is an opera made
about the devil, there was a Broadway play made about this and of course there is the
movie made by Ken Russell, a very bizarre and strange movie made by Ken Russell in which
Vanessa Redgrave plays Sorjean de Sange and Oliver Reed at his most malevolent best
plays Urban Grandier and it's a movie that is in fact extraordinary in its loot and
sexuality and also violence, because that's the way it was, it takes liberties with the
historical truth with the things that truly happened there, but it's a movie that truly
captures the atmosphere in which religion, politics, sexuality come together in the churches
of witchcraft, thank you.
