Lecture 23 The Witches of Essex and Salem
Welcome to Lecture 23.
In the previous lecture, in Lecture 22, I examined the case of Euron Grandier aludant,
a very famous case of witchcraft, unique in many respects in it was a case involving
a man rather than a woman in cases of witchcraft which were mostly aimed at women.
It was a case also that attracted a great deal of attention and that it resonated not
only in the 17th century itself, but also in the 18th during the age of the Enlightenment.
Also to this very day, as I mentioned at the end of the previous lecture, with movies
and operas, the movie by the way is entitled The Devils and is produced by and directed
by Ken Russell.
In this lecture today, we are going to tackle a very different two types of topics.
One I want to enter into the social history of witchcraft, that is to say, what can we
say about witchcraft from a social historian point of view.
And I'm going to have two cases studies.
One is a series of witchcraft cases that occurred in Essex in England, Essex Chia, and the other
one one that is very familiar to you probably, which is of course the very end of the witch
craze, the case of Salem, the witch craze of Salem in 1692.
Now as I do all the time, I want to begin by providing some context to this story.
And we have to look at Essex in the period of 1660s, which is when the story would pick
up the story.
This is the very end of the witch craze in England.
After 1660s, it would be very little.
And you will see how social conditions in the Chire in fact affect or had something to
do with the way in which the witch craze comes to an end.
There is in the late 1650s, 1660s an increasing hatred against the old and the poor, the kind
of things that I discussed in an earlier lecture when I tried to provide an economic and social
context for the witch craze.
The family in Essex, as it is the case throughout Europe, is a family which is of course undergoing
dramatic changes under a strain to absorb new children because of enclosure, because
of changing economic situations, it is very difficult to absorb new children.
So in many respects, many people can no longer live in the village.
Changes in the methods of agriculture, enclosure and so on, send many peasants on the road.
It is, there is a link, there is an important link between being an outsider, this is a
case of course of Urban Grandier in Lodon, of coming from the outside into a new village
and charges of witchcraft.
So in the 1650s, 1660s in Essex, we have these people going on the road seeking jobs, sometimes
begging, sometimes acting like outsiders by trying to get positions which are really reserved
for the people in the small villages and town.
So you have a migration of new members of families which affect the security, witches
are people who are really not fully integrated into communities in Essex.
We know a great deal from the information collected by Alan McFarland on the, it's a
very great book on Essex, it's called Tudor and Stewart, Witchcraft and Tudor and Stewart,
England.
We know a great deal, we know that the husbands of witches, when they have husbands since
many of them are really single women, are usually laverers.
That is to say they are people who are not, they're very poor, but are people who are
caught in between changing economic conditions, that's to say they have jobs, they might even
have a bit of land, but they are not people who are well off at all, they are caught in
a squeeze, they are caught in an economic squeeze.
We also know that the victims come from the landed tenant classes, that is to say we have
already a social difference here, the victims are better off or the supposed or the alleged
victims of witchcraft are better off than the witches themselves.
So we already have a kind of a social and class conflict in the makings here.
We know that in Essex, in particular, witchcraft is associated, as I said before, with rural
misfortunes, that there are no great cases, that is to say not the kind of cases that
are described in the Malish Maleficatum, that it becomes the death of an animal, the spoiling
of milk, the spoiling of butter, the piles of wood that fall down, and occasionally from
time to time the unexplainable death of a child, things like that, which occurred naturally
in nature, but which are attributed to witches or which are attributed to people in the outside.
We know, for example, that human and animal sickness, death that cannot be explained,
are attributed still to the work of witches.
Now what can we say, and I want to look at my notes to, in a sense, tell you exactly
what are the numbers, what are the statistics on witchcraft.
In Essex, in a great assise at Essex, 23 out of the 291 accused witches were men, that
is to say the immense majority of the people brought to trial for witchcraft, only 23 were
males, and the rest of the 291 were women.
We know that the victims or accusers, that is to say the people who claim that they have
been the victims of witchcraft, were more or less equally divided by gender.
We have 148 males and 173 females.
We know that the age of the witches, we know the age of a good number of witches, and we
know that there are 15 witches of which we know the age in this assise, two were between
the ages of 40 and 49, three were the ages between 50 and 59, seven between the ages
of 60 and 69, and three between the ages of 8 and 89.
All of the witches that we know their age, that we can actually historically and document
their age, are all beyond the age of procreation.
That is to say that there is obviously a link in the role of women when women are no longer
able to have children, when women are considered old, and you must realize that in the 16th
and 17th century, in fact even into the 19th century, even until very recently, someone
at 40 was very old.
Not only was very old, but also look very old, that a woman at 40 who had been in childbirth
before, probably the age of 40 had no longer very few teeth left, that her breast were drooping,
that she was indeed looking exceedingly age.
That is to say we age very differently nowadays from the way in which we age in the early
modern period.
We also know that a good number of the people who were accused, were accused by people
who were related to them by marriage.
That is to say that the common dictum, that the mother-in-law is a witch, is something
that applies to Essex and applies to the reality of relationships between married couples and
their mothers-in-law.
So that the accusations come from neighbors, and that accusations come also from people
related by marriage.
And we can also build a kind of essentially to say profile of what a witch looks like.
For example, in Essex, lewd behavior, incest, promiscuity, all those things blaspheming,
cursing in public, all those things that Puritan society will consider to be not tolerable,
we are also charges that will be used to accuse you of witchcraft.
Essentially what we're talking about is that you look like a witch, that is to say you
are old and bent, you beg, or you are someone who is a troublemaker, or you are someone
who is irascible, or you are someone who behaves lewdly, then if you do that, if you
look like a witch, you are a witch.
Essentially what we are talking about here is of course the fact that we have a society
in which certain types of behavior are now put into the category of witchcraft.
This is a way in which we enter into the social history of witchcraft.
We see essentially the types of witches, we see how they look like, and we in fact create
a profile of how people are essentially determined to be witches, selected for trials, brought
to trial, in fact essentially punished for what they are for their behavior.
This is a case of Essex at the very end of the witch craze, and of course there are many,
many other cases, and there are many other places in Western Europe where we can obtain
the same type of profiles, the same type of things which lead us to the conclusion that
essentially the witch craze was eventually targeting a specific types of population,
women who live at the end of the town, women who are by themselves, the mother-in-law who
is a burden to you, who doesn't want to play, remember we lived in a society in the 16th
and 17th century in which there is only the nuclear family, there is no extended family.
So the old lady, the mother or the mother-in-law does not live necessarily with you, might
live away in a little hut on the edge of town, and she might be a bothersome creature who
comes in and makes trouble for you, and by making trouble for you eventually she will
end up being in England hanged from the neck.
Now one of the things that of course was raised before, and which is indeed a question, is
why all these people, who after all are really essentially bold-nuddle-bold and downtrodden
will confess to these things, and I was going to discuss this when I discuss the benandanti
and we shall see in the next lecture how this happens, but this is one of the questions.
Why in a place like England or indeed in Salem where there is no torture, people will voluntarily
confess to these activities? This is a very puzzling question because it is indeed the
unanimity or the uniformity of the confessions that have led some people I think misguidedly
to believe that bushcraft was real, and I will talk about that later on at the end of
this lecture, but it is indeed a reality that what we have here is the process by which
in Essex or in Salem the questioning that is done by those who question either on the
torture or not will lead to a very specific answers. That is to say as we shall see in
the case of the benandanti, a kind of continuous questioning, a kind of lead-in questioning
by those who are the prosecutors will lead eventually to the breaking down and the acceptance
by those who are accused of the charges and by the voluntary confession to these activities.
This is not strange or indeed very difficult to understand. It happens all the time. If
you question someone continuously and you provide the answer in your question and you
are in a situation in which you want to please your questioner because in fact your life
might depend upon the way in which you answer this question, and there is a threat of not
only of torture in the continent, but also of social ostracism in England, then you will
provide that which will make your prosecutor happy. You will cooperate. And if they want
to know that you are a witch, yes, by your means, I did that. But I think that there
is another psychological element here too as well at play, which is that please understand
that in the case of Essex this is very clear. These are women without power. These are women
who are at the very edge of society. These are people who have very little input into
the way in which the villages are run or in which the economy is organized. These are
people who are essentially not the very poor, who is never a target of witchcraft, but people
who are marginalized to certain extent. And in some respects and in a kind of, should
we say dramatic and bizarre way, what you have here is a case where being in a trial,
coming to an assay, coming in front of all these judges, important people, the most important
people of the town, people who are very illiterate, who have books, who have power due as the accused
standing there and confessing to these extraordinary deeds, confessing to having a relationship
with the devil, confessing to be able to, in a sense, connect with the superior power
that you have powered or incantation of killing, of committing mischief, provides to those
confessing a kind of empowerment, which we will never have in their life otherwise, that
they may pay with their lives for that moment in which they can actually instill fear into
those who are their accusers, for those who say, yes, I am a witch and I did this and
did that, even though it might be something fictional and created in their imagination,
provides them with a moment of power over those who are torturing and controlling them.
So that in thinking about witchcraft and about why people essentially became witches or were
accused of witches, that's in fact one of the answers is that first, the questions which
are drawn directly from the Malleus Maleficatum, which is a model that is followed all throughout
Europe, provides those accused, I mean, the accusers with a kind of format of the questions
that you ask and the questions that you ask will lead to the answers you want. The end
is always the same. The end is either you deny completely what you are and then we will
still determine that you are a witch or we will question you continuously and if you
look through the inquisitorial transcripts, you could see that, for example, in the case
of the Belendanti, which I will discuss in the next lecture, some of these questions
went on for years and when you go on continuously, well, you think you are not a witch but we
know you are a witch and yes, you did this and you did that. Eventually, you come to
believe that you are and eventually you come into an agreement with those in power and
in fact, agree with them and say precisely what they want you to say, which is indeed
quite remarkable indeed. So here is indeed the situation. We could see how this plays
out in the case of another case of study, which is that of course of sailing town. Now, sailing
also provide us with a kind of laboratory for the kind of studies of witchcraft. It
is also an important moment, even though it never really resonated in Europe and it is
only a little incursion that I am making into the new world because in some respects, the
witch trials at Salem in 1692 marks the very end of the witch grace. It truly is the kind
of last reverberation of this madness as it echoes in a very distant and insignificant
outpost in the new world. It is essentially again a combination of social causes, religion,
extreme religiosity, sexual hysteria and intolerance. It resonates of course in the
American imagination because as you know from Arthur Miller, the crucible and from movies
that have been made recently is a case that in many ways appealed to the American imagination
is a confrontation between truth and lies, between exaggeration, between fantasy and
reality. What is the case of Salem town? We know that Salem in 1692 really consists
of two towns. Salem town, which is on the sea, which is a mercantile outpost, which
is innovative, which is in fact changing, which is engaged in the material world, which
is not as religious as Salem village, which is puritanical, rural, agricultural. In fact,
Puritan farmers are struggling to survive. This is remarkable here because Salem is
remarkable not only in that it is a case of witchcraft in the new world, but it is also
remarkable in that these social relationships are changed here. That is to say, unlike Essex
or unlike many other places in Europe or unlike Italy and Germany and so on, where the accusers
are better off than the accused, here the reverse is true. That is to say, the accusers
are from Salem village. These are the impoverished, puritan farmers who do not want change, who
do not want social change, and the accused and the people who eventually suffer are the
people from Salem town, the people who belong to a kind of middling source or who have
aspirations to enter the middling sort. And it is not just Salem that gets involved into
this. There's a series of villages around Salem that are drawn into the case, and in
fact, almost over 150 people are brought to prison and are brought in charges. Now we
know that 19 people die, that is to say, hang from the neck accused of witchcraft. And another
one died pressed to death because refused to actually participate in the trials or testified
in the trials. Of the 19 who hang from the neck, 13 were women. How does the case begin?
I think this is something very familiar to all of you. The case begins again with one
figure, Samuel Paris, a priest who is selected, a pastor who is the pastor of Salem village,
a very puritanical man who in a sense is always eager to see the devil's work in whatever
happened. He has a daughter, Elizabeth Paris, she's nine years old, and she has a niece who
is 13 years old. And there is also a slave, Tituba, who is an Arawak, that is to say a
Caribbean native who have been brought into Salem. And again, you could see the beginnings
of the so-called triangular trade that link New England to the Caribbean and to England
in a kind of triangular and to Africa slaves to the new world, to the new world Caribbean
islands, spices, not spices, but sugar and molasses and rum to England and the people
in New England serving as a kind of intermediaries of this triangular trade. So this slave reads
the future, reads that the girls begin to show strange signs, they seem to be ill, they
seem to have illness, a doctor is called in, very significant, there are doctors, there
is to say there is a medical profession, the doctor comes in and they, the girls, he cannot
explain the signs, they cannot diagnose the girls with any illness. The doctor suggests
that it might be a case of wishcraft, which is immediately picked up by the priest, by
their minister, by the pastor of Salem village, to in a sense begin a campaign to get rid
of devilish influence of non-puretantical behavior in his village. The girls are questioned,
we are talking about a nine and a twelve year old and of course they are questioned and
eventually they come up with some names that they want to accuse. One is the slave, Tituba,
the other one of course is Sarah Good and the other one is Sarah Otzborn. Essentially
what happens is that the village becomes consumed by this all-pervading hysteria and people
began to denounce each other and to accuse each other and to claim that spirits have
appeared. Now these are young women who can be easily influenced by the questioners and
leads essentially to not only the trial of these people but the execution of these people.
All of them, well one of them confessed to being guilty of wishcraft and of course Tituba
confessed to having relationship with the devil and it's very easy to plan this idea
into her mind especially since she herself will not suffer, will not be one of those
executed and essentially what happens of course is that the town becomes divided. Those who
believe the charges to be true and those who believe the charges not to be true and
if you do not believe that the charges are true you are already suspect of being engaged
in wishcraft. The trial resonates in the history of New England because once it has been done
and once thirteen women have hand from the neck from wishcraft everyone recoils at the
awareness of what had transpired and taking place in the town and eventually the whole
things ends and she says when the new governor of New England decides or Massachusetts decides
that spectral testimonies is not to be accepted in the trial that is to say that you cannot
in fact go on someone, a young child saying yes I have seen this spirit who told me this
and that, that there is a need for evidence and that in a sense is a mark of the ending
of the wish craze, the manner in which certain testimonies, verifiable testimonies are required
in trials in order to condemn someone. So here we end essentially our discussion of
the wish craze and I want to conclude this discussion with a kind of extended discussion
on my own point of view on the whole thing. That is to say I end my classes when I teach
this class with the idea of where they are witches. This is an important question nowadays
because if you go to Salem to this very day you will see that in a very politically correct
way the Salem city fathers or civil, physical fathers have created a museum to the events,
the victims of wishcrafts are glorified and there is even in the website a very nice statement
about wishcraft, meaning wishcraft is a form of religion which is practiced by people before
Christianity which was mild and benefic and which have nothing to do with the delirious
fantasies of people in the 16th and 17th century. This is by the way I always find in my classes
three or four people who want to in fact tell me about wika and that they are practitioners
of wika and how important that is. Well I think that wika which is a kind of modern
version or an attempt to create a myth of the past that is to say what E.P. Thompson
called the invented traditions, the way in which we, not E.P. Thompson but Hopps bound
called the invention of tradition, the way in which we invent traditions in the past.
I think that there is very little relationship with the kind of practices that I will discuss
in the next lecture that is to say the survival of certain practices in Europe and what we
call wika today but I don't believe that wishcraft really existed. I mean do you ask me where
there are witches in Europe? Where there are people who believe themselves to be witches?
Yes, of course there was and there is today that is to say there are people who actually
believe that they can have relations with the prince of darkness and that they can obtain
certain powers by selling their soul. Where there are an immense number of people who
believe that witches existed in Europe? Absolutely. That is to say this is part and parcel of
what we have been discussing here, that the immense majority of the population of Europe
believe that they are witches, that there was this international conspiracy, that there
was this unbelievable connection between all the different covenants of witches all through
our Europe, all conspiring to betray Christ and the state because please understand that
wishcraft is a charge that is against God but it is also against the king which is also
one of the reasons that Ur-Ban-Kran-Dia gets it in the neck. So are there people who believe
that they are themselves witches? Yes. Are there a whole population that believes that
witches exist? Yes. And all of course is founded upon the foundation of the belief in the devil
which is indeed intrinsic to the Christian religion. Do I believe that people went and
gathered in this nocturnal gatherings and in fact did all the kinds of things that are
described in the Sabbath or that they flew in the back of animals? No. I think that this
is essentially yet another case in European history of the kind of mass dilution in which
rationality is set aside and the imagination is allowed to fly free. The code for this
course is really an etching from Goya. It is one of the etchings of Goya's made during
the period when the French invaded Spain. It shows a man laying down on a desk, his
head, his sleep and there are monsters flying all around him. The word is in a sense that
Spanish el sueño de la razón produce monstruos. That is to say the sleep of reason produce
monsters or the dreams of reason produce monsters. And in some respects this is the reality of
our history of Western history. The tilting always from one end to the other. The pendulum
swaying between reason and the rational. There are cycles in European society in which
we embrace reason and therefore dismiss all these things as superstition. And there are
times in which reason is not enough. In periods of great conflict, in periods of great need,
people in a sense seek other explanations, the rational explanations, seek ways of understanding
the world, of dealing with the world or of escaping the world. This in some respects
is what we call the terror of history, which I will revisit at the very end of the next
lecture. The way in which we seek in a sense to make meaning. And witchcraft and the devil
and the explanations and the choosing of escape goats who we can in a sense transfer all our
frustrations and anxieties is one of the ways in which Europeans and in this case no
world inhabitants dealt with the realities of everyday life and to the cost of the life
as all this. Thank you.
