Lecture 24 The Survival of the Past
Welcome to Lecture 24. This is the last lecture of this course on the terror of history.
We conclude here and I would like before I conclude to thank you for being with me for this 24 lectures.
I would also like to give you again my email address at UCLA in case that you have any questions or commentaries or suggestions on how to do this in a different way.
In the previous lectures we look at two specific cases of witchcraft, one in Essex and the other one in Salient, Massachusetts.
And in this lecture I go back to the very first lecture.
That is to say what I would like to do here is to in a sense explore first by looking at the Benandanti, a case studied by Carlo Ginsberg, one of my colleagues at UCLA,
and then by providing a series of folk stories about the survival of the past in Europe.
That is to say how a very deep past going back to a world before Christianity survives to this very day in the European mind or indeed in our minds.
And I want to begin as I began the first lecture with a kind of recollection, the way in which we tie the personal to the wider historical phenomena.
And that I remember when I was a young man or even a child that on the eve of St. John the Baptist, on the Feast of St. John the Baptist on the 22nd and 23rd of June,
of course in antiquity coincided with the solstice.
We went to hills where we built huge bonfires and as the sun set on the longest day of the year or closest to the longest day of the year, we dance around the bonfires.
I had no idea whatsoever why I was doing that.
I know that is something that has been done by my ancestors over many, many years and yet I did it without the realization of his historical significance
or indeed of the very lone tradition that preceded these bonfires.
Of course these bonfires go to the great belting fires, the great fire festivals of Celtic people in Europe
and is something that is still practiced to this very day in many parts of Europe.
And in a sense it is a way in which we connect the past to the present in which many of these all folkloric beliefs remain alive,
but transform and having lost the meaning.
We who live in cities or in suburbs nowadays, we have lost, is the very felicitous phrase by Peter Laslet,
that we is a world we have lost and it's a world that we have lost by abandoning the land,
but in a sense removing ourselves from a whole tradition of beliefs, from a whole tradition of practices and ideas which have been elitted
in fact eroded by what we call civilization.
In many respects in the Europe of the 16th and 17th century many of these practices were far more alive than they are today
and they were caught in a very difficult situation and the situation that I described before
when I talk about the way in which the reform, the reformation and the counter reformation in many respects
tried to avoid or delete from the world in which these people live in the 16th and 17th century many of these practices.
But then they were vivid, they were alive.
If you want to get a sense of what these practices were like and what rural life was like,
a movie such as the Return of Martin Ger or the book by Natalie Davis which is wonderful,
give you a sense of the daily life of the routines, of the beliefs and superstitions of the people who lived 500 years ago.
And I begin here with the evocation of a group of people who lived in the Friuli, the north-eastern most part of Italy,
close to the mountains. Again we come face to face with mountain people or with people who lived close to mountains.
In the Friuli there was this deep practice belief of certain people who called themselves benandanti, the good walkers.
There is a magisterial study of this by Carlo Ginsberg.
It has been translated under the title of Night Battles and he tells a story by calling materials from the archives of the Inquisition.
The archives of the Inquisitions are among the best archives in Europe.
Inquisitors were extraordinarily careful about collecting all bits of information.
If you are in an inquisitorial trial, if you have been questioned by the inquisitors, they will collect all the things that you say.
They will write it down from every scream that you make as you have been tortured to every word you put down.
And it is only through this inquisitorial record that we can hear as a very far distant cry, almost through a glass darkly,
that we can hear the voices of the victims.
And of course we hear it mediated by the illiteracy of the inquisitors we hear mediated by the written word.
We can never in a sense retrieve completely popular culture.
We can only reconstruct it as it is allowed to be seen to us by those who in a sense mediated that culture.
The inquisitors, the people who wrote, the people who have books.
What about this benandanti?
This benandanti is where people who were born within the call, that is to say the amniotic membrane,
because they were born within the amniotic membrane, which in fact they carry around their necks as a sign of power,
which they preserve, and this is something that is common to many other civilizations.
It's a mark of distinction.
You are born between the call and therefore you are a special, because they were born within the call.
Men and women believe that they were a special, that they were the good walkers, that they were good witches.
Of course the word witch is one that is imposed on them by the inquisitors,
that they are people who fight in the villages in the Friuli to protect the crops, to protect the harvest.
On a special days of the years called the amber days, they will go out into the fields in a spirit,
because they will do this while they are asleep, their spirits will come out of the bodies,
and in fact there is a belief that if you awaken up while you are in one of those trances, while you are a spirit, is abroad, you will die.
Your spirit can never return to your body.
So in a spirit they will go to the fields and armed with phenocchio, with phenol stalks,
they will fight the evil witches for the life of the crops.
Now you could see, and Carlo Ginsberg argued, that this is a throwback to an agricultural cult,
to a kind of great antiquity in which the survival of the harvest, the survival of the crop was all important,
and that the crop was always threatened by evil spirits and that you have to fight.
The witches came armed with the stalks of sorghum and they fought in the fields for the life of the crop.
And if the verandantes were successful, then the crops will come and people will be fed and people will survive into the next year.
The witches did all the things, the witches essentially, the bad witches went around after they have tried to disrupt the harvest
and will go into the basements of the peasants' houses and tap the wine and drink wine,
and after they have drunk all the wine they wanted, they will also urinate or throw some terrible thing into the wine to spoil the wine.
So in a sense the verandantes also protected the wine and protected the harvest.
They healed, they were able to heal, and they held a special place in the society, in this rural society.
By the middle of the 16th century and into the early part of the 17th century, the inquisitors got wind of this.
The inquisitors in the middle of the 16th century and in the early 17th century are not anthropologists, they are not ethnographers.
They are essentially people who come armed with the malios to ask questions.
When they hear about these things, the only thing they could think of is that these people are indeed witches,
that they are evil witches and that they do this as a demonic form of possession.
And so these poor unsuspected peasants who had indeed vested so much of their energy in fighting and saving the crop are now brought to the inquisition.
It is remarkable because essentially Carlo Ginsberg's book gave us a very different picture of the way in which the inquisition works,
in the way in which this questioning was took place.
Now I must admit of course that Italy is always a very different place.
That is to say that Italians are milder in the way in which they apply punishment than other parts of Europe.
But it is very clear that these inquisitors took a long time to come to a decision.
That many of these people were in fact interviewed and questioned for years before in some way or another,
they were able to pin them down as guilty of witchcraft.
And that in fact the final result of all these questionings was seldom death.
It was some other kind of punishment, imprisonment, humiliation in public,
but that there was no burning by fire that a company or at least not always that a company essentially the admissions of witchcraft.
So how it happens, what happened is what I was discussing before and we can see in the previous lecture how people are turned into witches.
You have to think of the inquisitors as people who barely understood the Friulient dialect.
There was no Italian. The people did not read. The people were illiterate.
The people did not speak Italian. They did not speak Latin.
So that there is already something lost in translation here because the people who are essentially questioning them,
the inquisitors are from another part of Italy.
They spoke of course Latin and they spoke perfect Italian.
And you could see the way in which you try to make sense of what these persons are confessing.
And they are protesting continuously. They are protesting and insisting that they are good witches,
that they are people who protect the crops, that they are people who do good deeds
and that they are the enemies of the bad witches, of the evil witches who are in alliance with Satan.
Yet over a period of almost 60 years or so, you could see how slowly but surely this benandanti,
in spite of themselves, in spite of the certainty that they are in fact not connected to the devil,
come to admit that they are witches.
Again, this is a veritable proof of the manner in which a proper questioning by people who are learned,
by people who are intelligent, who have a book in front of them, who have a set of questions in front of them,
can lead the accused to certain admissions.
And it was told to me in one of the breaks before this lecture began,
that of course an analogy with this is of course that the trials that were carried out by Stalin,
the short trials in the 1930s, people who were powerful, intelligent, erudite,
and nonetheless who are forced and obligated through a process of questioning and brainwashing,
which is what this is all about, to confess to crimes and to errors which of course they had not committed.
So it's not difficult to explain or to understand how the benandanti, in some respects,
are led slowly and inexorably to the conclusions that they are fact, they are bad witches,
and that they are all mistaken that this set of beliefs which are probably very ancient,
indeed are not what they believe they were, but it was some form of demonic possession.
One of the things that Kalo Ginsberg does, magisterially as well,
is to trace back the genealogy of this set of beliefs,
and to in a sense go back, and I have said this in an earlier lecture as well,
to the origins of many of these beliefs, to folklore, to ancient practices,
many of them so remote that they go to the very beginnings of history,
in which certain things like traveling in a spirit, fighting for the crops,
being born within the amniotic membrane, all of these things form part of a brother
and all the tradition that goes back to the center of Asia,
to the very first settlements of Europe and so on, and that survives in the Friuli,
and in all the parts of the world indeed to this very day.
I am reminded in a sense how, for example, one of the most important experiences,
and this is an aside from the lectures from my outline,
of going to Brazil two years ago, going to Salvador,
and attending a ceremony of Candomblé, which is an Afro-Brazilian religion,
and seeing there essentially the way in which the present is linked to the past,
seeing a whole ceremony performed in Joruba,
and the gods, the arishas, descending upon the dances, being possessed by the spirit,
and of course I am sitting there, and it's one of the most extraordinary
and impressive things that I have ever seen,
because essentially I was seeing a recreation,
and a recreation which was deeply believed by those who were involved in this ceremony,
of something that probably has an extraordinary antiquity.
And here I think we want to slow down and tell you a few stories
about the way in which things survive in Europe.
I began this class, I began this series of lectures,
with a story taken from Fraser the Goldenbow,
this extraordinary 10-ballroom collection of folklore,
books that are no longer really much thought of by anthropologists
because it is a dated anthropology,
but which remain nonetheless an extraordinary record of the decision
or the termination of Fraser to collect all kinds of information on folklore.
And what I want to sense is to bring to you the survivals in Europe
of the Celtic tradition.
The Celts are remarkable people.
They migrated into Europe from the center, from Eastern Europe,
and settled into areas which are all essentially alike,
places which are green and mountainous and close to the ocean,
Brittany, Galicia in Spain,
and from there a migration to Ireland, the Isle of Man,
Cornwall, and all the Celtic homelands.
And the Celts brought with them not only a religion,
which is of course their Druic religion,
but also a sense of the mysterious,
which will enter European literature in the 12th century
through courtly love, the ideas of dragons and trolls,
and all kinds of beliefs that have a very long life in the European imagination.
And I want to mention a few of them.
One of course are the Great Fire Festivals,
which are still in a sense practiced around the solstice
in many different parts of Europe.
That is to say the building of fires and the top of mountains.
This probably goes back to human sacrifice.
It probably goes back to a way in which a man was sacrificed
in these great fires as a way of replenishing,
as it were, the life and fertility of the earth.
Then of course, the mistletoe.
Now we think of a mistletoe as this little green thing,
mostly artificial that we put in our houses during Christmas time,
and people kiss under the mistletoe,
but we are very far away from what the mistletoe meant for Europeans
in the 16th and 17th century.
The mistletoe was the golden bow.
The mistletoe is a parasitic plant.
It grows in the oak tree.
It stands between heaven and earth.
It is collected on the first and sixth day of the full moon,
cut with a gold sickle,
and put on top of the lintel of your door on May Day.
It is the absolutely most important anti-wishcraft plant.
It has healing power.
It is the plant of the God,
and it grows indeed on the oak tree.
And the oak tree is the sacred tree of the Indo-European people.
It is a sacred tree of many, many different groups throughout Europe.
And on a specific days of the year,
that is to say on the solstice and the equinox,
they are the great Bonfire Festival,
the great fire festivals of Europe.
And what you do in the Celtic tradition is that when you burned the oak,
you return the fire,
because it was believed that the fire of the sun resides in the heart of the oak,
and when you burned the oak,
then essentially you return the fire to the sun,
which is why it is done specifically in all the solstices and equinoxes,
but specifically on the soma solstice.
You return that fire to the sun
and guarantee that the sun will shine brightly for another year.
Think how this enter popular literature and the European imagination.
In Thomas Hardy's extraordinary novel,
The Return of the Native,
as he's coming back home into this fictional Wessex,
Southwestern England,
he sees in the distance the great fire that is being burned for one of the equinoxes,
and it is logs from oak that are burning there in a sense,
and it is a premonition of things to happen.
There is also in Europe a well-known belief,
which is still preserved to this very day,
not only in Europe, but in many other parts of the world,
of essentially the transmission or the transference of evil.
How do you, of illnesses, how do you transfer something that is happening to you to someone else?
It can be transferred to animals.
It can be transferred to other human beings.
It is the way in which you cleanse yourself from all things that are evil within you
and pass it on to someone else.
This, I remember as a child, seeing this in the practices of santeria
in which people will cleanse themselves and take away,
it is called a cleansing, take away all the sins,
delete them and throw them out,
either into an animal which is sacrificed
or into a figure of wax which represents another human being and so on.
To this very day, around the Feast of John Kippur,
very Orthodox Jews, wilt, in a sense, twirl a chicken over their head.
And what they do is, in fact, they transfer the sins and so on into the chicken
or will throw pieces of bread into the water,
which is emblematic of the sins and their illnesses and problems
and will be passed on to the fish.
This happens in all culture
and is part of the way in which the past survives into the present.
There is, indeed, also the importance in Europe of May Day.
And I already mentioned that.
It's the day that follows, in fact, the Great Witch Night, the Walpurgi Snack.
And May Day is not just a day in which all countries
but the United States celebrate Labor Day.
It is, in fact, the day in which all of Europe
has a tremendous change.
You go from the end of winter, the beginnings of planting your crops
to the full bloom of the spring.
And it's a day in which you celebrate fertility.
That's what the May Day Poles are all about.
They are celebrations of the fertility, not only of couples
who dance around this gigantic phallic symbol,
but also of the earth itself.
And again, it follows the darkest night of witches.
That's the day in which, the following day,
you bring green branches into your house.
You decorate the house of green.
You select the Queen of May.
You select the King of May, the King of the Woods, who dresses in green.
In fact, celebrating the revival of the earth,
the kind of growth of new vegetation,
something that dates back to the beginnings of history.
And, of course, the May Pole, around which maidens,
and think about this, dance in search, in fact, of a husband and of fertility.
And you could hear echoes of this, all doing hardy,
the nays dancing around the May Pole, unseen by the young man.
This is something that, of course, we practice today
without realizing the deep meaning that it had,
the deep kind of sense of meaning that it had.
It is, in fact, a world we only remember through a glass darkly.
We only remember in a kind of hazy way,
in an incomplete manner.
It's no longer what it really meant for these people.
May Day, celebrate the Slave of Day, of course,
because on May Day, a series of workers in Chicago
were a killer hay market by the Pickerton police,
but they were a killer on May Day
because May Day was a day of holiday in Europe,
and that's a day they did not go to work and demonstrated instead.
And this is a way in which the past gets imbricated into the present,
and therefore it becomes, Slave of Day, a day of celebration,
but it really harkens back to a day in which no one worked.
And peasants on May Day will go and make love on the furrows,
because, in fact, even though they might go to church
and take confessions and make communion and so on,
around Easter time, it's nonetheless a way in which you still pay tribute
to a very old and ancient way of being.
And I can go on with these stories for another 10 days
because it is essentially a whole collection of folklore
that remains alive in Europe.
Think about this.
Think about, in March, in Europe, in Rome,
the old, which is the beginning of the year, traditionally, in all of Europe,
and in Rome, an old man was beaten out of the city
to indicate, essentially, the exit of the old year and the coming of the new,
which is why we, to this very day, represent the old year as an old and bent man
and the new year as a baby.
But this is a practice that goes back to before Christianity
and to the very origins of Rome.
Or think of escaped goats, think of Athens, Athens, the great Athens,
the democratic Athens, the Athens of Plato and Aristotle.
Well, in that Athens, they kept escaped goat,
somebody who was assigned and designed as escaped goat,
and they kept him and they fed him and they pay him a rent and they pay him a salary.
But if things went really wrong and somebody has to be sacrificed,
that was the selected one.
And this is something which, of course, is not only unique to Europe.
It exists in all other societies.
Read about the Mexica, the people whom we call the Aztecs.
Read about the Mayas and see the manners in which, in fact,
this idea of the sacrifice of the person who must die,
in a sense, to replenish the soil, to replenish the crops,
is still very much alive.
Think of the ball game in which the winner is, in fact,
executed and sacrificed to the goat in the Maya tradition.
Go to Chichen Itza and see the ball game and see the maze plan
growing out of the heart of the sacrificed person.
And together with this idea and this folklore,
it is, of course, the sacred sites, places that are still so sacred
that people flock to them because there seems to be a unique power to them.
The sacred places all around Europe.
The Pantheon in Rome, which is a very special place.
The stone circles in England, of course, are best known,
but not the only one, the Stonehenge.
And then, of course, the Cathedral of Schacht,
built on an old Celtic sacred place.
The Catholics did not have churches, did not have monuments.
They worshiped trees and fountains and sacred groves
and most of all, mountains.
And in Schacht, if you go to the most beautiful of all medieval cathedrals,
and you enter there in the middle of their nave,
and there were no chairs before that,
there is in white and blue stones a maze.
And you follow that maze,
and that maze goes, in fact, imitating the road to Jerusalem.
And it leads you essentially to the navel, to the onfalus of the world,
and you essentially can do this magical trip,
which takes one hour to walk slowly through the entire maze,
and now you enter into the very center of the world.
People who go there now don't even notice that this is on the floor.
They don't know what it meant.
Oh, a maze here. Well, what does it mean?
But the people who lived in the 12th and 13th century,
in the 14th century, the peasants who came from time to time to Schacht,
knew that they can take a journey,
that they could, in fact, travel all through this maze
to the very center of the world.
And then, of course, while I began these lectures
with the sacred mountain, a Celtic place, a Celtic place,
a place of worship and sacrifices on a mountain in Galicia,
overlooking the ocean and feeling there, in a sense,
all of the weight of tradition and age coming back.
So, what about? It is these things.
It is these traditions, these sacred places,
the making and construction of ideas
that are the ways in which human beings, in a sense, deal with the terror of history.
The terror of history is not just a medieval and early modern phenomenon.
The terror of history lives with us.
Think of the last century.
Think of the 20th century.
Has there been ever a crueler century,
a century more inexplicable and irrational than the last one?
On the one hand, great technological advances,
which makes it possible for you to hear me
and to see me at a distance.
And yet, on the other hand, one genocide, one Holocaust after another,
from the beginning of the century to the end of the century, without end.
In a sense, this is the weight of history.
History is made by elites.
History is written by those on top.
It is bent to the service.
It is constructed.
It is a way in which, in a sense,
we try to explain things which are often unexplainable.
It is the way in which we give order and reason
to things that are neither order nor reasonable.
Because we live as it were on the very edge of doom.
We live as it were in danger all the time.
Around us is the uncertainty, the rationality of the world.
Around us, not yet in the way in which for ancient man was,
it's not the perils of nature,
even though they do indeed torture us as well.
It is our own actions that terrorize us.
And therefore, in order to deal with this,
in order to make meaning of that,
we construct and create religion,
scapegoats, sacred places as a way of escaping that.
Thank you.
We hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses series.
Our courses are now available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com
or call our customer service representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-TEACH-12.
Thank you very much.
