Most of us recognize how religion can inspire great art, but we seldom appreciate how religious
beliefs can inform great inventions.
While some civilizations, such as our own in modern America, have used inventions primarily
for enhancing wealth, others have placed their priorities on using inventions to express
spiritual meaning.
This lecture investigates two societies, Buddhist culture in East Asia and Catholicism
in Europe, that developed inventive technology in order to shape and articulate religious
ideas and beliefs.
As we'll see, the inventions that we examine, the Buddhist pagoda and the Gothic cathedral,
function on three important dimensions.
First, both were instruments of spiritual practice.
Second, they formed and embodied specific spiritual ideas.
And third, they became subsumed within devotional practices themselves.
Now, because the cathedral was a Catholic building, it always needed to serve a variety
of roles beyond being just a backdrop for the liturgy.
Unlike many Protestant denominations, where grace and salvation are earned through good
works as well as private prayer and practice, in the Catholic Church, sanctifying grace
is dispensed by the clergy through the sacraments.
This is a crucial distinction because it means that Catholics need places of worship in which
the clergy can administer the sacraments before large numbers of believers.
Further, the word cathedral itself comes from the Greek, cathedra, meaning seat.
And by definition, any church designated a cathedral was the seat of a bishop.
This means that the cathedral not only had spiritual but temporal significance.
By contrast, Buddhist teaching focuses not on a god, but on the power within each individual
to reach enlightenment.
That is, an understanding of one's own being, the universe, and the means of achieving spiritual
peace through that understanding.
Buddhist temple complexes frequently included buildings of several types, the most iconic
of which, for Westerners at least, is the pagoda.
These towers evolved from stupas, domed or bill-shaped tombs, and served as markers
of sacred ground, places where a significant relic was preserved as a reminder of the teachings
and the purity of the Buddha.
Pagodas served as a focal point for inspiration.
By looking at them and meditating, the Buddhist adherent should be able to concentrate and
hopefully open him or herself to enlightenment.
Pagodas occupy a prominent, often central location within the temple complex, indicating
their importance.
Whereas cathedrals express the essential institutional role of the church in spiritual
and temporal terms, pagodas function as tangible tools in the elusive quest for enlightenment.
This difference is at the heart of why these two religious structures look so different
from one another.
While these spiritual considerations are central to how architects and craftsmen built pagodas
in cathedrals, environmental factors also played a role.
In the heyday of cathedral building, from about 1,000 to 1,600 AD, craftsmen built first
and foremost with stone.
Certainly stone evoked the strength and the constancy of the church itself, but it was
also the building material of choice because it was plentiful and at least initially well
suited to both the structural requirements and the aesthetic sensibilities of the designers
of cathedrals.
In various parts of Asia, when builders sought spiritual expression, they made very different
decisions about structural design, materials and construction.
While pagodas in China, Korea and Japan share many common visual elements, they can vary
greatly in terms of the materials used and the structure that they have.
In China, wood predominated before stone and brick became the more common building choices.
However, by contrast in Japan, wood continued to be used almost exclusively for pagodas
and the form there moved in surprising and sophisticated directions.
So let's talk first about pagodas.
Pagodas evolved from the burial mound in which the remains or artifacts of the Buddha were
interred.
Gradually, the mound became a dome and then a bell-shaped stupa.
In some places, the stupa grew to tremendous size and became the form of an entire building.
As for example, in the Shwezagon pagoda, completed in 1102 AD in Myanmar.
After Buddhism crossed the Himalayas into China, the shape of the pagoda, the central
element of the temple complex, became increasingly taller than the other buildings that were
found there.
Although brick pagodas date from the 6th century AD, it would appear that wooden pagodas
were common if not predominant in China until about the early 10th century, and then a general
shift took place from wood to brick.
One example is the Tiger Hill or the Yunyang pagoda in Suchao City.
This seven-story octagonal structure is supported by internal brick columns, but still features
many of the structural elements that came from wooden pagodas.
Another example is the Iron Pagoda, so-called because of its grayish hue, and it's a masterpiece
of Song Dynasty architecture, completed around 1049, and it replaced a wooden predecessor
that had burned down after being struck by lightning.
The Iron Pagoda has 13 floors and reaches a height of more than 186 feet.
At the command of the Song Emperor, this pagoda was rebuilt out of fire-resistant brick, but
here, too, the new building retained many of the elements of the older wooden pagodas.
Doors, windows, brackets, and balconies all resemble those that you would find in an earlier
structure, while the rest of the exterior of the building is clad in brown, green, red,
and blue-glazed brick.
However, in contrast with wooden structures, the tower has a completely solid interior
and a spiral-stone staircase on the outside that leads to the windows on each successive
level.
Both of these massive Chinese pagodas weigh millions of pounds each, and they have survived
dozens of serious earthquakes over the last thousand years.
The oldest surviving wooden pagoda in China is the pagoda that can be found in the Fagang
Temple in the Shanxi province, and it dates from 1056.
It is undoubtedly the most impressive of its kind, so much so that it has become iconic,
and the Chinese fondly refer to it as muta, meaning the timber pagoda.
Certainly, one reason for this is its massive size.
It is both broad and very tall, more than 220 feet tall.
The muta is a nine-story pagoda, although it appears from the outside to have only five
floors since eaves and balconies alternately extend across the upper eight floors.
Its width provides a generous amount of open, inviting interior space on successive levels.
Unlike solid brick pagodas that date from that era and can only be seen as objects of
external veneration, the pagoda at Fugang houses a variety of holy objects and thus invites
visitors to come into its interior.
Finally, while brick pagodas use decorative elements to simulate the structural form of
wooden pagodas, the Fagang pagoda expresses beauty by displaying its structural elements.
The interplay and variety of these elements is simply amazing.
They include 57 different kinds of bracket arms alone.
At Fagang, structural technology is the central feature of the building, its presence and its
essence.
In temporary sources note, seven earthquakes within 50 years after its completion, and
the building survived relatively intact until it was damaged during World War II.
Duly repaired, this pagoda remains inspiring.
Let's start and talk a little bit about pagodas in Japan.
The design of pagodas evolved in a very different direction up to the introduction of Buddhism
to Japan during the 6th century.
Like early pagodas in China, Japanese pagodas were made of wood, but the social and environmental
circumstances of the Japanese archipelago exercised an influence that caused the material's
use to be very different than on the mainland.
In fact, the modifications to pagoda design in Japan probably caused wood to remain the
material of choice long after it had lost favor in much of China.
In China and Korea, pagodas had served the utilitarian function of being lookout towers,
as well as the spiritual function of inspiration, and the upper levels were often accessible
via stairs or ladders.
However, over time in Japan, stairs and ladders disappeared, and the upper levels of the building
could only be reached with difficulty.
Perhaps Japanese Buddhists saw the pagoda in a pure light that encouraged them to reserve
its use for spiritual rather than any worldly purpose.
Another way to think about this is that the shift comes in a point of view about the pagoda.
The pagoda goes from being an observation point to becoming the object observed, and
it becomes in that way an important expression of Buddhist practice.
As objects of contemplation, pagodas need to offer the spiritual pilgrim no worldly
distraction while on the road to spiritual enlightenment.
The Japanese climate forced further changes in pagodas, particularly in terms of the size
of the eaves.
The islands are subjected in the north to snow and in the south to monsoons, and the
effects of wind and rain associated with any number of typhoons have to be taken into account.
Humulatively, Japan has twice the average rainfall of China, a reality that pagoda builders
need to take into account.
To protect the foundations and wooden structural members from excessive rain and runoff, designers
extended the size of the eaves on each level to minimize the amount of water that would
run down the vertical supports and seep into the foundations.
Pagoda designers also covered the roof on each level with tiles, ensuring that rain
would really run off the building rather than cascade down through its structural members.
Compared to Chinese pagodas, on which the eaves extend to a maximum of 20% of their
overall width, eaves on Japanese pagodas extend to approximately 70% to the building's width.
This alternation in style gave the Japanese pagoda a distinctive look, and some people
have compared to a pine tree with its branches weighted down by snow.
It has even been suggested that this was more than just a poetic vision and that the pine
tree was actually the inspiration for the design of the Japanese pagoda.
This however was not necessarily the case.
Just as the functional evolution of the building had its roots in social circumstance and the
visual design, the visual design evolved from climatic pragmatism.
The structure of the pagoda descends from still another important factor, earthquakes.
Located within the so-called Pacific Ring of Fire, the islands of Japan have been shaken
by hundreds of serious earthquakes over the centuries.
Even in the last two decades, there have been two extremely violent quakes, one that killed
6,000 people and destroyed a large portion of the city of Kobe in 1995 and another in
2011 that caused the destruction over much of Honshu, Japan's largest island, and it
included damage to the Fukushima nuclear reactor.
Remarkably, neither of these powerful quakes toppled any of Japan's wooden pagodas.
In fact, only two of the hundred pagodas in Japan have collapsed from earthquakes over
the last 1,500 years.
The reason for this is the unique structure of these buildings.
We know that as early as 607 AD, with the construction of the Hiroshi Pagoda in Nara,
which is the oldest multi-story wooden structure in the world, there was a means in place for
mitigating the motion introduced by earthquake tremors.
The system that accomplishes this has several key components.
First, each level or floor of the pagoda is made up of interlocking, vertical and horizontal,
not diagonal, structural members.
The pagoda also lacks low-bearing or stiffening walls, although it includes sheathing on the
roof and the eaves of the topmost floor.
Some of the connecting joints are even designed to allow a limited amount of movement in response
to sudden stresses.
For example, zipper joints allow for some horizontal movement.
The overall effect of this arrangement of structural joints and horizontal sheathing
and decorative elements is a stable but flexible building.
Next, the floors of the pagoda are simply stacked one upon the other, held in place
only by their own weight.
When fitted together, these modules create a hollow core and it is in this space that
the pagoda builders display their true brilliance.
Suspended from the top of the pagoda and extending nearly through its entire height
is the shinbashira, a square sectioned pillar of cypress that can be as much as two feet
in diameter.
If the pagoda is just a few floors high, the shinbashira may be composed of a single
massive tree trunk, but larger buildings can require the two pieces be joined together
to create one rigid component.
While you might think that the shinbashira serves as a pillar holding up the pagoda,
it actually functions like a giant pendulum because it almost always ends anywhere from
several inches to a full floor's distance above the ground.
Occasionally, it will even rub against the pagoda's foundation.
So when an earthquake occurs, all of these elements act in unison to dampen the motion
transferred from the ground, from the quake, to the building.
As the building shimmies, the individual floors move independently in opposition to each other.
The first floor goes in one direction, the second in the opposite direction, the third
back in the first direction, the fourth in opposition, and so on.
This lessens the overall sway of the building.
At the same time, the tiles on the outer edges of the extended eaves distribute the weight
of each module over a greater area, thereby increasing the radius of gyration and the inherent
inertia that the quake's force must overcome to impose horizontal motion on each floor.
Finally, as these units move from side to side, they strike the shinbashira and its
huge mass absorbs much of the energy of motion, which it releases by swinging slightly within
the confines of the pagoda's central shaft.
The Toji Pagoda in Kyoto was first built in 826, although its current iteration dates
from 1644.
At the height of more than 180 feet, it was supposedly the tallest building in Japan until
1968.
The deadly 6.9 magnitude earthquake that hit nearby Kobe in 1995 destroyed several buildings
in the neighborhood around Toji, but the pagoda survived unscathed.
At least one writer has suggested, a Japanese pagoda is as much a machine as a structure.
That perspective is certainly true from the standpoint of how we talked about machines
back in lecture two on the Potter's Wheel.
Like the Potter's Wheel, the pagoda is a cunning device that outmaneuvers Mother Nature,
causing buildings to sway gently rather than topple in earthquakes.
At the same time, we should be careful about calling a pagoda machine if we think that
machines are only the product of science, for that misses the point of what Japanese
craftsmen achieved 1400 years ago.
It simply misses the point.
The ability of those craftsmen to fashion a pagoda that can withstand such violent environmental
forces was a result of trial and error, of invention and discovery.
It was the crafts of carpentry and construction, not the science of physics that came into
play.
Instead, it's another commentator, John Linehart, who comes much closer to hitting the mark
about pagodas when he suggests that, Shinbashura could be as much a religious object as a
dynamic balancing device for dampening the destructive forces of earthquakes and typhoons.
In addition, the pagodas' role as a focal point and inspiration for meditation, a step
in the quest for enlightenment, this is certainly an interesting idea.
Certainly Japanese craftsmen developed a complex technological solution in order to preserve
an object of great meaning in the face of earthquakes.
That the Shinbashira is an essential part of the pagoda, one that fundamentally embodies
the qualities of inner strength and the peace that observers and adherents seek.
Indeed, one might well conclude that the technology of the Shinbashira, its components
and how the components interact, have great meaning for the Buddhist faithful.
Let's turn now and talk about the cathedral.
In Christian Europe, certainly in English, the word church has multiple meanings, referring
at once to a building, a group of worshippers, and an institution.
For over 1500 years, the cathedral was the building that captured all of those meanings
for Catholics, both lay and clergy.
Perhaps the earliest progenitor of the cathedrals to come was the Basilica of St. Peter commissioned
by an early Christian emperor, Constantine the Great in 352 AD.
This church was the seat of the Bishop of Rome, and it was modeled after the Basilica
of Lupea, a civic building constructed as part of the redevelopment of the Forum during
the reign of Trajan in the 2nd century AD.
Not to be confused with modern St. Peter's, which dates from 1626, old St. Peter's had
a high, high ceilinged central aisle and a semi-circular Alcovite one end and double
side aisles running the full length of the building.
Old St. Peter's included an abbreviated transept and a wooden roof that was supported by a
timber truss.
The general plan of this church, which stood for nearly 1200 years, was well known and
throughout Europe, churches great and small were modeled after it.
From the 4th to the 12th century, numerous churches were constructed across Europe, but
their size and splendor was limited by the twin facts of limited population and limited
economic activity.
There wasn't just all that much wealth that could be available to invest in really big
churches.
Beginning in the 12th century, however, improvements in agriculture and other technologies led
to an increase in trade and the growth of towns and cities.
Civic pride as well as faith now stimulated a competitive energy that focused on the construction
of grand churches, cathedrals, as an expression that would convey a message on multiple levels
spiritually, economically and politically.
One of the oldest and most impressive surviving examples of Romanesque or Norman cathedrals
is the Durham Cathedral in Northern England.
The gun in 1093, less than 50 years after the French, the Normans invaded and conquered
England, the massive presence of the Durham Cathedral, with a nave 400 feet long and three
stories high, must have conveyed to the local English population something about the power
of their new Norman overlords and the future that the rulers had in mind for the country.
Notably Durham marked a move away from barrel vaulting of the nave that had been favored
in medieval churches and is the first example of the ribbed groin vaulting that would become
widespread.
Although the height of the nave at Durham allows a certain amount of light to flow through
from above via an arcaded clastry, the overwhelming feeling at Durham is one of great weight and
somber darkness exemplified by gigantic pillars that separate the nave and the side aisles.
Even so, the great pillars were not enough to control the outward thrusting load of the
nave's heavy roof.
To support the weight of the nave, the roofs above Durham's side aisles can seal an innovation
that will be subsequently exploited and developed almost beyond recognition.
The arched buttress.
As half arches, these buttresses help prop up the nave and provide additional support
for the heavy weight of its roof.
Arched buttresses served as extra pathways for the load of the roof to be distributed.
At Durham, the arched buttresses were merely utilitarian, hidden away from view, but surprisingly
soon they were brought out into the open and embraced.
The notion that structural elements should be visible and embraced was a central idea
of Gothic architecture, and this notion was very much on the mind of one of the pioneers
of Gothic architecture, Abbot Sougère, as he sought to make the abbey, sandee of destination,
of religious pilgrims in the resting place of early French kings, Sougère sought to
make it into a focal point of France's religious and patriotic emotions.
It was at Saint-Denis, in a single ambulatory encompassing the absent chapels built between
1140 and 1144, that the world saw first the clearly identifiable Gothic style, marked
by pointed arches, larger windows, thinner columns, lighter vaults.
According to Sougère's own account of the building of Saint-Denis, there were two specific
goals.
The first was to construct a building with the geometric order and mathematical proportional
harmony that people saw in God's universe.
And the second was to create a luminous interior where the miraculous light flooding through
the choir, through the most sacred windows, became the light divine, a mystical revelation
of the Spirit of God.
The method of achieving these two goals, particularly the first, required that the structural elements
be exposed.
All this began in 1163, barely 20 years after the completion of Saint-Denis, but already
the Gothic style was evolving.
From its start with Abbott-Sougère and Saint-Denis, the Gothic style spread across Europe, and
one of the most compelling examples of it is the Cathedral of Notre-Dame in the heart
of Paris.
Construction of Notre-Dame was the central element in a more extensive urban renewal
plan on the Eau de la Cité in the center of Paris, a plan that included an open square,
broad streets, and the Bishops' Palace.
These being built in England at this time continued to be long and horizontal in order
to deliver visual impact, but here in Paris the vertical scale of the project grew to
monumental proportions, a feature that was only amplified by the relatively compact dimensions
of Notre-Dame's floor plan.
Yet the increased height meant greater loads that would require a structural solution that
was still true to the theological imperative, a solution that was both geometrically harmonious
and visible.
Moreover, along with raising the nave, the builders of Notre-Dame also wanted to enlarge
the windows throughout the cathedral in order to let in more of the miraculous light.
The solution to all these challenges was the flying buttress.
No one knows exactly where the first use of the flying buttress occurred, but we have
seen that there were early hidden supporting arches at Durham, and they were certainly
the flying buttresses were certainly in place at Notre-Dame sometime between 1190 and 1225.
At Notre-Dame the flying buttresses were more than modest structural members.
They grew from substantial stone piers abutting the outer walls of the aisle and the apps,
such as those that had been used at Durham, and they grew into being grand structural
elements reaching upward until they rose above the height of the roof of the cathedral's
lower flanks, extending into spires that mirrored the crossing tower at the top.
At Notre-Dame the flying buttresses demonstrated a kind of orderly structural exhibitionism
that fluently expressed Sougere's thinking about proportion, and consequently revealed
their status not just as structural members, but as an articulation of spiritual meaning.
Structurally, the flying buttress allowed the creation of a system of internal and external
skeletal elements. At Notre-Dame and elsewhere, flying buttresses achieved the goal of reducing
the area of solid load-bearing stone walls so the walls could be replaced with larger
and larger windows. Stained glass windows were not new, but now the size of those windows
was unprecedented. A millennium later, even somebody with a blunted, jaded sense of the
21st century cannot help but react in awe to what those medieval craftsmen created.
Notre-Dame's three rose windows, L'Étoile rosette, appear to be a radiant pattern of
jewels. The windows in Yorkminster contain some of the best examples of medieval stained
glass in Europe, but for sheer impact, the windows of Saint Chapelleau, concentrated
in 1248 in Paris, are unrivaled. When one enters the upper chapel, all one senses is
divine light, no walls, just a few delicate columns that apparently support the light
self. Safe to say that Abbot Sougere would have been most pleased. And here again, just
as with the Shimbashira of the Pagoda, is a technology that manifests the meaning of
the Christian faith. One last late Gothic refinement of Sougere's ideas of proportion
and how proportion was an expression of God's natural world is the development of the fan
vault in England during the late 15th and early 16th centuries.
An exceptional example of fan vaulting is King's College Chapel in Cambridge, and the
chapel dates from 1515. From below, the radiating ribs of the vault resemble the form of a fan,
but in actuality, the ribs form a segment of a concave cone, curving outward from the
base in one dimension as they radiate in another. Resembling a spider's web more than anything
else may be the most naturalistic structural element in the Gothic style.
Vault is tempting to view pagodas and cathedrals solely in artistic terms. Both forms of architecture
express spiritual values not only through form and decoration, but equally through the
technology that they employed as structures. Both the Shimbashira inside a Japanese pagoda
and the flying buttresses on the exterior of the Gothic cathedral did more than just
hold up the building. Both were great inventions because they embodied spiritual ideas that
were deeply significant to each culture. The calming inner presence of the Shimbashira
echoes the inner peace of Buddhist enlightenment. The aesthetic proportionality and luminosity
of Gothic architecture are inseparable from the order and beauty of God's universe and
the sacred revelation of His divine light. Both reveal to us that inventions don't just
simply get a practical job done, but also do cultural work by illustrating powerful ideas
about how we think about ourselves and the world. Such inventions challenge us to ask
why it should not be possible to invent technologies that manifest similar spiritual values for
our time and for our past.
