With every lecture I try to have a big idea, and the lecture for today is that living in
the 21st century, we assume that much of new technology grows out of scientific discoveries.
Scientists are supposed to conduct new experiments, develop new theories, and inventors and engineers
in turn apply that science to create the new technology that we enjoy.
However, it was exactly the opposite when science first appeared in the 15th and 16th
centuries.
The scientific revolution came about largely as a result of new inventions, namely new
scientific instruments that we're going to talk about today, the telescope and the microscope.
As these new instruments revealed new information about the heavens and the world of tiny things,
philosophers had to decide how to make sense of this new information.
The new observations made using telescopes and microscopes didn't fit into any of the
old ideas that were put forward by the church and ancient authorities like Aristotle.
And they prompted individuals like Galileo to create a whole new system of meaning,
what we today call science.
So in this episode, we'll look at how these new inventions revolutionized how we think
about the world, making them obviously great inventions.
Now, throughout this lecture, I won't necessarily use the term scientist, or science, because
both those terms really date from the 19th century.
And instead, when I'm talking about people doing work in the sciences, I'll use the
term that was common in the 15th and 16th century natural philosophers.
Before delving into the history of these inventions, the microscope and the telescope, let's review
how they actually worked.
Telescopes and microscopes work according to the same principle.
If you have an object, and here I have a little canoe, and you look at it, if you have it
up close, there's a fairly wide angle from the top to the bottom to your eye.
If I hold it further out, that angle from the top to the bottom that meets my eye is smaller.
What lenses do is by taking advantage of the principle of refraction, they artificially
manipulate that angle, so that instead of your eye seeing the actual angle that might
be fairly small, it sees a wide angle, making your brain think that it's actually seeing
a large object.
And we can see this illustrated by looking through this particular lens.
And if I hold the canoe just right, it actually looks a lot bigger than it does when I have
it out here, and you're looking at it from a longer distance.
Telescopes and microscopes do exactly the same thing by using lenses to change the angle
of the light before it hits your eye so that things seem bigger when you look through the
telescope or the microscope.
Although modern instruments have many more components, lots and lots of lenses, the
early instruments use these basic principles by just having two lenses.
There was a larger primary lens that was at the front of the telescope called the objective.
That was always nearest the object or the target.
There's a secondary lens at the back of the telescope known as the eyepiece.
Now we can see how these parts fit together by looking at this diagram over here.
Any object reflects light off of it, and that light can go off in any number of directions.
The first thing that a telescope or microscope does is it clarifies the image by collecting
some of the light from the target which goes through the objective, the front part of the
telescope.
Now the curvature and the size of the objective can be manipulated so that the light can be
refocused at different points inside the telescope tube.
We see that that focal point is where there's the middle of the X where all the yellow lines
meet.
Now having refocused the light from the target, the eyepiece picks it up at that focal point
because the X is where not only the focal point of the objective lens ends, but it's
where the focal point of the eyepiece begins.
The eyepiece picks it up and it can now handle the light, bend the light in such a way that
it strikes the eye at an artificially wide angle, thereby making the target the thing
that we're looking at appear much larger.
Now while the telescope in this diagram uses two concave lenses, the same effect can be
achieved by using convex lenses.
And in this diagram over here we can see the difference between concave and convex lenses.
Concave lenses are caved in, they curve into the center of the lens.
By contrast, convex lenses bow out, that's how I always try to remember it.
As we'll see, most of the early instruments used a pair of convex lenses were more rarely
and more famously, Galileo's telescope used a combination of a convex objective and a
concave eyepiece.
The phenomenon of refraction is what's behind, what's behind lenses.
Refraction simply is the idea that as light moves from two mediums, say from air into
water, the ray of the light bends.
Now refraction has been observed in nature for thousands of years long before anyone
was able to come up with a good explanation.
The Greeks, for example, noticed that an image was magnified when viewed through a spherical
object like a glass bowl filled with water.
And by Roman times, this phenomenon of refraction, that glass or crystals could bend light, was
put to use in a burning glass that could focus the rays and start fires.
Greek philosophers recorded their observation on the behavior of light passing through and
reflecting from objects, and some most notably, the mathematician Euclid, who lived around
300 BC, attempted to explain what he saw.
Now the part that he got right was that they are indeed light rays that travel from the
object that you're looking at to your eye, okay?
However, what Euclid didn't understand is he thought the rays actually went from your
eye out to the object and that they were not actually rays reflected off the object.
In the second century CE, Ptolemy continued to grapple with the problem of refraction,
the bending of light as it passes through different substances like a pool of water.
And Ptolemy proposed the idea that the angle of refraction was proportional to the angle
of incidence, something that proved to be conceptually sound and eventually useful in
developing lenses.
One more interestingly, in his book of optics, the Islamic scholar Ibn al-Hathan made an
important contribution to optics before modern times, and Hathan was around in the 11th century.
In his volume, he recorded observations not just of nature, but also very careful studies
of light.
He spanned subjects ranging from the rainbow to the physiology of vision, as well as the
property of curved mirrors and the magnification of glass segments.
Later translated into Latin, El Hatham's book was widely read and had a significant
influence on European philosophers, including Robert Groestest.
Groestest was the Bishop of Lincoln, and in the 12th century he noticed that lenses made
small things larger and distant objects appear closer.
One of his students, Roger Bacon, sought to build on the Bishop of Lincoln's observations
and came up with a practical application using lenses to improve vision.
Having noticed the magnifying qualities of what was then called reading stones, which
were hemispherical rock crystals that were set into reliquaries, Bacon believed that
experimentation could yield a lens with predictable qualities capable of postponing the problems
of vision in one's old age.
Bacon described in his book a spherical magnifier, which he used as an aid for reading.
But even more ambitiously, Bacon wrote that under the right circumstances, this new lens,
this new invention, the lens had the possibilities that, from an incredible distance, we might
read the smallest of letters.
In this way, a child might appear a giant and a man a mountain.
While Bacon showed how lenses could be used to improve vision, decent eyeglasses could
only come about once somebody had made a better material for making lenses.
Through their trade network in the Eastern Mediterranean, the Venetians had learned about
a material called natrium, a substitute for potash, which is used as an ingredient in
glass making.
Using this ingredient, it was possible to produce a glass that was clear, only faintly
colored and had far fewer bubbles.
Venetians called it crystallum, and by 1484, the Venetians required that it be used for
all of the high quality glassware produced in their city.
And artisans also began to use crystallum to make lenses that could be fit into frames
so that they could be positioned in front of a person's eyes.
Spectacles were already in use in Northern Italy by 1290, and at the turn of the century,
in 1300, Venetian commercial regulations regarding glass works make mention of rodi.ugl, little
discs for the eyes.
A few years later, they were even more specific and referred to them as vitreous-op-oculus-odd-legendum
eyeglasses for reading.
Yet it would be another half century before we see the first portrait of someone wearing
eyeglasses.
It became about in the 1352, and examples of spectacles and many references can be found
from the 15th century onwards.
Initially, only convex lenses were available to treat farsightedness.
However, as time went on, concave lenses were used to treat nearsightedness and were certainly
available by the mid-15th century.
At first, the Venetians made lenses with one-side convex, that is to say, bowing out, and one-side
planar or flat, and they made these lenses by taking a crystal sphere and cutting a slice
off of it.
However, this technique was problematic and it was difficult to maintain true curvature
in the sphere that was used for making these lenses.
Spectacle making and lens making in general experienced another round of innovation in
Nuremberg in the late 15th and early 16th centuries.
Between 1475 and 1500, approximately a dozen individuals gained the privilege of citizenship
in Nuremberg as spectacle makers.
And it was during these years that lens makers began to experiment with grinding lenses.
With using a concave mold, they were able to then produce convex lenses, but at the
same time, they retained this reverse planar surface.
So unlike lenses that we often think about in a magnifying glass that have two bowed
outsides, think of a lens that only has one curved side and one flat side.
The Nuremberg specialists that came up with this grinding technique tried to keep it a
secret, but by 1520, knowledge of the technique of grinding lenses had spread into Italy,
France, and England.
The demand for spectacles grew very rapidly in this period, largely in part because there
was greater literacy.
More and more people were reading books as a result of the printing press, a topic that
we talked about back in lecture eight.
Turning to the telescope, it's really hard to actually identify the true inventor of
this important invention.
Indeed, it's probably impossible to decide who should give the credit to, to whom we
should give the credit.
But seems certain is that various combinations of convex and concave lenses were tried in
England, the Netherlands, Italy, and Germany, all during the late 16th and early 17th centuries.
Traditionally, credit for the telescope has gone to, quote, a fortunate spectacle maker
from the Netherlands by the name of Zacharias Janssen.
In 1604, he basically reported that he had come up with an instrument, a telescope, but
he had based it on an Italian account, which historians of science speculate to have been
written by Giambosta della Porta.
And the book was called Maggi Naturalis.
Now, della Porta wanted to get credit for the invention of the telescope, but at the
same time, he didn't want to give away the idea because he knew it was valuable.
And as a result, in the book that Janssen read was an intentionally vague description
of how della Porta put the lenses together.
There's also hard evidence that in 1608, another Dutchman by the name of Hans Lipperche
demonstrated a telescope to the Prince of Nassau.
There exists an account that Chronicles tells the story of how the two men ascended into
a tower in the Hague, and from there, using the telescope, they were able to see the clock
tower endelped and the cathedral windows enlightened.
The secret to Lipperche's success was that he added an extra feature to the telescope,
a diaphragm with a hole in the middle of it that was 10 millimeters wide, what astronomers
and instrument makers today call an aperture.
The aperture eliminated much of the distortion introduced by having a large objective lens.
Lipperche requested a patent for his invention, but others, including Janssen, claimed that
they could produce instruments with similar qualities.
And as a result, Lipperche was unable to get his patent.
Regardless of the origin, all of these ideas about the telescope spread quickly across Europe.
From the first half of the 17th century onward, everyone who was a natural philosopher was
investigating the potential of a telescope.
Among these people, probably the most important person was Galileo Galilei, who was often
regarded by historians as being the effective inventor of both the telescope and the compound
microscope.
However, Galileo always insisted that, at least with regards to the telescope, he was
not the person that needed to be honored, but that the telescope was a Dutch invention.
Galileo, however, was the first person to make good use of the telescope, and he conducted
detailed experiments involving the relative size of the aperture and its placement with
regard to the objective.
Galileo's first telescope, which he made in 1609, was fabricated using a long tube.
It was 2.9 meters long, and it was 42 millimeters in diameter.
It used a planoconvex lens as its objective, and a planoconcave eyepiece, and together
those two lenses produced a magnification of about three power.
Galileo thought, as did Liperche, that the telescope was a very promising invention,
and that it might be used by military officers to direct battles, and they promptly tried
to sell it to various people.
Galileo tried to sell it to the Venetians for military use.
The sort of telescope that we're talking about these times you probably have seen, and it
was what we would call today a spyglass.
Later on, Galileo produced telescopes that had as much as 33 times magnification, which
is approximately equivalent of today's modern binoculars, a good pair of binoculars.
Unfortunately, Galileo's instruments had a notable shortcoming.
They had a very narrow field of vision, about 7 minutes 15 seconds, which means that only
about one quarter of the width of the moon could be seen at full magnification.
And while it didn't initially occur to Galileo to train his instrument, his telescope, on
that celestial object, it very soon attracted his attention.
When Galileo looked at the moon through his telescope, it served to undermine an awful
lot of what people had assumed about the universe, and ultimately it changed how we think about
our place in the universe.
According to the philosophical ideas put forward by Aristotle, which were treated as the basis
of science and philosophy throughout the Middle Ages and the early modern times, the heavens,
according to Aristotle, were a separate reality from the earth.
And while man, who was imperfect, lived on a terrestrial world which was imperfect and
malleable, subject to change by the weather, by different conditions, the heavens where
God lived were believed to be perfect, immutable and constant.
The sun and moon were unchanging objects orbiting around the earth, where man occupied
a central position underneath the canopy of stars.
In the Aristotelian universe, or the Ptolemaic universe, we and our planet are alone, unique
in the universe.
Following the tenets, the principle set out by Aristotle, Galileo should have seen that
moon when he looked through it by using his telescope as a perfect, unblemished ball.
But instead, he immediately saw that it was covered with craters, and had mountains and
plains, much like those that we find here on earth.
Suddenly, 2,000 years of Aristotelian philosophy were called into question.
As Galileo's view of heavenly objects became more and more clear, the heaven and earth
dichotomy was starting to blur.
Those who argued against him noted that the traditional philosophical view was to set
sensory perceptions.
What we take in by our eye, or our ear, or by taste or smell was inherently faulty, and
his critics hypothesized that the imperfections that he saw on the moon were not actually
out there, but caused by defects in his telescope.
For his critics, it was pointless to look through Galileo's telescope, and indeed many
of his opponents literally refused to do so.
As Galileo trained his telescope on other objects in the heavens, he encountered even
more surprises.
Through his telescope, he saw that the planets were different from the stars, as they formed
into or coalesced in his eyepiece into illuminated discs rather than simply being points of light.
For Galileo, this indicated that the planets were closer and much more similar to the earth
and the moon than the sun.
Could there be other earths?
The heavens were further transformed in other ways as Galileo looked through his telescope.
Galileo saw stars too faint to be seen with the naked eye, suggesting that there existed
in a universe at immense distances.
The Milky Way ceased to be a luminous cloud, which is how it looks when you see it through
the naked eye, and it became a belt of innumerable stars.
Suddenly the universe was a much larger and a much more complex place, and if this was
not enough, Galileo soon made another discovery that really boggled the minds of the day.
In January 1610, Galileo observed three bright spots that were aligned across the face of
the planet Jupiter.
Viewing them over the next couple of nights, Galileo noticed that their lateral, their
horizontal position, relative to the planet changed.
They moved across the disc, but that they remained in the same alignment.
Finally, a week later, a fourth spot appeared in alignment with the others, and Galileo
decided that what he was seeing were moons orbiting Jupiter, passing across its face
and appearing and disappearing behind its bulk.
While none of this proved the Copernican theory of the heliocentric universe, a universe in
which all of the planets revolve around the sun, Galileo's discoveries did make the heliocentric
view much more plausible by demonstrating that not all objects in the universe revolve around
the Earth.
In March of 1610, Galileo published his observations in Ciderius Musius, messenger from the stars.
Up to this point, Galileo's findings had created a sense of fascination among many
of the members of the Catholic Church, but as the new discoveries continued to accumulate,
it became more and more likely that a straw would break the back of church tolerance.
In 1611, Galileo observed spots on the surface of the sun, and the way they moved indicated
that the sun was rotating.
Now remember, the sun was supposed to be a perfect object, so sunspots and moving sunspots
really messed with the whole set of notions that the heavens were perfect.
The evidence that heavenly bodies rotate was another important piece fitting into the Copernican
puzzle.
Previously, cautious about Copernicus and his ideas, Galileo was now accumulating more
and more evidence indicating the implausibility of the old geocentric universe put forward
by Aristotle.
It had become clear to Galileo that the heavens were no longer simply a backdrop for a solitary
central Earth surrounded by a canopy of stars, and as the whole nature of the physical universe
changed, the conception of human existence within it changed as well.
The implication was that if the Earth was not the only planet, then man's unique relationship
with God, as set forth by the Church, might just be an issue.
In 1632, Galileo published his conclusions, comparing the evidence for each of the competing
theories of the universe, and he tried to lay them out in an objective manner.
However, and unfortunately, Galileo could not keep a degree of sarcasm from seeping through
in his report, and it is the sarcasm that got him into considerable trouble with Pope
Urban who saw himself as the target of some of Galileo's barbs.
Called before the Inquisition and threatened with torture, Galileo claimed to abandon his
support of Copernicus' theory.
However, Galileo could not recan his evidence.
Thanks to the invention of the telescope, the astronomical cat was out of the bag.
No matter what he said, no matter what he recanted, Galileo's telescope had changed
not only how people understood themselves, but how they viewed their relationship in
the universe.
It would be up to another scientist or another natural philosopher, Johannes Kepler, to confirm
and convert Galileo's findings into mathematical principles.
Kepler also went on to devise the standard lens configuration that we find in telescopes
today using two convex lenses.
But the larger point for us, concerned as we are about how inventions change the world,
is that you have to get the technology right if science is to progress.
And indeed, over the next century, major scientific figures devoted as much energy to
inventing better optical instruments as they did to formulating scientific theories.
Both Christian Huygens and Rene Descartes, two of the most important scientists of their
time, spent a great deal of time and effort on calculating how to grind precise lenses,
and they dreamed of coming up with a machine that could perform that grinding precisely.
The great Isaac Newton decided to sidestep some of these problems with grinding lenses
by inventing an entirely new kind of telescope, a reflecting telescope that magnified objects
by using a curved mirror instead of a lens.
Although Galileo is credited with re-engineering the microscope from the original telescope,
microscopes really advanced rapidly as a result of the work of lots and lots of lens makers
and natural philosophers in the middle of the 17th century.
During this formative and exciting period, individuals experimented with two kinds of
microscopes, some that were based on telescopes and had multiple lenses, and others that
employed only a single lens.
Now the major difference between microscopes and telescopes is generally the orientation
of the eyepiece.
In microscopes, the rounded surface of the convex eye lens faces the target or what you're
looking at, but it's reversed to face the viewer in telescopes.
Microscopes from multiple lenses were developed and promoted by Robert Hooke, who was the
first secretary of the newly formed Royal Society, which was one of the first scientific
societies formed in the world.
Hooke was born in 1635 on the Isle of Wright.
He studied philosophy at Oxford University, and thereafter became an assistant to his
favorite professor, Robert Boyle.
In 1663, he was tempted away by the Royal Society, and their Hooke embarked on a new
course of research under its auspices.
Fascinated with telescopes, with microscopes, Hooke was tasked by the society, quote, to
bring into every meeting one microscopical observation at least.
Two years later, Hooke published his seminal book, which was titled Micrographia, and that
included both his observations on a wide variety of specimens, as well as his description
of the instrument he used.
Two of Hooke's most famous observations in Micrographia detail a flea, and the original
drawing was 16 inches in length, which gives you a sense of how much detail Hooke could
see through his microscope.
The other thing that we remember for Hooke for was that he looked through a thin layer
of cork.
And as he studied the cork, he concluded that the little sections that he saw, the little
passages reminded him of the cells that monks lived in, and as a result, Hooke coined the
term cell to describe the structure that we today associate with biology.
In contrast, Anthony von Levenhoek pioneered the single lens microscope.
Levenhoek was born and delft in the Netherlands in 1632, and as a young man, he was apprenticed
to a draper, a textile merchant in Amsterdam.
Among the things that the textile merchant had Levenhoek do was to check the count of
threads in fabric, in other words, inspect the fabric by using a lens.
And Levenhoek became fascinated with lenses and optics.
He began to make microscopes when he became a fully established merchant in his own right,
and he undertook research with microscopes and began publishing in 1673.
In that year, Levenhoek's name appears in the Archives of the Royal Society, where Hooke
was already established and there was a great deal of interest in microscopy.
One letter from Constantine Huygens recommended Levenhoek, and it wrote in part, he is a person
unlearned in both sciences and languages, but of his own nature, exceedingly curious
and industrious.
And indeed, Levenhoek's personality emerges from one of the early letters in which he
sent to the Society, in which he describes himself as having, as in the following way,
I have no style, I do not gladly suffer contradiction or censor from others.
These impressions that Levenhoek was a prickly character born out by the fact that he was
notoriously secretive about both his instruments and his methods of observation.
Levenhoek never let anyone outside of his immediate circle look through one of his microscopes.
Nevertheless, his results are amazing and detailed in more than 200 letters that he sent to the
Royal Society.
Levenhoek's instruments were very different from those of Hooke.
Hooke had a single lens, in contrast, Hooke used multiple lenses.
But Levenhoek's were much more effective, much more effective.
First, Levenhoek's microscopes were small, they were hand-held devices, they could fit
in the palm of your hand.
They consisted of a brass plate with an aperture into which a single tiny spherical lens was
mounted.
Behind that lens, a specimen was positioned on a pin and manipulated using a series of
screws.
The whole thing was reputed to have been made with polished lenses made from fragments of
glass.
Remarkably, one of the best of his instruments magnified items more than 250 times and allowed
Levenhoek to study bacteria and sperm to his oa.
Even in the 19th century, one of Levenhoek's lenses was judged to be superior and better
than the lenses and the microscopes produced at that time.
Biologists for years found it necessary to always consult Levenhoek's records to see
if they were simply duplicating or copying his work.
Through the 1600s, as philosophers articulated what we now call science, they continued to
interact with the practical artisans who were busy coming up with new and improved optical
instruments, better telescopes, better microscopes.
As better lenses became available and magnifications increased for both telescopes and microscopes,
became a challenge to figure out a couple of different things.
Artisans first and foremost needed to figure out how to provide a stable mount so the instrument
didn't shake and blur the image.
They also had to learn to focus the lens precisely so that you could get a good image.
And for telescopes, they had to create clockwork mechanisms that allow the telescope to move
ever so slowly to offset the rotation of the Earth.
Because if you didn't do so, the star or planet that you were trying to watch would
eventually go out of sight and you couldn't find it in the viewfinder.
Working within the limit of the materials and tools available at the time, skilled artisans
developed all sorts of mechanical solutions that took care of these three problems.
And they came up with different ways of having movable mountings and focusing mechanisms.
As these problems were solved, artisans were able to establish themselves as a new craft,
that of the scientific instrument maker.
And these new craftsmen began turning out standard telescopes and microscopes that could be purchased
by all sorts of curious people, not only scholars, but also merchants.
In the process, instrument maker shops became the centers of exchange for scientific and
technological information.
And competing with the early learned societies.
Robert Hook's diary indeed provides almost daily evidence that he visited shops or the
taverns where instrument makers worked and met their customers.
As we'll see later in the lecture on the steam engine, James Watt, who invented an
improved steam engine, began his career as an instrument maker in the mid-1700s.
Obviously, the scientific revolution was nurtured by the spread of ideas through printing,
but the revolution was even more dependent on the development of optical instruments.
First and foremost, these instruments allowed natural philosophers to make observations.
And these observations prompted the creation of new fields today that we call astronomy,
biology, physics, and chemistry.
Many of those discoveries would not have been made possible, or would have been made impossible
without the new instruments.
Because the instruments allowed investigators to see something that had always been there,
but could not necessarily be discerned.
Another way that instruments contributed to the scientific revolution was that they helped
establish what we now call the scientific method.
Thanks to the telescope and microscope, it can be understood that it was essential to
make observations in the natural world that could be then used to formulate scientific
theories.
Without instruments that could make both phenomena, both the motion of planets or the cellular
structure of plants, visible, there was no way that you could make precise measurements
and no way that you could have an orderly development of the natural knowledge that we call science
today.
Overall, then, the telescope and the microscope are great inventions, because they allowed
people to revolutionize the way we see and understand the world.
Instruments like these two, the telescope and the microscope, are at the very heart
of what science is today.
And rather than seeing technology as being applied science, maybe we should remember
that often science is really applied technology.
