I
hate to break it to you, but you really should not have slept through all those classes on
the industrial revolution when you were studying history in school. If you did, you missed one
of the most pivotal points in European and American history. In 1700, the major powerhouse
in the world was still China, where progressively-minded emperors and mandarins were doing what they
could to encourage improvements in agriculture as well as innovations such as spinning machinery
and textile production. Just to keep the Europeans on their toes, even as late as 1848, a large
Chinese sailing ship or a junk, the Keying, sailed east across the Pacific, around the
bottom of South America, into the Atlantic, and turned up one fine spring morning at the
docks in London. By 1900, though, all was changed. Britain, Germany and the United States were
the leading nations in the world, thanks in large measure to the development of large-scale
modern industry. How did this new world order come about?
Well, since you may have slept through those classes on the industrial revolution, I'll
let you in on the secret of what happened. Britain, Germany and America got ahead because
they were able to use a host of inventions to make more stuff, food, clothes, machines,
guns, battleships, to increase productivity. Inventions allowed them to make more stuff
more efficiently. So you might reasonably ask, how do inventions contribute to productivity?
The answer, as I tell my students so they can memorize it, is scale, speed, coordination,
plus transportation. In a nutshell, all of the amazing things that happened during the
industrial revolution can be boiled down to several basic ideas. First, industrials found
that you could make more stuff cheaper by using bigger plants and bigger machines. As
we'll see in a later lecture, it's a lot cheaper to make tons of steel in a giant
pessemer converter than it is to produce steel using a smaller, crucible process. Economists
like to call the advantages accrued by doing things big economies of scale. At the same
time, other entrepreneurs discovered that the key to success was to do things faster.
If you can combine workers and machines in a way that spits out more widgets per hour
than you can charge less per widget and make your money by selling thousands instead of
hundreds of widgets. To speed up the process, you may have to invest in expensive machinery,
but if you can make and sell massive numbers of widgets, then you can make a real fortune.
Economies of speed are the reason why textile manufacturers chose to take up new inventions
like the spinning genny and the power loom. Both allowed them to use the same number of
workers to turn out quickly, far more fabric than if the industrialists had stayed with
the old hand-powered machines. Third, you can also get ahead in manufacturing
by carefully studying the steps involved in making a product and then adjusting those
steps so that the workers can do each step just a little more quickly. These are called
economies of coordination and we'll learn more about them when we talk about pin making
in lecture 14. Now while these first strategies refer to
the things that industrialists might do on the micro level, that is, inside a factory
or company, the last strategy is a macro strategy in that it's something you do for a region
or a nation, namely develop better transportation. You can drive down the costs of moving raw
materials to factories and finish products from factories to consumers, then businessmen
will make more money and the cost of goods to consumers will also go down. As we'll
see in lecture 15, that's exactly how canals and railroads contributed to the industrial
revolution. But for this lecture, let's go back to
economies of speed and scale. If you want bigger and faster, then you need stronger
materials and you need better energy inputs and that takes us to the intertwined stories
of coal and iron in 18th century Britain. Without a fuel, coal, that could deliver more
heat and a material, iron, that was both cheap and durable, early industrialists would have
been hard pressed to pursue their dreams of bigger factories and faster machines.
But before you can improve productivity and have an industrial revolution, there has to
be an increase in the demand for goods. Otherwise, why should inventors invent new machines or
entrepreneurs launch new businesses? In Europe, population and economic patterns
change dramatically between 1400 and 1700. In England and Wales, just to use one example,
the population nearly doubled between 1530 and 1690, going from 3 million to just under
6 million. There also were improvements at this time
in food production. New land was brought under cultivation in Europe, as forests were cut
down and swamps were drained. Europeans introduced windmills and water wheels for processing
grain. Different regions began to specialize in wine, cheese or olive oil, doing whatever
they could do best. And new crops were introduced, crops such as the potato or maize corn that
came from the New World to feed hungry Europeans. As we saw in the lecture on European exploration,
trade also stimulated economic activity. Developments at the New World brought in new wealth, such
as gold and silver. New luxury goods came to Europe from Asia and America, tobacco, chocolate,
coffee, tea, silk and porcelain. And all of those were things that the merchants carried
and the land and nobility wanted to consume. Urban merchants grew rich in this time period
and constituted a new political force in many European countries. And these new merchants
pushed the governments to implement policies that favored investment in new enterprises.
In response to growing population and wealth, many activities expanded from small-scale
household enterprises to kind of proto-industrial operations. And those included beer making,
glass making, production of soap and iron working. Many of these operations involved
heat and economies of scale could be achieved by building bigger and hotter fires to increase
temperatures and pressures. But to get hotter fires, people needed to use more wood or more
charcoal. And as we've talked about in other lectures, charcoal is desirable because it
burns hotter since the impurities have been driven off previously and it's nearly pure
carbon.
By the time of Queen Elizabeth I and the 1600s, by the time of her reign, England's forests
were quickly disappearing and the nation was in fact facing an energy crisis. This prompted
the crowned place restrictions on which forests could be cut down and how many trees could
be removed. In response, early industrials started to look around for an alternative
to wood or charcoal and that alternative was coal.
Coal was created millions of years ago as temperatures and pressures underground converted
the rotting plant matter from the Carboniferous Era, which is about 300 million years ago,
into nearly pure carbon. Pound for pound coal delivers far more heat, that is to say BTUs
than an equivalent amount of wood or charcoal. And as a comparison we have on the display
table a sampling of wood and a sampling of charcoal and it's about the equivalent BTUs
from each of those.
Now it's likely that the Chinese were the first to burn coal during the Han Dynasty,
somewhere between 200 BC and 200 AD and the Chinese continued to do so for centuries thereafter.
Marco Polo reported in the 13th century that the Chinese kept warm by burning what he called
black stones. Since there are no major outcrops of coal in either the Near East or the Mediterranean
Basin, ancient cultures in those regions didn't use coal. The first use of coal in Europe
was in Roman Britain in the 5th century AD and the Romans called them the fuel sea coal
since they found it on the shore where it had been broken away from surface seams by
the ocean's waves. However, since coal gave off a lot of smoke when burned in open pits
and open pits were what people had in medieval houses to use to keep them warm, coal was
abandoned and forgotten until the crisis of the Elizabethan times. Now you can't simply
substitute coal for wood or charcoal. As I mentioned a moment ago coal creates a lot
of smoke, it's also harder to ignite and you need a chimney with a good updraft to keep
it burning. In glass making for instance coal also introduces impurities that can spoil
the product. In response glass makers developed in the early 1600s reverbitory furnaces in
which the fire was separated from the glass. Unlike a glass furnace where the iron ore
is mixed with the fuel, the charcoal, glass in this new furnace was placed in crucibles
at one end of a tunnel shaped brick furnace and the crucibles went near the chimney. The
other end of the furnace, a hot coal fire was built and the heat of the fire was reflected
off the arch roof of the furnace and it reflected back down onto the glass in the crucibles.
In brewing coal had been used to try to dry the malt but the coal left an awful taste
in the beer. Consequently in the 1640s brewers in Derbyshire drew an analogy from the way
wood was converted into charcoal and they began experimenting with baking coal in ovens
in the hope of purifying it. The results were cinders of nearly pure carbon that the brewers
called coax and they were able to brew delicious beer using it. Coke not surprisingly became
a desirable fuel because it burned hotter and for a longer time than either coal or
charcoal. Thanks to significant coal deposits around Newcastle in the north and Wales in
the east, Britain enjoyed a significant energy advantage over its industrial rivals France
and the Netherlands. Through the 17th and 18th century, English coal mines expanded sometimes
using wagonways with rails to move the coal efficiently out of the mines as we'll see
in lecture 15 these wagonways were the starting point of railroads. Moreover, as we'll also
see in that lecture, the demand for coal in cities such as London, Birmingham and Manchester
prompted entrepreneurs to build an extensive system of canals and the high thermal energy
output that made coal an ideal fuel for steam engines were also developed in the 1700s.
Deep and plentiful then, coal literally fueled the British industrial revolution. As they
scaled up operations for brewing beer or manufacturing textiles, British industrials also sought a
stronger material for the brewing tanks and for the machines that were going to be used
to spin and weave fabric and that material for both of those applications turned out
to be iron. Now the iron that is most useful to us is actually an alloy of the element
iron and carbon. By varying the trace amounts of carbon, you can make iron that is suited
for all sorts of different purposes. If the carbon falls between 0.10% and 0.25% you have
wrought iron. The carbon drops between where it comes in between 0.25 and 2.1% you have
carbon steel and greater than 2.1% the carbon then makes the iron into what we call cast
iron. Generally speaking wrought iron and steel are more ductile than cast iron which
is more inflexible. Iron was well known in the ancient world and was used by Indians,
Chinese, Greeks and Romans. But because it has a high melting point, 1300 degrees centigrade,
all of these ancient people were unable to melt iron and hence had to manipulate it in
different ways than they used with other metals. Consequently all iron tools and weapons in
the ancient and medieval times were made of wrought iron. In the smelting process the
impurities would burn off and melt away and that left the iron master with a spongy mass
that they called a bloom. And a blacksmith would take that bloom and work it by hammering
it, heating it, cooling it and continually repeating the process. That process of heating
and cooling is what is called a kneeling. During the late middle ages Europeans finally
learned how to melt iron and to do so they created a new invention, the blast furnace.
In a blast furnace the pig iron is melted by mixing it with charcoal and by using a
water wheel power of bellows, iron masters were able to pump air into the furnace, raise
the temperature and that way the iron and the ore melted. The output from a blast furnace
is called pig iron and that's because when the blast furnace was tapped the molten iron
ran into a series of channels cut into the sand floor, sandy floor of the foundry and
that was the way that they created iron bars. The pattern of the channels with one main
channel feeding a series of smaller channels reminded early workers of piglets nursing
on a sow and hence the name. Pig iron could be cast on the foundry floor not only into
bars but a variety of products such as pots and cannons. Cast iron however is brittle
and it can't be used to make other products such as hardware, nails, locks or tools. To
make those products the pig iron still had to be worked by a blacksmith pounding away
on an anvil. By heating and pounding the iron the blacksmith was able to make the iron wrought
which was both stronger and more malleable that is to say they could bend or flex without
breaking. In 18th century Britain the growth of markets at home and abroad prompted entrepreneurs
to investigate new ways to produce more and better cast iron. The leading entrepreneur
in this area was Abraham Darby and his dates are 1676 to 1717 and he was a Quaker iron master
at Colbrookdale on the river Severn outside the city of Birmingham. As an aside it's
worth noting that Quakers were non-conformists meaning that they did not conform to the church
of England. Because of the close links between the church and state in Britain this meant
that non-conformists could not vote, hold office or attend a university and as a result
many non-conformists chose to pursue technical, scientific and entrepreneurial careers in
order to make their way in the world. As we'll see in the next lecture the inventor of the
steam engine Thomas Newcomen was a Baptist and this probably contributed to his creativity.
Let's go back to Darby. As a youth Darby was apprenticed to a firm in Birmingham that
made small brass mills for grinding malt for beer making and so he was aware that coke
could be used for making beer. After visiting Holland and seeing how the Dutch were casting
large brass kettles and sand molds Darby came up with the idea that he could make similar
pots cheaper by substituting iron for the brass. To pursue this idea Darby leased a
disused blast furnace in the village of Colbrookdale on the river Severn in Shropshire in 1707.
Because the cost of wood had continued to climb since Elizabethan times that made charcoal
very expensive to use in blast furnaces. Hence Darby was looking around for an alternative
fuel to apply at Colbrookdale. Now you might have thought that Darby would have tried just
using ordinary coal in his blast furnace but the contaminants in coal sulfur and phosphorus
tend to make pig iron brittle and useless. Moreover iron masters had found that when
using coal in a blast furnace the burning coal often slumped in a dense mass that choked
the furnace when they tried to tap the bottom and release the molten iron. Recalling that
coke had let brewers make a more pure beer Darby had a hunch that coke might let him
make a more pure iron. In 1709 Darby charged his blast furnace with coke and he was the
first person to use coke to produce high quality cast iron in quantity. Darby was soon casting
not only iron kettles that sold well all over Britain and yes those are the round kettles
that you see in cartoons that cannibals use to cook people. But Darby also produced a
whole range of new products. One important product at Colbrookdale were the cylinders
for the Newcomen steam engines that we'll talk about next time. These cylinders were
demanding product not only were they quite large often three or four feet in diameter
and eight to ten feet tall. They also had to be machined priced precisely. In order
for steam engine to work that is to not let the steam escape or the air to come into the
engine cylinder the piston and cylinder had to be machined with tolerances in the order
of a hundredth of an inch. To meet the demand for steam engine cylinders or kettles or other
iron products the furnaces at Colbrookdale were soon working around the clock with the
red furnace glare glowing in the night and the steady thunderous roar of the blasting
engines. Indeed as one visitor described a visit to Colbrookdale the smoke and fumes
and glare of the furnace named Bedlam were like a descent into hell itself. Indeed only
service that's the three headed dog said to guard the entrance of Hades. Indeed only service
was needed to make it look like a heathen hell. Following in his father's footsteps
Abraham Darby II and his dates are 1711 to 1763 mastered the art of making large castings
and in 1763 Colbrookdale delivered a seven ton steam engine cylinder with a diameter
of 74 inches and a length of 10.5 feet. Darby's also promoted the use of cast iron in new applications.
To demonstrate the strength of their product the third member of the family Abraham Darby
the third he would have been the grandson of the founder of the works and his dates
are 1750 to 1791. Darby the third designed and built a hundred foot cast iron bridge
over the river at Colbrookdale. Now this bridge was made up of 70 foot arches that were cast
to single pieces and bolted together. As Darby the third made the first arches and that is
to say tap the furnace and allow the molten iron to pour into these 70 foot molds a crowd
gathered because no one had ever attempted to make cast iron pieces that big before.
One of the great masterpieces of the industrial revolution Darby's iron bridge at Colbrookdale
was the first large civil engineering structure made exclusively of iron and so it's the forerunner
of all the bridges and skyscrapers today that are built with a steel frame. When John Wesley
the founder of Methodist religion visited Colbrookdale and saw the iron bridge he recorded in his
diary that there was nothing else like it in England and he compared it in his notes
to the Colossus of Rhodes. Thomas Jefferson was equally impressed so much so that he hung
a print of the Colbrookdale bridge in his dining room at Monticello. This impressive
bridge at the iron bridge conveyed to the world the strength of cast iron and engineers
began using it for beams and columns in order to in the buildings and to make gears and
other machine parts. Just as the Darby family concentrated on improving cast iron other
entrepreneurs experimented with ways to increase the production of wrought iron from pig iron.
Ultimately this problem was solved by Henry Court and he lived from 1740 to 1800 and Court brought
together several ideas to develop the techniques of puddling and rolling. Like the Darby's Court
used coke as a fuel but he also borrowed from glass making the reverberatory furnace. Once
the pig iron had melted in his reverberatory furnace, Court had his workers stir or puddle
the molten iron with an iron bar. In doing so, Court increased the amount of air in contact
with the iron which caused excess carbon to be burned off. Finally, Court took the iron
mass from the furnace and he passed it through rollers which gave the iron the desired shape.
Although some engineers were initially suspicious of the wrought iron produced using Court's
process, his techniques could be scaled up so as to produce large quantities of wrought
iron cheaply. Court's rolling techniques were essential for making the rails that were
needed for railroads and after the 1780's large puddling furnaces became widespread
and they replaced the small independent forges that had previously provided most of Britain's
wrought iron. Thanks to coke and the new pioneering techniques that were developed by the Darby's
Court and others, the output of the English iron industry grew dramatically. Between 1788
and 1796, the output of the industry doubled and it doubled again in eight years. As output
soared, the price of iron dropped and manufacturers began using iron to make a wide range of goods.
Soon iron became the material of choice for making steam engines, machines, ships, rails,
buildings, hardware, stoves, pots and tools. But to appreciate fully the potential of iron
as a material, one need only consider the creative achievements of one of the greatest
engineers of all time, Dismbarm Kingdom Brunel and he lived from 1806 to 1859. Brunel was
the son of a French engineer working in Britain and he got his start by working on the first
tunnel on the Thames River, which was one of his father's projects. From there, Brunel
went on to use iron to design several innovative bridges, including the Clifton suspension bridge
in Bristol, which he started in 1831. Over 200 feet above the river Avon and with a span
of 700 feet, this was the longest bridge in the world at its time. In 1833, Brunel was
appointed chief engineer of the Great Western Railway. And for that railway, he designed
the route, the bridges and the tunnels that allowed the railroad to run from London to
Exeter and finally on to Wales. Determined that the Great Western would have a wonderful
grand terminal in London, Brunel designed a graceful canopy of iron and glass that curves
over the many tracks in the station. Brunel's vision didn't stop in Wales. He envisioned
a global transportation system in which one could purchase a ticket in London and that
ticket would take one all the way to New York via both the Great Western Railroad and its
steamships. To accomplish this, Brunel built several progressively larger iron ships, the
Great Western, then the Great Britain and ultimately the Great Eastern. Of these, the
Great Eastern was simply gigantic, over 700 feet long and was designed to travel nonstop
from Britain to Australia. Brunel's ships were among the first to be propeller driven
and they paved the way for the modern steamships of today. Many of Brunel's bridges and structures
are still in use today and the London Underground still uses the tunnel that he and his father
built under the Thames. In 2002, the BBC conducted a poll to identify the 100 Greatest Britons
and Brunel was placed second only after Sir Winston Churchill.
For us living in the 21st century, accustomed to thinking about electronics and telecommunications
as high tech, it may be hard to grasp how revolutionary coal and iron were for the 18th century.
Indeed, when we want to talk about the opposite of high tech, we talk about smokestack industries
conjuring up the specific image of an old fashioned factory spewing out all that smoke
from its chimneys. Yet coal and iron were the breakthrough inventions of their time.
Why? Because they committed significant economies of scale and speed. Because coal burns hotter
than wood or charcoal and because it delivers more heat per pound, it was possible to build
bigger furnaces and boilers to run processes like brewing and glass making at higher temperatures
and also higher pressures and hence produce more output at lower costs.
Even though we regard it as an old fashioned fuel, coal is still the major fuel used today
to generate electricity. Over 44 percent of the electricity produced in the U.S. today
comes from coal-fired plants. And indeed, U.S. coal consumption has tripled since 1960.
There are still significant coal reserves throughout the world, and that's leading
India and China to build some of the largest coal-fired generating stations that are going
to be in the world today. Nonetheless, there's a need to develop more environmentally appropriate
techniques for burning coal.
Turning from coal to iron, the availability of cheap iron, both wrought and cast, meant
that people in the 19th century had a material that could be used to build faster machines,
stronger buildings, larger trains and ships. Generally speaking, stronger materials allow
greater forces to be utilized, such as forces such as weight, temperature and pressure,
and those lead to economies of scale and speed and generally lower the cost of production
and the cost of retail prices.
While we tend to think that steel is the preferred material in machines and cars, cast
iron still turns up in a variety of applications, such as domestic radiators or engine blocks
or automobile axles.
Without coal or iron, the Industrial Revolution would have not brought us the gains in productivity
and we would not have the standard of living that we enjoy today in the West.
Unsung and little noticed, coal and iron were and continue to be great inventions.
