In the lecture on motion pictures, we started talking about how we can use inventions to
help us think about what makes the 20th century a distinctive era in history.
There I suggested that the 20th century was marked by mass technologies such as mass production
and mass entertainment. And we concentrate on Edison and the motion pictures as a specific example.
Many historic eras can also be described in terms of the materials that come to be used in that
period since materials inform the look, the feel, and the scale of machines, buildings,
and artifacts of that age. In this lecture, I want to suggest that three materials helped
make the 20th century, steel, glass, and plastics. These materials transformed everyday life
and our expectations of what the world should look like. We look at our homes and buildings,
automobiles, and other products. We can readily see that the ability to shape and curve steel or
glass or plastic has defined what we think of as a modern or even futuristic style.
A product should have clean curving lines, smooth shiny surfaces, and no messy parts,
mechanical or electronic poking out. Indeed, in both architecture and product design,
steel, glass, and plastic allow form to ultimately trump function.
But as we'll see, these materials were developed not so much for their aesthetic possibilities,
but rather in response to utilitarian demands. Steel was developed because armies needed stronger
guns, railroads needed stronger rails, and companies wanted larger factories or office buildings.
Glass became an industrial product because the food industry that we talked about in lecture 16
needed more containers and because Thomas Edison needed bulbs to enclose the vacuum surrounding
the filament in his incandescent lamp. And plastics came about as scientists and engineers
learned to manipulate molecules with long chains of polymers. In other words, these materials also
highlight several trends in the 20th century, trends in technology about scale, mechanization,
and science. And we will touch on all of these as we tell the story of each material.
Before discussing each individual material, let me explain that inventions as they relate to
materials often take three forms. First, you can alter the formulation or the composition of material.
Second, you can improve the processes by which you create or shape that material.
And third, you can use the material in new ways or for new applications.
As we look at steel, glass, and plastics, I'll touch on innovations in each of these areas.
So first, let me talk about steel. Steel is an alloy consisting primarily of iron
with other trace elements, the most important being carbon. In steel, the carbon content
falls between 0.2 percent and 2.1 percent by weight. Other alloying elements are sometimes
used, and these can include manganese, chromium, vanadium, and tungsten.
Carbon and other elements act as hardening agents in steel, preventing the layers in
the crystal lattice of the iron atom from sliding past one another. By varying the amount of alloying
elements, one can control qualities in steel, such as its hardness, its ductility, and its tensile
strength. Steel with higher carbon content can be made harder and stronger than cast iron,
but as such is less flexible or ductile than iron. Hence, while steel is very useful in situations
where you need a very strong material, it's not suitable for all applications.
One application for which steel is ideal is for making knife or sword blades, since steel can be
ground to have a sharp edge because it's light and flexible. And I learned this firsthand
when I fenced in college, and as you can see, a fencing foil is quite light and it's quite flexible.
Since ancient times, steel has been the preferred material for swords,
even though metal smiths struggled to produce steel blades with any consistent set of properties.
While the smiths were aware early on that carbon in the charcoal had something to do with steel,
a complete understanding of the chemistry of steel wasn't available until the end of the 19th century.
The first steel was produced in India, perhaps before 300 BC, by the Tamils using the Woods
process. Because this process was a secret conveyed over generations of metal smiths,
the exact details have been lost, and modern metal urges still struggle to duplicate the
characteristics found in surviving swords. Legend has it that an Indian king presented
Alexander the Great with a wood steel sword in 326 BC when Alexander passed through India.
During the Middle Ages, wood steel traveled along the Silk Road to Damascus,
where it was fashioned by craftsmen into extraordinary swords. Because steel was so
desirable for cutlery and tools, smiths continued to experiment with ways to make it consistently.
Between 1300 and 1600, smiths in Nuremberg, Germany found that they could make steel by
heating iron bars at a red heat for days in a bed of charcoal. The resulting steel ingots
could then be further annealed and forged so as to create the desired qualities.
Because this process created steel with a pitted surface, the resulting product was known as blister
steel. Although blister steel could be used to manufacture cutlery in great quantities
and English inventor Benjamin Huntsman was not satisfied with the quality.
Working in Sheffield, England in the 1740s, Huntsman devised a coke-fired furnace which
was hot enough to convert Swedish iron ingots into steel. Known as crucible steel, Huntsman
tried to convince the cutlery makers of Sheffield to buy his product, but they refused, complaining
that his steel was just too hard to work. In response, Huntsman sold all of his crucible steel
to French knife makers and when their improved knives began to capture the English market,
the Sheffield cutlery manufacturers conceded and they were forced to take up Huntsman's crucible
steel. While crucible steel was an improvement in terms of quantity and quality over blister
steel, the iron industry still did not turn out all that much steel. In 1850, Britain,
then the largest producer of iron, had a steel output of only 60,000 tons.
Yet thanks to the next round of inventions, worldwide steel production soared to 500,000
tons in 1870 and 28 million tons by 1900. What happened? Well, what happened was the
invention of two new techniques, the Bessemer process and the Open Hearth process, as well as
the development of large-scale integrated steel mills by Andrew Carnegie. Both the Bessemer and
the Open Hearth processes create steel by using a blast of hot air to remove excess carbon from
molten iron. The first individual to realize the possibility of using an air blast was an American
iron master, William Kelly, who made sugar kettles at the Suwannee ironworks in Kentucky.
Around 1847, Kelly noticed that if an air blast was directed at molten iron,
not covered with charcoal, it became white hot and the carbon was burned off.
Between 1851 and 1856, Kelly built seven experimental converters for his air-boiling
technique, but he unfortunately did not file any patent applications to 1866,
after which he had heard about Henry Bessemer's invention. Henry Bessemer was a professional
inventor in England who produced a string of commercial successes, a machine to cancel
postage stamps by perforation, an improved pencil, a process for making gold paint out of bronze dust,
and even a machine for making imitation lace. When the Crimean War broke out in 1853,
Bessemer turned his attention to developing a new rifle for the British Army.
Now, up to that time, rifles were made more accurate by machining a helical groove or a
pattern of grooves in the inside of the barrel of the rifle. The grooves imparted a spin on the
bullet, which caused it to go much more in a straight line and not deviate. Bessemer thought
that he could speed up the production of rifles by making barrels smooth and then putting the
grooves on the bullets. However, the cast iron available at the time was too weak for the barrels
for his new rifle, and Bessemer resorted to coming up with a stronger material.
Bessemer came up with this stronger material by blowing an air blast up through the bottom
of an egg-shaped crucible that was filled with molten iron. The air was blasted through for
about 20 minutes. Now, contrast that with the fact that it took days to make iron using the blister
process. Because the blast eliminates all of the carbon, but steel needs to have a small amount
of carbon in order to have its desired properties, the steel master has to introduce carbon back
into the molten metal. Because the steel must be cast or shaped while still hot, Bessemer placed
his converter on pivots so it could be tipped over and the steel ladled out from the top.
Now, to illustrate a Bessemer converter, let's look at this diagram. As you can see, it consists
of an egg shape, and down on the bottom the air is pumped in through a series of ports. That air
blast goes through the molten metal, and then bubbles up through the surface, creating a lot of
sparks, and the sparks go out of the top of the egg-shaped crucible. The whole egg-shaped crucible
is on pivots so that when the blast is done, it can be tipped over and the steel ladled out
and used to mold and shape the necessary materials. Because the process developed by Bessemer was
quicker and used less fuel, the earliest Bessemer converters produced steel for about 7 pounds a
long ton, but because there was such a high demand for steel at that time, mills could charge upwards
of 40 to 40 pounds a ton. The major advantage of the Bessemer converter is that it produces
large quantities of steel quickly, 10 or 20 minutes per blast. However, at the same time,
the Bessemer converter is very finicky in terms of impurities in the molten pig iron.
And good steel cannot be produced from just any kind of iron ore. In particular,
the ores have to be completely free of phosphorus, and the Bessemer process cannot handle recycled
scrap iron or steel. Consequently, there was room for a second steelmaking process,
one that is now known as the Siemens Martin process or the Open Hearth process.
In the 1850s, Carl Wilhelm Siemens, the brother of the famous German electric manufacturer,
Werner Siemens patented a regenerative furnace that saved energy by preheating the air,
circulating it through the furnace to heat the materials that are being processed,
and then bringing the air back to the firebox where the air currents caused the fire to burn
hotter. In 1865, a French engineer Pierre-Emile Martin secured a patent for a Siemens or patent
license for the Siemens from Siemens for the new furnace and proceeded to use it to make steel.
Unlike the Bessemer process in which the blast is sent up through the bottom of the molten pig
iron, the Open Hearth blasts air across the top surface of the molten metal.
To appreciate the Open Hearth process, let's look at another diagram. In this diagram,
we can see that the hearth or the furnace is in the middle. On one side we see is the air
and two spots where the preheating process takes place, and the air is heated up,
and then it passes up into the furnace on top of the molten material. It then passes back,
goes through the firebox where it fans the fire, makes the fire burn even hotter,
and finally it exits out the other end. Overall, this means that in the Open Hearth process,
the process runs much more slowly, but it means that the steel master can control the process
better. Hence, rather than having to eliminate all of the carbon and then add some back in,
which is what you have to do with the Bessemer process, the steel master running an Open Hearth
can control the whole operation until he gets exactly the right properties he wants in the steel.
Combined with the fact that the Open Hearth is more fuel efficient and can be scaled up,
it's not surprising that the Open Hearth process was widely used in steel mills throughout England,
Germany, and America by the end of the 19th century. Because the Bessemer converter and the
Open Hearth process both have their advantages, steel mills often have both kinds in order
to create different kinds of steel, and both were used in the United States and Britain until the
1950s. Russia and India still use the Open Hearth process to manufacture steel.
As Kelly, Bessemer, Siemens, and Martin created new processes for making steel,
the challenge then became how to develop plants and a business organization that could exploit
all of these inventions. In particular, the challenge was that steel cannot be cooled down
and reheated later when you want to make something from it. You have to shape the hot steel into the
final product right away. You need to cast it or roll it into the rails, girders, sheets, or
wires that you want. The industrialist who best addressed this challenge was Andrew Carnegie.
Born to a poor Scottish family, Carnegie emigrated with his mother and brother to Pittsburgh in
1848. Carnegie went to work at the age of 13 in a textile mill, but he soon secured better
positions first as a telegraph messenger boy and then as a clerk in the offices of the Pennsylvania
Railroad. There, Carnegie became a successful manager and learned how railroads needed large
quantities of rails, as well as girders for bridges and other structures. To provide those
rails and girders, Carnegie entered the steel industry in the 1870s. From the outset, Carnegie
recognized that the profitability in the steel industry depended on both economies of scale and
speed and that to achieve both of those, you needed to carefully integrate all of the steps in the
production process. As a result, Carnegie built the largest possible blast furnaces and rolling
mills in the Pittsburgh region. To ensure that Carnegie had adequate supplies of iron ore and
coke, he integrated backwards buying his iron, buying iron and coal mines, ships and railroads to
carry his raw materials, and Carnegie located his mills adjacent to rail lines and rivers.
And taking a cue from the Pennsylvania Railroad, which had grown more efficient by hiring
managers and assigning them responsibility for key tasks in the operation, Carnegie created a
managerial structure which coordinated all of the steps involved in making steel. Carnegie drove
his workers and his managers hard, pushing them to work faster and tracking down costs to one
thousandth of a cent so that he could make steel cheaper than anyone else in the world.
As a result of Carnegie's efforts, the United States became the world's leading steel producer
by 1900. In 1901, at the age of 66, Carnegie was ready to retire from the business and he negotiated
with J.P. Morgan to merge his Carnegie Steel Company with all of the other steel companies in the
United States, and together they created United States Steel. US Steel was the first corporation
to be capitalized at over one billion dollars. With the coming of US Steel, Steel came to be
applied in a variety of applications. It was used to erect large office buildings, so tall that
people said the buildings scraped the sky, hence the name Skyscraper. Steel was also used to build
a nationwide rail system, and steel rails were stronger, allowing for bigger locomotives and
longer trains. Steel also was applied to building heavily armored battleships that had huge guns.
Steel also played an important part in the manufacture of automobiles, providing strong
parts in the crucial pieces of all vehicles. And sheet steel was used to give automobiles,
airplanes and appliances a clean, streamlined look in the early part of the 20th century.
Let's turn now and talk about glass. Glass is an amorphous material with amorphous meaning here
that it is an estate between solid and liquid. Glass is by far the most common example of an
amorphous material, and the most common type of glass is soda lime glass, which is composed of
silica, sodium oxide lime, and several minor additives. Glasses are typically brittle and
optically transparent, but modern engineering has been able to create glasses that have a
remarkable array of characteristics. As we noted back in lecture two, glass was discovered in
ancient Mesopotamia around the time that potters were learning how to glaze pots and fire them.
Taking advantage of the sand and natron that they had available, ancient Egyptians created
beads and beautifully colored miniature heads and figurines out of glass. During the middle ages,
glass plowing techniques evolved steadily so that glass could be used for vessels.
Towards the end of the medieval era, as we noted in lecture 11, optical instruments were developed,
and the Venetians mastered the art of making transparent glass that could be readily used
for making eyeglasses and telescope lenses. Yet until the 19th century, glass remained a luxury
material used to make items by hand for the upper class. A good example of this is window glass.
Other than the stained glass windows, the first glass windows appeared in the 17th century,
and they used what was known as crown glass. To make crown glass, the glass maker blew a large
bulb, which was then cut open and spun by hand at the end of an iron rod until it flattened out
into a disk. The disk was then cut into half circles and finally into panes. The crown referred
to the mark left at the center of the big glass disk by the iron rod.
Because it required a great deal of skill and labor to produce, window glass was quite expensive,
and from 1696 to 1851, in fact, the English government used the number of windows in a house
as an indication of the value of the house and hence to determine the property tax.
Through the 19th century, in order to provide a growing middle class with new products for the
home, glass bottles for preserved food, cut glass serving dishes, and so on,
inventors worked to come up with a variety of techniques and machines for producing glass
products in quantity. One of the first improvements came in the area of window glass. In France,
inventors developed a technique for introducing a large glob of molten glass onto the center
of an iron casting table. Hand rollers were then used to spread that glass carefully across the
surface where the glass was then allowed to cool. Process produced what came to be known as plate
glass, but it was still quite labor-intensive and expensive since both sides of the plate had
to be polished by hand. Nevertheless, plate glass was used for early department store display windows
and indeed is the main building material for the Crystal Palace that housed the First World's Fair
in London in 1851. Further improvements followed the adoption by the glass industry of the Siemens
regenerative furnace that we talked about in our discussion of steel. Not only could this
furnace be used to make steel, it could also be adapted to making large quantities of glass.
In the glass industry, it became known as a tank furnace and each firing of the tank
was referred to as a campaign. Since glass makers felt they were engaged in a battle with their
material, never knowing whether or not they would win and get the kind of glass they wanted
or whether the tank would go sour and produce lousy glass. Since the Siemens regenerative
furnace worked best when fired by natural gas, the American glass industry grew up where natural
gas was discovered after the Civil War, namely Pittsburgh, Wheeling and Toledo.
To take advantage of this cheap fuel natural gas, Edward Libby moved the New England Glass
Company to Toledo in 1888 and renamed it after himself the Libby Glass Company. Libby was especially
interested in manufacturing bottles and he hired a talented glass maker named Michael J. Owens.
Owens had left school at the age of 10 to take up an apprenticeship as a glass maker
and he became the supervisor of Libby's plan. Owens invented the first automatic
bottle-blowing machine in the 1890s that worked on a simple principle. From the surface of a pot
of molten glass, a piston pump soaked up a heated gob and pulled that gob into a mold
and then the pump was reversed to blow the glass into the shape of the mold.
Although the Owens bottling machine was complex, it ultimately involved over 9,000 parts.
It could be operated by two men and those two men with that machine could turn out 2,500 bottles
an hour. Libby fully appreciated Owens invention and financed all of his experiments. Together,
Libby and Owens formed the Owens Bottle Company which merged in 1929 with the Illinois Glass Company
to create Owens, Illinois. And Owens, Illinois today is the largest manufacturer of glass
containers in the world and it's estimated that one of every two glass containers made worldwide
is made by Owens, Illinois or one of its affiliates.
But while cheap fuel and mechanization favored the Libby-Owens partnership, innovators at the
Corning Glass Works found their own way to thrive. Like Libby, Amory Houghton entered the glass
business in New England by organizing the Bay State Glass Company in Somerville, Massachusetts in 1851
and Houghton went as well west in search of cheaper fuel. However, lured by promises of
cheap high quality coal by local businessmen in Corning, New York, Houghton moved there first in
1868. As it turned out, the coal was not suited for glass production but that didn't stop the
Houghton family. Even though the Corning Glass Works failed in the early 1870s, they reorganized the
company as a specialty glass company focusing on coming up with glass compositions suited to specific
needs. One new need was for a glass that was thin and could be quickly blown into bulbs,
the bulbs of the incandescent lamp that Edison had invented in 1879. Amory Houghton's son,
Amory Jr. and grandson, Alanson and Arthur, aggressively pursued this market from the 1880s
to the 1910s, developing a sophisticated operation where they employed hundreds of workers known as
gaffers, each of whom turned out tens of thousands of bulbs every day. In the 1910s, the great-grandsons
of Amory Sr. encouraged their engineers to develop a machine for making light bulbs and they came
up with what was known as the ribbon machine. Incredibly efficient, seven ribbon machines,
all owned or controlled by Corning, were able to produce all of the lamp bulbs that were needed
in the world during the 1950s and 1960s. Notably, Corning was able to control bulb production for
decades by keeping careful control over who used the ribbon machines and they only exited the bulb
making business when one ribbon machine was accidentally scrapped by a licensee purchased by
a competitor in Asia and then duplicated. Another specialty application were the lenses in railway
railway signals and lanterns. To coordinate the movement of trains, American railroad companies
had devised a system of red, green and yellow lights, but the lenses in these lights often failed
because of the weather. The glass either became too hot or too cold and it cracked. In response,
Corning hired scientists to study the problem and established in 1908 one of the first corporate
research labs in America. There, chemist Eugene Sullivan perfected a thermally resistant glass
based on a borosilicate formula. First marketed as Nonex, this new class eliminated most of the
breakage in railway lanterns and signals. Realizing that there was only a limited market
in railway glass, Sullivan repurposed borosilicate glass and used it to make laboratory glass wear
and pie plates in the 1910s. Two of the products that Corning produced, as I said, were railway
lanterns and this railway lantern has a red globe in it and that is made of a borosilicate glass that
was marketed under the brand name of Nonex and it was eventually because they lost the market,
Corning lost the market in railway glasses because these didn't break very often. It was reshaped
and redeveloped as a product to make clear glass products under the name of Pyrex and these both
then the Pyrex proved to be extraordinary popular with housewives prompting Corning in the 1920s
to make an entire product line of kitchen goods.
Let's now talk about plastics. Technically, most plastics are polymers and are the result of the
carbon atom's unique ability to form itself into very long chains by joining together large numbers
of simple units. For instance, one of the most common plastics polyethylene is made up of long
strings upwards of 50,000 units of ethylene. There are lots of polymers in nature and they
include natural fibers like cotton, linen or silk as well as the proteins and carbohydrates that we
find in foods. Once they were identified by chemists in the 19th century, inventors attempted to
modify natural polymers so that they could serve as substitutes for scarce materials.
For instance, one remarkable material, nitrocellulose or gun cotton, was discovered accidentally
when a German chemist spilled nitric acid on his kitchen table and wiped up the mess with
a cotton apron. Imagine his surprise when the apron dried and exploded. Intrigued by nitrocellulose,
a number of inventors experimented with it including Alexander Parks in England. In the
late 1850s, Parks mixed a liquid version of nitrocellulose with camphor and produced a hard,
flexible and transparent material he called Parkson. In the 1860s, John Wesley Hyatt purchased the
American rights to Parkson. Recognizing that there was a limited supply of ivory which could be used
to make billiard balls, Hyatt modified the formula of Parkson so it became a hard material and Hyatt
called this hard material celluloid. While celluloid was used for billiard balls, it had the unfortunate
tendency to explode if the balls were hit too hard, but celluloid did find other applications
as the base for the new flexible film that George Eastman used in his Kodak brownie cameras
and Edison used in his Kinetoscope. One drawback to celluloid was that it could not be molded,
leading chemists to continue to investigate polymers. In 1872, the German chemist
Adolf von Beyer mixed phenyl and formaldehyde only to create a dark sludge that he thought was useless.
However, in 1907, Leo Bakerland found that by controlling the pressure and temperature
applied to phenyl and formaldehyde, he could produce a hard, moldable plastic that he called
Bakelite. Bakelite was an ideal material since it could be placed in a mold and heated. Once formed,
Bakelite did not melt again. Bakelite found numerous applications in the electrical and
electronics industry since it was an insulator and was also used in the automobile industry
for all kinds of small parts. As I mentioned earlier, polyethylene was one of the first plastics
and polyethylene was fully developed in the 1930s by Britain's imperial chemical industries
as a result of research to subjecting polymers to high temperatures and pressures. It was first
used as an insulator and submarine cables and it proved to be highly valuable in building the
radar equipment that was used during World War II since polyethylene could be used to insulate
high-frequency electronic components. After the war, it was found that polyethylene could be used
and shaped in a variety of ways, leading it to be used to make everything from molded plastic
toys to shopping bags. Unless carefully formulated, polyethylene does not naturally degrade,
prompting scientists today to continue to look for new formulations.
Another plastic discovered in the 1930s was nylon and it was developed by DuPont. DuPont hired in
1928 a promising young chemist from Harvard named Wallace Carruthers. Carruthers was excited by the
controversy surrounding the nature of polymer molecules. At that time, some chemists thought
that polymers were held together by the same forces that operated on smaller molecules,
but other scientists thought that these large molecules must have involved some other kind of
force. Carruthers resolved this controversy by building long-chain molecules one step at a time
employing well-understood reactions that used acids and alcohols to form esters.
Through his research, Carruthers and his team not only laid the foundation for our modern
understanding of polymers, but in 1930 they discovered two valuable materials, artificial
rubber or neoprene and a strong man-made fiber that they came to call nylon. During the early 1940s,
nylon came to be used in women's stockings, in automobile tires, as reinforcement cords,
in rope and a variety of other industrial applications.
Prior to 1900, people lived in a world where many of the products they used every day
were from familiar organic materials. Sure, there were iron pots and clocks with brass gears,
but items were typically made of wood, clay, leather or straw. It was a world of wooden or
brick houses, wooden boxes and barrels and woven baskets. By contrast, increasingly after 1900,
the products of industrialization were made out of new materials, steel, glass and plastic.
As we've seen, these materials came to be important because of the practical things they could do.
Steel could be used to make stronger guns, so the rails needed to support bigger trains.
Glass became important for enclosing the bulb and Edison's electric lamp, and both glass and
plastics were valued because they could be molded and shaped by high-speed machines.
But along with these practical applications, these materials illustrate several key themes
of 20th century technology. First, they illustrate the drive to profits by scaling up production,
production to enormous levels, an effort that required the creation of large corporate bureaucracies
where managers carefully coordinated all the steps in the operation and drove down costs.
Think here of the story that I told you about Carnegie and Steel.
Second, glass and plastic reveal how these materials were chosen because they lent themselves to
mechanization. It was possible to build incredible machines that could turn out thousands of bulbs
or bottles. And third, in order to make the most of all three of these materials,
industrialists turned to scientists to study the nature of these materials
and how they could be formulated to speed up production or create new consumer products.
Yes, glass, steel and plastics came to create the modern look of the 20th century,
of the architecture and the products that we enjoy. But behind them is a secret life of
production and research that is equally fascinating and equally worthy of our attention.
