Topic of this lecture is flight, and a good place to start is with Icarus from Greek mythology.
Being a legend, Icarus succeeded in flying with wings that his father Daedalus had made
using feathers secured with wax.
Ignoring his father's warnings, Icarus chose to fly too close to the sun, and that melted
the wax, and Icarus fell into the sea and drowned.
Now rather than drawing a straight line from Icarus to the Wright brothers, I want to take
a detour through the 1550s and the 1560s.
Time in those two decades, the Flemish old master, Peter Bruegel, painted a painting
titled The Landscape with the Fall of Icarus.
Although the original has been lost, we know about this painting because one of his students
produced a copy that you can see in the Royal Museum in Brussels.
As you look at this painting right here, you'll see that the scene is dominated by the medieval
plowman who is concentrating on his work, followed by the shepherd who is tending a
sheep, and the caravelle, the sailing ship with its luffing sails.
Where you might ask is Icarus.
His legs can be seen in the water just below and just behind the ship.
Bruegel's message in this painting is that often the most impressive moments of creativity
go unnoticed and underappreciated.
Icarus sailed into the sun and drowned in the process, only to be ignored by the plowman,
the shepherd, and the sailors on the ship.
To this interpretation, I'd like to also add another idea, that inventions like aviation
only take off, I'm sorry about the pun, when the circumstances are right.
In the world depicted by Bruegel and his student, there was no place for flying humans.
There was no context for flight, no place where it fit into the day-to-day activities
of the plowman or the shepherd, and so flight could be ignored.
Indeed, aviation only developed in the 20th century, not only because the Wright brothers,
and again I'm sorry about the pun, but because it was taken up in certain circumstances, the
Wright circumstances, in which political and military sense made it possible, made it appropriate.
In order to tell a story of aviation, we do need to start by specifying that there are
two kinds of aircraft.
First, there are lighter-than-aircraft, such as dirigibles, balloons, and blimps.
A good example of lighter-than-aircraft are the Mongolian brothers, who flew the first
hot-air balloon in 1783.
Now while these brothers are a great story, we're going to concentrate on a second type
of aircraft, namely, heavier-than-aircraft, airplanes, and helicopters are great examples
of those.
To understand airplanes, let's begin with a simple question.
How do birds actually fly?
Is it that they flap their wings, or is it the shape of their wings?
For centuries, most people thought that the most likely way you'd be able to fly would
be to imitate the flapping wings of a bird, and a good example is Leonardo da Vinci's
Orientalopter, a device that he sketched in one of his many notebooks.
However, by the 19th century, the English aristocrats, Sir George Cayley, had come to
realize that the way forward was to worry a lot less about flapping the wings than understanding
their shape.
Cayley was a prolific inventor, and he developed a self-riding lifeboat, tension-spoke wheels,
a caterpillar tractor, automatic signals for railway crossing, seat belts, and even internal
combustion engine that used gunpowder.
But Cayley is best remembered for his aerial experiments.
After experimenting with flapping wings, Cayley decided that it was the shape of the wing
that counted, since that could create lift as long as the wing was moving through the
air.
Cayley discovered that when a fluid like air flows over and under a body, it exerts a surface
force on this body.
Lift is that component of that force that makes the wing go up, or makes the surface
go up.
As a wing divides the air into two parts, a part going over the top of the wing, a part
going underneath, you can get the right balance of those two forces, in other words more air
going underneath and less air going over top, and create lift.
When the pressure, because you have more air underneath the wing, it exerts an upward force.
Lift is that force that permits airplanes to fly.
For decades, Cayley studied the shape of wings and the amount of lift that each shape produced.
And in 1853, he sent one of his servants soaring across a valley in Yorkshire, England, and
the servant traveled over 500 meters.
I think it probably was important that Cayley didn't send himself, but sent instead a servant
to travel on this what Cayley called a governable parachute.
Now, during the closing decades of the 19th century, several inventors such as Otto Lillenthal
and Octave Channout followed up on Cayley's investigations and developed their own wing
gliders.
Channout also published a series of tables showing how differently shaped wings provided
various amounts of lift.
Of all of these early experimenters, Samuel Pierpont Langley, an astronomer and the secretary
of the famous Smithsonian Institution, came closest to achieving manned flight before
the Wright brothers.
Langley assumed that the amount of power was crucial for flight, and so he concentrated
on developing lighter and more powerful engines.
In 1896, Langley successfully flew an unmanned, steam-powered airplane over the Potomac River
near Washington, D.C.
With $50,000 from the Army and $20,000 from his own Smithsonian, Langley set out to build
a manned aircraft with an internal combustion engine that was ready for flight on the 7th
of December 1903.
Unfortunately, on both those days, Langley's aircraft was damaged as it was launched by
a catapult and it crashed into the Potomac River.
Disheartened, Langley abandoned his efforts.
But about the same time, Wilbur and Orville Wright did not lose heart and followed up
on Cayley's work with their own gliders and careful experiments in a homemade wind tunnel.
The Wrights were bicycle mechanics from Dayton, Ohio, who became fascinated by flight as youngsters.
At an early age, their father brought them a toy helicopter, a wooden propeller on a
stick that would fly when the stick was rubbed between their hands.
They were fascinated and played with this all the time when they were children.
In the 1890s, as they began to investigate flight, the Wrights made a critical decision
that the challenge was not power, as Langley had assumed, but rather it was controlled.
As far as they were concerned, existing internal combustion engines were sufficiently light
and powerful.
In contrast to Langley, who used a 50-horsepower engine in his aircraft, the Wrights were
happy with a 12-horsepower engine.
On approaching control, the Wrights made a further critical decision.
An airplane would be more like a bicycle than a sailing ship.
It would require forward motion and continuous control for stability.
Much like a bicycle rider who shifts their weight from side to side to remain balanced
while pedaling continuously, a pilot would have to continuously adjust the controls of
the airplane in order to keep it stable.
The Wright brothers decided to control their airplane by wind warping, and they came to
this idea one day while they were working in their bicycle shop.
One of the brothers was idly playing with a cardboard box in which an inner tube had
been shipped to them.
Reasoning how the box could be twisted, the Wrights realized that they could control the
lift under their wings by warping the wings, and that would allow the plane to move up
and down and turn left to right.
Just as the Wright brothers experimented with wing warping, the idea was they would bend
this wing down on the lower part of the aircraft, and they would get increased lift up here.
Also by twisting one wing this way or one wing that way, they could steer the plane to the
right or to the left.
Today, the same control is achieved by flaps on the back of each wing.
We don't use wing warping anymore, instead we use control surfaces on the back of each
wing.
To test out their ideas, the Wrights traveled each fall to Kitty Hawk on the Outer Banks
of North Carolina.
They chose Kitty Hawk not because it was by the ocean, but because they were told by
the U.S. Weather Service that Kitty Hawk had the strongest average winds of anywhere in
the continental United States.
At a Kitty Hawk, the Wrights flew a number of kites and gliders in order to test out
their ideas about control.
At the same time, though, the Wrights realized there was something wrong with Chinute's
lift tables.
They weren't getting the same amount of lift with their wings that his tables predicted.
In response, the Wright brothers went back to Dayton and built their own wind tunnel
in the Bicycle Shop.
In the Bicycle Shop, using the wind tunnel, they tested a range of wing shapes and found
which ones gave optimal lift.
In the fall of 1903, the Wrights combined all of these decisions about using a lightweight
engine, wing warping, and wing shape to create their first flyer.
On the 17th of December, 1903, 10 days after Langley's failure on the Potomac, the Wrights
flew successfully at Kitty Hawk.
The flight only lasted 59 seconds, and they only traveled 852 feet.
But that flight, that day, was enough to convince the Wrights that they had invented
the first airplane.
Although they flew in 1903, the Wrights only fully demonstrated how good their airplane
was in 1905.
In that year, they flew on a flight outside Dayton, Ohio, and with Wilbur at the controls,
he went 24 miles and 38 minutes, and he was able to bank, turn, climb, and descend at
will.
Moreover, the Wrights were not recognized as pioneers of flight until they demonstrated
their airplane in France in 1908.
Having built a functional airplane, the Wrights proceeded to patent it, and the challenge
became finding a customer for their invention.
In other eras, perhaps the first customers might have been civilian businessmen.
But in the 1900s, the most promising customers proved to be the military in both the United
States and in Europe.
This was because both the U.S. and the European powers were engaged in a naval arms race.
This race came about as a result of gigantic big battleships, the first of which was the
HMS Dreadnaught, built by the British.
The Dreadnaught was regarded as the super weapon of the age, and nations rushed to build their
own battleships, and they were quite keen to come up with inventions that might protect
them from attack.
The airplane was one of those possible inventions.
Consequently, the Wright brothers sold their first plane to the Signal Corps of the United
States Army in 1909.
And over the next few years, the other European powers acquired airplanes and began experimenting
with how they might be used in war.
Now, as many of you know, World War I was fought between the British and Germans, and
by early 1915, the war had become a stalemate with both sides in trenches on either side
of a line.
As a result, both the British and Germans relied on airplanes for aerial reconnaissance
to get early information about where soldiers and companies of troops might be moving out
of the trenches and mounting an attack.
And that information was so important that both sides launched fighter aircraft to defend
the reconnaissance missions.
And when the fighter aircraft began to interact with each other, we had the beginning of aerial
dogfights.
Two of the most famous planes that were used during World War I were the Sopwith Camel.
That's the plane that was flown by Snoopy in the cartoon strip Peanuts.
And of course, Snoopy was always battling the Red Baron who fought in a Fokker triplane.
After the war, in the 1920s and 1930s, aviation grew largely as a result of government support.
In Europe, governments created airlines with KLM, the Dutch airline being the first to
be founded in 1919.
In the United States, aviation got a leg up as a result of the United States Post Office,
which sponsored regular air mail service across the country, and that in turn encouraged the
development of new airlines in the United States.
Now, you might find it surprising to see the government promoting aviation in the 1920s
and 1930s.
Surely, a high-tech industry will grow much faster if it's left in the private sector.
Nevertheless, keep in mind that all major forms of transportation have required government
investment at some point, whether it be New York State building the Urie Canal in the
1810s or the federal land grants in the 1860s and 1870s to the transcontinental railroads.
At the same time, there was a great deal of research being undertaken to understand the
dynamics of flight.
In the U.S., a portion of this research was funded by the federal government through a
forerunner of NASA, a group called the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, or NACA.
And the work was pursued at a number of different universities.
One example of the research concerned the turbulence that was created as the airflow came over
the wing and under the wing and joined up behind the wing.
Under certain circumstances, when those two flows rejoined behind the wing, they created
a vortex which caused the plane to pitch rapidly and this phenomenon was known as buffeting.
Now, this image that I have over here shows vortex shedding.
This is taken from a wind tunnel and in the wind tunnel is a rod that you're seeing the
end of.
As the airflow goes over the top and the bottom of that particular shape, it creates a lot
of turbulence.
It's called the bright green stuff and most importantly, it sheds off a whole lot of energy
that's shown in that green tail.
That's the vortex being shed.
Now, using a combination of mathematical analysis and wind tunnel tests, researchers at Caltech
figured out that those vortices were caused by joints at the wing and the fuselage of
the plane and that they could be eliminated by filling in the right angle between where
the plane's body and the wing joined up.
If this is the body of the plane, the fuselage and this is the wing, the thought was if you
could put something in that space, you could eliminate the buffeting and the vortex shedding.
This picture over here shows the sort of filets that were put in to streamline the design
of airplanes.
Hence, government funding and academic research, both available in the 1920s and 1930s, played
an important role in improving the performance of airplanes.
Now, between the wars, the Americans, the Germans, and the British, the major powers
realized that airplanes would be essential for future battles and they pushed their engineers
to develop planes that could carry large payloads of bombs over long distances.
Again, the context is significant.
In previous centuries, war had been defined as a conflict between armies and navies of
warring nations and the rules of war discouraged attacking civilian populations.
They were off limits.
The war was going to be fought between two armies or between two navies.
Now in World War II, everyone came to see that victory was only going to be possible
by destroying the industrial capacity of their opponent and that conflicts were going to
be total war.
Military bombers were the weapon of choice for total war and all sides, the Germans,
the British, and the Americans, raced to create bombers that would both destroy cities and
industrial sites such as factories, hydroelectric dams, and railroads.
One of the first major efforts of total war was the Battle of Britain in 1940.
There, Hitler used his heavy bombers to attack British cities night and day with the hope
of forcing the British to surrender.
That proved futile.
The British and Americans retaliated by bombing German cities night and day through the rest
of the war from 1941 to 1945.
The Americans conducted similar heavy bombing raids on Japanese cities as well in the Pacific
Theater.
In this context, American airplane manufacturers developed progressively larger bombers and
they applied the mass production techniques that came from the automobile industry in
order to turn out tens of thousands of planes.
The rapid improvement of bombers can be seen by comparing statistics of American bombers
from beginning and the end of World War II.
The most famous plane at the beginning of World War II was the B-17 Flying Fortress.
It had a wingspan of 103 feet.
It had a load of 65,000 pounds and it could cruise for 2,000 miles.
Compare that to the most impressive plane produced just at the end of the war, the B-36.
It had a wingspan of 230 feet, so it had wings that are twice as wide as the B-17, and it
weighed 328,000 pounds, meaning it was five times heavier than the B-17.
And it had a cruising range of 8,100 miles.
The B-36, for those of you that are aviation aficionados, is the largest bomber that the
U.S. has ever produced.
B-52s, with which we are often much more familiar, are actually smaller than the B-36.
While the effectiveness of strategic bombing in World War II is still debated by military
analysts, the United States decided after the war that it would rely on long-range bombers,
such as the B-52, to deliver nuclear bombs.
In the 1950s, aircraft firms like Boeing continued to design and build planes for the U.S. military.
But they were anxious to keep their large plants operating at capacity, and to do so they leveraged
the engineering expertise that they acquired on military projects and they used it to create
civilian aircraft.
For instance, during the war, Boeing had taken the basic design of the B-29 bomber and converted
it into a cargo plane, the C-97.
Now after the war, Boeing took the C-97 and reconfigured it one more time so that it became
the Model 377 Stratocruiser, one of the first passenger airplanes.
Boeing made similar conversions in order to create its first and most famous jet airliner,
the 707.
In order that B-52s could carry nuclear weapons to targets deep in the Soviet Union, those
B-52s needed to refuel in mid-air, midway to the target.
And to do so, Boeing designed a prototype, the 367-80, in 1954, from which it spun off
both the KC-135 Stratotanker and the 707, the passenger airliner.
Both the Stratotanker and the 707 appeared in 1957.
Now although the 707 was not the first jet airliner, the 707 was indeed the first commercially
successful jet passenger plane and it ushered in the jet age.
In connecting military aircraft with passenger airplanes, I've jumped over the development
of jet engines, so let's go back and talk about them for a moment.
As we've seen, early aviation pioneers recognized that they needed a powerful and lightweight
engine and they debated the merits of several different power sources.
While Langley used steam power, the Wright brothers focused on a piston-driven engine.
By the late 1920s, several other inventors had begun to think about a different power
source and these included Frank Whittle in England and Ohan in Germany.
And both Whittle and Ohan began investigating turbojet engines.
Just as turbines came to replace piston engines to generate electricity in steam power plants,
so both of these new inventors wondered if it would be possible to use a turbine engine
to power a plane.
Basic idea was to use a combination of compression and combustion to speed up an airflow and
create thrust.
Hence for your typical turbojet, you need a couple of basic parts.
You need an air inlet up in the front, you need a compressor, you need a combustion chamber,
you need a gas turbine that drives the compressor, and you need a nozzle that focuses the thrust
out the back end.
Now as this diagram here shows, the basic idea of a turbojet is pretty simple.
Air is taken in through the front inlet and compressed three to twelve times its original
pressure by the compressor.
Fuel is then added to the compressed air and the fuel-air mixture is burned in a combustion
chamber.
In the combustion chamber, the temperatures can easily reach 1100 degrees Fahrenheit.
Resulting hot gas passes through the turbine, which drives the compressor.
If the turbine and the compressor are efficient, the pressure of this hot gas will be nearly
twice the atmospheric pressure, resulting in a high-velocity exhaust stream which in
turn produces thrust.
The first turbojet aircraft was built by the Germans, it was a prototype, and they flew
it in 1939, it was the Henkel HE-178.
Now while the jet engine was ideal for creating fast fighter planes, Hitler insisted on trying
to develop a jet-powered bomber, so that the only jet fighters to see service before the
end of World War II was the Messerschmitt 262.
After the war, the U.S. and Britain and the Soviets as well sought to build their own
jet-powered bombers and passenger planes.
They did so not just because jets could attain higher speeds, but because jet aircraft were
more economical and could fly at higher altitudes.
Pound for pound jet engines can deliver far more thrust than existing piston engines and
they involve far fewer moving parts.
However, at lower altitudes, propeller engines are actually more fuel efficient than jet
engines and they're also more maneuverable.
This is why propeller engines are still used on short hop or commuter flights.
In the 1960s, turbojets were replaced by turbofan engines on commercial airliners.
When they're operated at subsonic speeds, your typical turbojet engine generates a lot
of exhaust that ends up traveling very fast and wastes a lot of energy.
Consequently, turbofans are used now on airliners because they give the exhaust speed that is
better suited for supersonic airliners.
Now again, as this image of a turbofan jet engine shows, the turbofan consists of two
parts.
There's a big fan in the front and then in the middle, there is a traditional jet engine.
Powered by its own low pressure turbine, that fan in front sucks air into the engine, some
of which passes more slowly around the traditional jet engine.
Meanwhile, the jet engine, with its own high pressure compressor and turbine, generates
thrust in the usual way.
At the back of the engine, the thrust is created by mixing the flow from the fan with the flow
from the jet and the combination of the two propels the airplane forward.
As a result, turbofans are more efficient at subsonic speeds and because of their lower
exhaust speed, they are much less noisy.
Thanks to the Wright Brothers, decades of investment by government and military in aviation research,
people today can take air travel for granted.
We spend more time complaining about air traffic delays and the cost of airline tickets
rather than marveling at the remarkable principles such as Lyft or the intricate engines such
as turbofans that made modern aviation possible.
Perhaps in some ways we are like Bruegel's medieval plowmen, preoccupied with our own
affairs and needs.
Maybe we occasionally need to look up at an airplane overhead and marvel at the human
creativity and the social context that made flight possible.
