In this lecture, we're going to talk about two major inventions of the 20th century,
nuclear weapons and nuclear power. For me, nuclear technology is all about extremes.
On the one hand, the atomic bomb and its successor, the hydrogen bomb, have the potential to destroy
all forms of life on Earth. Nuclear technology is the ultimate in dystopian technology.
On the other hand, nuclear power could be the long-term solution for our ever-growing
need for energy. Using nuclear reactors, it might be possible, as they said in the 1950s,
to produce electricity so cheap that it would not need to be metered. That's clearly a great
utopian dream. In this lecture, we will look at the invention of nuclear weapons, as well
as the development of nuclear power, and in doing so, we'll inquire how societies manage
to find a way between these two extremes, between nuclear annihilation and endless free energy.
As far as we've avoided one, but we don't seem to have achieved the other.
The nuclear age began in 1938 when three German scientists, Otto Hahn, Leismeitner, and Fritz
Strassmann, successfully split a uranium atom. Now you might be wondering, why uranium? Uranium
has an unusually large atom, and hence it's hard for the atom to hold together, to keep
from all of its protons and its neutrons that it has in its nucleus. This makes uranium
235, 235 means it's an isotope, a good candidate for nuclear fission. As a heavy metal, uranium
has more neutrons than protons. This doesn't really help with the capacity for uranium
to split, but it does have an important bearing on the capacity to facilitate what scientists
call a chain reaction. Now back to our German scientists. Working on a laboratory bench
in 1939, these three physicists bombarded uranium isotope with neutrons. As they did
so, they found that collisions between the neutrons and the uranium atoms caused the
atoms to split, releasing energy and even more neutrons. As the fission process went
on, the uranium atoms decomposed into various radioactive elements. Physicists in Germany,
Burton and the U.S. quickly realized that the discovery of nuclear fission might mean
that one could make a bomb of incredible power. The question was whether or not one could
control the uranium and get it to reach a critical mass. That means the point at which
the nuclear reactions going on inside the sample can make up for the neutrons leaving
the sample. In the United States, two emigrate physicists, Leo Zallard, came from Hungary,
and Enrico Fermi, who was from Italy, conducted their own fission experiments. Their experiments
confirmed that as more neutrons were released, the process did indeed become a chain reaction,
capable of sustaining itself and producing great amounts of energy. Now let me talk a
little bit about uranium fission. As this diagram over here shows, you have an incoming
neutron that hits a uranium-235 atom. Now when that neutron hits the uranium-235 atom,
three things happen. There's energy released in the form of both heat and gamma radiation.
Gamma radiation is the strongest form, the most powerful form of radiation. There also
were released a number of neutrons. This diagram shows that three neutrons spin off of this.
The uranium atom falls apart into two fragments, and there are three neutrons that are seen
going off. Those neutrons in turn hit other atoms, cause them to fall apart to have fission,
and more and more neutrons are released. All of these spare neutrons fly out with a sufficient
force to split other atoms and to keep the chain reaction going. In theory, like the
diagram shows, you only need to split one U-235 atom to start the process and to have
it go along. Remarkably, the process takes only a millionth of a second for all of these
reactions to take place. And as you can see, it's a process that takes place arithmetically
and not geometrically. So lots and lots of reactions are happening and the whole thing
goes faster and faster. Deeply concerned that Nazi Germany might develop an atomic bomb,
one of our emigrate scientists that I mentioned a moment ago, Zillard, approached Albert Einstein
and asked him to warn Roosevelt of the danger of a nuclear weapon. Einstein agreed to sign
a letter, and it was sent in August of 1939 to President Roosevelt, warning that Germany
might be on the verge of developing an atomic weapon. It is conceivable, the letter concluded,
that extremely powerful bombs of a new type may be constructed. In response to Einstein's
letter, Roosevelt appointed a committee of scientists to investigate the possibility
of an atomic bomb. In the meantime, the British government was pursuing its own atomic bomb
program under the codename Maud. And in 1941, it warned the Americans that a bomb was practical
and could be built in two years, possibly by German scientists. This British warning
led FDR to order the War Department to begin a top secret project to develop an atomic
bomb. Codename the Manhattan Project. Development of the atomic bomb was led by General Lesley
R. Groves. As a project leader, Groves faced a number of challenges. He needed to convince
other government agencies to supply him with scarce materials, materials that were going
to be used for a top secret project and couldn't always explain why they were needed. Groves
had to hire tens of thousands of scientists, engineers, and skilled workers. And with the
skilled workers, he had to make sure that they weren't going to go on strike and bring
this entire enterprise to a halt and slow down the development of an atomic bomb. Groves
also had to coordinate the work of dozens of contractors and suppliers, all of whom were
producing sub-assemblies and parts that were needed for the project. And finally, Groves
had to maintain security and not let the Soviets or the Germans steal any of the secrets. But
most of all, General Groves had to balance the need for further scientific research,
what the scientists wanted to do, with the necessity of building an actual bomb as quickly
as possible. In this balancing act, Groves worked with both a team of talented physicists,
including Fermi, Zillard, and J. Robert Oppenheimer, and a team on the other side of engineers
who came from the Dupont Company. Groves selected Dupont to serve as the prime contractor for
building the gigantic plants needed to process live grade uranium and make it into weapons
grade fuel. The Dupont engineers were able to do so because they had lots of expertise
that they had acquired over the last 50 years building large-scale plants for gunpowder,
nylon, and other chemical products. Although Dupont engineers had no experience with radioactive
materials, the company agreed to undertake the project out of patriotic duty, recalling
the accusations that came out in the 1930s that accused Dupont of being the merchant
of death as a result of the fact that it made profits on its World War I explosives business,
Dupont charged the United States government $1 for its services on the Manhattan Project.
Thus, America was able to build the bomb, the atomic bomb because it had the people
who could do both the theoretical research as well as the practical engineering.
One can see how both of these things came into play, the science and the engineering,
by taking a look at how the nuclear piles were developed to produce weapons grade fuel.
These piles were constructed out of graphite bricks in which uranium fuel rods could be
moved in and out of the bricks, and this allowed the scientists to control the amount of uranium
throwing off neutrons and creating those fission reactions I told you about a few moments ago.
The first working pile was designed by Fermi and a team of scientists in December of 1942,
and it was located underneath the football stadium Stagg Field at the University of Chicago.
Ironically, at about the same time that the Chicago pile came online, German scientists
concluded that an atomic bomb was not feasible and they abandoned their project.
Initially, Groves and the physicists planned to build a bomb using uranium, but in February 1941,
Glenn Seaborg and others at the University of California had isolated a new man-made element
that they called plutonium.
Seaborg reported that the slow neutrons caused plutonium to split evenly and more easily than uranium.
Based on Seaborg's discoveries, Groves and the physicists decided to use the results of the nuclear pile,
the work that they had been doing at the University of Chicago to design new reactors that would produce plutonium
and the plutonium would be used in bombs.
To begin to make the atomic fuel, Groves acquired a 500,000 acre site in Hanford, Washington,
out in the middle of nowhere, where he ordered Dupont to build a plant for making enough plutonium
for a bomb.
This huge isolated site was needed to keep the project secret, and at the same time,
it was a good site because it was near several giant hydroelectric dams which could provide
vast amounts of electric power needed for the project.
Dupont built a giant plant at Hanford, as well as a town for thousands of workers,
and in September of 1944, Hanford began producing weapon-grade plutonium.
To keep the bomb project secret, the workers at Hanford were never told about the purpose
of the plant until the war ended.
To build an actual bomb, Groves turned to J. Robert Oppenheimer and had him direct operations
at Los Alamos, New Mexico.
Their Oppenheimer's team designed a firing mechanism to push the proper amount of plutonium
together, setting off a rapid chain reaction and releasing enormous amounts of energy.
Oppenheimer's team tested their bomb in New Mexico on July 16, 1945.
That bomb released the equivalent of 20,000 tons of TNT.
As Allied Forces gained control of Germany in the early 1945, it was becoming clear that
Japan would be the target for the bomb, not the Nazis.
Allied military commanders had estimated that to invade and defeat Japan, they would
need a huge army, tens of thousands of Allied soldiers, and all of those soldiers could
be killed.
Hence, after Roosevelt died in April 1945, the new president, Harry Truman, authorized
the military to use the bomb on Japan.
On August 6, 1945, a B-29 bomber, the Enola Gay, dropped the first atomic bomb named
the Little Boy on the Japanese city of Hiroshima.
Three days later, a second bomb, Batman, was dropped on the city of Nagasaki.
According to official estimates, 70,000 people were killed instantaneously by the Hiroshima
bomb, and another 200,000 died over the next five years from radiation and other kinds
of wounds.
Nagasaki, about 40,000 people were killed by the blast, and another 140,000 died over
the years to come.
Following these two horrific bombings, Japan surrendered unconditionally on August 14, 1945.
Hiroshima and Nagasaki are the only times that nuclear weapons have been used in war.
Historians have long debated whether the atomic bomb was used by Truman not only to defeat
Japan, but also as a warning to the Soviet Union.
During the last months of the war, the Soviet army invaded not only Eastern Europe, but
other countries as well, including Bulgaria, Poland, Austria, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia.
Aware that the communists had an ideology of world domination, Truman feared that the
Soviets would not withdraw from Eastern Europe, and that the Soviets might indeed try and
create communist regimes in Europe and elsewhere in the world.
Consequently, Truman hoped that the atomic bomb might discourage the Soviets from further
regression.
As a result, Truman shared the secrets of the atomic bomb with Britain and later with
France, but he deliberately chose to withhold information about the bomb from the Soviets.
In response, the Soviets developed their own atomic bomb, which they exploded in 1949.
Horrify that the Soviets were able to catch up so quickly, Truman authorized in 1950 the
development of even more powerful bomb, the hydrogen bomb.
Unlike the first atomic bombs, which relied on splitting the atom or fission, the hydrogen
bomb works on nuclear fusion.
In nuclear fusion, the nuclei of atoms are brought together, fusing to form a heavier
nucleus.
Specifically, the nuclei that are used isotopes of hydrogen, deuterium, and tritium.
And together, they form a heavier helium nucleus.
This only happens under very, very hot conditions, and to get those hot conditions, a hydrogen
bomb relies on an atomic bomb to produce the heat and start the fusion process.
Fusion releases energy due to the overall loss in mass.
The total mass of the particles which go into the fusion reaction is greater than the total
mass of the particles which come out.
So this mass difference takes the form of energy, whereas Einstein had predicted E energy
is equal to mc squared.
The hydrogen bomb is thousands of times more powerful than an atomic bomb, something that
I cannot emphasize enough.
We often just sort of think hydrogen bombs, atomic bombs, they're all kind of the same.
Let's just think about the actual power of these weapons.
A common hydrogen bomb has the power of up to 10 megatons of TNT, and the atomic bomb
in contrast dropped on Hiroshima had the power of only 13 kilotons.
All of the explosions that took place in World War II totaled only 2 megatons, 20% of the
power of one common typical hydrogen bomb.
In 1952 the United States exploded its first hydrogen bomb, and the Soviets followed suit
in 1954.
Since neither the Americans nor the Soviets could gain the ultimate technological advantage,
an arms race began in the 1950s with both sides trying to amass the largest number of
warheads.
The Cold War had begun.
Worried that amassing stockpiles of nuclear weapons would bring the end of human life
on the planet.
Many of the scientists involved in the Manhattan Project came to play important roles on international
committees to control atomic energy, and the scientists advocated that research should be
undertaken to identify how nuclear technology could be used for peaceful or civilian purposes.
Most promising application the scientists felt was the generation of electric power.
As you may remember, in an atomic pile the chain reaction caused by bombarding uranium
with neutrons results not only in radiation, but also heat.
This heat the scientists suspected could be used to create steam, which in turn could
run conventional turbines and electric generators found in power plants.
While this part in all things sounds easy, it's actually easy to do from an engineering
standpoint.
Indeed, there are some basic challenges that engineers figured out how to overcome.
They figured out how to contain the radiation.
They figured out how to efficiently and safely transfer the heat from the pile to the water
that's going to be made into steam, and they also engineers figured out how to deal with
the excess heat.
All these problems were solved by developing new materials such as alloys that could be
used for transferring the heat from one part of the reactor to another and sophisticated
systems for monitoring and controlling the reactor.
Between 1945 and 1955 the United States government, through the Atomic Energy Commission, focused
much of its atomic research on breeder reactors.
It did so because the government was worried that there was going to be a shortage of uranium.
This was because the major sources of uranium that were known about at that time were in
Northern Canada and the Congo Republican Africa.
In response, scientists investigated how they could design a reactor that would not simply
consume uranium, but rather produce, breed more plutonium that could be used in other
reactors and of course bombs.
Breeder reactors would have also had the benefit that they produce a lot less nuclear waste.
You don't have the spent uranium fuel rods.
But despite their best efforts, federal atomic scientists were not able to perfect the breeder
reactor in the 1950s.
Part of the problem is that the reactors don't produce good plutonium, they produce bad
plutonium, in the sense that the plutonium that is generated by breeder reactors is non-fissionable.
It can't be used in other reactors or in other weapons.
Another factor that spelled the end of the breeder reactor program was that new sources
of uranium were discovered in the late 1950s in Utah, in Australia, in South Africa.
Nevertheless, as fuel rods accumulated in the 1970s, advocates for nuclear power once
again called on the federal government to resume research on breeder reactors.
Instead of growing out of the ADC research on breeder reactors, civilian nuclear power
came from an entirely different source, came out as a spin-off from the nuclear navy.
The nuclear navy is an interesting story.
It begins right after World War II.
Envious that the army had control of the atomic bomb, the navy wanted a piece of the action.
And the navy assigned in 1946 a team headed up by Captain Hyman Rickover to work with the
ADC and investigate how atomic power might be used to power ships and submarines.
Although there were several alternatives for designing a nuclear reactor, Rickover chose
a very particular kind of reactor.
He chose to develop a pressurized water reactor, and that was what he wanted to use in his
submarines.
Now, as this diagram over here shows, a pressurized water reactor has several basic parts.
There's a reactor vessel, there's a steam generator, there's a turbine, there's a generator,
and there's a cooling tower.
The most important part of this entire system is the pressurized water system that connects
the reactor with the steam generator.
The water runs through the pipe that you see there, it's pumped through at a high pressure,
and that water comes into contact with the nuclear pile.
It in turn goes to the steam generator where that hot water that has been through the nuclear
reactor transfers its heat energy to a different set, a different supply of water, which is
turned into steam, and that steam in turn drives the turbine.
The important feature about this is that everything that touches the reactor or has the chance
to be exposed to radiation is completely sealed up.
And it was this design that Rickover wanted to use in the nuclear subs.
Rickover and his team installed the first pressurized water reactor on a nuclear submarine, the
Nautilus, which was launched in 1954.
To put Rickover and his team's accomplishment into perspective, it's helpful to think about
the relative size, a typical nuclear reactor in the 1950s, and what was on the Nautilus.
The 10 megawatt reactor at that time took up roughly the area of a city block.
In contrast, the reactor that was put into the Nautilus fit inside a hull that was 320
feet long and only 28 feet wide.
Rickover went on to supervise the installation of nuclear reactors in dozens of other submarines
and aircraft carriers.
Rickover always wanted to ensure that the crews that were operating these ships could
do so safely, and he instituted special training programs that required every candidate that
was going to be a nuclear officer to interview with Rickover personally.
When asked why he was so obsessed with safety, Rickover once told a fellow officer, I have
a son.
I love my son.
I want everything that I do to be so safe that I would be happy to have my son operating
it.
That's my fundamental rule.
Rickover's stringent standards were the main reason, or are the main reason, why the United
States Navy has a record of zero accidents onboard its nuclear ships.
By contrast, the Soviet Union had a number of significant accidents on its subs from
the 1950s to the 1980s.
In the 1950s, both the British and the French also developed their own civilian atomic power.
The British were the first to deliver electricity from an atomic power plant, and they did so
in 1956 from Calder Hall.
The French have had a similar ambitious program, and indeed today get over half of their electric
power from nuclear generating stations.
Keep up with the European developments, what the British and the French were doing.
The Atomic Energy Commission asked Rickover to work with the Westinghouse Company and
install a pressurized water reactor and a demonstration plant at Shippingport, Pennsylvania,
which is located just outside Pittsburgh.
Shippingport began generating electricity in 1957, and while this plant was never economically
efficient, its performance convinced a number of American power companies to build their
own nuclear plants.
Between 1957 and 1974, 104 nuclear reactors were built in the United States.
Of the 69 were pressurized water reactors.
The sort recommended by Rickover while the remaining were boiling water reactors.
In a boiling water reactor, water circulates to the nuclear core, and it goes directly,
becomes steam in the nuclear core, and then is fed directly to the turbines.
So there is no separation of the hot side, the radiation side of the reactor, with the
cool side, the turbine, and the generator side.
The American nuclear power industry grew steadily until an accident in 1979 at Three
Mile Island changed everything.
Unlike Rickover, who was able to create a highly disciplined workforce on the Navy's
nuclear ships, it was not possible to do the same thing in the civilian nuclear industry.
Three Mile Island was built by the General Public Utilities Corporation, and it consisted
of two pressurized water reactors, one that was installed in 1974 and a second one that
came online in 1978.
Together the two reactors could generate about 1700 megawatts of power.
The accident began in the second unit with a simple plumbing breakdown, a small valve
opened to relieve pressure in the reactor, but that valve malfunctioned and it failed
to close.
This caused, this little plumbing accident, caused the cooling water to drain out of the
reactor and the core began to overheat.
The machines monitoring the conditions inside the nuclear core provided false information
to the control room, and so plant operators shut down the very emergency water supply
that would have cooled the nuclear core and solved the problem.
Core soon reached 4,300 degrees Fahrenheit.
Fortunately, the nuclear plant's designers were able to talk to the plant operators several
hours into the accident, and the designers instructed the operators to turn the water
back on and the conditions were stabilized.
Nonetheless, the accident caused a release of radioactivity into the atmosphere, but
fortunately there were no deaths.
Subsequent reviews of the Three Mile Island accident concluded that it had been caused
by poor training of the operators and comparisons were drawn directly with the nuclear navy.
Three Mile Island had a profound impact on the American attitude toward nuclear energy.
In the 30 years since Three Mile Island, not a single nuclear power plant has been approved
for development.
Further concerns about the safety of nuclear power were raised by the accident at Chernobyl
in the Soviet Union in 1986 and most recently in 2011 with the disaster at Fukushima in
Japan.
Let's talk about Fukushima.
The Fukushima plant was made up of six separate boiling water reactors.
They were designed by General Electric and the reactors were operated by the Tokyo Electric
Power Company or TEPCO.
On 11 March, Japan experienced a severe earthquake and tsunami.
Immediately after the earthquake, the reactors that were generating electricity at that time,
one through three, shut down automatically and emergency generators came online to power
the cooling system.
However, the tsunami that followed the earthquake quickly flooded the low-lying rooms in the
power plant where the emergency generators were housed.
At that point, the flooded generators failed, cutting power to the critical pumps that
circulated the cooling water needed to keep the reactors from melting down.
As the pumps stopped, the reactors overheated and over the next few days there was an incredible
amount of high radioactive decay heat produced.
At this point, only prompt flooding of the reactors with seawater, the Fukushima plant
is located right on the coast, could have cooled the reactors quickly enough to prevent
a meltdown.
However, because the seawater would have permanently ruined the reactors, TEPCO and the government
hesitated at a critical moment and were reluctant to flood the complex.
Flooding by seawater only commenced after the government directly ordered it, but it
was too late to prevent a meltdown.
Because the seawater poured in, it boiled away, the fuel rods heated up and they melted
down.
The Three Mile Island and Fukushima remind us nuclear technology comes with significant
risks to humans and to the environment to say nothing of the risk of nuclear annihilation
or even a regional war waged with nuclear weapons.
Those that might take place between Israel and Iran, or India and Pakistan, or even North
Korea and the United States.
As I suggested in the opening of this lecture, we might well ask how society has managed
to minimize these risks.
Now, while I can't go into all the steps, important steps that were taken by statesmen,
diplomats and generals to avoid nuclear war in the last 75 years, the invention of the
atomic bomb and nuclear power does suggest that society is navigated between the extremes
of paying attention, the extremes of nuclear annihilation and endless free energy by paying
attention to both the technical and social dimensions of nuclear technology.
In particular, the social dimension means paying attention to the individuals and organizations
that are needed to develop and manage nuclear technology.
Today, we've seen how both Leslie Groves and Hyman Rickover carefully structured their
organizations, bringing together the right people and training them thoroughly.
Unfortunately, when the technology of nuclear reactors was transferred in the late 1950s
from the Navy to the civilian sector, it was not possible to duplicate the highly disciplined
organization that Rickover created, opening the way for accidents like Three Mile Island.
But along with building strong organizations, we should note that Groves and Rickover picked
the right mix of people.
They relied on both scientists and engineers to get the job done.
For the most part, the public and historians as well focused on the role of scientists,
especially physicists, and the part that they played in the development of nuclear technology.
Individual scientists like Oppenheimer, Zillard, Teller, and Richard Feynman were all highly
articulate and deeply concerned about the ethical implications of nuclear weapons.
At the same time, though, engineers played an important role, an equally important role
in creating nuclear technology.
Groves relied on engineers from DuPont to build the enormous plants needed to produce
uranium and plutonium that were used in the first atomic bombs.
Equally, Rickover looked at engineers to create practical and reliable reactors that could
be used on both ships and civilian power stations.
And I would hazard a guess that it was engineers who diagnosed the problems at both Three Mile
Island and Fukushima and mitigated those accidents.
For me, one of the most important lessons in thinking about nuclear weapons and nuclear
power is to remember that it took both scientists and engineers to invent these technologies
and that it will take a combination of both kinds of experts to help society continue to
navigate between the extreme hazards and the opportunities that nuclear technology presents.
