Although 10 days of intimidation had reduced the massive size of demonstrations against
Iran's disputed presidential election, thousands still crowded on the streets of Tehran on June
20, 2009.
That was the day 26-year-old Nita Agha Sultan decided tentatively to join the revolution.
A non-political woman whose greatest crime appears to have been the enjoyment of clandestine
singing lessons, Agha Sultan's car was stuck in traffic on a side street as she approached
the area where the demonstrations were taking place.
Stepping out of the vehicle, she stood among the passers-by, evidently trying to decide
what to do.
She never had a time to decide, however, because within a minute, a shot was heard,
she fell to the ground surrounded by a pool of her own blood.
This woman, anonymous to the crowd and to the world, a random victim of a sniper's bullet
ceased to be anonymous at that moment.
As a doctor from the crowd frantically struggled to resuscitate her, at least two bystanders
used their smartphones to record the scene.
Lying face up on the street, her eyes lost focus and rolled to the side.
She briefly convulsed and then torrents of blood pulsed from her mouth, nose, eyes and
ears.
Very soon it was over, the blood stopped flowing, Nita was dead.
However, the regime could not kill the images of her death.
They lived on and they flew around the world with unprecedented speed.
Despite the government's efforts to isolate Iran to hide the embarrassment of disunity
from a global audience, that horrific scene, witnessed by a few dozen or hundreds, would
play out over and over again on tens of millions of computer screens.
Even though the Iranian government controlled internet servers within their country, smartphone
users and satellite dish owners uploaded the videos to Facebook and YouTube within hours.
Hundreds of users had been doing the same thing with images and videos of the street
protests since they began, but few had the impact of Nita's death.
The Arab world, she became a martyr.
For the rest of the world, Nita became an icon, a secular saint in the struggle for
political freedom.
Within partial professional journalists imprisoned, banished or barred from entering Iran, observers
and members of the opposition became their own citizen journalists, providing coverage
of the events from an internal point of view.
This perspective on the news was entirely new, something beyond the traditional reporting
that detached professional journalists often used to witness history.
There was no pretense of objectivity.
That was replaced by a new intimacy expressed by the words and images produced by the participants.
Twitter, Facebook, YouTube continued to host the text and images of daily life, but suddenly
that life was far from mundane.
History making events now appear in the near real time.
Social media, the valley wick of youth, where the emphasis was definitely on social, suddenly
looked a great deal less frivolous and a great deal more like media.
Even the staid giants of the news media embraced this view of social media.
The same day that Nita died, Robert Mackey, the blogger at the lead at the New York Times
dot com, requested that and I quote, readers inside Iran or in touch with people there
are encouraged to send us photographs and to tell us what you were seeing or hearing.
One way to think about social media is to see them as technologies of freedom.
That's a term I take from Ithiel de Sola Poole's 1983 book.
The idea that technology has an inherent prejudice in favor of free speech and democracy.
Since the Enlightenment, Westerners have believed that communications technologies like the
printing press, telephone, radio and television can all supplement face to face exchange and
foster freedom.
Americans have a long history of linking communications technology and freedom.
During the revolution and the early republic, Americans firmly believed that innovation
in many areas of the useful arts, what they call technology in the 18th century, would
usher in an age of liberty and prosperity.
Americans at that time assumed that technology in the right hands was sympathetic to freedom,
although Americans at the same time recognized that technology could produce contrary effects
if it was misused.
To some extent, it's easy to understand this preoccupation that technology was congenial
to liberty and that any underuse of it by definition was improper.
It is Madison's idea that the greatest safe bar of democratic freedom was the inclusion
of as many citizens as possible in the political debate.
The notion that many heads are better than one depended on communications technologies
like the printing press and newspapers to bridge time and space.
Madison and the other founding fathers believed that the tyranny of the few was best combated
by a broad public dialogue, one that needed to take place actively on a national and not
on a local scale.
In Madison's time, the mechanism that supported this virtual dialogue was free press and an
efficient postal service.
Today, much of this dialogue still takes place virtually, but now this exchange occurs both
globally and much more interactively via Twitter, Facebook, and the blogosphere.
Some of the characteristics of this environment are fundamentally different than those encountered
in the use of earlier technologies.
For example, while radio and television excel at communicating with groups, they're not
as special useful as conversational technologies.
On the other hand, the telephone and the telegraph are excellent tools for supporting conversation,
but they're very poor for assembling or coalescing groups.
Today, the Internet combines both the ability to join a group and to enable a conversation.
Furthermore, the texture of that conversation is much richer and more complex than it has
been in the domain of earlier technologies.
The written word today in social media is still important, but it is not necessarily
central in that environment and includes images and video.
Some aspects of current use also allow the customization of content for individuals within
the group, meaning that all participants in a conversation may or may not be having exactly
the same conversation.
Recalling the sentiments of the founding fathers, some politicians today view the Internet
and access to it as a basic human right, an essential element of life in a free society.
In a speech in February 2011, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton described the Internet
as, and I quote, the public space of the 21st century.
Internet freedom is about defending that space.
And Clinton went on to assert that an open Internet will lead to stronger, more prosperous
countries.
Some media pundits like to view new technologies such as the Internet and social networking
to be so open, so widespread, as to be beyond the control of those who would pervert their
natural affinity for free and open exchange of information.
Recently, many articles have appeared using Iran's Green Revolution and the Arab Spring
as examples supporting this theory.
In fact, many of them have employed Nita's story as proof of their claims.
And can social media, all by itself, be a determining factor in political change?
Is there mere presence or availability of Twitter and Facebook, catalysts for political
action and a determining factor in the outcome of political events?
Let's look at several episodes of political unrest in this lecture.
The Green Revolution in Iran in 2009, the overthrow of the government in Tunisia in
2010, the occupation of Tahir Square in Egypt in 2011, and the Internet in China.
And we'll use all of these episodes to see what role social media is playing in determining
the outcome of the struggle between oppression and freedom.
And we can ask, are all of these recent technological developments inherently democratic and or
immune from the effort of those who had misdirected them?
In doing so, we'll be considering how one form of the Internet, social media, may or
may not have the civilizing potency that Tesla hoped in 1902 that new media would have.
Now, I realize that for some, the approach I'm going to take here may seem surprising,
as you may have been expecting this lecture concerning social media to have been about
Mark Zuckerberg and other inventors of Facebook and social networking.
However, what I want to do in this lecture is suggest that inventions are not necessarily
finished when they're put in the hands of consumers.
Indeed, consumers often use new technologies in surprising ways and in so doing can profoundly
alter our understanding of an invention.
In this sense, the Tunisian blogger Lena Ben-Mahini, who we'll talk about in a few moments, is
as much an inventor of Facebook as Zuckerberg.
In the Iranian uprising of 2009, Twitter and Facebook proved to be far more useful as reporting
than its organizational tools.
Journalists, professional and otherwise, use these tools effectively to distribute information
and to mobilize sentiment beyond the regime's clutches.
However, inside Iran, Twitter and Facebook were not effective technologies for the purposes
of organization.
In fact, text messaging proved timelier than either of those two technologies, and even
more effective than that was word of mouth.
More importantly, no technology served as a game changer, for as Charles Krauthammer
put it, quote, Twitter cannot stop a bullet, a determined regime that is oppressive that
will shoot, almost always wins.
This is exactly what happened in Iran in 2009, when the Revolutionary Guards ruthlessly suppressed
the demonstrations and the Green Revolution withered and died.
However, internet use increased in the Arab world over the next few years.
Internet use has been fueled in large measure by the fact that a significant percentage
of the population of the Arab world is under 30, is well educated, and is unemployed.
Creative and knowledgeable, young Arab people rely on social media as a means of communicating
and expressing themselves.
Hence, the ingredients are right for the development of new ways to use technology to shape political
discourse and change.
To investigate this, let's consider another case, Tunisia.
In Tunisia, Twitter and Facebook again played an important part by casting light on events
the government tried to hide through a media blackout.
Even before widespread protests erupted, these technologies had been utilized by dissidents
opposing censorship and the violation of human rights under the Tunisian strongman Zin
Al-Abin Ben Ali.
Many of these dispersed voices were suppressed through intimidation and the confiscation
of equipment.
Strategies made necessary because the government lacked complete control over the network
itself.
The blogger I mentioned a few moments ago, Lena Ben Mahini, endured threats and the threat
of the theft of computers from her home even before the spontaneous uprisings began, and
she resorted to using virtual private networks, VPNs, and proxy servers to circumvent the government's
efforts to restrain her.
Then, on December 17, 2010, a fruit vendor, Mohamed Bouazizi, frustrated and humiliated
by the authorities who were attempting to interfere with his efforts to support his
family, set himself on fire in the city of Sidi Bouzid.
Word spread quickly and bloggers picked up the story.
Ben Mahini made inquiries and posted what she learned on Facebook, Twitter, and her
blog.
When the demonstrations took to the streets in Tunis, she joined them and reported her
experiences online using images and video as well as text in her narrative.
Then she attended protests across Tunisia, continuing to spread news online about the
rebellion.
Notably, the government lighted on the strategy of using Facebook, although rudimentarily,
as a means of funneling online protests into a central conduit where the government could
track it more easily and deploy security forces.
In early 2011, Ben Ali fled the country, bringing his regime to an end.
So is there a cause and effect relationship between the technology and the outcome here?
Ms. Ben Mahini, a central figure in the use of social media during the revolution, doubted
that technology played a critical role, much less a determining one in the outcome.
Speaking to the New York Times, she said, and I quote, in Tunisia at least, the role
of social media has been exaggerated.
Already in Egypt, the call started on social media, but here everything started on the
ground.
Mohammed Boazizi set his body on fire and everyone started to demonstrate.
Social media didn't start the revolution, it was just a tool that helped.
In her scenario, it's human agency, specifically emulation and demonstrations, that determine
the outcome of events, not the technology.
Furthermore, the available technology was utilized primarily as a reporting tool that
spread news about the demonstrations, rather than a tool for organizing the demonstrations
themselves.
Finally, it's impossible to see these technologies as having a democratic bent when their various
characteristics were utilized by both sides for diametrically opposed objectives.
Nonetheless, Mahini did offer a hint that the situation might have been different in
Egypt, so let's look at that situation.
As in Tunisia, it was the death of a previously anonymous individual that catalyzed opposition
to a repressive regime.
Hosni Mubarak's security forces employed intimidation and murder for three decades, but no incident
provoked such extreme responses as did the death of 28-year-old Khalid Said.
Khalid, a businessman and someone who was neither a journalist nor dissident, was suspected
of taking a video of Egyptian police officers using drugs.
In June 2009, the police dragged Khalid out of an internet cafe in Alexandria and beat
him to death in a lobby of a nearby building.
The police informed his family that Khalid had died of aphyxiation as a result of trying
to swallow a bag of marijuana, but photographs of his brutally injured face contradicted
his fantasy and these photographs were smuggled out of the morgue and posted online.
Less than a week after his death, a Facebook page titled, We Are All Khalid Said had been
created and within days it had 130,000 members.
Clearly, here was a victim with whom many Egyptians could identify.
18 months later, in January 2011, when protests brought Cairo to a standstill, Khalid's case
and a Facebook page were still prominent in the minds of those protesting in Tahir Square.
During the period between Said's death and Tahir Square, internet service and access
to Facebook, Twitter and other social networking sites had remained available.
Egypt had the largest number of Facebook users in the entire Arab world, more than 5 million
and many of them used this virtual space to voice their opinions.
As they did so, Egyptian Facebook users coalesced into a movement, began to organize and mobilize
activity on the ground.
Invitations to street protests were posted on the Said Facebook page in June 2010 and
thousands of people started to attend.
Protests continued more or less on a weekly basis through the fall.
When in December and January, the revolution in Tunisia led to the ouster of Ben Ali, general
protests against the government broke out in Egypt.
Jared Cohen, former State Department consultant on technology policy, was on hand when protesters
flooded into Tahir Square in January of 2011.
During the first week he tweeted, I heard from Egyptians, tech makes weak ties strong,
links people in and out of country, allows organizing in advance of total shutdown.
In another tweet, Cohen wrote, every Egyptian I talked to on the ground this week laughed
when I told them that something tech was not a vital tool for organizing.
Three days after the protesters took over Tahir Square, the internet was shut down inside
Egypt.
However, under pressure from the U.S. State Department, at least some service was restored
within five days.
My point here is that this is a very different picture than what emerged in either Iran
or Tunisia.
In Egypt, Facebook and Twitter not only played an important role by spreading information,
but also served as a means for organizing the revolution itself.
Moreover, to the extent that Facebook served as the only available public space where opinions
could be shared and bonds formed, one could make a pretty convincing argument that social
media acted as a catalyst for revolutionary action.
Social media might have contributed to the very large scale of the movement, a factor
that probably influenced the Egyptian military to refrain from cracking down on the protests
with a brutally similar manner that we saw in Iran in 2009.
Nevertheless, it would be going too far to suggest that Facebook was the only factor
or even the most important factor in that decision.
Equally, it would be baseless to assert that any inherent quality of the technology itself,
its theoretical democratic nature, determined the outcome of the revolution.
Let's take a look at China.
Nowhere in the world does the conflict between free speech and political oppression play
out more profoundly than in the technological environment of China.
As a BRIC country, and BRIC refers to Brazil, Russia, India, and China, China is one of
the fastest growing economies.
But China has also been identified as one of the sick countries.
And sick refers to Syria, Iran, China, and North Korea, countries that are among the
most politically oppressive.
One of the newest tools in China's arsenal of repression is the so-called Great Firewall.
Now, the most obvious purpose for erecting this barrier is to protect the Chinese regime
from what are generally considered to be universal values associated with human rights and free speech.
In reality, though, the effort to isolate Chinese netizens has proven to be more of an
electronic magnoline than a Great Wall, as the Great Firewall has produced unexpected
consequences and opportunities for authorities.
As internet use evolved in China, the government in Beijing has become far more sophisticated
about the potential of this technology and how to use it to promote its own political aims.
When the government cut China off from the internet, it did not create a virtual dead
space, but rather it replaced the internet with China net.
When Google, Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube were kicked out of China, we saw the birth
of Chinese clones Baidu, Renren, Weibo, and Youku respectively.
Beijing understood the need to satisfy the demand for social networking because, as the
Chinese blogger Michael Ante said, if netizens can't go online, they go on the street.
Today, China net is a thriving electronic landscape with half a billion users and 300 million
microbloggers using Weibo.
In fact, microblogging in China has many advantages that Twitter users cannot enjoy in the rest
of the world.
Although Weibo users have the same 140-character limit as Twitter users, it takes more Roman
letters than Chinese characters to convey a similar amount of information.
In fact, the ratio is about 3.5 to 1.
As a result, a Weibo tweet can contain all of the elements of short story or report,
whereas the English equivalent may only be a sentence or two, and the German inversion
might only be an expression or a phrase.
Building on this inherent advantage, Weibo now looks more like a Facebook, Twitter hybrid
than either of its internet progenitors.
Leading Weibo users like Yao Chen have more than 20 million followers, more than most
of the leading media outlets.
This kind of audience, Weibo becomes the media platform itself, but it's not mentioned
on Weibo, it doesn't exist.
And the process, Weibo has become the country's first public space, one that enjoys a greater
degree of free speech than any other part of Chinese life.
The incredible number of social networkers is a testament to the appeal of this environment
and contrary to what many would believe an impressive regime like Beijing would allow
and encourage.
This is because unlike other countries, the Chinese government controls every aspect
of the servers and applications that will let massive amounts of people participate
on the internet.
The Chinese government is interested in having that level of power, so it can capture massive
amounts of data on users, and this data is a powerful resource that the central government
minds in order to monitor and exploit digital discussion for its own purposes.
Beijing, if you will, sits at the center of a network, the hub, the center of a wheel,
and the spokes of the wheel are the way that people can communicate with one another.
This allows Beijing to separate the population into disunited blocks even as public discourse
is increased.
Social control of China Net also lets the central authorities maintain a modern version
of an ancient Chinese tradition, namely the petition of the emperor.
This tradition exploits the image of the emperor as the ultimate symbol of good and
is done so in comparison with corrupt local officials, often the central cause of problems
for the average peasant.
Now, peasants could travel to the capital and directly petition the emperor for a redress
of their grievances in imperial times.
However, in the modern world, even where travel is so much easier, any system that directs
complaints to the central authorities in Beijing runs the risk of flooding the capital with
thousands of unhappy citizens.
Hence the exploitation of a Weibo petition, an arrangement that promotes dependence of
central authority and enhances its image of beneficence at the expense of local officials
and without concentrating discontent in a single physical location.
Of course, because it possesses administrative control over the entire digital system, Beijing
can shape the direction of rumors and conversation and can even ban discussion if need be.
Beijing did so in 2012, August of that year, when Weibo was shut down to remove posts containing
rumors of a coup.
Users are well aware of the level of control that the central government has over China
Net and they often use a variety of puns and mimes to avoid censorship.
Even so, any reference to a meeting, gathering, or assembly is monitored and the police often
greet attendees as they arrive.
However, all of this relates only to the central authorities and not to local officials, because
local officials don't have control of the data.
As the blogger on to you points out, local officials can only apologize, not censor.
And this being the case, local governments have become more transparent, perhaps as an
unintended consequence of China Net.
Several recent incidents in China specifically illustrate how the system of petition, monitoring,
and censorship works.
A Chinese Twitter user, not the US Geological Survey, made the first report of a 7.9 magnitude
earthquake in eastern Szechuan in May of 2008.
That's also how the Chinese government first learned of the earthquake.
As a result, the Chinese government could not restrict knowledge of the event as they
had done so with earlier quakes.
With the government's encouragement, Internet users created sites where donations could be
collected.
The news about the collapse of several schools in the area began to circulate, especially
with pictures of grieving parents and that was a particularly effective image in a one
child society.
Users of protests followed and in 2008 all of this was too much for the Chinese government.
The government cracked down, restricted dialogue, and arrested the protesters.
The system that had been constructed to filter content from the outside world failed when
internal rather than external information was perceived as a threat to the Chinese government.
Two years later, on July 23, 2011, one of China's bullet trains, a proud symbol of modernization
plowed into the rear of a stop train, killing 40 and injuring 192 in the city of Wenzhou.
Officials distributed instructions to the media, ordering them not to report information
about the crash and to focus instead on human history stories about victims and their rescuers.
The effort to limit information was so extreme that rescue efforts were aborted and the trains
were broken up and buried at the site of the accident.
Nevertheless, within five days, 10 million critical posts had appeared online.
There is no precedent for this outpouring of public criticism.
Whether for this reason or for another, the Chinese government-controlled media then openly
attacked the railway ministry.
This led to the charging and conviction of the railway minister who was subsequently sentenced
to 10 years in jail.
In this case, central authorities exploited public opinion to purge an undesirable bureaucrat
and to polish their own image.
Another example is the case of Bo Xle, a Communist Party princeling and his wife, Gu Kale, who
was convicted of murdering a British businessman in 2011.
Bo, a powerful provincial leader with national aspirations, was an annoyance, maybe even
a threat to the national leaders.
After the discovery of his wife's crime, we both served as a rumor mill dealing in theories
about both the murder and Bo's activities, one in which great latitude was allowed about
the specific topic.
One blogger, Li Wei Deng, posted the following item.
Ms. Gu invited some close friends for her birthday.
She cooked the soup herself and told a helper to get some poison to put into the soup.
She saw to it that the poison was indeed added into the soup and then cleaned the dishes
and left calmly.
A cop cut a piece off the dead man's body to keep his evidence.
I'm not sure if this is true and I'm trying to verify this.
If true, this is terrifying.
Because Bo had been very popular, he had to be discredited before he could be purged
from the party leadership.
Another rumor, in this case a well-substantiated rumor, accused Bo of electronic surveillance
of Communist Party leaders, including the President Hu Zhantao.
Public conservation of Bo cast the party's ouster of the once popular figure as a noble
act.
In each of these cases, open debate was a convenient tool for political fight.
The Chinese blogger auntie has suggested that the central government's manipulation of
free speech in the Weibo public space is reminiscent of Mao Zedong's mobilization of
the masses against local government and institutions during the Cultural Revolution.
My point here is that today, in China, the absence of censorship is a political tool.
Yet at the same time, auntie also sees the lid of censorship ajar and social media, like
Weibo, as the training ground for future democratic systems.
The juxtaposition of censorship and democracy may be the most accurate analysis of the political
nature of the internet and social media.
The examples we've discussed here suggest the technologies themselves have little or
no inherent bias toward authoritarian or libertarian rule.
They can and have offered new opportunities to both sides.
In all cases, it's human action that determines outcome, not technology like social media.
Social media may act as a catalyst for further action and outcome, but technology in and
of itself cannot determine that outcome in opposition to anything else.
For me, Tesla's notion of civilizing potency lies within us, not within the technology.
