So, welcome to this introduction recording of our lecture series, The Beautiful and Virtue.
A study in Six Platonic Dialogues.
Now before I begin with these prepared, my prepared introduction essay, I want to first
say thank you for taking the time to sign up for the course and spend the next several
weeks with me in investigating Plato's early dialogues on the topics of the beautiful,
in particular, and the virtue.
There's a lot of things you could be doing with your time.
You could be spending your time hiking or leisure activities like watching movies or
spending time with loved ones, but instead you chose to take the time to go through
these lecture series and the discussions of dialogue with Plato.
And I think that's something to be commended.
I think it's very common to think that there's something very given.
We take it for granted what beauty is, but I think the reason why maybe you are in this
course right now and felt a calling, a resonance, to be here is that it's the simple things
in life that might be so given, so obvious, so explicit that with more investigation,
more inquiry, you realize there's a lot more subtlety and complexity going on.
And that's something that's worth your time, to have a life that's worth the kind of enrichment
that a deeper consideration will allow.
I want to thank you for that consideration and be given this opportunity to speak with
you today.
So with that said, hopefully this dialogue series and lecture about it will be worth
that investment of time, and I take that seriously, so I want to thank you for that.
So let's begin.
One morning not too long ago, I felt the urge to re-retonance Aquinas' take on honesty.
In particular, I read this, I was reading this account on an ostinium and was shocked
to what I found.
Now when I recall honesty, as taught by my parents, or to use the term with friends,
the term seems synonymous with truth telling, yet Aquinas had a completely different understanding
of ostinium, described in four parts in the Summa.
First, honesty is placed under the virtue of temperance.
This is unusual because temperance is a moral virtue and not intellectual virtue, which
we would think is related to honesty, with truth telling.
Second, honesty is convertible with virtue itself.
Now truth telling is important, I wouldn't dismiss that.
But it would not seem to encompass the entirety of what virtue would mean as a concept.
Aquinas is directing the reader to something radically different from just truth telling
with the term ostinium.
Third, honesty is not the same as the useful or the pleasant.
But rather something good for its own sake, a statement that's usually only reserved
for virtue where it said human happiness.
Lastly, honesty is said to be convertible with beauty.
And not a beauty of physical appearance, Aquinas is very clear to emphasize rather the spiritual
beauty of true reality.
It's a state of beauty of clarity and perfected existence.
All at once as I'm reading Aquinas' account on ostinium, I understood the power of Plato's
work.
Centuries later, the long shadow of Plato's writing on the beautiful has been cast on
this 12th century Dominican writing.
And that long shadow does not stop at Aquinas.
When I recall the Heidegger's account on authentic existence as care, I continue to
sense Plato's shadow continued to stretch over time well into the 20th century.
Now this lecture series is going to consider how, for Plato, beauty ascends the beloved
from appearances to true realities.
This is a shocking assertion because since Kant's beauty has been treated as a personal
preference on the same level as a favorite ice cream flavor.
How could a subjective preference move a pupil from appearances to true reality?
This is a question of pedagogy, of epistemology, and just kind of reason discourse.
When would a preference ever change a person's entire orientation to reality?
So now we have a question of ethics and how to live the good life.
Consider how if we considered beauty as this vehicle, as the level of a preference for
ice cream flavor, how could that possibly be the case?
I would not think so.
Instead, in this course, we return to the foundation of thought in Plato and see what
other mode of beauty we could consider.
Now join me in this six module seminar as a journey within the platonic dialogues that
approach the beautiful and virtue.
If this is the first time you're encountering me, I hold a BFA in communication design from
Parsons School of Design.
Since 2015, I have worked with corporations such as Starbucks, Foot Locker, Express, and
Google on various design projects.
I have taught either as a lecturer or as a professor in various educational centers
on design, such in New York City, such as School of Visual Arts, Pratt Institute, Parsons
School of Design, the Fashion Institute of Technology, and the City University of New
York.
In 2021, I co-authored with Javier Rivera and OG Rose the book, A Philosophy of Glimpses,
available on Amazon.
I am thankful for this opportunity with the Halkion Guild that has provided to me to speak
with you today.
My time with design students focuses on drawing forth the beauty inside their sketches and
prototypes.
With my students, we worked out with the first principles of art and design, the hidden fulfillment
of what is possible inside their work.
Now while such practical practices are very rewarding, because the first principles, in
this case for design beauty, is taken for granted, I have always felt like the opportunity
to really investigate and discuss beauty was always lacking in these institutions, which
is ironic.
A different context of inquiry is required to think about these first principles.
Now with the Halkion Guild, we will explore the in Six Platonic Dialogues with the particular
contemplation of the beautiful and virtue.
The six dialogues we will read together are, Greater Hippias, Symposium, Phaedrus, Nino,
Pratilis, and Permanides.
I have structured the course in such a manner so that as we read these dialogues, we will
circumscribe the following considerations.
We start with Greater Hippias, with the typical Alencus method of knocking down the Sophists
Hippias's particular examples of the beautiful, followed by Socrates' hypothetical replies
to what the definition of the beautiful would be, albeit with failure.
In fact, from the exchanges between Hippias and Socrates, the connection between predicates
and their subjects begin to untether.
From Symposium, we will explore what is love as a predicate and how beauty interacts with
love, in the words spoken by Socrates, to behold true realities that nourish true virtue.
In Phaedrus, Plato presents two shocking notions to us.
First, that predicates are a hierarchy of excessive desire.
Second, the virtue of temperance is the acquired opinion to desire the best.
Contending with Nino, we will attempt to thread the concepts of beauty, excellence, knowledge,
and action into a woven hole.
From Pratilis, Revelations await us.
Plato suggests the very instruments of knowledge, names, is in fact images that are nothing
like the realities they purport to depict in a transparent reality.
If this is the case, the standard critique of image makers by Plato, and dialogues such
as the Republic, seem to extend even to words, let alone images of the poets.
How can we reconcile this apparent tension?
We read together to find out.
Lastly, we continue to circumscribe the path with permittities, one of the more enigmatic
dialogues of Plato.
After demolishing Socrates' notion of forms, images and likeness are explored to point
the way to a rehabilitated conception of the beautiful.
When I introduce philosophy to my design students, I begin with a topic of aritse, which can
be translated to excellence or virtue.
Most of my students have never heard of the concept in a design context.
This was the case of my own education.
This collapse of aesthetic deliberation into personal preference is my suggestion why excellence
is never spoken of in the classroom when you would seem to be the most obvious place to
talk about it.
Instead, what if we can reconsider virtue not as a cultural subject of preference, let
alone as a visual preference, but rather as a beautiful activity, then we can begin
to see with a vantage point of reality pregnant with possibility and energy is what I suggest.
As I tell my students, writing is like writing, both in prose and poetry, when done well
presents to the viewer a reality, albeit in different modes, which complement one another.
For example, when we ask the question, does this artifact do a function, that only really
entails a reality of engineering, whereas if we ask the question, does this artifact
function with beauty, we're now asking a very different question with very different answers.
The answer such an inquiry is vastly different.
It is not a formulaic repetition of the same answer no matter the context, but instead it's
when done well and with beauty a creative living dance.
My own experience as a design student is an example of this.
In my sophomore typography class, I was instructed by a typeface designer named Joshua Darden.
As I recall, almost 20 years later, what I thought at the end of that first class with
Darden, I went to mind as beautiful as his.
I immediately recognized in that first lecture Joshua's intellectual powers, perceptions
and considerations and fell in love with what I was beholding.
I was then Joshua's apprentice for three years after this inaugural course.
It is funny to think that in one lecture directed my entire understanding of what design could
be and how my life was to unfold.
At 19 years old, my entire orientation to life was reshaped by an encounter of the beautiful.
My life was shaped by that beauty and that acted upon me and compelled me towards a beloved.
And this is important, it's not a beloved of the body of some physicality of some kind,
but rather a beauty of an activity of the soul.
This is one of the things we will explore together.
Plato is very empathetic about the point, demonstrates that beauty, there are many kinds
of beauty.
The beauty of living bodies, such as maidens and horses are beautiful.
There is the beauty of the activities of the soul, such as my mentor's thought process
and typography, but there is more still.
There is the beauty of virtue itself, such as 42 in charity, the beauty of laws and institutions
and even higher still, all of which seem to abide under some unity named the beautiful.
I would like you to consider if the beautiful we encounter in our lives is also not just
some generic conceptual abstraction.
For example, it is not sunsets that are beautiful, it's this sunset you are beholding that is
beautiful.
Maidens are not beautiful as an abstraction, this maiden before you is beautiful, this
act of charity you witness is beautiful, this law enacted is beautiful.
In all these examples, beauty seems to direct us to the hexity, the thinness of an entity.
Yet also beauty seems to point us to something universal beyond the particular individual
present in front of us.
The many in the one is expressed in the beautiful.
I ask you to join me in these readings of the Six Platonic Dialogues to find out the consequences
of such a conception of the beautiful.
Our understanding of images and likeness also requires a more profound thought if we wish
to grasp what Plato means by beauty without figure or color.
We need another look at likeness.
Likeness as mimicry is the standard explanation of beauty in the arts.
The drawing of a person is beautiful when it best mimics the actual person before it as
a subject.
I suggest in this lecture series that mimicry of nature does not exhaust the beautiful.
As Carl Jung says, quoting the alchemists, what nature leaps in perfect are perfects.
Consider how does a name mimic the thing named?
In what manner is a written named dog, composed of sounds and marks on a page, anything like
an actual dog?
We have to admit there is no likeness in sound or figure.
Likeness as mimicry is lacking as an explanation.
Using my points, the convertibility of goodness and beauty is a puzzle we will attend to in
this seminar series.
One of the readings in one reading of these dialogues from Plato, you could conclude,
as Tolstoy did, that goodness and beauty are one in the same concept collapsed into the
notion of pleasure.
But such a conclusion does not exhaust all possible answers.
The phrase goodness is the same as beauty entails acknowledging some differences.
Now that difference could be one of phonemes or sounds that make up the name, so for example,
beauty and jamal in Arabic posit the same notion, but in different languages, depicted
by in other, in different markings that map on a different sounds.
Or that difference between goodness and beauty could be a difference in relation under a
subject.
For example, a good chair is different from the good man sitting on that chair.
For most ecmatically, the difference between goodness and beauty could be one of analogy.
To explain what I mean, let me give you an example.
What exactly are we saying when we speak of the term liquid capital or cash flow?
When we use the term liquid in these cases, we tend to think of entities such as water,
yet capital is nothing like water.
Capital is a promise imposed onto some material, be it paper with ink or zeros and ones on electrical
current.
Water is a particular arrangement imposed onto hydrogen and oxygen atoms.
In both form and material, capital and water are nothing alike, yet the analogy of liquid
posits a real and common reality to both entities.
And I mean real reality, actual reality, not figures of speech because economists deploy
liquid dynamics, which describes water, to make falsifiable predictions related to finance
and capital.
Rather, whether the difference between goodness and beauty is one of sounds, relation to a
subject, or analogy, is something we will need to investigate together.
Much of our work together is to help uncover the deeper meanings of phrases and words that
have become collapsed or buried over the development of philosophy.
The term is such a word.
What is translated a form, figure, pattern, arrangement, is in fact referring to paradigma,
eidos, merfe, schemata, or taxes, for example.
These are not the same idea, but instead a hierarchy of reality.
Aerosol uses taxes and rhetoric to refer to the composition of unlike elements arranged
together to make a whole of a persuasive speech.
He also uses schemata to reference the shape of unnatural kinds bound together, whereas
the term morphae is used for natural types like animals and dogs and humans, for example.
Eidos, which may be translated as species, can, to aria be a sematic category, whereas
for the Greeks, eidos was ontological, rather than sematic.
Within Sufi philosophy, you could make a suggestion of this form of appearance to reality, could
map onto eidos and morphae distinctions, but that might more to the point of why disentangling
form is a worthwhile venture, for better understanding.
Lastly, paradigma points to what later thinkers such as Aquinas would call the exemplar cause
of a thing, the isolated entity which illustrates the first principle within the mind of the
maker.
Where Aquinas states the exemplars are in the mind, Plato saw paradigma as a much more
authentic and singular reality outside of minds.
A more rigorous understanding of these terms will likewise aid our understanding of the
beautiful for Plato.
The dichotomy between a recitalian and platonic thought is due for reconsideration.
Rather than the top-down rationality count of Plato, it is my hope as we review these
dialogues together, that the variable-making arts at a particular time play a large role
in Plato's arguments.
This is different from the singular mind-hunting of definitions of concepts with ignorant interlaculars
for some inert substance such as what is piety or what is courage.
Indeed, seeing Plato arrange the dialogues in such a manner so as to esteem the making
activities that bootstrap knowledge is a very different experience of dialectic.
Much more inductive than the top-down rationalist depictions of Plato would permit.
If Plato truly is a top-down thinker, then why does Plato's character Socrates repeatedly
recite the work of doctors, craftsmen, and gymnasts to refute the claims of his speaking
partners?
Something is going on counter to the stereotype.
To summarize the section so far, our inquiry into the beautiful will instruct us in four
major topics.
First, the motivation of pupils under the topic of desire, second, pedagogy under the
topic of rhetoric, followed by epistemology under the topic of love, lastly, the nature
of reality is to be studied under the topic of images and resemblances.
This course is for several kinds of readers.
First, this course is for those who come from an artistic practice and wish to explore philosophy.
By reconsidering what is beauty, artists may deepen their practice with such an investigation.
Philosophy can be daunting, especially if you attempt to re-contemporary thinkers.
The terms are technical and are different from common meanings that you would find in
the dictionary and are very loaded with a long tradition.
But by starting with Plato under the beautiful virtue, you will have a gateway to connect
and enliven your professional practice with the methods and language of philosophy.
The second kind of learner in this course is for those who wish to have a more steady
footing for the authentic life.
As I spoke with Johannes in a discussion you can find on YouTube, we cannot simply copy
paste the ways of thinking of the past and bring it to today.
Our world is different from the past.
Our constraints, our dangers and our opportunities are not alike to that time.
Instead, we need to reach not for the duplication or mimicry of the past, but rather bring
forth a new image of how to live well.
The beautiful is how I believe we can begin to achieve this authentic life of a true happiness.
If you are such a learner, join me in the Halkion Guild to meditate on the following
questions.
What is the beautiful?
Who understands and enacts beauty?
What does beauty shape in the soul?
How do we come to know and love beauty in the world?
And lastly, where does a love for virtue come from?
I look forward to our approach towards the mysteries that surround both the beautiful
and virtue.
I am confident you will be delighted by what springs forth inside yourself by the sincere
inquiry into the beautiful.
We will begin our inquiry with the dialogue greater hippiest, where our common suggestions
of what is beauty is to be reconsidered.
I'll see you all then.
