Where is all that information?
Please tell me.
We want to go out into space to look for life.
What we have to do is look here on Earth at chemical space, because where
aliens exist is in the potential space of things that our universe could
build, and we can conduct experiments on this planet.
This is a presentation by the brilliant and courageous
Sarah Walker, recorded
just a few weeks ago at MindFest Florida Atlantic University, 2024, led by Susan Schneider,
Director of the Center for the Future Mind.
Sarah Walker is a professor of astrobiology at Arizona State University.
Here you are talking about the hard problem of consciousness, the
hard problem of life, the hard problem of matter, alien life.
And of course, clustering theory, Stuart Hameroff is next.
All talks from the AI ​​and Consciousness Conference,
also known as MindFest, are in the description, along with a link to the
Future Mind Center website in the description.
I recommend you check it out.  You
should also know that there is currently a two-hour video on the
mathematics of string theory, which has just been published.
It's string theory.  You've
never heard of it before.  The
link to that is also in the description for those of you who
don't know this channel.
Welcome.
My name is Kurt Jaimongal and this is Theories of Everything,
where we delve into topics of mathematics, consciousness,
physics, and artificial intelligence with a depth and rigor that is
unique to this channel because of us, not as a technical chewing for the benefit of a
broader scope.  market.
If this precision is interesting to you, you're in good hands here as far as theories of
everything are concerned.
Well, now enjoy this presentation by Professor Sarah
Walker.
I think we can start with our second speaker at MindFest.
We have Sarah Walker.
Sarah is a theoretical physicist and astrobiologist at
Arizona State University.
She is the Deputy Director of the Beyond Center, and external faculty at the Santa Fe Institute
as well, as well as two other centers there.
As you know, its main focus is original life research,
construction theory, you know, research on assembly theory, assembly theory, my
fault, my fault.
And I'm looking forward to seeing if we can find signatures of life in other worlds,
techno-technology signatures, which is really interesting.
Thanks for coming.
Sarah and hand it over to you.
great.
I am glad to be here.
I work primarily on the origins of life, not actually the origins of the mind,
but as we heard earlier this morning, those problems are perhaps closely related and
I am interested in both.
I just think the origin of life is so easy and solvable within the
next few decades that I really want to get there.
My training was in theoretical physics as a theoretical physicist, and
I'm really interested in the fundamental laws.
Therefore, many people who have addressed the origin of life in the past have tried to
do so from the perspective that known laws would be sufficient to explain the
origins of life.
That's not my take on the problem.  My take
on the problem is that we are missing something fundamental and that there are
new theories to understand how reality works when we take things like
life into account.
So I went through all the formal education in physics,
but when I actually started working on this problem,
I realized that there was no one particular shoe that fit this problem.
So I've spent most of my career trying to think about what the
structure of the laws of physics might be that would explain life.
This is just to give you a little bit of context for how I think about the problem
.
And what I want to talk about today is this theory that I've been working on with my
collaborator, Lee Cronin, and a group of graduate students,
postdocs, and other collaborators at the Santa Fe Institute called assemblage theory,
which is an attempt to explain life from a more fundamental perspective
.  And it
has some interesting philosophical features of the theory that I
hope to touch on today, which I think will frame some
interesting questions about the nature of minds as products of evolution.
The fact that complex things are organized only through an
evolutionary process and an information process.
We have to take that as part of basic physics.
So when I deal with questions of minds, the thing that I think is most interesting as a
physicist is not what something is, but what does it do?
What I mean by that is, does it have any causality in the universe?
Are there measurable consequences to something that exists?
So I've been thinking about the question of consciousness and minds for a while
now, but the kind of question I'm really focused on is
not the question of subjective experience,
but whether there are some things that only exist because minds exist and they exist would be a
measurable consequence of the existence of the mind and how that actually
reframes the question and how we think about the nature of the mind and how
we measure it.
So as a preface, I'm not even convinced that consciousness
can be measured as a property of individual minds.  I
think it might be a property of societies that you can measure over time, which is
pretty radical, but it's consistent with some other things, I
think.
So, we're used to thinking about the hard problem of consciousness, and it's been
very well formulated in many ways as thinking about what it's like to exist,
at least for us.
There are other hard problems related to this that can be structured in
similar ways, such as the hard matter problem, which is a kind of play on the
hard problem of consciousness.
So I think the hard problem with consciousness is more familiar to people,
but the hard problem with matter is the idea that we can't actually measure
anything, not just subjective experience,
but anything about an object in the universe outside of interaction with
another object.
So even matter in some ways is also mysterious to consciousness because you
can only know its properties when you measure it.
My colleague Paul Davies and I, thinking about the hard problem of consciousness and the
hard problem of life, came up with the idea of ​​the hard problem of
matter.  We
have come to this idea about the difficult problem of life.
This actually came from thinking about the original life.
What is unique about original life?
What happens when life arises and we don't see it in any other type of
physical system?
And the idea that we really focused on was the idea that information seems to
play a causal role.
Well, maybe I'll try it.
I won't do that.
Well, actually let's do an experiment.
How about, can everyone raise their hands now?
Thank you.  Okay.
So why does this happen?  You
know, this is not like, it's not a completely mysterious property, is it?
Someone might give you an optimistic description, but it seems like a better description would be that
there are some informational properties that have emerged, uh, for example, you know,
in brains that have developed language over time, we all speak the same language.
I understood what you said.
This is part and parcel of the historical emergency
that we share, and that informational property allowed me to cause the
things that you just did.
Well, this kind of movement over a distance that
information seems to have is actually,
I think, movement over time, not distance,
but I'll get to that.
Um, but anyway,
that seems to be the mysterious property, doesn't it?
The information appears to be causal.
Oh, that doesn't seem quite right.
Because it doesn't fit with standard physics.
Perhaps we can explain this through some automated atomic narrative.
Umm, but so far we haven't been able to reconcile
these things.
So I think when we look at these hard problems,
uh, whether we're talking about the
substance of consciousness or life, they have some common characteristics.
So the hard problem of the existence of consciousness seems like a hard thing to solve, and the important problem
is that we can't observe anything that exists outside of interactions with
other things.  The hard problem with life is that abstractions and information are important in
determining what can exist or what happens.
I think the last question is certainly true in the biosphere,
isn't it?
Everything that has appeared in the biosphere over 4 billion years of
evolution is the product of some information that has been selected over time.
Well, all of these difficult problems deal in some way
with the nature of existence.  And
that to me is actually the most important and unifying thing about
them.
And also one of the ways he challenges the standard way we talk
about things in physics and why there might be problems.
So the nature of existence,
what existence means is consciousness.
How do we define what things exist as matter and how can some things
exist without other things, which is life?
So usually when we talk about the existential problem,
people like to think about all the
mathematical things that are possible.
So at least, I don't know how many of you have been trained and how
many people have actually been trained in physics here.
So I know.
Yes.
We, we, are the problem children.  Okay.
Or yes.
So,
if you go to some kind of mathematical physical description of reality,
you start asking these questions like, why do the laws of physics have the structure
that they do?
Umm, we don't actually know.
Most explanations of the laws of physics are pushed outside the
universe.
So people assume their laws, they assume they have the mathematical structure
that they have, and then we have to assume an initial condition.
These are boundary conditions placed outside the universe for which there is no
explanation.
And when we get into a deep philosophical discussion about why these
laws exist, you know,
one of the easiest explanations is to assume that all the mathematical structures
exist somewhere.
So it's a different version of the multiverse hypothesis.
Everything has a place, right?
This is also the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.
So the scapegoat we usually use to explain why some things exist and others do not
is to assume that everything exists somewhere.
Um, I don't find this explanation particularly compelling
because it doesn't explain much about why things are here the way they are.
Well, it's usually easy to talk about all the
possible mathematical structures that exist and think that this is something real.
But if I ask you the question again, and you say all possible particles,
can all possible particles exist?
Does anyone think they can?
Why can't they?
Does anyone know how big that space is?
Help yourself.
What topological capabilities are really present in it?
So this is the topological constraint.
Do you mean you can't make them all because of limitations in the reaction chemistry?
I mean, it's possible to have it in a completely non-Euclidean spacetime,
but not enough flat spacetime.  Okay.  I'm
not sure I understand the argument, but we can get into that later.
It will be fun.
Yeah, so I think there's kind of a yeah, go ahead.
The universe is not big enough.
Yes the universe is not big enough.
I know, I put you there.
No one knew I had a setup in the audience.
No, just kidding.
So we don't have enough time or resources in the observable universe to make every
possible molecule.
In fact, we don't have enough to make every possible small molecule,
like a few amino acids of a small size.
So I think what people don't appreciate is how big the space is of possible things,
even if you look at chemistry.
So cheminformaticians have no idea, even though they do it all the time,
how many possible molecules there are.
Not every molecule will exist, let alone every human being.
And I bring this up because I think when people look at images like this of the
Hubble Deep Field, they think space is big.  We've
all learned that space is really big, right?  The
universe is huge.  It is
billions of light years wide.
There are billions and billions of galaxies, each one with billions of stars.
We are infinitely small compared to this vast and vast physical space.
What we don't appreciate is that the conformal space is really big,
isn't it?
So I was talking about the space of all possible particles.
This molecule that I'm showing here is Taxol, which was mentioned in the last talk.
It is an anti-cancer drug.
It's a very heavy molecule, well, not very heavy, but it's a very big molecule.
But if you want to replicate all the possible molecules
with the same molecular formula, they exist in this vast space
of other possible configurations.
And you have to ask the question, well, why is there taxol on Earth and
not some other molecule out there in space?  It's
not as if there are two other types of options.  It
seems like there are millions of them.
It's an area that grows exponentially every time you add an atom to a molecule.
So this space is really big.  And
as it turns out, the only place in the universe
that we know of that has access to most of space
is actually planet Earth, because we have chemists who can do
chemical synthesis, and now we have the digitization of chemistry,
which uses artificial intelligence to automate the process and allow for the exploration of chemical space and the
synthesis of things that wouldn't exist anywhere else in the universe
.
So, a lot of times today, I don't talk about the origin of life,
but when I talk about the origin of life, I'm usually talking about the fact that we
want to go out into space to look for life.  And
what we really need to do is look here on Earth in chemical space,
because where aliens might be is in the potential space of
things that our universe could build, and we can run experiments on this planet to look for
them without having to worry about the time it takes to get
there.  And
that's interesting to me because it makes it an
easy scientific problem to solve because you're testing a hypothesis in
the lab, and you're not just hoping that life is common
and you're going to bump into a planet where it exists.
You can already start making predictions about where it should be.
So this is what I'm trying to get at with thinking about the origins of life,
which is how do we actually look in the chemical space of alien life?
Now, when you think about this space of possibilities, DNA is one molecule in this space.
Proteins, well, are not a single molecule.
There are many molecules in this space, depending on your sequence.
Proteins are many molecules in that space, but they exist in this
huge conformational space, and they are the product of selection.
So I would say that information is necessary for those molecules to exist.
They do not exist spontaneously for free.  It
should appear as a product of selection and evolution.
So some people believe that DNA can be found on Mars.
I disagree with this, and I will give arguments why later in my talk.
But the idea that information is necessary for some things to exist is not intuitive
to us when we think about particles.
Because I think a lot of people think that any complex molecule, no matter how complex,
should be able to form in a universe outside of life.
I claim no.
Now, the reason I disagree is the same reason I think satellites would
n't just start forming randomly on a planet and launch themselves into space
outside of the process of evolution.
Well, if you think about what's necessary for a planet to do what's called anti-accretion,
we know that the familiar physical process is accretion, right?
Planets form by the gravitational accumulation of greater mass
on bodies that were already more massive
in the early solar system.
Anti-accumulation is a kind of strange process.
It might happen by chance.
For example, if a planet is hit by an asteroid, it could collide with an asteroid.
It might happen by chance.
For example, if an asteroid collides with a planet and injects some stuff into space.
But our planet is the only planet we know of
in the entire universe that has a reliable process to
prevent accretion from occurring at the planet's surface.
That process is that there is an intelligent physical system on the surface of that planet that
knows enough about the regularity of the laws of gravity,
some kind of information extracted from its physical world, to
build little boxes and launch them into space.  right?
So this is the product of four billion years of evolution.
Gain information and knowledge to limit the space capabilities
of building and launching satellites.  The
advantage of this is that it has become reliable and regular.
It is a process like a law on our planet.  It
can happen over and over again.
Obviously, an asteroid hitting a planet and launching something
into space is physically possible, but it's kind of a spontaneous event.
So they are of different quality.
So, satellites the way we have them, I
don't think they would have existed outside of evolution.
Another example, I'll just go on, the laws of physics as they exist now are
not sufficient to explain what intelligent things
that understand the laws of physics can do.  You
know, that's
David Deutschian's way of thinking about this.
It is, as you know, thinking about the elements in the periodic table of elements.
There are some, you know, that go up to 118 agnesium,
which is the highest atomic element that we make in the Earth laboratory now, and
which is produced more reliably by technology.
So, if you look at all the physical processes that make elements,
we may have some elements that formed right after the Big Bang, some that
formed in stardust, and some that formed on planets
where intelligent beings evolved that could control all the mechanisms and
boundary conditions sufficient enough to accumulate these elements in
high abundance.
It doesn't mean they're forbidden by the laws of physics, but it's just that
this will never happen unless you constrain space
far enough to actually produce these elements,
which means you need information to constrain space to produce them.
So the argument I like to make about life is that information, this property,
is so abstract that we don't know how to talk about it in relation
to life, and its stuff just arises
as a product of evolution and learning and selection, and that's what we call the physics of life.
So, it seems like, you know, in the history of physics, we've
discovered new areas of physics by trying to think about things
from new perspectives.
One of my favorite unifications in physics was the unification of
celestial and terrestrial motion.
So, before that in human history, no one knew that these things were governed by the same
physics.
Now we accept that gravity is universal physics,
it's everywhere, but there are some things in our universe
like planets and black holes where gravity is the most intense and
it's like a really prominent physics that we need to use to study those objects.
We don't really care about gravity in the nucleus of an atom.  I
think information is a universal physics, but I think the place where it becomes most
important is when we study life,
because that's where this process is most concentrated.
So we are the embodiment of whatever
we don't understand in this physics.
Now, this is in many ways contrary to the standard way we talk about
things in physics.
So in physics class I learned about particles in boxes,
and also how brains can arise from particles in boxes
with very low probability.
Has anyone ever heard of this, that we might be Boltzmann brains?
Do you feel like a Boltzmann brain?  I
feel it, I felt it a minute ago, but I'm not so sure now.
No, I am, yes.  Okay.
So the argument is that brains can spontaneously flip into existence
because statistical physics allows it and
quantum physics allows it.
I think there are a lot of problems with this argument
for various reasons.  The
first is that we never noticed it happening.
So maybe you might want to question your laws of physics
if they make predictions that you can't observe.
It's interesting cases where people try to use this
as a cosmic boundary for properties of the universe and similar things.
So I think it's interesting as a conceptual tool,
but I don't think it's a material argument.
It's interesting how the
Boltzmann brain argument has been woven into the logic of other arguments people want to make about the nature of
life and mind and how they relate to physics.
It's not like a cultural argument.
It's not like a culturally isolated phenomenon.  It's as
if people really believe that the universe can generate anything anywhere
for free.
I think this is equivalent to intelligent design
because it basically says that the universe has information for
every object to spontaneously fluctuate into existence at any given place at any given time.
Where is all that information?
Please tell me.  Okay.
People in the audience want to tell me I love this.  Okay.
I got some arguments coming.
I'm excited.
Good.
So where do brains come from?
Well, if you take apart the brain and look at its past history,
brains are a product of evolution, right?
So they have a long lineage.
So this is an abstract representation of the brain.
It's a human mind, but just imagine.
You know, it's like he needs a body.
So I'm not saying that minds can be disembodied.
So I just draw a picture because I like drawing pictures.
They are helpful.  It's
really hard to get art right.
So that minds do not spontaneously flip into existence.
They are accumulated over time through evolution and selection.
So, if you think about each step of creating a mind, of
building a brain, each step takes time.
You can't compress all that time into
spontaneous, momentary fluctuations.  The
mind is an object that takes time to build.
Evolution is a process that we know does that.
So part of the structure of the theory that we build to explain life
talks about things as coming together over time.
There is a certain way we talk about assembly as a construction process.
But the point is that every evolving organism has a structure over time as much as it does how it is
built.
So, if you start from the basic building blocks, the way we think about things is mostly
in terms of molecules now.
So I'm doing a big coverage now by talking about brains.
But it is supposed to be a general theory of evolution, and
we are working our way towards the universal features of the theory.  And
I have some promising things going on in both labs right now
.
Well, if you think about the mind, and actually look at how the
mind is built, this is the physical construction of the mind
.
This will be the argument of the whole hadith.
It's not a momentary thing for the brain.
But the brain is a very large organism over time.  And
I'll say this over and over again, but this is kind of my take on
things that are advanced.
It's informational, and you can't see informational properties
because it's temporal,
not spatial.
Well, that's the mind.
Now, I'm going to explain a little bit more in a few minutes
about how we think about how to build this kind of space.
So I'm doing it conceptually here in a quantitative framework, and in terms of the theory
that we're building and we like the
principles of the theory that are like one-to-one summation theory.
But one important feature of this is that once you decompose an object
in this way, you can see that it's been chosen
from a very large space of possible objects, right?
So, if you start, if you take apart a brain, and, you know, I want to look at its pieces, the
molecules that make it up, those molecules can be assembled into a
space that grows exponentially.
Every time I add two pieces of a molecule together, every time
I form a bond, the amount of space gets exponentially larger.
If you get to the size of the cells, you know, the space is bigger.
And once I get into the minds and technological civilizations, this space is so big, it
's so big, I don't think we can even imagine how big this space is.
So remember I said that we can't even estimate how many
possible molecules there are in a known periodic table of elements.
So the brain is actually very deep in terms of its structure, but when
you build this space, you see what a huge space of possibilities the
mind is in.
In a sense, the brain carried all that history with it, it just folded up
in the present.
So it has some ability to understand the whole structure of space because it is a
combinatorial space and has some remnants of it
stuck in the brain.
When you look at this fusion space, there may be
other minds in this space.
Here I present two types of brains on our planet, which exist
in the same harmonic space and in fact shared
lineage up to a certain point in their history before they diverged from each other.
So, if you look at the causal sequence of events of the processes
or the building blocks that put together our brain
and you look at the ones that put together the octopus brain, there's a lot of overlap, and
we're not that different.
But if you look at my mind and someone else's mind in the room,
we're more alike, and that's one of the reasons we share experiences with each other
is that we're practically the same when you look deeply at us.  time.
Now the reason we take this approach when we think about the origins of life,
and I also think a lot about extraterrestrial life, is that we need to generalize beyond life as we know it
, to understand a lot of the properties of life as an
organism.  The abstract nature of our universe, in the sense we speak of it in
theoretical physics.
So, if you think about the paradigm of theoretical physics, like the
paradigm framework of what theoretical physics is about, it's about building abstractions that unify
as many parts of reality as possible under a
similar conceptual framework.
So movement is a good example.
I can look at all moving objects and not care about their colors, not care about their
shape, but care about their mass and speed.
So what matters to abstraction in talking about the unification of motion is mass and velocity,
and these are inventions of our theories that are compatible with measuring devices.
What I'm saying here is when we're talking about advanced things, the abstractions that
matter are this kind of depth in time and also its relationship
to other things, but I'll talk specifically about concrete, observable things in a
minute.
But the reason we do that is because we don't necessarily believe, at least in this
day and age, and I hope this is the theme of this conference,
that the only minds that exist are biological minds.  I'm
not sure I'm convinced that any AI currently is a mind, but
there may be others that are.
But we care about technological minds and we care about
strange minds.
What is the space of possible minds that our world can build?
I think that's a really relevant question and an interesting question to reframe
some of the ways we talk about the nature of minds, and
obviously that's a very important and urgent conversation that people are
having right now.
So when we think about where we are in the space of possibilities and how we interact
with the world and that other things have evolved
with us on the same planet, there are a whole set of paths
through space that we don't know about.
And these, you know, may be technological minds that may have evolved from the same
chain of events as us, or the same causal chain that has been built up
over time, or they may be alien minds with a history that is entirely different from ours
.
I put the assembly time here on this axis because I don't really think
of this as clock time.
I think about time in a way different from the standard concepts of
physics.
It's like a causal time.
It's always interesting for me to look at the history of physics in trying to invent
new physics because you see that every theory in
physics invents its own concept of time.
So why not?
In fact, it's interesting because every century invents a concept of time, and
they're really strongly tied to the cultural narrative of that period in
time and technological inventions.
Yes.
I'm actually thinking more of a clockwork universe,
and Newtonian time was invented based on clocks, right?
So what is causal time?  I
think the reason is that we live in a very complex world and
we realize that time is not completely linear.
It's immersive, and it's fun.  Okay.
So I mentioned this aggregation theory at the beginning.
So the assembly theory is a theory that was designed to solve the problem of the origin of life,
which I'll talk a little bit about how we think about that in a minute.
But the way you sort of consider the basis of assemblage theory
is to say that there are things you can observe, right?
Those things we observe are physical things that exist, just like you and me, and
you can break those things down into their basic building blocks.
So let's not talk about you and me because it's very complicated, but
let's talk about the molecule.  A
molecule is made up of bonds, right?
So people think it's made of atoms, but if you're actually talking about building a
molecule, a molecule is made of bonds.
So bonds are the physical thing that builds molecules.
Molecules made of bonds.
So if you take a molecule apart and look at its bonds,
there's a whole space of molecules that I can build, that combinatorial space of chemistry that I
was talking about, which is very large.
In fact, if I have no physical limitations, this space grows exponentially
with every new exercise I do in this space.
So this space is huge.
This space is actually non-physical because I have not imposed any
of the laws of physics or processes that we know of that can occur in our real world.
So we might want to add some restrictions and say we only want to perform the operations that are possible.
We just want to make connections that can actually be made.
So maybe LEGO is better.
So some of you are not chemists.
I see people confused as to how to build a
human being and how to build a molecule?
How many people have played with LEGO?
LEGO, well, we know LEGO.  Okay.
Do you know how they have little pieces on them?
So what are handles called?  I
don't know.
inlay.
Let's just call them buttons.  Okay.
So they have little spikes on them, right?
So the assembly, the space of possible LEGO structures, if there's no physics involved,
no constraints imposed by how they fit together, let's say you have superglue,
is like a really huge space, right?
You can make all kinds of weird things out of LEGO.
And every time you add a new piece, the number of possibilities
grows.
If I limit myself to using those little nails
to hold things together, I've limited
the space of possible things to those that are physically consistent with the rules of the
LEGO world.
The next type of restriction you might want to add is that you can't
auto-assemble things for free.
You have to build it from the things you've already built.
This is what we call the assembly sentence or assembly unit.
This is an old name, so it's actually called conditional assembly in the newspaper, but that's what it is
.
So I added more restrictions.
And that's the advantage of objects being built according to historically probable paths,
which means if I want to build a LEGO castle, I build one part of it first,
then I add that part to another part, then I add that part to another part.
So this actually restricts the kind of paths that
go through things that are built, because once you start restricting and building things,
you can only build from what you've built before.
This means that the type of paths to building things is historically conditioned.
So what we see when we take existing things and take them apart is a specific example of
possible history, but it tells us something about the space of histories that could have been,
the kind of space around them of what evolution could have done but didn't.
Thus, the assembly theory has no initial conditions.  It
has no laws of motion.
It contains things and their causal history and then constrains the
future based on the causality it finds in things in the present.
Now this gets some interesting because what you're talking about as fundamental in this
theory is not what we're talking about as fundamental in
current physical theories.  And
I think one of the reasons why that's really important is because again,
looking at the history of science, we've invented a lot of technology in the
short history of science.
And every time we invent new technologies, what we call
fundamental changes.  A
good example is atoms, right?
Atoms are the things in the periodic table and are called
atoms because we thought they were indivisible like the Greek atom.
And then we realized they had infrastructure.
Now, the most fundamental theories that
people want to propose are things like string theory, which is
more fundamental but currently inaccessible to our technology.
We want to define the basic as the smallest things in the universe.  The
problem is when you are an observer existing in the
universe, what you call fundamental changes in your evolutionary history, how much technology you have
developed, and how much you can measure.
So the theory of evolution that tells you where you are
in the evolutionary chain cannot contain a fixed, finite being as indivisible
as your fundamental particle.  It
cannot be the basic structure of your theory.
So the assemblage theory is a theory of things.
It's kind of funny because I got my whole physics education without knowing what
it was.
Then I started thinking about it.
So we define objects as having many features.  The
first is that they are limited and distinguishable.
So you see basketball and football in the universe.  You
don't see a diagram of every possible type of
ball configuration between them.
They are finite, distinguishable objects.
Objects are breakable.
I can disassemble your brain into atoms.
I can decompose the molecule into atoms.
I can't decompose an electron into anything.
It is not an object.
It's a limit to your notes.
Objects exist more than once.
This is a strange feature and perhaps one of the most
counterintuitive, but one of the key features of assembly theory is the idea of
copy number, that things created by evolution
can be produced again, and that copies of
organisms matter.
So we are not identical beings like humans.
So you say, like, I'm not an object in the theory.
I am not here.
But in fact, if you look at us and look at our causal history
and look at where we are in possible space, we are almost identical.  You
know, we're 1% different from each other in our genome, right?
So you can follow these causal trees to build these things all the way down to the branches
.
We, the living beings now, are nothing but branches of these
trees.
Beings are genealogies.
So this gets to the point about things existing in time, doesn't it?
So, in order for us to get to something like you or me,
we think, you know, we'd have to have about 4 billion years of evolution on the planet.
And my friend Michael Luckman is really cool when he says, when you ask him how old he is, he's
3.8 billion years old, because some of the
information in his body is so old.
Even in your life, you are not the same atoms you were when you were born.
So what are you?
You are the breed.
You are the thing that is constantly being rebuilt.
Objects are formed by selection.
I love this site.
Sometimes I put it on my slides.
Only this will give birth to man.
It is one of the neural networks that is considered fun
on the internet.
But, you know, the whole idea is that this person doesn't exist, right?
So the space of things that cannot exist is
really big.
So you have to ask, well, why are we here?
Why are chairs the things we sit on, right?
Because they were chosen from this
potential space to be limited and distinct material things.
Selection is the mechanism that does this.
So this image here is the gathering space.
It is a collection area for adenosine, the molecule used in DNA.
I mentioned that molecules are built on bonds.
So the way we do that is by building collection spaces.
It performs a linking operation between two basic blocks.
You are building something else.
Once you build this thing in assembly space, you can use it again to build
something else and again combine it with other features in the
causal paths to build the object.
But when I talk about assemblage theory being a theory of objects, this is
what we usually call an object.
But in assembly theory, the goal is this path.
It is a media object extended in time.
So adenosine is that pathway.
It has all these features as a kind of compression of this
object as a physical object as it is created through
time.  Okay.
So I mentioned, you know, when thinking about theories of motion, we're talking about
very specific variables that show up in our abstract theories to describe those things.
Then we give these physical variables.
We are talking about these being the real physical features of things.  The
things we consider to be physical features of things are features of our theories, not
necessarily of the things.
These are the features of our descriptions.  They
must be consistent with the real properties of things.
Otherwise we are not practicing physics.
But in assembly theory, we care a lot about being able to
go into the lab and measure things because we
really want to do the experiment to solve the origin of life in the lab using
digital chemistry to explore chemical space.
We need to be able to measure when life evolved from a chemical soup
in the laboratory.
So we have to measure it.
Thus, the two observable properties of
clustering theory, the clustering index, are the number of steps it took to create the object.
This is what we mean by assembly time.
How many causal processes are there?
What is the minimum causal process to construct this object?
This set of causal processes has
very specific properties that are unique to the assemblage theory.
It is not a feature of other compression theories.
Although they have some relationship with them.  The
copy number is the second feature.
How many copies of the object do you find?
If an object appears only once in the universe, this is not necessarily evidence of
selection and causation.  It
can be random.
So I said that brains don't form randomly because there are a lot of building steps.  I
never expected to find the brain as a single organism.  I
would always expect to find brains as collections of things linked by a causal history
evolving on a planet in bodies.  I
don't think minds emerge on their own.  Okay.  I've
already covered some of these, but I think
they're worth going through more slowly.
I think I have a little time here.
So, one thing I've already said is that the universe can't build new things unless the pieces
already exist to build them.
So the collection spaces are repetitive.
So the universe in the collocation theory is a recurring universe.
All you see is a repeatedly stacked object.  It
was built from things that were built before it.
In fact, this feature of repetition is so prominent that I
don't expect any advanced beings, or anything chosen to exist in our world, to not have
this property.  And
I have strong quantitative reasons to say that, we're writing a
research paper right now.
But the structure of these paths is what I have already described.
So this doesn't show the molecules now, but this is a
graphic representation.
So, if I have two items and I connect them together, I can create a line.
And if I glued them together and added an extra link during this process, because I have to glue
everything together here, I could make a triangle, but I could also make a square.
Then what comes after that depends on that
previous date.
So you can see how the number of ways to build things as you build things becomes
pretty untamable.
But the important feature of these paths that I want to show
you is that they are combinatorial.
So you take separate elements and glue them
together to build things.
They are synthetic.
You can only build on things you've already built.
Steps must be timed into physical, observable processes.
So the aggregation index is what can be physically observed for the molecules.
We think it's likely for other things as well, but we have to
figure out how to build gathering spaces in ways that make physical sense.
But this is an example of an assembly path.
But what's interesting is that this kind of idea of
building a molecule by taking this kind of simple path through the
history space of building a molecule is actually a measurable feature of
real molecules.
So this shows the block specification as you add bonds to a molecule
and how the fragmentation pattern in the block specification
actually corresponds to the assembly index.
So my collaborator Lee Cronin is pretty adept at these things.
So he actually developed the assembly theory originally to go into the lab
with a group specification and try to see whether or not the system was developed.
This was kind of a measurement challenge.
So he took the properties of molecular mass scales to try to construct
a way to talk about how a molecule evolves.
In fact, it turns out that it is not unique to the collective specifications.
You can measure it using nuclear magnetic resonance and infrared spectroscopy.
So it is not a feature of the mass specification measurement, but the assembly index is measurable.
Okay, I already mentioned this, but I want to make it more specific.
Complex organisms can only exist if there are physical systems that contain the information needed to
build them.
This is how complex things are the product of evolution.
It requires objects that make more complex objects that make more complex objects that make
more complex objects.
Unless you have that full set of reasons, you can't form it.
Because you need all the informational constraints along those chains to produce
that particular object from that huge space of possibilities of things that could have been
but aren't.
This is the only way to get information.
So we expect it to be above the clustering threshold, and we expect to observe any object unless it has been
selected into existence.
This is one of the reasons why we are trying to use clustering theory to detect alien life.
Because we don't care what the particles are.
All we care about is whether it is a product of evolution or not?
Are they deep enough in this building history to be signatures of evolution, and
had this choice to happen?
So, in this community, you're probably familiar with the neural correlates of consciousness,
right?
And people really believe that consciousness isn't about neural connections or something
deeper going on there.
In my field, the origin of life, people always focus on the chemical bonds
of life.
Can we find DNA?
Is it protein?
How can I make amino acids from prebiotic soup?
This is not the question to ask.
The question that must be asked is whether this system is informative or not?
Is this evidence that the information was acquired over time?
How do we actually talk about that property?
So we want to go after the actual physics, not the things we see.
Like, what abstraction explains them?
So, these are two of my favorite quotes about physical reality.  A
message from Roger Penrose, whom we heard this morning: I don't like the word material
because it suggests that we know what matter is.
Madonna knows that she is a material girl and that we live in a material world.
Materials, coincidentally, are defined by our theories.
So, I think I live in a material world, but I think the things I think of as material
are more than what other people call informational.
Because that's actually what we need to talk about when we talk about the materiality of
things like us, as I talked about.
So this is kind of the picture that emerges from these ideas about the nature of life.
Life revolves around these strains that spread information about these gathering spaces.
Original life happens in chemistry.
It's actually a sudden shift.
We have a really concrete way of talking about phase transitions and collection spaces and when they
happen, which will be a paper I hope to come out later this year, that quantifies the amount of
native life in different spaces.
New physics emerges in high-dimensional combinatorial spaces.
What I mean by that is that the physics of choice is only apparent when you have so many combinations that the
universe can't exhaust them all, so it has to choose.  I
say choose in the active sense because we choose, but not in a primitive way.
She doesn't choose, but the choice happens.  We
can use mass specifications to measure particles and check for the existence of such a threshold.
This is a 2021 research paper in Nature Communications that took a whole bunch of
dead organisms, samples that were blinded by NASA, and put them through a mass spec, measured their
aggregation, and showed that biology was the only thing that produced
highly aggregating molecules.
So we could use it to detect alien life, probably.
So we're at a conference about minds, not lives.
So I want to talk a little bit about maybe some of the new philosophical structures emerging
from this theory that I think are fun to play with when we think about what a
theory of minds might entail.  The
first is that minds do not exist as momentary things.
It exists within a historically conditioned integrative space.
They are this kind of group.
If the assembly theory is on the right track and explains the physics of life, we can
generalize it to other kinds of physical objects besides molecules, such as the things that
molecules are made of.
So minds must have volume and time just like particles.
So I like the idea of ​​thinking about hyperbolas, things that are so big that we can't imagine them.
I think we're not used to thinking of physical things as having sizes and time.
We see it as having size and space.
When I look at a chair, I see that the width of the chair is just over a foot.  I
don't see the advantage in it taking a billion years to build the chair.
But I also don't see spacetime curved around me, do I?
So these abstractions that we build from our theories are really counterintuitive.
But the important point is whether it is interpretive or not?
I think one of the things this might explain, which I kind of like, is the simulation of
reality.
Because informational things, why do they seem abstract?
It seems abstract because we are looking at things that exist deep in time.
They are actually objects that are stacked repeatedly and deeply.
They compress a lot of time into a small amount of space.
That's why it looks so virtual.
This means that it may be possible for other minds to exist in the future of the construction process.
So this raises a question about the technologies we're building now, are they deeper than
us in time?  Is
it flat?  I
think, you know, the kind of technologies we have are more indicative of social minds
than human minds.
So, I wouldn't really describe them as being as creative as we are.
But I'm happy to discuss all of these things.
But I want to come back to my initial question, after putting all this framework around
how we think about things, which is the idea of, like, are there things that
can exist because minds exist?
It will serve as evidence for all the features we are interested in understanding in the theory of
mind.
And for me, the most interesting thing we do as humans is imagination.  We
can imagine things in our minds, we can share them with each other, and then we can build them
over centuries.
So the thing I like to use as an example is rockets, right?
Humans have been imagining sending things into space long before there was the theories or technology to
actually do it.
But rockets are now not just imaginary things that we can talk about, they are
real physical things in the real physical universe with real physical properties.
Where does this come from?
Well, I mentioned that I think minds are small in space but big in time, which means that
all of those combinatorial possibilities are contained in that structure that is the mind.  The
future is built through that integrative past that makes the future possible.
So in assemblage theory, the future is constructed combinatorially from the assemblage space in which
things are now.
So, if you don't think of the object as instantaneous, but you think of it as a causal graph of
these aggregation paths, you have a lot of structure to build futures on.
The future is not linear.
The future is bigger than the past in assemblage theory.
It's inevitable, but it's not definite because you don't have enough things right now to determine
exactly what will happen.
So novelty is possible in this theory, which is crucial for a theory of
life, I think, because life is mostly about generating novelty.
Thus, the future is more open, and it is possible to make more choices for things deeper in the
collection space.
So if you look at the structure like a mind, not only does the assemblage space
define the object, but the combinatorial future horizon is larger for objects deeper
in the assemblage space.
This is one of the reasons why our imagination is so expansive and why technology is making
it even bigger.
So there may be two important horizons and phase transitions, and I must say they may be important
in assembly theory.
I think the first life, you know, we're very close to really solidifying, like we have a
really concrete formalism about life emerging in molecules and we're working on
developing different features of the theory.  The
transition part of the stage is completed.  I
think brains are interesting because they pack so much choice into such a
small space that they now become active engines of choice.  It's
not just about building a choice, but the choice is, you know, like all that information is
condensed into an object and they become able to do things, imagine things that weren't
possible before and actually build them.  And
I think it's the physics of minds that I find interesting because it actually integrates us
into the evolutionary history and kind of the physical structure of the reality that we live in
here.
So, I'll end by saying that I have a book coming out later this year, which is the
first time I've been able to say that.
I'm really excited.
Actually, this is the first time I've said that.
In a hadith.
Yay.
Life is unknown to anyone.
But thanks.
It took me forever to write it.
amazing.
I am very excited.
It took me a really long time.
Then I would also like to thank my lab and my collaborators because they are amazing.
I work with an amazing group of people, all of whom are really crazy and tough,
which is a great combination.
Yes.
very.
Thank you.
Do we have time for any questions?
sign.
That was great.
Thank you.
I think you explained it really well.
Thank you.
It is difficult to explain abstractions that do not exist in many things yet.
definitely.
I have a lot of questions I want to ask you later.
But as when you talk about fusional time and kind of appearing in this kind of
quasi-temporal dimension, it makes me think a lot about diachronic appearance.  Okay.
I am not familiar with that.
So, you know.
Others may not be.
So it's good to explain that.
This is true too.
Yes.
So, you know, a synchronous appearance would be like an appearance that happens at the
same time.
Okay I see that.  A
non-historical appearance is an appearance that occurs over time in some way.
Yes.
So, if you think about an economy and you like the emergence of markets in the economy,
this would be an asynchronous emergent phenomenon.
right.
Do you see historical emergence as existentially different from
this kind of consensual emergence you are talking
about?
Not necessarily.
You will have to know more about it.
But my philosophy going into these things is that all emerging things are temporary.  I
think the reason apparitions seem strange in standard physics is that we think of
apparitions as occurring in space, not time.
This is only because the object is created over time.
So you're looking at a large object in time.
And when you like to try to look at the little things in time to explain them, you miss
all the time.
right.
I've lost all the physics I care about.
And when you say temporal, do you mean like temporal in the way we perceive time
or rather quasi-temporal?
It's not, it's not the time.
It's causal time.  Okay.
So it's all about the order of events.
Very exciting.
Yes.
I knew you would ask that.
Hyperbole, the second time I heard that you talked to Mark about it before.
amazing.
Any more questions?
Great talk, by the way.
I'll keep it quick.  You
know, I often think about how we perceive
and solve problems through perception and language.
So your theory of mind is very interesting to me.
I wonder how much your understanding of language, the way you
actually describe things, affects the way you solve the problem.
Because I know you're talking about a hyper being...
oh, I totally believe that 100%.
I use different words all the time and it confuses people, but that's because I don't
want to become a linguistic lock.
Because I think, I think, I think that words matter.
I think they are really important.
I believe that when you build a new abstraction, you build a new language.
So you have to be very careful about the words you choose.
certainly.
excellent.
Yes.
Thank you for a very refreshing line of thought.
Since you use the word object so much, where does the object end?
Oh, where does it end?
Boundaries in space or spacetime.
Yes.
I think the idea they have is that they should have limited boundaries.
So for molecules, it's very easy to define boundaries because
molecules have energy potential and things that
give them physical structure.
One of the reasons we have difficulty developing an aggregation theory for metals is
that it is really difficult to determine what the body in the metal is.
There is such a thing as a crystal unit cell, but the way it is replicated is not an exact copy due to
imperfections.
So it is very difficult to identify an object in the metal.
Objects in some string classes are also difficult to define, although in other
string classes it becomes a little easier because there is some semantics about what borders
the string.
But there are some really tricky things about clustering theory.  The
first is definition, such as creating mathematics for new spaces.
One is what is the object?
The second is what are the physical mechanisms of body building?
If you know these two things, you can construct a theory of assembly for anything,
but in reality it's very difficult to define these things in a rigorous, measurable way.
This is one of the reasons why we take our time trying to develop a
theory of assembly that works properly for other types of systems besides particles.  The
particles were a promotional gift.
They have these properties all at once.
It's really weird.
Yes.
Sorry, I just have one question.
If an organism is made up of evolutionary time history, what about things that are
no longer part of it?
For example, is the human mind part of the thing because it is part of the history that the
rocket created?
Yes, it's very interesting.  You
know, I have to compress things so I can explain them.
But, the idea of ​​genealogies spreading information is actually something that we
developed with Michael and Vikman at the Santa Fe Institute.
And Michael, you know, has a really nice way of talking about this, which I
really agree with, as if we're a genealogy group.
So, you're not like a particular structure that's
come together, but you're parts.
Like all things you create, all things that are parts of you can also become
parts of other beings.
So you don't even like when, the example I like to give is, you know,
Einstein's biological lineage wasn't very creative in the universe.  He
doesn't have many grandparents, does he?
But his creative strain, like the ideas he created, spread to many minds.
So this lineage was actually more stable than his biological lineage.
But both are subspecies and should be spoken of as equivalent objects in
assemblage theory.
So it does not distinguish between abstract things and things we traditionally consider to be
material things.
Well, I really liked the way you looked at it in the Noema article that you brought up before looking at
technology as an extension of that spreading strain.
Where do you think this is going?
I think, I mean, the expectations I have are whether we can solve the original life.
So, in a technological world, you have to originate in a technological world to solve the original life, right?
So the technosphere understands where its deep biosphere came from.  The
technosphere is therefore a living structure on a planetary scale that can reproduce on
another planet.
Thinking, you know, once AI becomes able to augment this guided selection
like we do now with AI.
It's like how quickly that expands and how quickly things adapt and evolve?
Yes.  The
joy of thinking.
New technologies are deeper or somewhat flat, not as creative as we are.
Is this because of the assumption in artificial intelligence, that it does not maintain this new suggestion that its
cell puts forward in your mind?
If they adopted that, would the models change?  I
think it's possible to build things, but I think we're in the early stages
of what those things will be.  And
I, I, the way I see, you know, large language models are
very interesting to me because it's as if you took language, which was a technology that was distributed
across many, many minds, right?  And
I compressed it into a small device so that humans can now interact
with language as a physical object.
This is the big language model for me.  it's
not.
So, but if you look at the ecosystems, the technologies that we're creating, they may have
more mind-like functions than any individual.
So I tend to think about the emergence of technology globally and how do
these things come together?
What I wrote about in this, this piece called Artificial Intelligence is Life and Noema.
Yes, that's great.
Where do I look?  Sorry.
Hello.
Hello.  Sorry.
I like to put a face to a question.
Thank you.
Thank you for the letter.  My
question is, when you talk about the mind, you use the brain as an example.
Yes.
Isolated from the rest of the nervous system, the nervous system.
So.
I wanted to put the nervous and nervous system.  I
couldn't get a good view.
So I actually use, I, yeah.
So this is one of those semantic things, like, what word do I use for brain, mind,
nervous system?
Like, what do I actually mean?  I
don't know.
Well, perfect.
So.
I am atheist.
Next question.
The question is relevant.
Yes.
What about conjoined twins, conjoined twins like that.
correct.
Yes.
They are technically the same object.
They share the same body.
Yes.
But if they have two minds, they perceive themselves as two separate minds.
Yes, I think, I think that, yes.
I mean it's interesting why you identify yourself as separate from the world.  I
think this is more mysterious than the fact that we have minds like, you know,
I have such minds, because of the way I think about the physics of life, I hardly think
of myself as an individual.
Because I realize that I am of a lineage and like everything on this planet is part of the
same structure that I am.
So this part is interesting to me.
But I think, you know, our minds are partly constructed by our social reality
.
So I don't know if I can separate thinking about consciousness from social life.  And
this part is more interesting to me than the actual physical embodiment of like, what
are the individuals?
I mean, most of my conscious thoughts are related to my community, like
connecting and thinking about things that I love, you know, all the unconscious things that
you guys don't know about.
It's crazy out there.
Thank you.
Thank you, Sarah.  That
was great.
I take it you will disagree with my claim that consciousness came first.
Yes.
My question is, what is the role?  I also believe that life, even very simple life,
requires quantum coherence.
Yes.
At the microtubule level, at the cellular level, and so on.
Yes.
Do you disagree with that too?  My
philosophy on quantum physics and its role in life is somewhat similar to my philosophy
on thermodynamics and gravity.
I think these are theories, you know, that describe features of physical reality,
but I don't think they capture the relevant regularities of what life does.
And I, so the things that life builds will have those properties because life is a physical system
.
But the abstract thing we want to call life is not an integral part of those theories.
Why is it abstract?
But I'll leave it at that.
Well, because theories are abstract.
But life is not like that, we can have theories about life.
Well, if you want a theory of life, it would be an abstract description of the regularities
that connect it to life.
That's what the theory is.
Well, like Schrödinger's theory of life as a coherent quantum state.
I think he was going for a theory of negation, which I don't, I mean I don't agree with his theory though.
So I think, you know, I always, I like to joke that, you know, he didn't use
mathematical deduction in What is Life because he knew he couldn't actually calculate life mathematically.
But, but, but, I think, I think it's a difficult problem.
It's a really tough problem.
This is why we have not come up with a solution to the origin of life.
We didn't design the right experiments.  Okay.
Thank you.
Good.
Questions?
Great talk.
Thank you.
I have a very basic question.
So, what, what, what are the basic principles that you have in the simple theory that distinguish
conscious entities from non-conscious entities?  You
know, it's interesting because people always want that, you know, I made a joke a
few minutes ago, but I'm more interested in what's going on in the subconscious.
Then my awareness, because all these things come to the surface sometimes.
And I'm like, where did that come from?
Well, I think it's interesting that we have the experience and stuff, but I'm not sure
, I'm not sure.
It's the most interesting thing that happens in our brains.
Well, but, having said that, I think the main difference is the only way I know
how to write English is through the idea of ​​imagination.
I think for most of biological history, things were built on things that, you know,
sort of existed in this like a much smaller conformational space because things
don't have much history.
There's something about the structure of the brain that I think history is
bigger than spaces.
So, in fact, it seems to pull counterfactuals into existence, but because they
exist in a larger space than they are, I don't know how to express them yet.
Um, but that's the closest answer I can give to trying to work, working to
formalize that, but it's really, it's really hard.
Great talk.
I'm sorry.  I
didn't understand the whole thing, but the questions you answered, I thought were
very interesting because you're talking about, you're more interested in what's unconscious
rather than what's conscious.
It's everything, it's the things that will be conscious in the future.
That's why I'm interested in it.
right.
Well, I'm interested in getting a background in cybernetics and kung fu.
I'm interested in that, I look at it, I look at it like, you know, you have
DOS and then you have windows running on top of it.
Yes.
If you get hit on the head, you'll go right back to DOS.
Yes.
Well, in terms of the organization of the central nervous system in the mind,
do you think that's part of the assembly blocks, I guess?
Yes, I think that, to some extent, I think that consciousness is really interesting because it exists in the
present moment.
right.
So there is something very special about the present.
It's as if we're hallucinating in the present moment because our touch works in 0.04 seconds.
So we feel grounded.
Yes.
But, but I think this is also interesting because people think the present is
instantaneous.
I think the present is thick.
Huh.
So like a gift it can take a second.
Yes.
Nicolas Gysin has a really nice way of talking about this in axiomatic mathematics and he likes
the fact that calculating numbers takes time like the present, and like the present actually has a
thickness associated with it.
If you don't, if you don't assume numbers or exist as a continuum.
right.
I've always looked to dance as an example of how to play with time.
Yes.
amazing.
Yes.
I think drug addicts do that.  I
don't know.
Thank you, Sarah.
These are great hadiths.
First, thank you for watching.
Thanks for listening.
There is now a website, CURTJAIMUNGAL.org, and a mailing list.
The reason is that big platforms like YouTube, like Patreon, can disable you for
any reason, at any time they want.
This is just part of the Terms of Service.
Now, a direct mailing list ensures that I have unrestricted communication with you.
Additionally, I will soon be releasing a one-page PDF of my top 10 toes.
It's not as Quentin Tarantino as it seems.
Second, if you haven't subscribed or clicked the like button, now is the time to do so.
Why?
Because every subscription and every like helps YouTube get this content to more people like you.
In addition, he directly helps Kurt, also known as me.
I also discovered last year that external links matter a lot in the algorithm, which means
that whenever you share on Twitter, for example on Facebook or even on Reddit, etc., it shows up on
YouTube, hey, people are talking about this content outside of YouTube which in turn
helps a lot with distribution on YouTube.
Third, there is a remarkably active controversy and subreddit for theories of everything in which
people explain toes.
They respectfully disagree on theories and build as our toe-to-toe community.
Links to both are in the description.
Fourth, you should know that this podcast is available on iTunes.
It's on Spotify.
It is available on all audio platforms.
All you have to do is write down the theories for everything and you will find them.
I personally benefit from rewatching lectures and podcasts.  I
also read in the comments that TOE listeners also benefit from the replay.
So, why not re-listen instead on those platforms like iTunes, Spotify, Google Podcasts,
or whatever podcast software you use.
Finally, if you'd like to support more conversations like this, and more content like
this, consider visiting patreon.com and patronizing CurtJaimungal and donating what you
want.
There is also PayPal.
There is also encryption.
There's also just joining on YouTube.
Again, keep in mind that it is the support from sponsors and you that allows me to work on
TOE full-time.
You can also get early access to add free episodes, whether audio or video.
It's audio in the case of Patreon, and video in the case of YouTube.
For example, this episode you're listening to now was released a few days ago.
Every dollar helps a lot more than you think.
Either way, your viewership is generous enough.
Thank you very much.
