This is mind-boggling. We are now sitting in this extraordinary convergence that
It allows us to glimpse the building blocks of biology, and the building blocks of disease,
And the heterogeneity of different individuals, different patients, and different tissues,
And different organs, different cell types, on a scale that was unfathomable 20 years ago. I think that
The challenge ahead may be our most complex yet. Deep within the laboratories of MIT,
A computational biologist has discovered a pattern that appears everywhere in nature. from
From single cells to human societies, from bacterial evolution to artificial intelligence. The professor spent
Manolis Kellis, a pioneer in computational biology at MIT and the Broad Institute of Harvard University, has spent decades
It took time to piece together a new kind of unification theory, one that would explain everything from biology
To perception, to language and meaning. Now, this is cool, because unlike physics, which follows
Unchanging laws, biology seems to operate through endless tinkering, constantly rewriting its own rules.
. This unification mission seems hopeless. However, today I enjoy my travel to
MIT to conduct this in-depth conversation in person. Kellis reveals how this unifying principle can
To transform medicine, unleash new breakthroughs in artificial intelligence, and fundamentally change our understanding of
What makes life unique. With expert insight, Kelis takes us on a journey through all the
Adaptive Systems from DNA to Consciousness. Professor Manolis Kellis, we're here at MIT. I thank you
For inviting me to your spacious office. It's a pleasure to be here with you,
Kurt. I've really enjoyed our interaction so far. It was a pleasure. I'm so excited to see
Where you'll take your podcast. I'm so excited to see someone thinking.
Deeply into this unity, not just from a superficial perspective, but being able to dive into it,
Which I'm really excited about. And that's why I'm excited to talk to you, because on this
The channel is called Theories of Everything, and most people know Theories of Everything in physics.
I mean how do you combine general relativity with the standard model? Well, that's something.
Completely accurate. But there are also people in logic, people in philosophy, who have
Their own ideas about what the theory of everything is, because they take it colloquially. Good,
Theory of Everything, quote-quote. But what about biology? Biology is one of the things
Which doesn't really contain theories. So biology began to study every aspect.
Only aspects of life. The first biology department was at MIT. Before that, there was zoology, botany,
Virology, etc. I feel that this concept of biology, to unify
Everything living is a very modern concept, and it is a concept that was
It is mainly based on the genome. So the genome brings this initial unification to biology, because
The central dogma of biology, DNA makes RNA which makes protein. So this concept is that although some
Living things, as you know, are animals, some are plants, and some are viruses and bacteria.
However, there are still some basic principles that biology can uncover. It started with clarifying
DNA as the basis of life and inheritance, how RNA is made and how protein is made, and
Basically this subdivision of labor, if you will, between storing information,
Transfer of information, then actual reality, and action,
It has changed dramatically over the past few years. The reason for that is
It's that we've gone from just knowing that DNA exists, to actually sequencing DNA, to
Having the complete genome of one species, then a few species, then the human genome, and now
Thousands of species. What's really exceptional is that we can now begin to
See some emerging principles. I wouldn't call them rules yet, unlike physics, which has a kind of
These are physical laws, but they are more like patterns of behavior, patterns of appearance. The reason
It is that biology is fundamentally different from physics. Suppose physics began 13.7 billion years ago.
. This is physics as we know it. So, basically, there's the period.
immediately following the Big Bang, where the laws of physics were still being written and changed dramatically.
changing. And then, of course, there are the corners of the universe that
Physics as we know it divides them into black holes, budding stars, etc. And more than that,
Every neighborhood speaks the same language. So Andromeda and Earth have the same physics. biology
Very different. I don't know, biology at the thermal vents on the ocean floor.
Totally different from the biology of the Sahara Desert, totally different from the biology of, you know,
Antarctic ice caps. Because biology creates niches, shapes those niches, and adapts to them.
With her. So there are a few rules of physics, and they're written down, you know,
13.8 billion years ago. There are millions of exceptions in biology, and they are still being investigated.
Writing. Perhaps this is the first thing we have to accept, which is that there are no rules.
But there are some emerging principles that continue to emerge. So the principles that
The genome works by it, the principle by which evolution works, the principles by which cognition works,
The principles by which artificial intelligence works have a lot in common. And it starts to show
As rules, it begins as laws, these basic recurring patterns, if you will.
These patterns are adjustment patterns, approximation patterns, and suitability patterns.
Curves and functions for data. I would say that bacteria do this, and humans do this,
Brains do this, societies do this, computers do this. So this whole concept
, instead of having a single function f equals ma or e equals mc squared, which describes
A very large part of the visible universe, you have thousands of tunable parameters which
These functions converge slowly. So what is the difference between a rule and a principle?
Or style? Is one just more flexible than the other? Sometimes one can break,
But in physics there is no such thing as a law that has exceptions. I would like to say that
The difference is that the rule was written before the notes. The law of physics is written
Before notes. We have the laws and then we have a lot of notes. While
Patterns and principles of life biology are written after the notes. In other words,
You have a scene that you're trying to fit in terms of evolutionary fitness, in terms of
Response to a drug, in terms of response to a disease, in terms of aging or climate change
Or environmental conditions, or poison it. So while these things happen throughout evolution...
Species adapt and fit in to the environment they are in. Physics doesn't care if the universe collapses.
The laws were written without a purpose in mind. While the laws of biology are
Constantly rewriting it to fit whatever evolutionary niche emerges. So it seems there is no hope.
In monotheism in biology if there are a large number of species. While in physics,
There are not many entities, there are quarks, there are electrons and so on. But as I mentioned,
There are different types at the bottom of the thermal vents in the ocean, and this varies.
About those in Antarctica. And if there is anything on the space station now,
It will be different. How can you hope to unite them? Unless you say something
So vague that it has little predictive power. So the building blocks are small and numbered.
So DNA has four bases. Amino acids have 20 copies. But the power comes in expression.
Of harmonics. In other words, one amino acid alone doesn't mean much. she has
Some properties of its charge, mass, hydrophobicity, interactions and type
The links it can form. But in isolation, it doesn't really mean much. In the same way for the chemical substance,
One carbon atom or one nitrogen atom doesn't mean much in itself. But when you have
A molecule like caffeine, the group of atoms has some emergent properties. In the DNA code,
ACGTs alone are like zeros and ones in a computer. They don't mean anything. but
Their groups are the ones that start to mean something. Now start building.
Representations of the world. You basically have a raw ACGT genome, and you start getting it.
Patterns that mean something. For example, a CGG space of 11 nucleotides for CCG suddenly becomes
an idea. It is recognized by protein. So, in the same way that humans have language,
We've come up with words that mean something. Word by word means something and we both understand
What it means. In the same way, the genome has developed a language that enables proteins to
Talk to each other and talk to DNA. CGG CCG attracts the organized associated with this
Binding form, Gal4. It is involved in the metabolism of galactose, for example,
And stop glucose and so on and so on. So there is language. It's not a law, but there is.
Grammar in languages. There are communication agreements. And if you look at the genetic code,
The way ACGT is translated into the twenty amino acids, there is a table that translates each
Triplet to a different amino acid. There are 64 possible triplets, three of which are stop symbols,
TAG, TGA, TAA, and others code for distinct amino acids. When viruses exchanged DNA and when
If bacteria were exchanging DNA with each other, bacteria that did not have the same
The genetic code will become extinct because it will not be able to take advantage of the advanced proteins of
Other species that move to it. So the genetic code started out with variations, but then
These differences have been eliminated due to software compatibility, and because of this connection.
Do we know that? Yes. Do we know of any other competitors to ATCG? So it doesn't mean
That is because there are competitors for the four letters, but there are competitors for the translation table. Show
. And that gives us, you know, what does each amino acid symbolize? For example... wait, wait.
Just one moment, because this is very interesting. Because in English, we use the alphabet, while
Other languages ​​use alphabets, French, German, etc. Chinese uses a different alphabet, or Mandarin uses
Different alphabet. But let's stick to just what uses the alphabet. Okay. that
Different languages. So it sounds like you're saying that the basic letters are also common across species.
located on the ground. The language is the same too. So the answer is mostly yes. In other words,
When the SARS-CoV-2 virus arrives with COVID-19 and enters your cells,
The RNA of that virus is essentially compatible with the host's machinery. So the virus sheds part of
The code you will run. It's literally a virus. If I throw a PC virus at you on your Mac, you won't
It works. But if you take a virus from bacteria and drop it into humans, it will work.
Basically, this translation mechanism is the same. So bacteria exchange DNA with each other. So
For example, if you look at antibiotic resistance genes, you basically have genes that are passed on
From one bacterium to another. I basically say, Oh, I just discovered resistance.
Here's how I did it. And they're like, Oh, great symbol. I will use it. This symbol
Instantly compatible. So the translation just works. So, this translation table requires the presence of
A group of transfer ribonucleic acids (tRNAs). These are transformer molecules that basically take all three triplets and then
It has a dual-quality translation. On the one hand, it is specific to the three letters. On the other hand,
It is specific to the amino acid that binds that RNA. So this was assumed decades ago.
The discovery of tRNA actually, as Francis Crick said, whatever molecule it represents
The converter between DNA and protein must be RNA. Because RNA has a dual ability to
DNA binding by complementation and RNA binding. On the other hand, he has the ability
On protein binding based on three-dimensional structure. The only molecule that does this is basically RNA.
Because it has the ability to fold, the ability to sequence and the integration of sequence.
. So this translation table is based on the set of tRNAs that we have. Now, suppose one
The species has mutated one of its tRNA molecules and changed the A here to a T or to a U. It will not
This U now recognizes the complementary base. He will now recognize a different base. This basically means
That the genetic code itself has changed. Now, this species can go off and recode all of its DNA.
This is called a recode event, which basically says I'm now going to translate this message.
From RNA to a different protein sequence. There are examples of these recoding events. in
In my work, I encountered a type of candida that had recoded its DNA, perhaps to fight
Viruses that may attack it. oh well. Because I was about to say, it seems like it's
The harm is not to have the same thing, not to speak the same language. correct. It is inappropriate
If you want to exploit your environment. But if you are attacked by your environment,
By recoding your genetic code, you have a fundamental advantage that viruses can simply
Throw in a piece of software that your cells will run. Because this program will not have
Meaning in your cell environment. There must be some trade-off, otherwise there will be
More. Well, what is a trade-off? So, the trade-off is, of course, isolation. You are now
Alone. You're doing your own thing now. For example, if you look at mitochondria,
Mitochondria were engulfed very early in evolution. They were some early bacteria,
If you like. It was swallowed by another protokaryote, which essentially became a eukaryote,
Which now possesses an organelle that was initially a free-living organism and eventually gave it up.
Most of its genes, except for about 11 genes, which now encode the electron transport chain in
The heart of energy metabolism in every one of our cells. This submersion led to freezing.
Mitochondrial genome over time. So, the mitochondrial genome now has its own translation table. He has
Its own code, if you like. So, basically, the ability now to look back in time to the merger event that
It led to the emergence of the eukaryotic lineage of which we were a part. And there is of course
Another fusion with the chloroplasts that plants underwent now allows them to
By metabolizing energy from the sun. So, again, it's one of those things that was invented.
Once and for all, she is chosen. But instead of being selected as a piece of DNA, it was selected as an entire species.
It has become part of your essence. Now all eukaryotic species have mitochondria which
She is a descendant of this original swallowing encapsulation event. So, I want to go back to
This analogy is about language. Mathematics, as we can see, is the language of physics. Is it correct?
So is ATCG the language of biology? Or is it more correct to say that this table?
Is it the language of biology or something else? So, I want to make a distinction between different things here. So,
First and foremost, mathematics is what humans use to model physics. That's why we call it language.
Physics because it resembles what humans use to code. But the building blocks of physics
They are basically the elementary particles of the Standard Model. In the same way,
The building blocks of biology are ACGT and the twenty amino acids. So, these are the building blocks.
Now, how do they get put together? What are the rules governing this combination? Well, that's it.
Rules invented or developed in the case of biology. These are the rules that were established in
The beginning of the universe in physics. These are the building blocks and communication pattern.
Among them is that which leads to higher levels of abstraction. So, basically, you can think of
These building blocks are quarks, and the quarks then fit together to build photons.
Electrons, protons, neutrons, etc., etc. Basically, you have this layer of
Abstraction. You start from the basic particles and then build up groups.
We now call them atoms. right. Hence, these atoms are not indivisible as
The etymology of the word suggests this, but it's a kind of building block in another layer of abstraction. We may never know if
There was another layer below the quarks, but there might be. As you know, nothing.
There can't be one. Now, from those basic atoms, we have molecules. And then from
These particles, these are the building blocks that then form another layer of abstraction,
Although from individual atoms you can make almost any molecule, there are some
Molecules agreed upon as a standard for communication, namely amino acids.
These are nucleotides and so on. So, these are the building blocks of life, if you
Wish And they're, you know, maybe four or five layers of abstraction away from
The basic laws of physics. Okay. Now, do nucleotides care about quantum effects? Most often,
no. Most of the time, no. Most of the time, no. That's the beauty of these layers of abstraction.
You can abstract away. Abstraction means you separate it. You don't look at the details.
anymore So, right now, life is basically about ACGT. It doesn't matter, you know, that there is
Minor differences. So, basically, this variance at the lowest level is wrapped up.
In knowledge and reading machine which, for example, now reads these ACGTs and then does
Something about it. Wait, I'm confused about the exact difference in ATCG. Therefore,
For example, C is most often C, but it can also undergo methylation. For example,
You can add a CH3 group to C, which is now methyl C. Now,
Methyl C will, most often, be read as C. It is still bonded to G. It still contains the three hydrogen bonds. But on the side,
You know, it swells up a little bit. Now, there are some regulatory bodies that will recognize C,
Some regulatory bodies will recognize C-methyl, and some regulatory bodies will recognize either form.
No problem. Therefore, for those regulators that recognize either form, ACGT with methyl
C is still the same. But for those who recognize the methylated form, they will only associate that form.
Genomics has found a way to use methyl C as a repressive mark that will essentially shut down
Some DNA regions will now be bound by repressive regulators when they see methyl.
C will not be bound to steroids because the methyl C will no longer be recognized.
So, this is kind of a modification. So, there is some kind of adjustment. You can have other types of
Modifications that are well defined chemically, but can also have a curvature,
For example, the properties of DNA itself. Then a specific regulator may bind the DNA.
Compact versus more flexible DNA. And so on. And this
Additional subtle properties are not fully captured in the ACGT digital abstraction. But rarely
What do you break through these levels of abstraction to start worrying about, I don't know,
Quantitative effects at the amino acid level. Does this make sense? Yes. So, the analogy would be that
This has a certain line. I'm sure I can still read it. Often times, you don't notice the line.
You don't notice the font change. So, if this C is written in cursive, I will read it.
In the same way. I didn't even notice it most of the time. And sometimes it can get so parkinson that it might
It makes me pause and have to reread. Or maybe I'll skip the word because this
It rarely happens. But imagine it caused me some error where I had to skip the word. exactly.
exactly. It's exactly the same way. So, basically, the genome has a setting like italics or bold or
Underlining that can give slightly different meanings to different words
Sometimes it can be stopped completely. For example, it has a line through it. This is a font modification,
If you want, which basically skips a word. Basically, say, oh, you know,
I shouldn't be reading this. Or brackets or a dash at the end of the sentence and so on. So,
Basically, all of these things are images of the language we've developed. But biology
It did that a few billion years before us. Are there any other modifications such as
Bioelectric fields or something else above... swaying on CTAG? So, DNA doesn't swim.
Naked inside our cells. They are packaged into nucleosomes. Nucleosomes consist of
Eight histone proteins. Most often, H2A has two copies, H2B has two copies, H3 has two copies, H4
Two copies. There are about one hundred and fifty nucleotides wrapped around each one.
Of these nucleosomes. Now, this same package can basically be subjected to acetylation or
Methyl or ubiquitous or, you know... ubiquitous? Yes. What is this? that it
Basically adding different types of modifications, adding additional chemical modifications to
Histone proteins that hold DNA together when it is packaged. Now, the number of acetyl groups,
For example, what you have can affect the integrity of your DNA. If you add more acetyl groups,
It becomes more flexible. If you remove it, it becomes tighter. This has physical properties,
And not just separate quantitative properties, in the interpretation of DNA itself. So
The beauty of the ACGT digital code is that it is passed down from generation to generation.
Generation without change. In other words, after a thousand generations, it does not mean that the letter A has now spread in
A shape, as you know, is barely legible from the shape A. Each generation is repeated as the letter A. And if
A mistake was made, like the letter T, now then it will be, you know, the new normal. It will not be
Somewhere between A and T. So, basically, this aspect of inheritance.
Completely separate. But then there's the explanation, the use of DNA, which is in our somatic cells,
For example, it gives rise to brains, and you know, hands, and you know, eyes, and senses,
etc., etc. This explanation is, by reading DNA, making something out of it,
In the same way that you were describing reading a piece of paper, this interpretation is where
These signs are more active. Can you talk about whether there is a match here between syntax and semantics?
? Or if that takes us out of the field, we can go back to perception and artificial intelligence.
So, you can think of the syntax as simply the fact that every gene starts with ATG, and ends with
With one of the three stop codons. So, that's the syntax. You can also think of syntax as linking.
, where a single protein is made up of multiple pieces of RNA, which are then joined together.
together. They are copied as one, but then linked together in a process known as
Binding, which basically follows, again, very strict rules about, you know,
The donor and receiver sides that bring them together. So, that's all the syntax. Now, semantics,
Oh my god, where do I begin? It's so beautiful. There are layers and layers and layers, again, of
Semantics is, basically, the way that meaning comes out of DNA. So, let's distinguish between two categories of
Jobs. One is protein coding, the other is regulatory coding.
And control all proteins. So, 1.5% of the human genome codes for protein. 1.5%
A small percentage. 98.5% do not code for proteins. Somewhere in that 98.5 is a bunch of garbage,
A set of spacers, a set of repeating elements that reproduce themselves,
and a set of control regions that control where proteins will bind to turn on other genes,
Where the silencers will bind, how the DNA structure is organized, and where the nucleosomes are positioned,
And how to shift them when running the copy, and all sorts of other things. So,
The regulation and control of DNA accounts for 98%, and proteins for 1.5%. Let's talk
About 1.5% first. So, the way this meaning arises is when the code, ACGT, is translated,
To amino acids, and those amino acids are formed. They fold in on themselves. now,
We only have four nucleotides, but we have 20 amino acids. The twenty amino acids have side chains.
Very different properties. Some are small, some are big. Some will be linked to each other. Some will react
Basically loosely with each other. They call them side chains? Side chains. So, basically,
There's the backbone, the backbone of amino acids, and then there are the side chains, which, you know,
One of 20 options. So, for example, tryptophan or methionine, you name it. So, this is basically
Side chains. These are different amino acids. So, the alphabet of 20 amino acids is basically what
Allows you to have a variety of functions. So, we have four letters, which result in the appearance of
An alphabet of 20 protein backbones? Yes, 20 building blocks of protein. What is the spine?
The backbone is simply the phosphate backbone of DNA, which is the amino acid backbone of proteins.
. But, basically, the code is not in the backbone. The code is in the rules, in case
DNA, in amino acids, in residues, in the case of proteins. Okay? And now where?
Meaning arises? Meaning arises in the folds that the protein makes. So, basically, a bunch of
Amino acids, as you know, a chain of amino acids, will basically fold in three dimensions. That fold
It will determine its structure, and its structure will determine its function. So, now, the meaning arises,
Connotations, from that fold. And if you want something that will, for example, bind sugar,
Glucose binding, there is a fold for glucose binding. If you want to transport cholesterol,
There is a fold for cholesterol transport. Can you make a different fold? The answer is yes.
Evolution has done it. Can you modify the fold while maintaining the
Cholesterol transport capacity? Yes, of course. Evolution has done that too. So, basically, you now have
The function coded in integral form, if you like, with everything
Another one you interact with. And you can think about evolution, you can think about all this patchwork,
This adjustment that evolution makes, as essentially an exploration of the landscape of forms, if you
You want to. This landscape of forms will sometimes maintain function, and sometimes disrupt it.
The job, and sometimes improves the job. Now, any change in the code that led to this change in
The form and function of this change will be determined for or against. That's why it's so beautiful,
Because you basically have this extraordinary combination of all the rules of physics,
And all the rules of chemistry, and all the rules of nature, gravity, light and darkness.
And temperature, as you know, the Waals forces and the quantum effects that
It is constantly undergoing this patchwork across thousands of interacting parts all the time. Well, I guess that
This will beautifully lead us to cognition and artificial intelligence. Therefore, it is usually considered
Syntax in logic is seen as grammar, and hence semantics is usually seen as meaning, in quotation marks. now,
Here, when people hear that, they say, what does it mean to take CTAGs then?
Translate it into proteins? What's the point? So, why don't you talk about it?
Meaning, and how it relates to meaning, and thus leads us to perception.
So, how do we understand all these different layers now? So, we talked about
The protein side of things is where the structures take on meaning when you start going up the chain of nucleotides.
From amino acids to folds to structures and finally sorting through all the interactions. on
The uncoded side of things, meaning arises from surfaces, landing sites, if you will,
Each piece of DNA code provides the corresponding proteins. So, DNA is a double helix.
The bases, A, C, G, T, are basically stacked in pairs, A, T, C, G, G, C, G, A, sorry, not G, A,
But C, G, and so on. Back These rules form the heart of peace. Now, when the protein binds
This ladder, it is connected from the outside. It bonds the atoms facing outwards. permission,
The backbone of DNA? No, because the backbone does not have sequence specificity. vertebral column
DNA is just a backbone of phosphates, and they all look like phosphates. So, transcription factors,
And the organizers, they have an affinity for the spine just to recognize that there is DNA there, but then
The convergence that leads to sequential pattern recognition comes from feeling aspects of
Rules. So, basically, there's, let's say, there's an iron ladder, and the rules themselves.
Made of wood. It is the wood that is recognized. It varies
Shape of different stacked base pairs. If I have an A, C, sorry, if I have an A, T, or a G, C, you know,
The sequence it comes from gives me specific atoms that will then be recognized by
A specific protein. Okay? So, now, when we think about ACGT in DNA, it's associated with specific regulators which
This will then lead to a meaning based on the set of organizations associated with a particular area.
So, basically, if there are three different organizations, let's call them proteins, I don't know, John,
Jack and Jill, okay? So, if John, Jack, and Jill link a certain region of DNA, then
That area will take on a new meaning because these proteins are linked. And then the translation
Among the identified binding sites, motifs, and sequence patterns, a set
Associated proteins, which is where the meaning comes in, if you will. Hence, some
It will affect the way DNA folds, by thousands of bases, sometimes millions of bases,
letters, and this will essentially lead to the emergence of an organizational meaning for genes. Okay? Now, if we think
Like computer scientists, how can we make sense of all this? Where does meaning come from for us?
Next, we were talking earlier about how mathematics is what we use to understand physics. What we use
To understand this giant and advanced result? We need a way to discover patterns in
It has been developed. We need a way to discover not ten, twenty, or a thousand rules, but billions.
The rules that make biology work. And in those billions of integrals of identical shapes,
etc., we can find some common recurring patterns, some design principles,
If you like. Now these design principles are not unlike some of the design principles that
We humans have come up with it, whether in our society or in our AI systems, as well as
In our perception that evolved from the same thing. ACGT graft. Maybe it is
The most beautiful relationship in the universe is the relationship between reality
DNA, which has its own language and code, has evolved a structure that has its own language.
And its own code that is now a learning construct that can adapt to learn almost any language and code.
And with this language and code, we develop programming languages ​​and human languages. And with this
Languages, we wrote structures that now lead to the emergence of artificial intelligence systems, which can now
Developing her own learning, symbols, and patterns about the natural world. So these patterns around
Patterns and this translation across all these different languages,
In the beginning, as you know, of atoms, quarks, and molecules, and in the end
ACGT stripping layer, 20 amino acid stripping layer, and fold stripping layer
And proteins. And finally, the abstraction layer, I'm going to build now.
An educational system that develops neurons and obtains projections through them and synapses.
Now able to sense sensory signals, store them as memories, and build inferences in
Patterns of thinking and starting to think in logic. And now that has become a language.
perception. And that language of perception, which initially existed only for understanding,
Our senses, finding food, reproducing, caring for young, and forming
New generations, building shelter, and so on and so forth, and eventually human language evolved. And this
Human language now has its own structures from the simplest languages ​​to the most elaborate grammars.
Sentence structure, meaning and connotations. Including the language of mathematics, which
We humans have developed ways to represent the world around us, to represent shapes and geometry, and to represent
Abstract patterns, representation of physics, etc. etc. Including:
The ability to master electricity, the ability now to make transistors, the ability to
Building fairly modern computers. From this, we build the programming languages ​​we use today.
Which in itself contains layers of abstraction starting with the zeros and ones of electric fields,
To assembly code, to interpreted code, to the increasingly abstract languages ​​we have.
Today, you will then be able to actually talk to an AI translator who will then write the code.
You then encode a whole other set, starting from the inferences of individual neurons.
In the neural network, then the transformer architectures and the ability to kind of now rewire
Edges of interest. Hence, understanding the world around us. I mean this is like
The most beautiful story of abstraction, languages, translation and a kind of construction
The whole civilization is layered and layered, as you know, from its basic principle. When we first spoke
A few days ago, we bonded over how most people have a lack of language, they abbreviate it,
And they say something that disguises language, like, Oh, language is fair, I have some
The perfect qualities in me or some meaning within me, some intention, and all I have to do is convey it to you, and not
I can never do that accurately, so language is a low-resolution communication, and all you get is
Broken phone. And if we could communicate more precisely, we'd have less, well,
There will be fewer misunderstandings and everything will be much better. Oh, isn't language just
Bad tool, something like that. This is what many people think. I wrote this article about my views on
Language, where I claim something similar to the opposite, that language is not just
A process of transfer, but also a process of creation and excavation. And then you had your own views.
About the language. Please tell us what language it is and how you see its place. So I sympathize with both.
My point of view. On the one hand, language is the thing into which we have to convert our thoughts. Therefore,
It is a low-resolution interpretation of what we think, which is sometimes abstract.
At other times, language becomes a tool for formulation, giving us primitives.
With which we can begin to interpret the world. Language gives you primitives. Language gives you
Primitives that you can build layers of abstraction on top of. in other words,
I could be the most intelligent being on this planet. So imagine the most intelligent beings on earth.
This planet, like this random human being born in the middle of the Amazon jungle.
They have extraordinary perception. Will they be able to formulate the laws of physics based on this?
From nothing without language? I think language gives us starting points from which we can
Understand more and more complex concepts. Then, take these concepts.
Life takes on a new meaning by forgetting the basics at some point.
We kind of started with it. Now you can start detailing more and more abstract types of operations. permission
As you know, we're learning aces with my kids now. And I explained to them
The base is the repeated multiplication. Multiplication is repeated addition. delusion
They ask, well, is there anything more complicated than multiplication? I, of course, calibrate.
It is the recurring exponential. They're like, is there anything simpler than addition? Yes,
The addition is then repeated. So, basically, you know, the next job. So 8 plus 13 is
Simply apply the subsequent function 13 times. So, this layer of complexity
With which you can build more complex processes from simpler ones, calibration will have no meaning if
They did not understand the addition process. So, in the same way with language, we can build
More complex functions than these more detailed elements. But there is also beauty in
Misunderstanding communication too. So, by misunderstanding each other, we create
New meanings may be more interesting than the ones I had in my thoughts. This
It happens twice. This happens when I try to take my abstract thoughts and formulate them.
In language. This happens when you take this formulated language and summarize it again.
In your brain So there are two levels of misunderstanding. There's how I misspoke.
And how you misunderstood what I said. Both are part of the creative process. And as
You know, when I meet with my students, I say to them, please write down your questions.
. As before our meeting, we have very short meetings, just before our meeting,
We write down all your questions, we put all the slides there with the illustrations, with the explanations,
With full sentence explanations of what you see. Because doing so
It often makes you think about the problem you are facing much more deeply. And sometimes
You will solve it once you formulate it. There is a programming principle that basically says that
One tool programmers can use is the rubber duck. The rubber ducky is exactly that. that it
Just a rubber duck, nothing smart about it. But by explaining the problem you are facing
For a rubber duck, you craft it, and sometimes you solve it. And sometimes I use
ChatGPT as a rubber duck. I'm basically saying, oh, listen, I have to create
Presentation and I want to start with this and I want to kind of continue with that. I want to
I go through the ideas of this and this and this and that, and then, you know, connect them in this way and
that way. It's not a rubber duck. She's smarter than a rubber duck. But it is
It still does its job of collecting my thoughts and embodying them in language.
Sometimes the output is just junk. But what I wrote actually had merit.
Forced to formulate my thoughts, you know, one by one. So, in some ways, ChatGPT is for me.
The best tool to combat procrastination because I can basically ask someone to do things.
that I wanted to do. But I can ask so precisely that I basically do it. Right, right. So this is it
One of the advantages of writing books. For more technical people, you might think,
Well, why don't you write another textbook? Why do you write for a popular audience? and people
Interviewees like Chiara Marletto from Constructor Theory, Roger Penrose, etc.,
Although they write to a popular audience, they say they understand even their most ardent thoughts.
More precisely because they had to reframe them from another perspective.
It is not always necessary to simplify to the common denominator. It's just a process.
Formulate it. I was invited to give a talk at TEDx in 2008. I was given a list of words that
I can't use it. And those were basically all the words I needed to explain what I do.
attic. So it was a clear no-no with science. But now thinking about what is
The broader principle by which I can explain what I do to a much wider audience. gesticulate
I tell my students every time to write their computational biology results as if they were
You're talking to the smartest physicist on the planet. Anyone who is very intelligent. but
Not in your field. But not in your field. right. Interesting. I say suppose infinite intelligence,
Zero knowledge. This combination is what we aim for. In other words,
Give everything for people to understand what you are saying without using jargon. I think
The beauty of these democracy books, these publishing books, these books that reach...
A wider audience, it now forces us to start thinking about how
Interpretation of other areas of what we say. And this is not, you know, it's not like, oh, she says.
To me when I was five years old, but basically, you know, she tells me like I'm a Nobel Prize winner in economics.
right. So, it's a whole different kind of vulgarity, if you like. I love it.
So I like this as an alternative to slang, explain it like you're five years old.
And then some people like to say, well, if you can't explain it like you're explaining it to a 12-year-old,
He is five years old, you should not understand him. But what they secretly mean is
I don't understand that. I feel bad. So I would say you must have some misunderstanding.
If I can't understand it. So I'm a researcher, and that takes up the vast majority of my time. But I
Also a teacher. So I'm constantly teaching. The beauty of modern academia is that there is
Coexistence between the two. Why is this so beautiful? And that's nice because I
Constantly forced to go back to basic principles. I am constantly forced to return to the following question: Why does it seem?
Does this make any sense at all? Or if I am an outsider, how will I understand this field? This
First, it forces me to re-understand all the fundamentals I may have learned 20 years ago.
Update my knowledge of the broad field beyond just the depth of my own research each year to re
Giving the same lectures, but now with all the new developments. And understand everything
The gaps in my explanations that will allow a newcomer to this field to enter it. I think
This leads to the advancement of my own research. I've talked to a lot of researchers who said, Oh, I want to
I would like to be in a research lab, not in academia, because I hate teaching. I think teaching is part of
The deal. Teaching is part of a genre that forces you to reach a wider audience,
And welcoming a new person. Of course, it works both ways. These people are coming now
With their own baggage, their own ideas, their own ways of thinking that bring fresh winds and clean air
New blood and new thinking in your current fields. So I think this post is part of
Which makes academia very creative and successful. The fact that we teach, I do.
I teach Introduction to Machine Learning, I teach Introduction to Algorithms, I teach Genetics or
Personal genomics or as you know, drug development. And by forcing myself to not only be aware
In all of these areas, but also deeply knowledgeable in all of these areas in my teaching of others, I am
Now I'm creating new representations in my mind of how I want to publish this. And
In doing so, I understand it in fundamentally new ways. Because every teacher
He is constantly looking for new abstractions, and new ways to pass that knowledge on to the next newcomer.
This is part of making this understanding much deeper. So it's not that you don't
Understand that. The teaching process forces you to understand it at a level beyond what you need.
To him to deal with. And I think that all of this, if I teach it, I understand it more deeply,
Which is very essential. Now, when students ask a question in class,
These questions sometimes show a complete lack of understanding. Those are the most powerful questions. Because if
They were misunderstanding, there were probably about 20 other people who were misunderstanding.
And that basically says, no, no, the way I'm interpreting this question is completely my fault. Oh,
I understand why you don't understand. The beautiful thing is that I don't imagine
These students are the smartest people in the world. No, they are. The beauty of teaching at MIT
And in this kind of organization, these are some of the smartest people on the planet.
If they misunderstand what I say, it's mainly on me. Basically,
There's something I always put myself in their eyes to try to see what I said which was
mysterious, which they would have interpreted to mean going down this other path. That's why I say
These questions are the most beautiful, because they teach me the limits of my speech.
Kind of, oh, wow, you know, I can go back, you know, three or four sentences. I think that
This whole thing can be interpreted in a different way. Now let me adjust the course.
To correct this misunderstanding. The thing you said that was very interesting is that
There are two levels of misunderstanding. Some of you make mistakes in speech and others of you make mistakes in speech
Misunderstanding, misconception, or what have you. Then I said there was something creative about it.
that. Yes. Okay. I have not heard what is creative in that. So explain. Yes. Yes. Beautiful. So
We have research meetings with my students all the time. This room is full of people and we are all
We exchange ideas. The student will start saying something. And when they start to say something,
We all think we're taking the same concepts and spinning them.
In our heads. I will begin to understand the beginning of their sentence. I will speak
About what they might say. Sometimes I'm so impressed
What I say. All our meetings are continuously recorded. So I don't feel bad when I say,
Okay, okay. I didn't hear exactly what you said, but that's what I think you said, you know,
Based on the first few things I've heard. Now I'm walking one way. This is part of
The creative process because I'm constantly trying to put together a mental model of their idea as they formulate it.
. And sometimes that beginning will now take me down a different path. This path may be
Also interesting. Show. And sometimes more interesting. Show. So imagine two people
They're playing tennis, which is what we think the conversation is supposed to be about. But sometimes
You can hit the ball instead of hitting it towards the person over there in an interesting part
From the forest. Now you have to go get the ball. You would never have gotten there if you were
You share them with each other. That's absolutely true. That's absolutely true. Now let me talk
From a different side. So this was on the receiving end. So I started hearing what you're up to.
I say as I walk in one direction with my mind. Then I said, Oh, that was really interesting,
But that's not where I went. Let me show you that part of the forest. Then let's go back.
Now I want to see your part of the forest. Now that's one way. And the other in
My own formulation of my thoughts. I have this giant headset that I wear all the time when I'm thinking.
. And I basically say, okay, give me about 10 seconds. And I like thinking there. And in many
Sometimes I realize I'm moving my hand and I'm kind of, you know, taking different parts and doing
Putting it together. And what I do there is I just take ideas and expand them.
. And almost every idea lives somewhere in that hyperspace. What I do there is that I
I'm trying, without language, I'm quite sure without language, I'm trying to take this
The variables and somehow align them, organize them, think about them, and find patterns between them,
etc. And by forcing myself to put it into words, there's a tremendous amount of pressure.
Which should happen from this kind of high dimensional space. In this pressure,
Sometimes I create one thing, sometimes I create another, and sometimes I create
Something else. So these are basically projections of the higher dimensional world of ideas.
Which each one of us possesses. By making these projections, I will change or alter a little.
That initial idea because projection doesn't work that way. And I basically say, well,
Now let me repeat what I just said, but in a slightly different way. Or let me now think about
It's from a different angle. Or I say, well, I have three ideas, but they all live together.
Let me kind of try to get them out. So there is an error that occurs from this high dimension.
For the spoken word. This reduction in language is part of changing ideas. Hence,
Re-expanding that to your higher dimensional perspective might take us to a different representation.
etc. etc. Anyway, I think this is part of the creative process. So
Professor, I want to know if you have a biological theory of everything that also includes perception.
And artificial intelligence, if it has a name. So we started with these building blocks of quarks to atoms,
To the building blocks of physics, to chemistry, and ultimately DNA, amino acids, biology, and life.
What is exceptional about this progress is that life itself is now self-replicating.
Why is this so exciting? Because then the evolution process begins and you can
Now messing around. You can now play numbers. You can basically create a billion copies of
Your living being and start patching, and the fittest will always be there.
Evolutionary field. At first, these organisms simply consume energy, producing more of themselves.
And multiply. But to get fitter than their competitors, they need to start chasing chemicals,
Knowing where the highest concentration of sugar is, also known as chemotaxis. They are able to
Align themselves with chemical gradients. That's the beginning of sensing. And the sensing can be super
Simplicity. Basically, all you have to do is get more of your cells to move in the direction of
High concentration of sugar. At some point, you have to start sensing the light.
To start, know which way is up, which way is down, which way is warm, which way is cold. And it becomes
Chemotaxis is a bit more complicated. Can you spell that? Chemotherapy for chemicals,
And taxes for harmonization, such as classification. Show. So you're biased towards the chemical. So this chemical attraction
Now you can start sensing your environment. At first, you feel the chemicals, you can
You can feel heat, you can feel pressure, you can feel light, you can feel sound at the end. And you can
Now you start saying, okay, I have multiple streams of information. Which one should
Believe it? Which one should I believe? Which of the different information streams should the cell believe?
? So I understand which one I should do since I have a lot, but what do you mean?
Which one should I believe? We have conflicting information coming to us all the time. Our brain
It constantly takes multiple hypotheses and selects the one that is most consistent with
The vast majority of sources, for example, or with the most reliable ones. When you look at
Optical illusions: Your eye keeps choosing between different representations of reality. So, what is it?
I have to think it basically means that there will be conflicting information at times. I am searching
About most of the food. Should I turn towards the light? Should I go a little bit more gradual this way?
Could it take me away from the real source of food? Mosquitoes floating around us,
It mainly senses carbon dioxide gradients. They are looking for the light. They are looking for heat. This still feels like,
Which one should I do? What actions should I take? First you build a model of the world,
From this model of the world, you need to move towards the source according to that model. Good,
So belief is to instantiate the model? correct. Show. correct. And then act on it.
This form. That's exactly it. I get it. Yes. So the concept of multiple streams of information,
If they all agree, there's no problem. Then I have different organizational processes.
Basically respond to this, respond to that, respond to this. So, first of all,
If you think about life developing new senses, if you will, then there begin to be triggers based on
Those senses in moving in the direction that those senses tell you, you now have five
Different senses all pulling in the same direction no problem you can basically create
Independent response streams to which the cell responds all at once. But sometimes
It will be conflicting. Maybe the chemical information pulls me in this direction,
Light information might pull me this way, and thermal information a third way. Should I reply?
Three? So this is the point in development where perception arises.
The concept of the central nervous system. I understand that I can integrate that information.
To build a model of the world and then act on a single decision of that model of the world. Do
Does this make sense? to some extent. So what you're saying seems to be that we have touch, we have sensation,
We have hunger, we have temperature sensors, we have interception, what have you. Okay. We want to
We take all of that and then decide what the world is like, and what the world is like is the same.
The model, which if I understand it correctly is the same as the belief. And on this basis you act
. But what I want to know is, can people act against their beliefs? Because it looks like
There is a one-to-one correspondence between, not one-to-one, but the model leads to an action. but
It's not like you're developing a model and it says you have to take this action so you can do
By another procedure. If you're going to do another action, that to me means you have a different model.
So I'm actually getting there slowly. I'm building layers and I'm almost there. I think
Many of your conflicts will be resolved once you get through it. Okay, but so far, do you?
I follow approximately? You are, but you are two steps ahead. I'll break it down into:
Much simpler. So we might be linking all this back and forth for a while and let me explain why.
So going back to what I was saying, I now have multiple streams of information and I can get
Decentralized control interacts with each of these information flows. But I still have
One goal. My goal is to get more sugar. I have chemical sensors, I have optical sensors,
And I have temperature sensors, and all these things. I'm trying to make a simple decision for a simple goal.
It is more sugar. So I'm still a bacterium, and now I'm integrating information. And now this is it
The place where perception begins. The realization begins with the existence of a kind of integration between
Multiple information streams to make a decision based on that. This joint decision
With one fairly simple goal. You're just trying to say which of these pieces of evidence I think it is.
It will go in this direction. Now with the central nervous system, the type of integration has become
More complex because now you have multiple senses, you have multiple lines of evidence, you have
A much more complex model of the world. This model of the world does not deal with
It doesn't just target one goal, it handles multiple goals at the same time. I am thirsty. I am hungry. I was late for class. I
Cold I forgot my jacket. All kinds of things. So I make a decision based on multiple streams.
From information, based on multiple and sometimes conflicting objectives, based on local tactics, based on
On global strategies, short-term, long-term, etc. In my opinion, this is one of the
The most beautiful transformations in this, you know, history that I draw about immersion in complexity.
The concept of the emergence of perception, the emergence of integration. Now you can think about
Life on this planet as having these very simple rules, simple goals, reproduction,
Nutrition, shelter, etc. But it all comes down to reproduction. Specifically, if
If the species was able to make more of itself, it would survive. Evolution doesn't care if this species
Beautiful, smart, and kind of useful. No, nothing matters. The only thing that matters,
Will there be more of this? Okay. Now you can start thinking about why one species,
For example, develops a central nervous system? The answer is, because it gets better.
For example, in reproduction, or improves in survival. Or it is better to stay. So all of these things
It boils down to, can I better interpret the world around me, make better decisions,
And finally reach my goal of creating more of myself. where things get
Even stranger are humans. Because almost all other species, you can interpret their behaviors as
Pure natural selection. You can explain that, you know, dogs are basically nice to humans.
We will raise it more. As you know, plants are kind to animals and they will eat more of them.
They will eat their fruit and excrete their seeds, you know, to spread the plant. So almost everything
In evolution, you can interpret it as some kind of symbiotic relationship or some kind of, you know,
I fit in my evolutionary position, and I provide a service to those who will help me.
Reproduction. Okay. Humans are a bit strange, because we've basically overcome natural selection.
We have overcome the burden of childbearing and shelter. In some ways, you could say we are
We have stopped evolving, at least in the genetic sense, as humans are basically no longer about
Being the strongest, being the smartest, being the fittest, or whatever you call it. He - She.
At present, humanity has taken a new path. This path is not a path
Genetic evolution, perhaps even a path of cultural evolution. This is what I call horizontal development, instead.
From vertical development. So vertical evolution passes on your genes. And with humans,
Vertical development also included taking your knowledge back to your village. Every village had
Its vertical proportion of knowledge. At some point, the culture began to spread.
Horizontally. A great idea in Mesopotamia will spread throughout the world. The great idea
In China it will spread, you know, maybe separated by the Himalayas, or, you know,
It will spread in all kinds of cultural ways. Part of what led to the acceleration of civilization
It is the fact that we are the only ones in the world. The trade routes of being able to take silk are kind of
Trading it for glass, or whatever you want to call it, basically means that you are now exchanging
Information a lot, and much more. Thus, a new idea will be adopted and spread more quickly.
So, I see the reason this is called horizontal is because there is
Horizontal gene transfer with bacteria. So this is like horizontal meme transfer with people? That's absolutely true.
That's absolutely true. So bacteria are able to spread their genes in this way. This is it
Horizontal gene transfer. This basically means that I have found a solution to antibiotic resistance. I will
By dissipating it in the environment. Those genes that are randomly scattered can be any of the following:
These genes. But if the genes that are randomly mutating are antibiotic resistance genes,
Those bacteria will be selected and will continue to multiply and so on.
. So, basically, again, you know, it's not teleological. It does not depend on
goal. It's simply built for survival. But with humans it's different. For humans,
There's this new layer of development, which is about cognitive development, cultural development,
Evolve ideas, evolve memes, if you will. Now those memes live on in different fields. And this
The same fields attract different people. There is this co-evolution of people.
And specializations. There is the evolution of ideas, and there is the evolution of genes that
I'm kind of starting to blend in in some ways. And the really exciting part about all of this is that we're doing
Now by creating communities where we take care of each other. And since, as you know, if you don't have
Good eyesight, no problem, we will help you. If you have trouble running,
No problem, you won't need to chase your food. If you have a problem, you know,
For anything, we are here to help. So we as a community are here to help. The beautiful thing about
That is, you can now allow humans to excel in thousands of different directions. Basically,
You can have someone who is exceptional at physics, but they can't cook their own meal.
No problem. In today's society, we are constantly trying to force everyone to learn.
mathematics. Why? Why? We don't need everyone to learn math. We force everyone to exercise. Why?
Not everyone needs to exercise. I think it's okay to specialize. This is what made our society
He works. The idea that each of us has to be good at everything is ridiculous.
I think it's okay to allow humans to specialize. Now in the field of science, does that mean you should stop?
Looking at things outside your field? No, no, not at all. Because being better at
Understanding physics can give you new ideas in biology, and vice versa, or artificial intelligence in physics,
We can talk about the Nobel Prize soon. So the advantage of being a professor in
Department of Artificial Intelligence, while working in biology, while interacting with
Students from physics and all these different disciplines, is that we always have
This hybridization of ideas, rather than through doing specialization primarily in this way,
You're basically bringing all these different ways of thinking together. I think that
The next generation of science comes from taking all these different disciplines and making people
They cooperate together. Well, so don't throw away majors, but even advance in your major.
, but more cross-pollination. That's absolutely true. That's absolutely true. no
I want all multidisciplinary scientists to come to my lab only. No, I want the world of pure physics,
I want a pure mathematician, I want a pure biologist, I want a pure chemist,
I want pure experimentation, all working together under one roof. Because diversity is
The power of humanity. Diversity is the power, you know, to move things forward in many
Solutions. So, you know, that's part of the beauty of it all. Now if you ask me,
What is that unified theory, if you will? So now we have, you know, the spread of ideas. We have
You know, the layers I mentioned earlier to build all these different components.
To create these artificial systems capable of performing perception. What is it
Your unified view of biology, cognition, and artificial intelligence? So, behind these three elements lies this.
The basic concept of appropriate jobs. So, if you look at the genome, you'll basically find millions of
Gene regulatory structures, which will fundamentally govern regulatory networks,
And the circles of those genomes. By adjusting these networks, you can adapt to
Different types of environments and different specializations. This is basically a job fit process.
. This fine-tunes your gene regulatory circuits to whatever evolutionary niche they occupy.
currently. So patchwork is the basis of the genome, it is the basis of
Gene regulation, the basis of evolution. Evolution doesn't work with giant knobs, you know,
You turn it one way or the other. Evolution works through the ability to manipulate.
With precise functions. This patchwork is what I call scalability. In other words, you get the good.
In evolution, you become good at adapting. This scalability, in my opinion,
It took me a long time to get there. In other words, if you look at the history of life on this planet,
You will find that the emergence of multicellular life took a billion years. Then you expect that with
Genetic algorithms, the increasing complexity will require more time. But in fact we see
Quite the opposite. After you have multicellularity, you begin to see very complex body plans.
Very quickly. And after you get those things, you start to see an increase in awareness.
Very quickly. Essentially, the human brain evolved in the blink of an eye in evolutionary terms. this
The expansion of the neocortex is something that has happened faster than anything else.
In development almost. This, in my opinion, reflects the ability to evolve. It reflects that we have become better.
In modules, we got better at hierarchical organization, we got better at all of these.
Different things. So, when you start increasing that complexity, you see an acceleration, not
slowing down This is mind-boggling. And again, this kind of teaches us how powerful this patchwork is.
. This is in the field of gene regulation. But evolution manipulates gene regulation. So,
Somehow, it seems that this ability to adapt to these thousands of small factors is
An emergent property, and perhaps even a fundamental necessity for both evolution and gene regulation. And if
You start looking at the shapes of proteins, and you find exactly the same thing. If you try to match
A specific function, you manipulate these 20 amino acids as your building blocks,
But then you have thousands of copies of it and you're constantly adapting. So, the same
The principle of this patching applies to protein structure. This applies to the chemical composition.
With the same kind of patching of individual atoms. This also applies to artificial intelligence. This also applies to perception.
how? If you look at our neurons, we basically have a very simple developmental program.
It leads to the emergence of our entire brain. Basically, it simply says, just create these layers of these.
Neurons. As the layers build, neurons essentially specialize. They communicate
With each other. They have some sort of intra-class connection.
And communication across layers. You basically have the same signal that forms the connections. You basically have
Synapses are strengthened or weakened based on the signals they receive and feedback.
that you receive. So it's an adaptive neural network based on the information it processes.
. As children grow up in more complex environments,
Their brains actually adapt to these environments during their early years. Even during pregnancy, the signs that
You are exposed to it and it changes your neural processes. Why is it difficult to learn?
Language after 12 years old? Because many of your neural connections have now been repaired.
They have been trimmed. The sounds you could hear as a child have now been removed, because you
Don't respond to those voices. Same thing with smell, same thing with all kinds of aspects of our adaptation.
With different types of environments. So, again, the neurological aspect is very much about
With these thousands of teachers, millions of teachers, billions of teachers
Which are constantly being adjusted to suit any job. In terms of artificial intelligence, it's exactly the same thing. Modern artificial intelligence
Like all this representational learning, all this generative AI, it's built on
Same basic principle that I start with thousands of parameters and I
They are built somewhat to fit the functions. And in all these different layers, you have one property.
Unite them all, if you will, and that property is the property of abstraction. that it
The property of being able to build building blocks that will then build
The next layer on it. If you look at human language, the same concept applies. You can basically take a word,
It is a compound word, for example, atom. It means uncut tome, like tomography in Greek,
It means cut. Corn means uncuttable. But now you have the concept of an atom that you can
Build on it and you can build layers and layers of understanding in this part. So,
It's always fine-tuning the functions, these building blocks, these abstraction layers that
You can always regroup concepts and then build on them. In biology now, you have
For example, the protein domain you created. You have folds. It will be
Reuse this fold, reuse it, reuse it, and then combine it with other folds to form
A rather new primitive. And this new primitive will now, as you know, be replicated in different places.
And reuse it. Not only do you have vertical evolution of a variant gene, but you also have duplicates.
Of these genes you now have two copies that you can continue to modify. So, I think that
The beauty of creating building blocks in layers of abstraction is what makes a language work. This
What makes evolution work. This is what makes gene regulation work. This is what makes minds work. This
What makes AI work? Therefore, modern AI is very different from classical AI. So, classical AI was
First of all it is about rule based systems. And then neural networks were invented, you know, like
Mammalian brains. In fact, they studied how our brains fit together.
Jobs and they said, well, great, let's do this kind of job-friendly process. Therefore,
Classical AI was about designing systems that appeared intelligent. It was all about the type.
From building expert systems where the expert brings all the knowledge,
And all the rules, all the decision, and we'll simply build the sensory part where
Artificial intelligence will monitor what is happening in the world and then make pre-determined decisions, where
The flowchart has already been defined by a human expert. Like if-then statements. this
Absolutely right. The advance of neural networks is that you can suddenly start modeling the world using this
Type of patchwork. It is designed very closely after the human brain. And then the goal was to be able to
To approximate functions, we are able to update these thousands of parameters through
Multiple layers of these systems, which can then build overlapping functions, functions
Reuse other functions. But that's only taken us so far. Modern artificial intelligence and modern generative artificial intelligence,
In my view, they started with the image and the vision, where the concept of twist was developed. And
In my view, the concept of warping is this dramatic shift to a new kind of artificial intelligence. This
Transformation is about building representations. The concept of not allowing each neuron
Isolated from others by recognizing a different part of the image. But instead, you learn these.
Convolutional filters, these are operations that you can then apply to each part of the image. One moment
. So are you saying that the twist means there is no neuron for the grandmother to say,
Is this how grandma is? It's a group of neurons? Are you saying you still have to look?
To the whole brain? It's a horizontal... slice? A horizontally applied process, where a part of
Image, I like the filter that recognizes diagonal edges. You can now use this filter,
You can use that kernel, you can use that primitive, you can use this pattern, you can use
That building block is everywhere in the picture. You share parameters across many parts of
your picture. You're basically learning these convolutional filters at the lowest level, which
You basically learn how to recognize edges. And then, at the higher level than that, you build on
Previous layer representations, remember 10 years ago or so, when Google Dream or so came out,
Something like that. And there were those psychedelic images, where the dog became eyes,
They were all eyes for 10 seconds, then they became something else. Okay. Do you say
That in those eyes, where all eyes have become, it's as if you could have a part of your neurons or
What do you choose for Qatar Airways, there may be another one that chooses the eyes
Or represents the eyes. These have been motivated in one way or another. What's going on there? Yes. permission
What's going on there is that you can basically ask, can I represent the pixels associated with this?
Image using primitive elements from another domain? For example, you want to represent a giraffe.
Pictures, but your primitives are all about the eyes. So you won't have giraffes built.
With eyes So this idea is that you take these primitives, you take these building blocks,
Then you combine them together to create higher-level abstractions. In the world of images,
It was about moving from pixels to lines, to shapes, to eyes, to ears and noses,
And finally, the people and the scenes. In the world of genomics, it's about going from DNA to
patterns and elements, then building them into grammars and organizational programs. in
In the world of chemistry, it's about building representations of your chemicals from
individual atoms to the bonds that these atoms make together, and then patterns
Contacts that you can then start representing as primitives. So when you ask now, what is
What is the similarity between these different chemicals? You now have the properties of individual atoms that
They are grouped together by combining the properties of their neighbors in the same domain. When you search
About proteins and kind of the emergent properties of those proteins, what we're doing now
In my lab, for example, it's trying to figure out how we can translate structure into function? How?
Do we do that? Basically looking at what is the functional representation of a protein?
What does it actually do? There are many ways to capture this function. The greatest impact of intelligence will be
Artificial intelligence, and perhaps the greatest challenge of all, is to understand life and medicine,
It is a kind of improvement of the human condition. So this is the last one. This is what
My work revolves around him. So what distinguishes modern AI from classical AI is actually these representations.
The truth is that in the same way that I can begin to build layers of complexity into the image,
Using these abstractions, layers of complexity in a chemical, in a protein, I can do the same thing.
With language. I can basically start with these primitives in language. I can start
With large language models that represent each word as a vector somewhere in space. This vector takes
A new meaning from the words around it. So the word apple in the context of the fruit basket
It is completely different from the word apple in the context of a PC or Macintosh. So the way our brain understands
These words individually contain some kind of projection, and these words in context
These projections can change. This concept that words take on meaning with other words around them.
It is analogous to the pixels in a picture taking on meaning based on the pixels around them, and the atoms in matter.
Chemicals take on meaning with the atoms around them. In the same way we find it across all
These advanced systems. So this is radically different from the way physics works. So, physics,
Again, it has these laws that were written down 13.8 billion years ago. Biology is all about tinkering.
However, in biology, we see that life took about a billion years to become multicellular.
And from there, you have this explosion. How is that possible? I think this is possible.
Through the same layers of abstraction, the same building blocks, the same type
By reusing these concepts you learn by modifying a few parameters. Hence,
The way you get to this dramatically faster growth is when you stop messing with pixels,
But you start messing with concepts. And this, in my opinion, is this.
The unifying emergent property of these evolving systems is fundamentally different from how physics works,
But it seems to be unified in some way across AI, across cognition, across evolution,
Across genomes, across gene regulation, across every aspect of life. Living and adaptable things. And it doesn't stop
At the decision of one person. You can now start thinking about companies. You could
Start thinking about communities. You can start thinking about search groups of the same type.
From building abstraction layers to building complexity and the type of appropriate functions
And all these kinds of emergent properties. Well, let me see if I got a handle on it. I will make an analogy
With awareness because I am more familiar with it. Let me make a Lego analogy first.
And then the perception. Let's say you have a Lego game and you play it as a little kid.
room. Then you build a bridge in the Lego game and you also build a fort or a tower. What you can do is
To start over the next day and build the bridge from scratch. But what if you could?
Build a bridge again as if the bridge was its own LEGO piece and the castle was its own LEGO piece,
And the castle is his own Lego piece. This is what we do with thoughts because when we hear the word,
When we hear about a plant, we don't have to rebuild the plant from the stem with dirt and so on.
That or any other way we learned before. We just got the plants. Now we can use that as a foothold.
And we go further. And so, throughout life, you don't have to wait another billion years until
Eukaryotic organisms evolve. Suddenly you have life that actually has mitochondria. This is related to
With basic building blocks. It's about primitives. It's all about reuse. It's about abstraction. This has become
Now part of your language. This is because the language is so unusual because
These primitives now allow us to formulate more complex ideas. It appears everywhere.
Throughout the evolving world, throughout the adapting world, throughout the
Adaptable world. The same kind of principle is present everywhere. This is a quick tour. So, Manolis, what I want
Knowing what the future will do, people may not know this, but you are also a master at
Medicine or at least study medicine, research medicine. What does the future of medicine look like?
? And feel free to combine this with artificial intelligence, biology, and other concepts.
We've talked about it so far. So we are at a crossroads. We are in this
The exceptional convergence of all these different fields coming together. One of them, of course,
It's artificial intelligence, and of course computer science as a much broader part, it's a much broader field.
Artificial intelligence is part of it. We also have miniaturization technologies, where we are able to use microfluidics.
To process individual cells, to be able to use imaging with extended microscopy to be able to
Looking inside individual cells to understand the properties of those cells. You have
Unusual measuring capabilities allow us to begin monitoring vital signs,
And start monitoring human brain imaging. We have the ability to sequence genomes with these
The ultra-fast pace with these seven price cuts over a decade
Time, which is unprecedented in human history in terms of how quickly this technology has developed.
So we are now at a crossroads where all these different areas come together, along with the ability
On folding each protein using AlphaFold, ESM Fold and all of these
Exceptional tools now use protein language models and deep engineering learning.
and graphical neural networks. With engineering constraints on it. We now have the ability to measure
Gene expression across millions of cells and thousands of individuals,
Each measurement measures 20,000 genes at a time. This allows us to glimpse the building blocks of biology, and
The building blocks of disease, and the heterogeneity of different individuals, and different patients,
Different tissues, different organs, and different cell types on a scale that was previously unfathomable.
20 years ago, not just a dream, not even a vision. And now we sit in this
The extraordinary convergence, at this crossroads, where we can now understand gene function using all
These different aspects. So what does a gene do? Well, you can look in the literature. but
This literature is now accessible because we can use large language models to capture all
Research has been written about this gene. We can now represent the function of the gene from
The entire medical literature. We can represent the function of the same gene using
Knowledge graphs. What diseases does this gene interact with individual chemicals? What is it
What functional explanations has this gene been associated with? What are the anatomical regions?
In which this gene appears? So all these different concepts of the gene, first through
Language, then through the knowledge graph, represents the function of the same thing. You can now think
In this gene as a set of amino acids and the structure that this gene has. And you
They can use protein language models and deep engineering learning to begin to understand the folds of this.
The same gene. You can look at the same gene and look at its expression patterns across thousands of
Data sets. You know, where it is expressed and how it is expressed in the brain and with all
Other genes in the body. You can build these gene expression similarity networks. You could
Also build a protein-protein interaction network to basically see through the experiments that
Pulling things that interact with each other, what are all the interactors for this gene.
You can now use this common representation to unify different domains. To start basically
In combining knowledge graphs and latent representations, this type of
AI-based hierarchical representations of every aspect of how this gene works. But you can do the same thing.
With every other node in this knowledge graph. You can take a disease and now start looking at
This disease is caused by a group of genes that interact with it, starting with the medications that
Affects this disease, and among the genetic variables that affect this disease,
Among the genes that are associated with these genetic variants are the pictorial representations.
For pathology in patients with this disease. You can now build this
Convergent representations of every aspect of biology. From proteins, to chemicals, to patients,
Understanding the patient who carries this disease with the complete clinical history of that patient,
With all blood measurements, imaging measurements and clinical notes that
Written by every doctor for this patient throughout their lives. You can now start measuring all
Environmental variables that interact with it. So, at some point, you become
The picture is so complete and complex that if we don't understand it at this stage, it's our fault. We have
Basically more technology, more data, and more functionality than we would have liked.
At the same time, we have this exceptional ability of artificial intelligence to understand all of these concepts,
And make these kind of hierarchical representations and connect them together. This
What I'm really excited about. I'm really excited about the fact that all these separate projects
In my group, my team has been working on all of these different aspects separately for decades.
From genetics, to understanding where genes are located. I started working on the human genome before I
There is a human genome. The tools we wrote helped clarify where genes are located in
Human genome. The current gene pool is based on work done by my team. Explaining the location of gene regulatory elements
And the location of the circuits in the networks. Understanding how the epigenome works
. Understand how to interpret genetic variation. All these different things were
Separate research programs. They're all close together now. I have
Students work to understand protein structure. Understanding the Job Structure Problem
. Understand how knowledge graphs are represented. Understanding how to visualize
The potential implications for different structures, different functions, and different patients. Patient pathways
And patient heterogeneity. We have been working on electronic health records since
Many years now. And all the different things were separate parts of
Knowledge. It seemed crazy that any research group would be working in all these different areas.
But now there is a method to the madness. It all comes together. They come together in the most beautiful way.
Integrative method. Because in order to understand how complex something like
Alzheimer's disease, obesity, schizophrenia, cardiovascular disease, or immune disorders
Or cancer or response to immunotherapy. You can't separate all that information. you have to
Be familiar with all the different parts. All of which together affect
Your understanding of biology. So what we do now is we combine all of
The massive, massive data sets that we generated ourselves in some of these cases. So my lab was probably born
More single-cell human brain data on dozens of different neurological and psychiatric disorders
. And more neurodevelopmental disorders than any other laboratory in the whole world. And we
Calculation lab. Why did we do that? We have basically partnered with all these outstanding doctors.
And experimentalists and experts in each of these different fields. We work together
To create this exceptional map. Why? Because we can now use it to understand diversity.
Human perception. To understand the diversity of pathology. Diversity of mental disorders
Thousands of people have it. By breaking down all these layers starting with the phenotype
Down to individual genes Down to the regulatory regions of individual genes.
So, where I see biology and where I see medicine going is this unification. It is the ability
To have AI systems that understand all these parts together. This can help us.
As partners in discovery to understand gene function at an unprecedented level of
Precision, complexity, volume, facets, and multiplicity. And do the same with
disease Do the same with each course of the underlying disease. What we draw
Now it is essentially a unified vision of medicine, biology and therapeutics. Which reveals that
The same type of modules we talked about earlier. Now applied at the disease level.
Where we can now begin to understand the complexity of Alzheimer's disease in terms of
Its building blocks. In terms of its features if you like. Instead of saying that
A homogeneous disorder and everyone with Alzheimer's disease. We can say well wait a minute. There are building blocks.
There is cholesterol transport. There is a defect in the regulation of fats. There is an accumulation of amyloid.
There is tau disease. There is removal of microglia. - There is a nerve inflammation. there
Dysregulation of the neurovascular unit. And all these different components are now showing up.
As building blocks. Through which we can finally understand medicine in a unified way. Why?
Is this exciting? Because the same pathways that appear to be behind Alzheimer's disease are being reused.
In different ways in cardiovascular diseases. They are reused in various ways in
Frontotemporal dementia and schizophrenia. So, now we can start to understand what the points are.
Convergence. What are these primitives? What are these building blocks of disease and medicine?
Biology, human well-being. We can now start processing them one by one. And in order to
Personalized medicine works both in terms of feasibility and economics. You can't simply say that I
I want a pill for someone. Because then we'd have a Jeff Bezos pill, a Bill Gates pill,
And a pill for Elon Musk. And that's it. Because they are the only ones who can afford it. Instead, we have to
To think about what is the right medicine for this path, that path, and that path. Because by building
This standard vision of personalized medicine makes economics work. Because this path
It is shared by millions of people in different groups. Now we can start thinking about
Personalized medicine in a way that I can take your genome. Add all the burden you bear
Regarding the dysregulation of each gene in each of these pathways. And say, okay,
Well, I need to change my cholesterol metabolism this way. And your microglia are inflamed with this.
The method. For each of these, we can now have a set of modules that allows us to make
Birth control pills are specific to each patient. Which will be a combination of all these different modifications,
If you like. That's why I'm so optimistic. And that's why I'm so excited about where we're going.
To him. Because we finally understand the building blocks of life. And we are finally
We understand how they fit together to create a vision that is actually possible.
For personalized medicine. Manolis, it was a pleasure. I am so grateful that we connected. It seems we have
Passion for integration and unification. I'm glad your project took off.
Decades in the making and it's starting to bear fruit at the intersection now. i couldn't
Be more enthusiastic. I think this is an exceptional time for our field. It's also
Exceptional time for AI. We are essentially seeing the impact of AI in every aspect of humanity, in
Every aspect of society. But I think the biggest impact so far will be in understanding biology. And in
Understanding medicine. And in a radical change in the human condition. a lot
Some of the early applications we see of AI in healthcare are basically just fancy versions of
Assistants. They use language. Languages ​​with such large language models have seen
An extraordinary ability to decipher sentence structure and semantics. The language is simple
In comparison. Language is something that evolved through humans talking to each other. I have evolved with
The limitations of our evolved brains. So, if we humans cannot understand language,
The language will not be the same as it is now. It will be easier. So the language evolved in complexity until we understood
. It was limited to the fact that we need to develop our brain from a single cell.
Through a series of development departments and programs. And this is not the only restriction,
But also the constraint that must be built upon as the chimpanzee brain evolves. However,
Evolution of the mammalian brain, evolution of the vertebrate brain, etc. In other words,
The type of perception we have is limited by number one, evolution. You must reach it.
With minor modifications to the previous version. You also have to reach it from all
Generation from scratch to again give rise to the same neural network. Artificial intelligence is not limited
that way. AI has the ability to start with completely different parameters in terms of
Depth, neuronal representation, types of operations, etc. etc. And we
Now we use a very simple AI architecture. Basically, this kind of
The representation learning that AI uses is very similar to a single cell type, for example. For example,
Only the neocortex of the human brain. But the human brain also has all these subcortical areas,
All this limbic system, as we call it. And this is where the whole emotional part is.
. This is where all the fear, fight or flight, etc., components of the brain are located.
. The brain is not only subject to traditional electrical calculations. It is also
It is of course subject to neurotransmitters, brain waves, hormonal interactions, etc.
To that. You can consider them as features or bugs. You can basically say, Oh,
We have this incredibly beautiful cognitive brain, but unfortunately it is affected by everything.
These other things. Or you can think of them as features. You can basically say that we have this.
The brain is constantly being pushed to different local optima or in different shapes and scales.
Because of all these things. Therefore, he can reach solutions that would not have been possible.
It would normally reach it if it was just a neocortical brain. So you can basically think of types of
Structures that we can now tap into even our advanced human brain to access
To more efficient accounts, more creative accounts, and more integrated accounts.
For our engineering brains, if you will. But you might also think, wait a minute, we can offer
All kinds of other reasons. Why do we have to use only traditional human-like logic?
Humans are very bad at doing all kinds of math. Humans have no intuition about genomes or
Protein folding or chemical reactions at all. So we now have the ability with artificial intelligence to bring
A whole new class of account, bringing all these different ways of understanding
The natural world which is beyond language. And when language has such an impact on healthcare
By being able to write down what doctors say or being able to summarize notes and the ability
On summarizing information, etc., which actually has an impact on healthcare,
Can we now combine that with symbolic logic, with causal inferences, with
Structural, geometric, and spatial representations of patient information, etc., etc.? So I would like to
I say that solving language is a much simpler problem than solving biology or solving medicine.
So I think the most complex challenge we face in AI may yet be, not in understanding physics.
Which has a relatively small number of laws, but understanding this patchwork, this
The exceptional diversity of functions and adaptations in specialized fields that biology possesses, and its adaptation to them. With this
Billions of parameters in the same way that evolution itself, cognition, and gene regulation are able to
In harmony with the natural world. So I think if physics is its own mathematical language,
Perhaps the language of biology and medicine is its own patchwork language that you can see in artificial intelligence, and that
The same kind of complexity has finally found a match with the most powerful knowledge.
that we have ever been built, combined of course with the exceptional abilities of humans to be
We are now able to build primitives based on AI models of the world and start thinking.
about them and their guidance, but now they are compatible with the complexity of medicine, the complexity of biology
The complexity of chemistry, the complexity of the evolving world. So I see this as a fit.
It comes together between these technologies that we initially built to understand images and understand
Language, but now to understand a language that none of us speak. language
Medicine, the language of biology, the language of chemistry, and the language of the natural world.
Very interesting. Thank you for spending so much time with me. Thank you. Now we have to get started.
In two minutes, so I want you to take one minute and address the audience that
Watch and offer your advice to new students who are watching, but also to researchers who are
They are watching. So my advice would be... A lot of times people say do what you love. Yes,
Sure, that's great advice, but don't just do what you love. Build
Build your basic knowledge, build your basic understanding of the world, go and study.
All these different specialties. Absorb it, and train your mind to think about everything.
Possible approaches embraced by different fields of science. The reason I say that is
You will need it. There is this unification that happens across all of these.
Different specializations at the present time, this unification, this ability to combine all
These different ways of thinking together are essentially what has allowed us to make so much progress in so much.
And many different fields. So the first tip is to learn how to code. There is no excuse not to do so.
Learn how to program primarily by reading a lot of programs, by understanding the basic elements.
For more complex AI systems. Learn how to tinker with these complex systems. Use ChatGPT
As your partner to explore huge chunks of code that may seem insurmountable, but ask them to analyze it.
for you. Basically, be fearless. Go there and dive into all this.
Different specializations. Because by becoming experts, frankly, we no longer have any excuse not to.
Understand something. We have at our disposal YouTube, Wikipedia, bioRxiv, Archive,
And ChatGPT where you can take any piece of paper and just say, okay, break this down for me, explain it,
You can keep building and asking questions. This boldness will be translated
To huge and huge profits. Don't just say, 'Oh, I'm excited about this.' Say, oh, I'll do my homework
Home I will build my business. And directly above the camera, it says, Effort
Equals fun in times of interest. Skill equals talent equals effort. Achievement equals skill
× Effort. Effort counts twice. Specifically, when you get down to business, you get better at it.
You understand better, you get things better, and that investment pays off. because
Your achievement is your skill that you build from your effort times that effort. So, basically,
Effort combined with talent gives you skill, but skill again combined with effort gives you
Achievement. Then the achievement is up to you to enjoy. So you have this
The exceptional interaction that if you say, Oh, I'll take the easy way out, yeah, it'll be easy for a while,
But then you'll stumble. If I said instead, let me now understand the theory of everything,
Let me dig deeper, I understand physics, I understand chemistry, I understand biology,
Understand chemistry, and how it builds up into the basic elements of life.
Do the same with math. Unfortunately, much of our math teaching
It strips you of all the beauty that you will only get later. But dive into YouTube channels that
Expands mathematics with extraordinary visualizations. I think of three sons,
And one blue. This - three blue, one brown. Three blue and one brown. This didn't exist when I was
Student My eight year old loves it and really understands and grasps these concepts.
In a way that was never accessible before. And by seeing how beautiful mathematics is later,
They are excited about the mathematics they have to endure today. I believe this ability,
And I've met students who have basically told me, Oh, in the next four quarters,
I'm going to take all of these classes to finally take this one. I'm like, okay,
Go to this class today. Just spend a week in this class. Find out if you like it. And sometimes
They come back and say, 'Yes, that's exactly what I want to do.' And other times they come back and say,
Oh, that's terrible. Like, thanks for saving me for like the next three years. I think that
The ability to start from complexity down rather than simplicity, I think, is something.
It can finally be achieved by being able to have the most brilliant teacher in the world,
By having ChatGPT as your partner in all your learning, from tackling the most complex paper
Then I say, Hey, split it for me. And kind of, tell me about this concept. And now
You can kind of rebuild it and dive as far down the rabbit hole as you'll go. So anyway,
My advice is don't be afraid, go to the basics, go to the building blocks, understand both deeply,
But then you're able to step back and see the bigger picture. And when you see something
It is illogical in another realm, there is probably some aspect of human cognition that
You will practice it by trying to understand it. Watch channels like Theory of Everything
Pause and reflect. Try to understand each one of these words because if there is something hidden in them
There is a beauty of integration that comes to humans that I think you will benefit from.
Really from him. This is my advice. Good luck with that. Fine, thank you. Well, thank you very much.
. This is fun. New update, sub stack started. The writings that are currently there
It revolves around language and undefined concepts as well as some other mathematical details,
A lot is written there. This is content that doesn't exist anywhere else. It is not present in the theories of everything,
Not on Patreon. The full texts will also be placed there sometime in the future. Many ask me
Of the people, Curt, I've talked to a lot of people in the fields of theoretical physics.
Philosophy and consciousness. What are your thoughts? While I remain neutral in interviews,
This subset is a way to reflect on my current deliberations on these topics. I also thank
Our partner is The Economist magazine. First, thank you for watching. Thank you for listening. If you haven't
Whether you subscribed or not, now is the time to do it. Why? Because every subscription
And every like helps YouTube spread this content to more people like you. In addition, he helps Kurt
Directly, also known as me. I also discovered last year that external links matter a lot in the algorithm,
Which means that whenever you share on Twitter, for example on Facebook or even on Reddit, etc., it
YouTube shows up, hey, people are talking about this content outside of YouTube which in turn
It helps a lot in distribution on YouTube. Third, there is a remarkably active dispute and sub-site.
For theories of everything where people explain toes, and respectfully disagree about theories
And they build as a community our toes. Links to both are in the description. Fourth, you must
You know this podcast is on iTunes, Spotify, and all audio platforms. All you have to do
His job is to write theories about everything and you will find them. I personally benefit from rewatching.
Lectures and podcasts. I also read in the comments that TOE listeners also benefit from the replay.
So, why not re-listen instead on those platforms like iTunes, Spotify, and Google Podcasts,
Or whatever podcast software you use. Finally, if you want to support more conversations like:
For this, and more content like this, consider visiting patreon.com slash CURTJAIMUNGAL
And donate whatever you want. There's also PayPal, there's also cryptocurrencies, there's also
Join on YouTube. Again, keep in mind that it is the support from our sponsors and you that makes it possible.
I work at TOE full time. You also get early access to ad-free episodes, both audio and
Or video. It's audio in the case of Patreon, and video in the case of YouTube. For example, this episode
The one you're listening to now was released a few days ago. Every dollar helps so much more.
than you think. Either way, your viewership is generous enough. Thank you very much.
