Welcome to the music experience team, I'm Jess Diggie, I'm Phoenix Elliott, I'm
Gray, and I'm Drake. And you're probably wondering, who are these people?
Stephen and Inuyash are unavailable this week, so it's me and some friends. And
we're going to talk about radical honesty, but first I wanted to let everybody
introduce themselves. Gray and Phoenix have been on before, Drake you haven't.
Does anybody want to talk about what brings you here today and what your
rationalist history is? Sure. All right, so back in high school I opened up about
100 math blogs and stumbled across Scott Aronson's blog, which led me to Scott
Alexander's blog, and from there I sort of spread throughout lots of different
nodes in the rationalist community. And Gray and I have been co-hosting the
Minneapolis slash St. Paul Twin Cities meetups for the last year and a half
ish, yeah. And got invited to be on here about a week ago and excited to be here.
And I'm Gray. I, as Drake mentioned, co-run the Minneapolis St. Paul Meetup. I
got into rationality from editing Rational Wiki, that was not very well
advertised. And I read their article on Eliezer Yudkowski and found the
criticism so single-minded that I felt obligated for intellectual honesty to
read something he'd written and then found that I didn't agree with the
criticism. And then just kind of got into things further from there. Who was it
you said that wrote that article about him? It's a Rational Wiki's article,
community article on Yudkowski. Yeah, I don't think it's attributed to anyone in
particular, but it is really kind of biting. Yeah, rational Wiki is a weird
thing. It's got some good articles that I would actually forward to other people
and then some are very biased. I think it's good at generating biting snark and
not very good at choosing targets of that. Yeah. I think that's a good summary.
You can describe the internet at large. Okay, Phoenix, did you want to say anything about yourself?
Yeah, I... Oh gosh, I don't know. I've been in the Rationalist sphere for a while. I'm partners with
Jess. Radical honesty or at least my version of it has been like a thing
close to my heart for a while and like more explicitly so in the last like
year I guess. But we'll get more into that. So glad to be here to talk about it.
Glad to have you here. And thank you for segueing us onto the main subject. Radical
honesty. So first of all, what is radical honesty? Radical honesty is the practice
of training compulsive honesty, which includes refraining from telling even
white lies. The name is actually trademarked. Is it? Yeah, it's... I don't know how recent
that is, but the basic idea comes from a book slash self-improvement program by
Brad Blanton. Different authors have also proposed similar ideas, even Sam Harris
in his book Lying recently and Emmanuel Conn, less recently, who claimed in his
1798 essay on a supposed right to tell lies from benevolent motives that we
have a categorical imperative not to lie under any circumstance, not even to a
murderer looking for their victim. So people who are in favor of radical
honesty claim that lying is the primary source of modern human stress and say
that speaking bluntly and directly even about painful or taboo subjects will
make people happier by creating an intimacy not possible while hiding
things. So that's not exactly... So I'm a proponent of radical honesty. That is not
how I practice it exactly, but that's a pretty good definition. Does anybody want
to add anything or have any objections to anything I've said? So I read through
Blanton's... As part of preparing for this, I read through Blanton's brief, like
core principles of radical honesty that you shared. And I... Because I know that
you do the mindfulness meditation thing, I thought I would comment on it. I'm
getting some strong reminders of vipassana slash mindfulness meditation from the
way that Blanton talks about it. Is that something that's more... That's
obvious, still obvious when you're more familiar with the practice? Yeah,
absolutely. I think it was him who actually directly called it out as being a
form of mindfulness meditation or living your life in a state of mindfulness
meditation. So Blanton's radical honesty includes practitioners just stating
their feelings bluntly, like right from brain to mouth. And typically in ways
that are considered impolite, which like Blanton in particular seems to kind of
emphasize, like, yeah, you know what, those pants do make you kind of fat.
Oh, actually, I hate this band. Can we turn the music off? No, I don't feel like
going to your parents' house. Your mom's kind of an asshole and your dad's
cooking sucks, which are the kinds of things that would normally cause
conflict and hence the reason why, like, I guess default society tends not to lie
or tends to do the opposite. One thing that I was a little bit confused by
reading some of Blanton's stuff is there's a lot of talk about these sort of
social situations where you say a thing that might otherwise be taboo or left
unsaid or where you're expected to give answer A. You just actually say what you
believe. But I wasn't as clear on more extreme scenarios like Kant's example
where murderer comes to your house and asks if you have a fugitive hiding in
your attic. I don't know what Blanton advocates there. I don't know either. I
don't know if he's addressed Kant and that's a good question. Actually, I'd
like to look that up. I can't speak to what Kant would have to say about it or
to what Blanton would have to say about it, but I feel like it's consistent with
my impressions so far of radical honesty to say no, screw you. I know that you're
going to misuse that information and I refuse to provide it. So it's definitely,
so there's some other, like, variants of radical honesty that we're going to get
into here that definitely just makes space for that kind of thing. Should we
just start getting into the other people's versions? So Wes, who's I think
been on here before. A friend of the blog within Reason or Wes. Wes's version is, I
think, is a good starting point for like a more practical version of this that you
can just like start applying directly in your life where it is a perfectly honest
response to say, I don't want to tell you that instead of like giving the
information the person actually wants. Because like honestly, like sometimes you
actually just need to keep a secret and I try to live my life so that I don't
end up in that situation very often. Yeah, but sometimes you can't avoid it.
That's actually one of one of my, this may turn out to be addressed in more of
the literature, but one of my concerns with radical honesty is that the biggest
chunk of a lot of secrets is the fact that there is a secret. So being, having a
policy that requires you to divulge that there is a secret that would be
compromised by your answer, actually answering the question is not ideal.
Yeah, I think, like, I think there's an important distinction here still
between just saying something that is false in response versus I guess like the
like least information response is like the high old neither confirm nor deny
kind of thing. And like I would say that the I can neither confirm nor deny or
least I choose not to answer this kind of question or whatever is honest, but
it's not, it's also not trying to communicate at all, which defeats some of
the point, but is still, I think, honest in the most important way, which is that
it is not saying false things. Yeah. I'm, so the term that I have used, that I've
heard used to refer to this practice is glomerization, which was popularized by
Elias Yudkowski, but I think exists in legal circles as a term for this kind of
thing, at least judging by Wikipedia article. I think one thing that may come
up later in the episode is that I like this and use it a fair bit to allow
myself to be honest in cases where I would otherwise not feel comfortable
committing to telling the exact truth about a question. I'm curious to hear
more about that. Yeah. I mean, I think I agree that it is, it sort of avoids
communicating in a sense. It is just saying I will not communicate with you
about this. Which is still an honest and use and potentially useful piece of
information, but it also can, but it can also be honest and useful for the same
reason that for the reason I expressed concern. But, and I think this is
something where I have some curiosity about how folks who do practice radical
honesty deal with this is that I often find myself in situations where I would
feel it was much more unethical to commit myself to answering questions where I
couldn't have this out of saying I don't, I, I, I pre-commit not to answering
questions of this form. For instance, if someone has like conveyed something
private to me or might not have, then like even saying, you know, whether they
have told me some secret might be potentially damaging. And so I like
generally don't answer questions about things that people have told me in
confidence. Yeah, I'm trying to think of an example, and I don't know if this fits
exactly. And now I'm trying to think of a way to say a secret someone told me
recently without like, maybe this isn't the best way to talk about this. Let me
go back a bit. First of all, the thing that I liked about Western within,
within reasons take on radical honesty is that this is kind of a performing like
radical honesty is an act of vulnerability that you can share with people who
have consented to share it with you. I like that a lot. And that helped me kind
of get at my like moral problems around radical honesty. Because I think it's,
it's like usually the standard cultures default that people, you know, don't
tell the truth. You're not supposed to tell the truth about certain things. And
you learn what those are at a young age, which things are faux pas versus not.
And you're not allowed to ask about them, ask which ones are which after a
certain age, because one of the norms is that you can't find out what the norms
are after a certain point. I'm sympathetic to radical honesty on that point. But I
do have the sort of, I have a game theoretic concern for lack of a better
term that's kind of related to what Wes said that I'll get to. But I'm, I do
want to hear more of this, Jess.
Real quick, I want to plug Wes's blog post is titled Not So Radical Honesty on
livingwithnreason.com.
Yeah, we'll link to it in the show notes too. And to Brad.
Blunt.
Brad. Blanton.
Blood Brinton. No.
You, you mentioned that Wes seem regards part of the practice of radical
honesty as a trust thing.
Yeah. Yeah.
That's how I see it too. It's kind of with my friends, partners and people that I
know are kind of on the same page as me in regard to wanting to actually hear
the truth. Because I think that's important. A lot of people actually don't
want to be told the truth. And I remember when I was in art school, we would
do critique. And I remember kind of like being confused at some of the people
that were not able to take criticism at all. And then I remember having like a
few works that I did that I worked really hard on that I thought were great
and like getting really like actually like taking it personally when somebody
would say, I think the hand anatomy there is wrong. And I was like, no, I
can't possibly be wrong. I used reference picture. So something looks off
about it. And like, you know, you're wrong. Oh, wait, I'm getting defensive.
Yeah, this like resistance to feedback is something that sort of confuses me. I
think I have always been very like pro receiving feedback. And at one point I
considered making a t-shirt with a QR code to my anonymous feedback page and
just wearing it around town. I have not in fact done that after some friends
strongly urged me not to. But I generally try and solicit a lot of feedback
from strangers. But my read based on the rate at which people send in feedback
to that form is that most people are very much not actively seeking feedback
or not looking to self improve in that particular manner. Drake, don't forget
that that sounds like a good website to plug at the end of the episode or now
in the yes. Okay, in that case, admonimus.co. That's a portmanteau of
anonymous admiration and admonishment. Yes. But if you want a maybe more
stable solution, you can just create a Google form that says give me feedback
here. Admonimus.co slash Drake is my personal one. If anyone listens to this
episode and decides that they have thoughts on my voice or my opinions or
anything else about me. And mine, if you have opinions, if you want to
anonymously share opinions about Drake that you don't want to Drake to know
about, mine is admonimus.co slash gray, G-R-A-Y. Excellent. I'm going to make
one too after I heard about, well, I didn't know this was a thing until we
were kind of doing the post episode chat. And first of all, that made me
especially happy that you were the people that are on this episode.
Admonimus.co slash Jess currently doesn't exist. So if you make it before
this episode is released, you're probably safe.
Oh, well, I mean, I will try to do that. But can you can you check it? Can you
check Phoenix Drake as long as we're here? Yep. I just made one and it is
called Phoenix. Oh, sweet. H-O-E-N-I-X. All right. So got a got a corner of
the market on those nice short strings. Yeah, and I'll put those in the
show notes too. Yay. I can't wait. But yeah, I've noticed that most people seem
not very interested in this either on the receiving or the sending end. And I'm
curious if other people have thoughts on why this is or how to make other
people provide you with honest feedback. Okay. Well, first of all, I think the
vulnerability thing comes into play pretty hard. You don't want randos coming
up and giving you feedback generally. I mean, maybe you do, but maybe I do. I
think a lot of the time when you're just trying to go to the grocery store, you
know, you're doing whatever you do in your life. And if someone came up to
you and was like, Hey, your voice is annoying. And also, did you know your
socks don't match? And you're wearing three times more makeup than is
appropriate. And yeah, if someone just approaches you in public and starts
telling you all these things, you're going to be off put. Excuse me. Who the
hell are you? Like, I don't care about feedback from people that I don't care
about. I like dressed goth or just Lolita for a while because this was me
sending a signal that Hey, if you're the kind of person that thinks this is cool,
or interesting, you can come talk to me. And if you are weirded out by this, then
don't come near me. That's, I don't know, I guess, visually the best way I
could. Yeah, I think the use case that I imagine these sort of feedback forms,
the sort of social role that I imagine them filling is people who are not so
on board with radical honesty that they can walk up to you and let you know
that Yes, this thing looks terrible on you or such and such. But where there
might be information that you do want to know, even if they aren't comfortable
saying it to your face. And I feel like I have there are things which I am
sufficiently uncomfortable with telling people directly that if everyone had
these forms, I would use them a lot. And I expect that I'm not like I expect
that I'm reasonably typical in how many such opinions I hold of people, but
maybe not in how willing I would be to tell them and not anonymously. Something
this is reminding me of is I used I had a tumbler for four or five years. I'm
not sharing the URL. It's old. And I remember a lot of people would. Well,
that there's some anonymous feedback that you can turn on or off. And there was
definitely a level of abuse that you would start to hit. That was kind of if
you became really popular, if you had a lot of followers, then you start
attracting a lot of anonymous abuse, just regardless of what your political
opinions are, what kind of whether your content creator, I guess, if you have
anything objectionable, people will find you and abuse you. Yeah, should be
something that I would worry about. Although one thing to note about tumblers
platform for people who are not familiar is that it's anonymous feedback can be
replied to and made public. So you sometimes can do this with a performative
aspect and hope that you bug the person you are talking to enough that they
reply to it and thereby make you famous. That actually connects to I think what
I think is a big part of people's general resistance to using anonymous
feedback forms that are not like that. And is it there's not a lot of sense of
like, like closing the loop on this interaction, you like you just submit a
thing and it just sort of goes into a pile and then you don't know what
happens with it. And then I think also there's a bit of a, at least for me,
even when it feels like real feedback, I still feel kind of passive aggressive
by using the system.
Sorry, I think that may be a an artifact right now of how much of how
comparatively socially rare it is. If there were a default, if there were an
expectation that you could communicate directly with anybody and share
uncomfortable truths or whatever, anonymously, I think that people would
do a pretty good job of separating them and that the overall throughput of
personal communication would increase.
For me, it's probably the case that anytime someone sends me anonymous
feedback, I would be just as happy or happier to receive it directly from
them, but that I assume other people's preferences are such that they prefer to
send it anonymously versus in person. And I would rather receive it
anonymously than not at all. And on the other side of it, if there's something
I'm not comfortable telling someone at all, even if it's passive aggressive to
or sort of at least it is passive, to tell them this thing anonymously that
I'd rather do that than just leave them in the dark.
Phoenix, I was going to ask what you meant when you said that you feel passive
aggressive, by which you feel passive aggressive by commenting on someone
else's or by creating a comment box for someone else to put comments in.
I'm putting comments on someone else's. And I think, I don't know, I'm trying to put
my finger on why that is exactly. I think because it's not an interaction and
that it's like sort of, it's a one way thing that it, this is the kind of thing
that is like people often resort to using this when they want to do a thing
that like they don't feel like they could do face to face because it's passive
aggressive or like because or like they want to be aggressive, but not in a way
that actually requires an interaction. And for some reason, my brain just sort
of jumps to that is like, okay, I have to actively choose to not be doing that
when interacting with this.
Drake, I was going to ask if, as the user of Admonimus, is there a way that you
can reply to feedback? Or is it just kind of a one way stream?
You can do this sort of indirectly by saying, if you want me to reply to you,
leave me some contact info. But yes, there it's designed for ease of leaving
feedback, which means that there is no login or other way to store who you are
when you leave feedback, other than to say, I am this person. I would love it if
there was an easy way to make like a temporary, you know, like an additional
obscure email or do some clever cryptographic scheme. But in practice,
I think any way of doing this is too much hassle to expect anyone to follow
through with.
As long as you're talking about it, though, you should explain the feedback
compensation procedure that you and I developed. Leave leave a charity.
I'm not sure I remember this.
Oh, so I'm putting this up because Drake asked Drake solicited my help coming
up with it for his own Admonimus. If one of the the things that you'd like to
do is encourage people to leave novel feedback. So Drake's got a notice,
which I'm copying after contributing to its writing that says, if you give
me novel personal feedback that I've not encountered before and name a charity,
I will donate $5 to it.
I love that. Yeah, that's that's a good addition.
If anybody wants to make a new social network, I was just thinking I would
totally join a website that's like Facebook, but it's specifically for
replying or sharing your feedback that you receive from other people in your
comments. If you want to be all trendy and get on the blockchain, there's mines.
There's what?
There's a blockchain based social networking site called mines. I don't
actually know much about it, except that it's blockchain based, but it does exist.
I know there's also, I don't know if it still exists, but probably the
blockchain based dating website Luna. Is it called Luna?
Oh, yes, it is. Although I think it was it was once functional enough that I
made a profile on it, but no longer seems to be in that state.
The website exists, but is not loudly proclaiming where you can go sign up.
So I take it that it is in a state of hiatus at best.
I signed up for the beta. I don't imagine it would still be in beta.
I don't know. Google shopping was in beta for like 10 years.
So I want to take a second and
possibly jump back to the main topic here.
I appreciated this side track about Admonimus, but I think there's still more
good stuff to say about, like, I especially want to hear about how people
actually implement honesty in their own lives and like ways that differs from
these systems that these people have written about.
I have my own question. I know of other social communication protocols,
including the one that I usually use.
So I will get in a question somewhere about how it compares.
Jess, or, you know, I could just do that here since I've set it up already.
Jess, how do you find, what do you see radical honesty comparing to operating
under Crocker's rules?
Can you summarize what that means?
Crocker's rules for means that you've agreed not to,
you are agreeing not to respond in strong negative ways to any information
that people provide you in the hope that you will get more honest
information than if people filtered for the filtered against the risk
of insulting or otherwise upsetting you.
To quote, declaring yourself to be operating by Crocker's rules means that
other people are allowed to optimize their messages for information,
not for being nice to you.
Yeah. So it's, it's not a license. It's not, it, it doesn't enable sending
possibly insulting information in the way that a weak man of radical honesty
seems like it might, but it does mean that you have licensed other people
to not worry about insulting you.
I think that I would be down for trying that as a social experiment with my
circle of friends and then maybe expanding it if it seems to work out well.
I just, I kind of feel like the way I would do radical honesty is
there's a contract between me and this other person that you're not going to
use this as a form of abuse.
And if I see somebody like breaking that contract, then it's like, well,
you've lost the privilege to do radical honesty with me.
That's how I would respond to like the Comteon issue of like, what if,
you know, someone's looking for the Jews hidden in your basement?
Right. Like clearly that, no, not doing it with you, but even just like some
random that I haven't met or gotten close enough to yet, um,
I don't know if this is going to be some sociopath who just gets off on
insulting people. Those exist. So they're not that common, but, uh,
I would want to do it in my, in my like circle of trust of confidants.
And maybe if it became more widely known and accepted, uh,
outside of that, but.
So how large is this circle of trust? Like what's,
what's around the threshold to,
to reach this point where sort of you are,
you're treating this person as someone who can engage in radical honesty, um,
and be trusted with honest feedback.
Uh, honestly, I tell them,
I'm someone who likes to tell the truth. Uh,
I like receiving direct criticism and if you would like to also do that,
like, I feel like I have a better way of phrasing this when I meet people.
It's just that a brain scatter Sunday. Basically. Yeah.
I check with the other person like, Hey,
does this form of conversation sound appealing to you and would you like to do
it? And if they seem down for it, then that's a, like,
that's basically it.
Yeah. I, um,
found this page describing crackers rules and, uh,
the sentence crackers rules means that you have accepted full responsibility for
the operation of your own mind. If you're offended, it's your fault. Uh,
I just appreciate how much that is in line with the courage to be disliked.
The whole thing that I'm sure we'll talk about on another episode because I keep
wanting to, but, um,
that does sound like it. That I've,
I'm grateful for the copy of that that you gave me and I have been flipping
through it and I like it. Excellent.
We'll eventually get to the courage to be disliked episode in,
in terms of, uh, like, who do you, who does,
who does each of us are like, who does one do this with?
Um, I liked, uh, some things from West's article again,
that this is especially important for
intimate relationships and like personal relationships that like are ongoing.
Um, and is, uh,
in the explicit list of exceptions for like, where it is not actually like
ethically like important that you stay honest,
uh, include coercive relationships where like,
if you're in a relationship where you don't have a lot of choice about being in
that relationship, um,
whether one of the examples he gives is employment because employment is
coercive in some ways. Um,
or like if you're in an abusive relationship that you're trying to get out of
or like a family relationships are a little bit coercive sometimes in that
like your brother is your brother and won't stop being your brother for any
reason. Um,
and that in, in relationships where you're stuck there,
uh, it can be acceptable to use dishonesty,
but it's really best to save that for like trying to exit the relationship as
like a way to protect yourself. Um,
and like only if, if you like really have to,
like if you really like can't get out of this relationship at all, uh,
and you like need to use dishonesty to protect yourself,
then maybe you can like use it in an extended fashion,
but we should be generally skeptical of,
uh, our motivation to do that because people tend to
round in that direction pretty frequently when they shouldn't, uh,
being, being dishonest when like thinking they have to be dishonest in an extended
fashion when really they either don't have to,
or they should be leaving the relationship.
Yeah. One,
one frame that I thought was interesting in this blog post is sort of honesty as
consent and sort of like that if someone is being honest with you,
then you have this, there's nothing that you are sort of having this interaction
with them without having consented to some fact about them that you don't know.
And a relevant quote to, um,
this notion of someone who's in a horse or relationship with you is that, um,
once a person has been dishonest with an intimate partner and refuses to correct
their dishonesty,
that person has robbed their partner of the ability to consent to continue the
relationship. The only ethical choice is to end it. Yeah.
Yeah. I really liked that framing.
I agree. This, this, um,
people's tendency to rationalize dishonesty in this sense is a,
a definite blind spot at the,
there's a definite tilt in priors in favor of this being an acceptable exception
to telling the truth, um, for a lot of people, a lot of the time,
but I have,
I guess I have weaker priors than a lot of people about the honesty of the
general population. So I guess the, while,
while I'm sympathetic to the offering a conspiracy, uh,
paradigm where you, you open with trust in that fashion,
sometimes that's too costly to justify. Um,
where I think about it in the other direction is, and this,
this is going to sound like a very dismal view of the world and I'm aware that
it is.
And the reason I like dealing with other rationalists is that I don't have to
think about this very often,
but there are enough people who benefit by dishonesty that a,
an excessively comfortable habit of honesty with default,
with the default person may, uh,
render you vulnerable in a way that you aren't willing to be.
Um, so I, I, I,
I'm going to tie together two bits of Harry Potter and the methods of rationality
to try to explain this. Um,
and when Harry meets Snape and reflects on a lecture he got from Professor
Quirrell about just first level deception, lying, no,
I didn't take the cookie out of the cookie jar.
Second level deception, uh,
when a parent hoping that they can catch the child breadhanded and thereby get
some greater repentance would lie about believing that the cookie was not taken
from the jar.
And then you can get third levels of deception where you want your second level
deceiver to think that they successfully fooled you and so on.
It gets really, really complicated after about three levels. Um,
that that's, that's part one. You do, there,
there's deception and deception about deception.
It's a complicated enough subject that you need the,
it behooves you to be up on it. Um,
the second half of this is, uh,
Lucius's remembered lecture to Draco about the rule of three,
where any plan that requires more than three things to happen is doomed to
failure. And since only an idiot would come up with a plan that was literally as
complicated as possible, the real maximum is two.
So my, my philosophy on that is that, uh,
so you,
it seems imprudent to be as defenseless as possible against other people's
deception. First level deception is inadequate to protect you from deception.
Second level deception only protects you from people who can't protect themselves.
So, and since it seems foolish to be as defenseless as you can breathe,
as you think you can get away with, the real minimum is third level.
So I think if you, if you,
if you're in a business that requires this kind of thing where like,
there's all, I don't know, like politics is the obvious example.
If you're in a situation where there's like a lot of backstabbing,
just sort of like in the nature of the work you're doing, um,
I think that you're going to often end up in situations where like an
interaction is coercive in some way, um,
or like you're having to do things sort of in self-defense,
which is the, one of the other examples West gives of like when sometimes you,
you have to do this and it's to like defend yourself or someone else.
So like, like with the murderer coming to your house example and that I
personally solve this by just like,
like I just hate being in those kinds of situations and I avoid them really hard.
Uh, I would,
I would be a terrible politician for example,
and I would never want to do that kind of work. I,
and maybe this puts me at some kind of disadvantage,
but I think that the life that I live instead is pretty good.
Yeah. That's exactly what I was going to say.
The examples that Gray was talking about, um,
or the, I guess illustrations from, uh, methods of rationality are kind of part
of, or like a large part of why I want to do it in general is just that I don't
want to have to keep all these levels of deception in my head.
I'm not good at it. Uh, yeah, there's,
keeping secrets. I suck at telling lies and it's exhausting it.
If other people want to do it, then like that's their choice.
I'd rather not be in a relationship with them. Yeah,
there's a post they probably don't want to be in a relationship with me.
There's a post by, um,
Eliezer Yudkowski, um,
talking about honesty, um,
and sort of about glomeralization and ways to never emit literally false
statements, um, in which he says it's good for your soul. Um,
and that I think resonates with me that it feels more,
um,
that it feels like there is some deep level on which, like, um,
I'm just more comfortable with myself if I am in situations where I can just be
honest with everyone that I'm talking to, um,
which for me is most situations, um,
when I'm talking to close friends and such. Um, but yeah,
and these more coercive environments like with, um,
for me as someone in college right now, um,
dealing with like school forms and things,
there are boxes where I need, it is expected that I say this thing and it is not
expected that it be true,
but I have to emit certain word patterns and I don't know how to feel about that.
I agree with, I agree with the assessment that it's, uh,
that a world in which I,
you didn't have to keep track of up to three minimum three levels of deception
at once would be strictly superior,
but it's not the problem that I have with this as with, uh,
fixing a lot of social norms is that this is very nearly and evolutionarily
stable strategy. Um, if when,
when the baseline includes these various levels of deception,
there's a limit to how far you can get without participating.
Yeah. I like,
I have in my notes that I'm tempted to say that, uh,
living with as much honesty as possible is like actually better for most people,
but I, I suspect I have some motivated reasoning there and that, uh,
dishonesty for me personally is just very difficult and very uncomfortable.
Yeah. I don't know that it's necessarily the best strategy for everybody in the,
in the vein of never telling, never issuing specifically false statements.
And I'm sure Eliezer is aware of this one because he's read enough fantasy,
but I actually learned about it from Steven. Um,
the Isidae in the wheel of time who are prevented from ever saying anything
that's specifically untrue.
So dealing with them is incredibly frustrating because they have long lives
and they've a good chunk of their communication is spent cultivating ways to
disguise the exact truth without ever having to say anything specifically false.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, go ahead, Jess.
I was thinking I was just brought in mind of packed,
which was the web serial that the author of worm wrote after worm that takes place
in a world where magic exists and magic users and magic creatures are forbidden
from telling lies, but not from hiding the truth.
So a lot of the stories based around the difficulties of having to live like that.
Yeah. That's the kind of thing that appeals to you.
I might, I mean, I, I've seen enough good from wild bow to have strong priors
about its quality. So I will have to pick that up.
I think an important part of the way I see honesty here is interacting with
someone in a way that's intended to give them a wrong idea,
even if you're never saying anything that's false is also dishonesty,
that it's about like whether you want the person to have like correct ideas
in their brain or not.
It's sort of at the core of the spirit of it, I think.
That seems like a reasonable assessment.
Um, that there's certainly plenty of discourse on whether allowing someone
a false belief is different from lying.
And I get always get the feeling that it's extremely self-serving to insist
that there's a difference, but yeah.
I guess in this case, I'm just sort of like defining dishonesty.
I think I'm mostly just stealing this from Wes honestly,
but defining dishonesty as a term to include lying and also these other things
that make people believe false things.
Yeah, withholding the truth or saying things that are technically true,
but misleading.
Yeah.
Something else that I forgot to bring up when I was going through
the original descriptions of radical honesty.
Blanton's idea of radical honesty includes compulsive truth as in
you're not supposed to just say nothing either.
If a thought comes to mind, you're supposed to say it.
I remember, I think it was like there was a magazine article.
It might have been time or something where I think it was with him or somebody else.
It was a famous radical honesty user and they were saying, yeah, you know,
if I walk in the office and I see a woman with nice tits, I'd be like, hey,
nice tits or like things that clearly like people.
I forget the way Wes phrased this.
Maybe you remember, but it was something like actually a lot of people don't
want to just have you spewing the truth at them.
Like either it's annoying or it's TMI.
Or that there are contexts where you just really don't need specific truths
presented to you right now.
Yeah.
Like the line from the summary section of the bottom of Wes's article is
where a person does not own honesty, there's no need to be honest with them.
That like if someone doesn't want to know something, you're not like violating
their boundaries by not telling them the thing they don't want to know.
Yeah.
I like that framing of radical honesty as telling people like things that you
think that they would want to know.
Or I don't know that that's because it generalizes to so many other situations
in life.
Poker seems like a good example of that.
That's not a case where anybody's expected to send honest signals.
Everyone expects to be lied to and everyone knows that everyone expects
them to be lying to them.
So the, yeah, there simply isn't any force pushing in the direction of
honesty in a case like that.
Yeah.
And I think like entering a situation like that where like everyone knows
that this is literally a game about lying.
Like obviously that's what you're in for.
You shouldn't expect people to be doing this.
I wanted to say something about the thing we were just talking about of only
telling people things that you think they want to hear and that my personal
version of that, I take that a little bit further in that if I think someone
would want to know something, I feel like I have to have a really good reason
to hide it from them to not tell them.
And that I think, hopefully I'm not misconstruing Wes's position here,
but that in that kind of situation, at least according to Wes's rules,
you can also just decide whether you want them to know.
But I just feel like I'm hiding things from people all the time.
If I don't have like a slightly higher standard for that of telling people
things, I think they would want to know even if I'm a little bit uncomfortable
with telling them.
How about like, for example, you have a friend who's just really obnoxious
at parties and their voice is very loud and they talk over everyone.
And you think that they probably are going to get hurt if you tell them,
hey, like this thing that you're doing kind of sucks and I wish you'd stop.
But then also you notice that this person has been going like,
why don't people like me?
That's one of those cases where I think it's a bit where you have to kind of gauge,
is this the kind of person that can hear feedback and will not take it personally,
but will realize that I am their friend and I want to help them improve at something
and that they will want to improve at that thing?
Or is this somebody who's just going to get defensive about it,
think that you're attacking them and not actually change?
So what's the point?
For me personally, I think there are like maybe five people where I would tell them
this unsolicited and many more where if they had actually asked,
why don't people like me that I would give them the suit back?
Yeah, I think this is an interesting point and I think also slightly different
from what I was trying to talk about, which is I think the thing I mentioned
mostly applies to like, I know someone would want to know this thing about me
but they like wouldn't think to ask and also it's like something that like maybe
puts me in a bad light or is like a little bit disadvantageous to me
for other people to know, but I know that they would want to know
and that I often will share those kinds of things anyway,
just because I think things work out better when I do that
and so I don't just feel like I'm hiding that thing all the time.
Maybe it's a central example of this,
something like being attracted to a person who you don't expect to reciprocate it.
Oh man, so that's a specific topic I wanted to mention at some point
of like places where I have difficulty with this.
That might be a good example.
It hurt for me to say because this other thing sort of takes precedence
and that I have traumas around people reacting very, very badly
when I've like expressed interest and intimacy
and so I am generally terrified of telling people that,
of like expressing any interest, so that's a place I struggle with.
But I think like the thing that keeps coming to mind
is sort of like having a dark past kind of things
where like knowing that you've done some terrible thing
that like probably isn't like who you are now,
but it's just like a context that can be useful for people to know sometimes.
I think for me at least, and I think I'm at least somewhat typical here,
my preferences for knowing things about people has appended to it
so long as it doesn't cause them significant emotional distress
to transmit this information.
I definitely have also had issues figuring out
how to communicate attraction properly
because there's a tendency and at least some circles for that
if it's not reciprocated to be taken as a slight somehow.
And I have seen people suffer significant social consequences
for that when it turned out to not to be unrequited.
I still don't know exactly how to communicate that sort of thing properly
outside of narrow social contexts
where it's expected that you communicate it upfront.
Yeah, and I think this is one of those things where like I know that I struggle with this a lot
but I still strive to be more straightforwardly honest about that kind of thing
because when I see other people doing it, it seems to be really good for them.
It's just a lot of terrifying work to get there from where I'm at.
I also think in the case of potentially negative things about yourself
that you would want divulged,
you wouldn't keep them absolutely secret
but you think they maybe cast you negatively enough
that you wouldn't be inclined to throw them out upfront.
I'm sympathetic to the view that disclosing that sort of thing is good
but on a meta level I think that if part of your means of communicating with someone
for example that you wanted to take on as a romantic partner
is to communicate everything about you immediately that might make you undesirable
that's going to make life difficult for you.
I have actually used that as my strategy when I date people.
I don't do it as much anymore but for a while there was a desperation
of trying to explain to people that like actually I have a lot of these neuroses
that are difficult to deal with and if you're not going to be cool with that
I would like to know that up front.
I think I've gotten better just picking people who have the same neuroses as me
so I don't have to communicate it
but I have actually like hey like out of my first date been like so you know
I have anxiety disorders.
I might have a panic attack randomly.
I get really irritable if I'm trying to read and just listing it off
like here's the list of things that you should know about me.
I think this is the kind of thing where like there is a thing to be said
for like giving good first impressions I guess
but I think that the penalty for like sharing a bunch of these negative things about yourself
like pretty soon in a relationship is probably much lower than you would think
I personally space them out when it's like relevant to context
because I think like you also want to give someone an accurate impression of you
and if you only just say all of the terrible things about yourself
that actually isn't helping give an accurate impression of you
but hiding them forever isn't either.
There's also maybe a question of norms where if people expect someone to exaggerate their good qualities
in describing themselves for dating and then they see you list all of your bad qualities
they think wow this is their times to goodness version of themselves
they must be really...
One of those signaling equilibrium things we were talking about yesterday.
Yeah.
Public service announcement, I've mentioned this to you Jess already
when I finish up legal systems in my own podcast
the next project will be Eleazar Yudkowsky's inadequate equilibria in podcast form
and Drake is providing one of the voices for that.
Hey.
Cool.
You heard it here first unless you said it somewhere else.
I said it at Solstice so there's a good chunk of possible audience that knows already.
If you didn't hear it at Solstice.
Alright.
We're talking about radical honesty in relationships
and something that I wanted to get to was
I am in the polyamory community.
So when earlier you were asking about which friend groups or which like social circles
in particular I use this kind of relationship style with definitely I think it's
for me like this is the only way I can do polyamory or even like going a bit further
this is the only way I would want to really do a romantic relationship ever.
So I'm completely sympathetic to that view
and I have some possible eggplant here
depending if you think that they wouldn't be comfortable having it discussed
but I know that Wes insists on disclosing this particular fact upfront about himself
and finds it very frustrating when even in a forum like OKCupid
where that's information that's put right in your face
people still don't read it and know and then act upset when they find out about it.
I am currently in a monogamous relationship
but certainly have found that it would it would seem very hard to make
a healthy relationship work without some level of trust and ability to like
know that you are communicating only honest things to your partner
and at least all all meaningful respects.
Something I find so frustrating is I think you see this in a lot of like rom-coms
or even commercials where
there's this like cliche about relationships where if your wife is asking
does this dress make me look fat obviously you're supposed to say no honey of course
and that seems to be a lot of people's relationship model
that one of the duties of being in a relationship with someone
is to like boost their ego even to the point where you're lying to them
seems very unhelpful to me.
That may that's an exaggerated feature of the formula rom-com plot though
as is other as our other forms of pure of poor communication.
My attitude to that sort of movie plot is Tom Lair is what Tom Lair said.
I think personally that if a person can't communicate
the very least he can do for everyone else is shut up.
Maybe that's why I don't like the romance genre is that it is so much like
so much of the conflict comes from miscommunication.
It doesn't have to I've seen good romances but like that's where the conflict is coming from something else
but so often even comedy in general without the romantic prefix.
There's this funny joke where these two characters are just screwing up
and if they had just talked to each other none of this would have happened.
Yeah I think there's a lot of overlap that and just doing poly in general
and that a lot of rom-com problems would just not be problems
if you're like poly and doing it well and I think these are very similar
because being poly very strongly requires good communication
and like being very open and honest with each other and that like I
it's like there's a lot of issues around jealousy and like being attracted to people
other than like your primary partner like especially in mono things
and like the way you get around that is you just talk about it like
you don't hide that you have various feelings you like actually discuss it with your partner
and this makes it like actually possible to work with these things
and I think that like a lot of the things that you have to do to do poly well
I personally think are also things you should be doing in mono relationships
it's just that the cultural structure of mono relationships gives people permission to not do that.
Yeah I don't even like the word jealousy I think insecurity is usually a more accurate word
like it's not that I want you to not date that person
like sometimes it's more just I don't want you to leave me
or I don't want to be getting less of your attention or love or resource.
I think the fact that poly has strong explicit communication norms around relationship structure
probably goes a long way to averting that.
It depends on what style of poly you're practicing too because there are different styles.
Non-hierarchical stuff I think you would definitely get around that for the most part.
I've gotten that sense elsewhere though as a YouTube book reviewer I like who did a video about why she doesn't read anything by Jane Austen
and her explanation was well every all of the conflict in a Jane Austen story comes from bad communication norms
and stupid norms about who's allowed to interact with whom
and if you don't have the values that make those norms that those norms are associated with
none of the story makes any sense.
Or it just frustrates the hell out of you.
Why is this a problem?
Go talk to this person and say the exact thing that you just said you're not currently allowed to say to them.
One topic I wanted to bring up was the interaction between others' privacy and honesty with someone else.
Like if you have a secret of a third party who you and your interlocutor are discussing.
Right so if A tells me something in confidence and now I'm interacting with B
and A's secret thing in confidence affects my interaction with B
maybe it affects my emotional state or some other aspect of that
how do you handle trying to talk about this with B?
Yeah for me at least
I don't follow the full version of this but
one rule set I've seen is
anything you tell me might be said to someone else unless you like
get me to confirm ahead of time that I will not.
And I do a slightly weaker version of this because I think
for that to work well you have to give everyone advance warning of that
who like ever might tell you something like that
which I just haven't told everyone that thing.
But it's another one of those things where I just try not to get myself in situations
where I have to keep that kind of secret
and so I try to make it very clear with the person who secret it is
whether like they really need me to not repeat it to anyone else
and I try to be careful with how many secrets I have to keep
because I ended up in a situation where
I knew a thing about an acquaintance
that someone else didn't want that acquaintance to know they'd said
sorry this is really hard to say without labels
Person A had told me a thing about person B
this affected my desire to be in friendship with person B
but I couldn't say why because person A didn't want me to say that
didn't want person B to know that person A had said that
because that would damage their relationship
and this is really uncomfortable situation to be in
and I mostly just solved it by I don't talk to person B very much anymore
which sucks.
Yeah I mean it seems like a hard problem.
Scenario I guess I could just say this
I was trying to like be coy about it earlier
I don't think I know none of my family members listen to this
and it doesn't matter
I was talking on the phone with my dad recently
and he just slipped to me
oh by the way your sister is pregnant
oh wait she wanted to be the one to announce that
I wasn't supposed to tell anybody
and I'm laughing because I'm like well now I know where I get it
I like to just tell people don't tell me secrets
because I will blurt them out
like I don't remember in the moment
that yeah it's hard to keep track of all that stuff
and I think the thing is I think most people are this way
there's probably some people who are just naturally good liars
who have really good theory of mind or whatever
but like most people actually suck at telling lies
and keeping secrets
yeah I think one thing that maybe isn't acknowledged as much as it ought to be
is like there is a decent social class to telling someone a secret
and that you have now like burdened them with this potentially eternal responsibility
to like have knowledge that they can't transmit to people
and like even though it affects all sorts of other things that they do
yeah
like I think one thing people should do is say like do you want to hear a secret
oh and um just to finish the story about my sister
so my dad's telling me that she's
well you know she's not sure yet
so she didn't want to spread the news around
but she's just having really bad morning sickness
and I was like okay well
um I just got on Dance at Cheyenne on the black market
which is the best anti-nausea drug
for prescription only
gray market
the gray market in which specifies
I resemble that remark
Canadianfarmacy.com or something
inhousefarmacy.v which is also where I get my Cipro
okay
so I was like well now I have this drug that I could offer my sister
that would
I've read that it's used off label for morning sickness and seems to work quite well
is it cat A?
in order to give it to her
I would have to tell her that my dad told me
the thing that she didn't want him to say
like it's a
it's not I don't think it's scheduled it's a
what is cat A?
pregnancy category
oh
it's not
I don't think that there's
not enough data on
it's using pregnancy for them to
prescribe it that way but that's
I think why it's used off label
I don't think that they've observed any
adverse effects
according to Wikipedia there are no
known negative effects from with pregnancy
but it's not very well studied
okay I've
category B apparently no risk in non-human studies
so that's reassuring to some extent
yeah
yeah but that's like the kind of
thing that I would like my sister to choose
for herself to have that option but now
like I can't
because it's just like I just
sent her an envelope
it's a chat and like
I know your secret
just write an anonymous letter
of course somebody's going to really trust
anonymous letter full of
full of pills yeah
check this
sign it like someone who wasn't
supposed to be told
as far as the burdens of
of confidence is like that my general
policy is to be
at least reticent about sharing
something that my model of the person wouldn't
write a blog post about
and but if I've heard someone
if I've heard the person divulge
the same fact to more
in the presence of more than
three people or after telling
me to at least one other person
that I sort of treat that
as the commons
I think that's reasonable
yeah I think
my standard is generally like
if I think that
sharing it like if it's sensitive
enough that sharing it
might realistically cause
some kind of like social
or other kind of harm
to the person whose secret it is
I try to
just ask that
person can I share this
and
because
trying to like keep a lot of secrets
automatically by default
is just so constraining in what I can say
and the mental load of it
is pretty high as well especially if you have multiple
people in your life who
know or don't know
specific restricted things about each other
keep the table
of that meta knowledge is
really hard to hold in memory
yeah
I wanted to ask one other
thing for like well everyone's
here so we
agreed that probably front loading
all of the negative the undesirable aspects
going into a or
in a new relationship
maybe divulging all
of the bad things instantly is not the best idea
where does that go in when you're pursuing a new one
someone who is
as far as you know not aware of your interest
what do people think
would be a good is a good policy there
so
when you say if they are not like
aware of your interest are you talking about
telling them that you like them
or telling them
or possibly negative things about yourself
both right now
there are separate questions
and I'd be interested to hear about
either one that's more useful
I've made a habit
of just telling people that
I like them and
it's like hey
no pressure I'd like to go out or anything
but like thank you
and if you ever did want to go for your day
I'd be down for that and that has worked pretty well
and I think that
some of that though is that I still
present female
and probably
unless threatening
then somebody who presents male
might be
so I know that
that might be difficult for some people to do
and it took me a while to be able to do it
and it does really hurt being rejected too
the first few times I tried this
the person was just like oh okay thanks
for telling me and then
I was like so that's a no right
I still haven't heard whether it's a yes or no
but
you do it enough times and then like you get
guesses sometimes
and that balances it out
I've seen
I've had like internal questions
about that in the rejection direction as well
I've had one rejection ever
that was completely intellectually
satisfying in the extent that I was aware
I was made aware of the other person's reason
and while I disagreed with it
I didn't find the need
I was not compelled to dispute
or probe further
when I was in college
and I had started on nootropics
and the person I went out with
was a nursing student
and they
we had conversation about that
and they talked about their job and I talked about
the nootropics stuff that I was
interacting with at the time
and the
explanation that I got was
I greatly enjoyed this date
but this thing that you do
seems like a reckless willingness to self-medicate
that makes me doubt you as a partner
and on the one hand
that definitely hits close to home
and I disagreed with it
but that's also
a real reason
and I was
that's a good signal that you might not
get along anyway
on the other hand
someone that honest about that sort of thing
I probably could have gotten along with
but yeah I was going to say
I really appreciate that response
which hers or hers
hers and that
it was
that's the kind of response I always
want to that kind of thing
like actually honest and informative
and like possibly actionable
yeah
yeah that's right
I don't think I've ever gotten a rejection
that
was the real reason
why they were rejecting me and that was always a bit frustrating
yeah
I don't I feel like
if I were in
the rejecting position of this
I would want to sort of ask for
consent or something like
I can give you a more brutally honest version
but I feel like someone might feel compelled
to say well yes I want to hear the truth
even if maybe they don't
maybe this is a baseless worry
but yeah because that's kind of on them
if they've said yes and then they can't handle
the truth well they said yes
but I don't know
I would be surprised if someone said
no I don't want to hear it
that's actually
a hack that I use pretty often
that I really enjoy
especially
if I think something is going to be a bit uncomfortable
for someone to hear
I ask them
if they want to hear it and provide enough kind of categorical information
for them to be able to
make some reasonable
kind of decision
and
mostly what this seems to get me is
that
almost every time the person says yes
but they have the choice to say no
and then if they say yes
because they have the choice
they then no longer feel like
this is being forced upon them
at least as much
and
this tends to result in people responding to
uncomfortable honesty much better
I was going to bring that up
hanging around Phoenix
has helped me also pick up this habit of doing the
would you like to hear
some data about me
or would you like to hear some feedback about
something that might be hard for you to hear
right now
asking before divulging
stuff when you get the sense that it might be
awkward
I think is a really good way to deal with a lot of the discomfort
of radical honesty in general
and sometimes my answer is like
I'm in emotional distress right now
let's try again in an hour
sometimes you watch the person
and you're like are you sure
and then you think about it
and you're like well maybe not right now
or
sometimes I've said yes but can you be very
gentle and kind
or maybe you said
it's a compliment or something
I've offered people
do you want a socially acceptable version
that won't give you anything useful
do you want
something actionable but where I'm taking care not to
still taking some care not to hurt your feelings
or do you want unfiltered stream of consciousness
I like that
I like that and also you said it quickly enough
that I forgot parts of the list
can you say that again slightly slower
do you want a socially acceptable
performative response that
won't give you any information you can act on
do you want
a response where I'm trying to give you
actionable information that may upset you
but will still go out of my way
not to just hurt your feelings
or do you want unfiltered stream of consciousness
I like that
I like that too
I also often try to encourage people
to do unfiltered stream of consciousness
when I think they're
filtering themselves too much around me
I think that's another
a benefit of being in a relationship
with someone who practices radical honesty
is like telling people
I won't hold it against you if you say something
and you're like no wait not that
maybe this
actually let's just drop this whole third
how about this other thing
that's the kind of conversation
that I actually am fine with and enjoy
I think a lot of people
model that kind of conversation as
it's going to be too confusing or frustrating
for the person to listen to
or that you have to absolutely stand by
every statement that you make
even if sometimes you blurt stuff out
you're like no not like that exactly
that's the kind of thing I wish I could think of an example for
speaking of difficult
relationship conversations
we've talked about
the beginnings of them and during them
but one thing that I've done when
sometimes a romantic partner will
say like oh can we talk about
a somewhat serious thing and then reassure me
that it's not a breakup conversation and I want to say like
no wait don't actually tell me that
because then when it is I'll be like
I will accidentally have been given this information
at a time that I didn't actually want to hear it
because you know I'd rather hear that
breakup conversation in a like
prepared emotional state
yeah
yeah I think there's this
that connects again with the like
telling people things they want to hear
kind of a rule where
I think like
timing things so that like the person
can actually receive it I think is pretty reasonable
you just have to be careful to not
keep waiting
forever for like the opportune time
and then never actually saying it
oh yeah one of the like
finer arts of radical honesty
is getting a sense of
when people are more amenable to it
like I think Phoenix said I keep trying to have a rule
where it's like we're not going to do hard conversations
after 11 p.m.
we keep failing at it but every time we do it's a bad idea
it was a lot of your kind of emotional processing
yeah I'm way more insecure
after 11 p.m. and trans out
I
met a note
I think we're at about like an hour and ten minutes of
actual audio
and we were
maybe going to talk about sequence posts
yes do we want to
start shifting over in that direction
give people a chance to bring up any more important
here's a radical honesty topics
yeah one short thing
that does not work well in audio format
to talk about at length
but which I think is worth a plug
is that my favorite webcomic is called
subnormality and often
features interesting complex characters
having the sorts of
genuine conversations with each other that
one might imagine in a society of
people who practice something like radical honesty
if we can include a link to a
a comic called subnormality tells the truth
I think this is maybe a has some interesting
templates for like conversations that might
not happen if people were quite as reticent
as they often are in
existing society
yeah I'll definitely
make a note of that
I just want to wrap up
with this little I had a second
minute it's about the relationship
of radical honesty
to rationality
where
I think that this matters to
me I guess as a rationalist
because
it kind of relates to that whole concept of
guess versus ask a culture I forget if we've had
an episode about that exactly but I think we've talked
about it where rationalists
tend to prefer the ask a culture
word guess culture is more
the game theoretical providing like
plausible deniability excuses
for why people might do things that will help them
always like signal correctly
it's costly
I think in terms of again having to juggle
a whole bunch of different threads of like what's true
what you're allowed to say is true
what things people have told you that are true
but that you're not allowed to tell these people but you can tell
these people like
the
I guess like a core tendon of rationality
is that the truth is good
and it's good to pursue it so
like
I don't know how much
I want to make that like a really strong
moral imperative
because again I do think that
radical honesty is kind of
it's a choice that worked great for some people
probably people on the autism spectrum
especially
and I think
some people really dislike it
and they really enjoy playing signaling games
and that probably wouldn't be the best
you know style of
relationship for that kind of person
and that's fine
another thing is like
I think the Slickstart Codex
surveys
and really some other surveys have shown like
rationalist values they tend to have
openness like effective communication
and less regard for taboo
traditions and signaling games in general
so those are kind of the reasons I brought it up
and I guess
the other thing is that rationality
endorses this like idea of overcoming bias
which
learning not to lie to yourself
in order to be more effective
and less internally conflicted
and I think that this can help you
learn to do that internally
and also applying that in dialogue with others
can also help you just be less conflicted
pursue your goals
more directly so forth and so on
as far as
the signaling games
and the filtering that goes on
in a lot of normal social interaction
I would add that when I
started attending physical
rationalist events I
started to notice a lot more of my
bad social habits and kind of got better
at doing the baseline
socialization because of it
I don't have
I've had a hard time putting it into words
but
being in an environment where I wasn't getting any of the
I get unconscious cues to do a lot of them
but historically I've been a lot of filtering
and
sort of meta
reasoning about the conversation as it's going on
and
the
greater emphasis
on this authentic social interaction
in rationalist circles
caused me to notice what cues I wasn't
getting anymore
I didn't notice them when they were cues that I was getting constantly
but I
like the stare that doesn't exist
at the top of the staircase that you don't notice
until you trip
I only noticed it when I expected it
and it wasn't there
what kinds of cues
out of curiosity
specific things that I would normally
go out of my way to
never disclose to someone
I wasn't already in a romantic
relationship with
like
I have had a
life with a lot of interesting stories
and some of them are more interesting to certain
types of people than others
and I definitely
I've gotten better
in some small way
at identifying those categories of people
and targeting my
interactions accordingly
it's been healthy
I'm definitely still not very good at it
it's been healthy to notice
ways of getting better at it
I think felt this too
that
my brain does some sort of default
understanding of what are the norms here and then how much of myself
do I have to conceal or put filters around
so that I fit in with those norms
and that
in rationalist spaces
I can basically just turn these filters off
and not be projecting a version of myself
that is
more honest, not in the sense of
like truths and falsehoods
but in the sense of like what I would be like
in the absence of social pressures to act
otherwise I think it's maybe
carried back over to that like
experiencing being in a more
sort of safe environment to be myself
lets me
express more myself
in the everyday
world and be like oh you know
I can just be a little bit weird and that's like alright
I think that's definitely one of the
biggest psychological benefits
for me of
ask or teleculture versus
guest culture
something about the guest culture
that I just wanted to comment on from your
your three choices that you give people
about what kind of
communication they want is the
first one of like
socially acceptable performance
performative response
is that
as soon as you give someone
that as an option
they can no longer do guest culture
about it which is like if they would have chosen
that now they have to explicitly
choose it and that's like
especially with the way it's phrased it's like obviously
not socially allowed
and I think that this kind of thing
can trip guest culture people up
okay I'm honestly
a way that I just mostly find entertaining
but I still I might have to
I should work on a rephrasing of that
something like how much effort do you want to go
into not working not into not hurting
your feelings
actually I'm curious what
is the distribution of responses to this
most people
most people ask for the second one
I've gotten
one request for the third one and
about three for the socially
acceptable performative response
which I find trust me confused the crap
out of me at the time
for a reason that I didn't
notice until Phoenix just put words to it which is
once you know that yourself
and we're getting
to the sequence post but there is a sequence post that points out
once you recognize that an option
is self deceiving you can't
really enthusiastically pick it anymore
yeah
you can't pretend
to not be self deceiving
by doing it no no really I've totally
deceived myself
on that note shall we move on to sequences
let's do it
okay
our sequences this
week are
absence of evidence is evidence
of absence
and conservation of expected evidence
so
absence of evidence
the sequence begins with
quote from Robin Dawes rational
choice in an uncertain world
the quote talks about the internment
of Japanese-Americans during World War II
when California
Governor Earl Warren testified before
congressional hearing a questioner
pointed out there had been no sabotage
or any other type of espionage by the Japanese-Americans
up to that time
Warren responded I take the view
that this lack of subversive activities
the most ominous sign in our whole situation
it convinces me more
that perhaps any other factor that the sabotage
we are to get the fifth column activities
are to get
our time just like Pearl Harbor was timed
I believe we're just being lulled into a false sense
of security
and by the way a fifth column
that's referenced a few times in the sequence
it's just a group of people who undermine
a larger group from within
Eleazar says
consider Warren's argument
from a Bayesian perspective
where seeing evidence for something means we should
give our hypotheses higher probability
shouldn't the opposite also be true
using Bayes theorem
Eleazar lays out the math behind the Japanese-American
sabotage question
he says let E stand for observation of sabotage
negation of E for no sabotage
H1
for the Japanese-American fifth column hypothesis
and H2 for the hypothesis
that no fifth column exists
the conditional probability
P of E given H
is our confidence in E of H were true
a quote whatever the likelihood
one would do no sabotage
the probability of P
naughty
with H1
it won't be as large as the likelihood
that there's no sabotage
given that there's no fifth column
the probability of P
of naughty
given H2
so observing a lack of sabotage increases the probability
that no fifth column exists
so he says this doesn't prove no fifth column exists
but the probability theory
there's evidence
absence of evidence is always evidence
of absence
in real life a cause might not
reliably produce signs of itself
but the absence of a thing definitely won't produce any signs
and at the end
Eleazar brings up the fallacy of the gaps
in the fossil record
pointing out that because fossils form very rarely
it's feelable to trumpet the absence
of a weakly permitted observation
when so many other strong positives of observations
already are recorded
in that same vein
if there are no positive observations at all
then it might be time to worry
so hence the Fermi paradox
and he ends this by reiterating
your strength as a rationalist is your ability to be more confused
by fiction than by reality
if you're equally good at explaining any outcome
you have zero knowledge
I forget if this was the first time
he ever actually
I feel like this was a quote that was
maybe a sequence or somewhere else
but I might be misremembering
just because I remember the quote so strongly
and I didn't remember that it belonged to the sequence
I think this is the
earliest use of that particular quote
or
is the noticing confusion post earlier
in the original sequences than this one
he definitely talks about noticing confusion
a lot
yeah I just don't know if it was this
this like
your strength as a rationalist is your ability to be more confused
maybe because I heard it in methods of rationality
yeah because
Harry's conversation with Professor Quirrell
and Diagon Alley references this
and a couple of other very Yidkowski things
and
the thing
which in that vein reading the quote
from
Governor Warren
that
was in support of the internment made me think
I can't believe this you can't have every possible
observation confirm your theory
yeah
some quick google food suggests
that the sentence
your strength as a rationalist is your ability to be more confused
by fiction than reality
than by reality was
first made by Elegy Yidkowski
in a last wrong post two days
prior so this is part of a sequence
about this
about this notion but it is not literally the first
post
so you might have discussed it on like
the previous episode or something
yeah
I want to say that there's also a footnote
at the end of this one
where he says if any of this
sounds confusing see my discussion of Bayesian updating
towards the end of the machine and the ghost
the third volume of rationality
from AI to zombies
so I'll put a link to that too
I guess
the main thing I see here
that I take out of this is
that
lack of evidence for something
when contextualized
where like if you're doing something
that you would expect to generate
evidence for this thing if it existed
and you're like generating a bunch
of other evidence about other things
and
like you keep not seeing evidence
for a particular thing I think that
like that whole being there
sort of like shows up in the shape
of data points around it
and that shape is evidence
of the thing not being there
I think it depends
on
sort of how far the hypothesis
is sticking its neck out about a particular
piece of evidence
like until the LIGO
detected gravitational waves
we had an absence of that particular
evidence for general relativity
but we had a whole bunch of
other evidence for general relativity
that meant that the absence of this extremely
unusual phenomenon shouldn't be taken as
strong evidence against
but when we did finally observe it
this is something that's blindingly improbable
by under any other theory of physics
that we know about
so it's a strongly predicted
rather than
the absence of the detection was a
weakly permitted negative evidence
and the eventual detection was a strongly
predicted positive evidence
one lens
that I think is useful in thinking about this
is sort of imagining possible worlds
and so if we have
a world in which there is
no
no subterfuge by Japanese
Americans and one in which
there is this sabotage
then sort of if you run all these possible worlds
together every passing day that you don't
see any sabotage is one where some of the
worlds where there is sabotage
are inconsistent because in some of those worlds
the sabotage had already happened then you had noticed
and so as time goes by and you see
this occurring
each of those all of the
more and more of the worlds in that universe
where this hypothesis is true are sort of dying off
and being ruled out from consideration
while none of the ones where it isn't happening
are being invalidated so
the pool of your hypothesis space that is taken up by
this hypothesis is false
grows over time
what other thing on reflection and
I think this comes up in the comments on this post
but I haven't read the comments for a while
although Governor Warren probably didn't know
the reason there was
intelligence to suspect the existence of
organized possible sabotage
at the time but not stuff they could talk
about publicly so
there's also an issue here
where they're trying
there's some really motivated reasoning here trying to point
whoever is listening to
what Warren is saying in the direction of
believing something that they know
for what's not the real reason
they believe it
I was going to bring up the motivated reason
motivated reasoning
and politics
because
Eleazar's kind of writing these as
advice to general people and then here's an example
of somebody doing the bad thing
but
the problem I have is some of the sequences
I'm trying to get people who aren't already
bought into it or in the rationality community
to see that this stuff is important
is some of these are just
ideas that if you said them were going to be really obvious on their face
like
the idea that
if there's no evidence for something
maybe that thing
doesn't exist
like if you tried to tell that to somebody as though
it were a revelation they'd be like well yeah no shit
but then
apparently this governor can
make this speech and people can be like yeah
that is suspicious that there's been no sabotage
there's probably going to be sabotage
yeah
and I think that
getting the full point of this
post requires the context
of
a thing that is often said otherwise
in sort of the scientific community I guess
that
the opposite claim of this title
that absence of evidence is not
evidence of absence
and I think that that is true outside of the context
of doing things that you would expect
to generate evidence
that particular one
I get the sense that
although I think technical limitations would have prevented
you from actually doing it
that the is should be italicized or bold faced
because people do fall back on that
frequently
in discussions ranging from religion
to alternative medicine to all sorts of other stuff
that the fact that there's no evidence in either direction
is a license to believe the specific thing
and
no the fact that there's evidence that we should be
that should be easy to find and we don't have any evidence
is in fact
weak evidence of absence
that the
absence of proof is not proof of absence
but absence of evidence is evidence of absence
right
or evidences in the sense is like
you should update
your probabilities at least a little bit
yeah
not necessarily a lot
it is the case that the amount that you update
when you don't see the thing can be much smaller than the amount that you update
when you do see the thing
if I ordered pizza
and I want to know if it will arrive
but I don't see the pizza delivery van
probably only makes my probability that it
has not arrived go up by
a very miniscule fraction each second
but if there's a second that comes by when I do see it
then my probability probably goes up to
99.99% unless there are
pizza van impersonators driving around my town
well that sounds like the mother of all segues
into the next step into the next post
I was hoping that somebody would do that
conservation of expected evidence
and this one
Eleazar starts talking about a priest name
I'm going to say this terribly
so I'm just going to say Frederick
Spieve on Langenfeld
Spade
Spade
Frederick Spieve
Spave on Langenfeld
I guess that's it
you heard the confession of condemned witches
and describe the decision tree for accusing condemned witches
if the witch has led an evil and improper life
she was guilty
if she had led a good and proper life
this too was proof for witches to symbol
and try to appear especially virtuous
after the woman was put in prison
if she was afraid this proved her guilt
if she was not afraid this proved her guilt
for witches to characteristically pretend innocence
and wear a old front
and the quote goes on
Eleazar points out Spade
was in the unique position to act as a confessor
to many witches
so he was able to observe every branch of the accusation tree
but in any individual case
you would only hear one branch of the dolena
so it's one-sided and this might not have been as obvious
he goes back to the rule that
absence of evidence is evidence of absence
and says you can't have it both ways
you would call
the more general law that this falls under
conservation of expected evidence
the expectation of the posterior probability
after viewing the evidence
must equal the prior probability
therefore for every expectation
of evidence there's an equal and opposite expectation
of counter evidence
or on average
you should expect to be exactly as confident
as when you started out
so if like the governor
in the previous post you claim no sabotage
is evidence for the fifth column
hypothesis you also have to believe
seeing sabotage is an argument against a fifth column
and the same he says for arguing
a good and proper life is evidence
that someone's a witch
or that God hides his existence to test humanity's faith
at the end
he asserts it's impossible for a Bayesian to seek
evidence confirming a theory
because you can't expect your confidence
at a fixed proposition to be higher than before
or I guess you might say
you can't control how confident you feel
you can only look for evidence to test a theory
I'm a bit confused
by the
statement that you should
be the same amount of confident before and after
do you understand that?
I guess your confidence equals 100%
the way that I see this is
like if I know that
in 10 minutes I'm going to see some evidence
the lab results are going to come back
but my confidence in my hypothesis right now
should be equal to
what I expect my confidence to be
the average confidence that I expect to have
in 10 minutes
which maybe currently it's 50%
and in 10 minutes I think there's
a two-thirds chance it'll be 60%
and a one-third chance that it'll be 30%
assuming that I have done my multiplication right
but that
the on average
I should not expect my confidence would change
because if I could forecast
my future beliefs then I would just
now believe whatever I thought I would believe in the future on average
since one of the
classical ways of introducing people to Bayes Theorem
is the test for a disease
that's got some prevalence in the general population
and the test is X% accurate
there's a good
there's a pretty good chance
given whatever accuracy of the test
the positive result means actual infection
and there's a pretty good chance that a negative result
means no actual infection
but the when you
if you run this on everyone
the probability that
you're still going to end up with
exactly the general population prevalence of the disease
that probability is not affected
by your testing it
okay
yeah that
that much makes sense
yeah
this realization could take a load off your mind
because then you don't have to worry about
how to interpret facts anymore
and ends with human psychology so screwed up
I think
which actually
I remember kind of
go ahead
I think I can sometimes utilize this a little bit
to make myself feel a little bit more rational
and do something like okay
I query my brain as to
what I expect to think in five years
about this decision
if my expectation of what I think
of what future wiser me thinks about this
is different than what I currently think
then maybe I try and update on
what current me thinks to more closely resemble
the future version of me that I think
has better information
like sometimes I think my brain is better
at forecasting what I will believe in the future
than it is at accurately having
an appraisal of what probability
I should assign something now
although I feel like in the spirit of this
you would have to then sort of
also have
the future you
that was wrong and
become both of them
yeah like
I think sometimes I can say like
I think maybe
half of all future me's think this is a bad decision
and half of them think it was a good decision
so I probably shouldn't be 90% confident
it's good right now I should really only think it's 50%
oh yeah
sure
this reminds me of the practice of doing
a pre-mortem
where
you're trying to come up with a plan
and then you're like
I think this plan is going to work for these reasons
but if I imagine
in the future
the plan has failed what happened
it can be easier to conceptualize it that way
and then you can kind of go back to the present
and alter your plan
that kind of way is to take into account
the things that went wrong
yeah I think
this is another theme of
maybe your brain is trying to like you sometimes
about
things that it would like to believe
and so you're starting this project
and parts of your brain are all very excited
and are telling you that nothing can possibly go wrong
but the part of your brain that looks into the future
or conditions on things having gone wrong
haven't quite gotten this memo
and so if you can ask other parts of your brain
then you can maybe circumvent
the parts that are trying to give you confirmation bias
and update your probabilities
that are not true-steeking
mm-hmm
that reminds me of another thing
that's tangentially related but uh
when earlier we were talking
about radical honesty
and poly I was remembering that
we haven't done this yet but uh
Minix and I heard in the multi-amory
podcast which I'm also going to plug
about the idea of doing a
relationship uh
what was it called a break up agreement
yeah it was when we were talking
about earlier in this discussion uh how you
break the news to someone
that you want to break up with them
I like the idea of
we have a break up agreement where we will break up
if these things become the case
and then that way that softens the blow
and like you don't get to argue about it anymore
if these things have become the case
then you're like well we both signed this contract
if you know of a list of example
break up contracts that sounds very interesting
and I would find it cool to read
yeah I also want to read that
that might exist I might be able to find it
and like it that sounds constructive
um I'm also
I remember uh during
this podcast's polyamory episode
uh that Katrina took an opposite
view on codifying thing or not
opposite took a different
and specific disagreeing
on at least the specific point view of codifying
things like that which may also
be worth being exposed to
you said that was just from a previous one
this podcast episodes
yes um before
before Jess was on uh Steven and Yash
and Katrina did a two part episode on polyamory
and I can't remember which part this comes up in
but uh
Katrina mentioned
a more skeptical attitude toward
codified rules on that sort of thing
that may also be worth listening to
I um generally
endorse not having codified
rules like
um
in regard to
trying to think of an example like uh
you can never come home like you can go on a date
but you like can't come home uh after
11 p.m. or something like that
I think that there's like obvious failure
modes for your rules like that
I think something like a breakup agreement I would say
is uh
the fact that both of you read it and that it's a living document
um
yeah I think
makes it less that kind of thing
I think I generally do agree with Katrina's view on that
yeah I think the being updated
makes it much more sort of
healthy in that respect but anytime you make some kind of
commitment like this
in the long term you are
in some sense saying
there's a thing that I worry my future self will do
and I want to
I like sort of don't trust my future self's beliefs
when they are trying to do this
so in some sense you're sort of like
you are distrusting some version of you with more information
that has come to some new feelings
or decisions so that's like at least a thing
to be wary of
yeah I think the breakup agreement thing is
is pretty categorically different
from other kinds of rules and agreements
in intimate relationships
because uh by its nature
it is like inherently
unenforceable because you're ending the
relationship um
and I think the point of them is
is more just like
here's what I intend to do
uh
and just like knowing that about each other can be
uh
it's very least help you
do a bit of planning even if like you know
that this kind of thing isn't enforceable
and can be something of a
comfort in like knowing that this person
intends to not just
ghost you if they're gonna break up with you
yeah for example
that's fair I can see value there
it's it's not so much it's not a
pre-commitment that okay if this happens we're never gonna see
each other again it's okay if this
happens then
I have the option that you can't
protest to break off at that point as we've
agreed which is a different
and more
I am more a different
whole different paradigm to which I'm more sympathetic
yeah and not to get too far down this
uh a bit of the interesting
topic but it's probably time that
we think of patron
oh yeah we've been going for a bit
uh Phoenix did you want to thank the patron
yeah I'm scrolling scrolling down
I
we want to thank
Roman
who
increased their donation from four to five
dollars which I'm going to interpret as
meaning that the show has gotten at least 25
percent better than it was before
yeah
I am gonna go with
that too because
that makes me feel good
so thank you Roman
and
does anybody have anything else they want to say before
we sign off
anything to plug
also
scroll through my list of things to say
he's got quite a list
um Drake's
expanded mind space has
a file of these things
the remaining items on the list I think are
not especially
conversation worthy I've gotten through most stuff
I'm good
yeah I was thinking about
I forgot to look up
things that I'm just like temporarily calling
honesty games
I don't know if there's an actual term for this kind of thing
but like circling is kind of
an honesty game and I remembered
another one hot seat which is neat
and I want to find more of these
and I wasn't prepared
to have a list of them on this episode
if I find a list I'll share it somewhere
also maybe a solicitation for listeners
to share good ones that they have played
and one discord community
that I'm part of has
a thing that you can opt into
where someone
elects to do an honesty hour
where you just commit to answering questions that are thrown at you
and
right yeah I think that's basically hot seat
but on discord
I think it's a good thing
yeah
okay
I feel like I
had some things that I want to plug but I'll remember
I'll do it next time
I'll just edit your own voice
oh I did remember a thing
I wanted to plug
this is
only this is somewhat related
to sort of difficulty of communicating
romantic things to people which is that
reciprocity.io
reciprocity.io
is a website in which
you are shown all of your Facebook friends
who also use this service
and two check marks
one for would you like to go on a date sometime
and one for do you want to hang out soon
and if you and the other person
both check each other's respective boxes
you are notified and so
this is a thing where if everyone used it
maybe 30% of all social dilemmas
would have been solved
yeah I wish that there was a third one
that was just has logged into
reciprocity like within the past month
because my list is mostly full of people
that I don't think ever check it
and I also often forget that it exists
they do give you a chance to
maybe this service is a ping for anyone
who is using it to go and update their
checkboxes
they give you the option to include a blurb
and mine always includes I last logged in
on this date
nice
that's useful
I might have to start doing that in some other places
I should do that on my ad monos box too
like I last updated my ad
this feedback solicitation on
yeah
yeah I like it
alright
I think that that is
all we have for this episode
of the Bayesian conspiracy
yeah
bye listeners we love you
I'm not actually going to
do that
but I am going to actually cause
yeah thanks for
also I'm just like praying
that when I click stop
audacity does not crash
oh yeah I'm not touching any buttons until grey comes over
and makes sure that they're the right buttons to click
I'm going to cut our audacity recording at this point
so just a second
alright the thing to do is click
stop and then save
