I'm cautiously optimistic that there will be enough, enough features of the model that
are generic that we may be able to make phenomenological predictions sooner rather than later.
There are people, those same people who are concerned about the connection between morphine
physics and reality, they often ask, okay, so what are the verifiable predictions you
get from this theory?
In my mind, it's going to be hard to get there because, first of all, the theories
we have, general relativity and quantum mechanics are extremely precise.
They work amazingly in terms of predicting what we see in the universe.
And because of this problem where the hypergraph is at such a small scale and so much smaller
than the Planck scale potentially, or at least, like you say, at an upper bound, it's at the
Planck scale, but it could be much, much smaller than that.
So we're never going to see nodes and edges directly.
We and our instruments are made of nodes and edges, and so it's sort of very difficult
to imagine how we could possibly see nodes and edges directly.
But I have heard you talk about certain possibilities, things like, you know, small discrepancies
in the dimensionality of space from perfectly three dimensional is one of them that might
give us verifiable predictions.
What are your thoughts on how we might find evidence for morphine physics?
Yeah, a few comments that are worth making on that.
So one is, I think, what philosophers call a category error.
And this is actually something which I slightly, it was a disagreement that I had in sort
of how the project was marketed, so to speak, right?
This description of it as like a project to find the fundamental theory of physics, or
even worse, sometimes described as a fundamental theory of physics, where really what it is
is a formalism, right?
The Wolfram model is not a theory.
It's a formalism that parameterizes an infinite class of theories.
And those theories have some commonality.
One of the interesting features of it is that certain things that we might think of as being
peculiar features of our physical universe, like relativity and quantum mechanics, turn
out to be fairly generic features of a large class of those models.
But still, asking for verifiable predictions of the Wolfram model as a whole is kind of
like asking for verifiable predictions of like calculus or differential geometry.
It's, you know, it's a language for formalizing theories.
It's not a theory in its own right.
Yeah.
That's the first comment I'd make.
Okay.
So now that that disclaimer is out of the way, yeah, okay, you might hope that there's
enough generosity in things like the Einstein equations and what have emerging in these
models that you may be able to make, even at the level of the formalism, you might be
able to make quite generic statements about testable predictions.
There I have some, I don't know, I think, okay, it's a fairly generic feature of these
Wolfram model systems that they do not have perfectly homogeneous dimension, either in
space or in time.
Yeah.
The only generic feature that the models also have is that many of them start off very densely
connected and effectively kind of cool down, they become more sparsely connected over time.
And that effectively translates to they start off essentially infinite dimensional and then
they gradually converge to something that's three dimensional.
And that's immediately quite interesting because what that's telling you is that effectively
the universe is starting off much more causally connected than you would expect it to be if
you assumed it was three dimensional.
And the reason why that's significant is because that potentially offers, for instance,
an alternative to what's called inflation in standard cosmology, right?
So in Big Bang Cosmology and what's called Lambda CDM Cosmology, there are these major
problems, the horizon problem, the flatness problem, the magnetic monopole problem, etc.
They can really all be boiled down to the fact that our universe appears to have been
in causal contact much sooner than it should have been, so to speak, right?
So when we look at the cosmic microwave background, the reason why inflation was originally proposed
was because when you look at the CMB, you see that it's a very, very homogeneous distribution
of radiation, right?
The temperature is very homogeneous in space.
There are small fluctuations here and there, which is very important because we believe
those are the seeds of galaxies and all large scale structure.
But by and large, you know, within like a couple of percent, it's all about whatever
it is, 2.7 Kelvin kind of everywhere.
Why is that, right?
If you just take the standard Hot Big Bang model, the standard Lambda CDM model, there
wasn't time.
If you look at the kind of past light cones of every point in space, there wasn't time
for those points to have entered thermal equilibrium.
They weren't in causal contact for long enough.
So in the standard model of cosmology, they should not be in thermal equilibrium and yet
they are.
And so the solution that was proposed by Alan Gooth and Andre Lindy and so on was that
you've got this inflationary period of expansion where the universe expanded much, much more
rapidly than we initially thought.
That has the effect of essentially smoothing out the initial inhomogeneities that we expect
to see as a consequence of quantum fluctuations so that you are actually so that there is
a gradient, but you're seeing a much, much shallower gradient than you would have expected
in the standard Big Bang model because it's been inflated.
So this is an approach that's been proposed.
It does, you know, the advantage of inflation is it does explain the horizon, flatness,
monopole problems, etc.
But the disadvantage is that we have no idea what the particle physics of inflation is,
really.
It relies on this hypothetical inflaton scalar field whose particle physics is essentially
unknown.
There are these quintessent scalar field models that have been proposed that couple to things
like the Higgs mechanism or to dark energy in some slightly complicated way.
They're probably the most plausible particle physics mechanisms that are currently being
explored, but still it's basically a mystery.
So it's a bit of a non-explanation.
It solves one problem, but it brings up a million more.
The exciting thing about this kind of dimension-cooling possibility is that it potentially gives one
a way to explain away the horizon and flatness problems without the need to postulate inflation.
Essentially, if the universe starts off essentially infinite dimensional, then points in space
can be in causal contact much, much sooner.
The apparent conflict with the horizon problem emerges from the potentially sort of mistaken
assumption that the universe has always been three-dimensional.
If you relax that assumption, you say maybe earlier on, closer towards the initial singularity,
it was much higher dimensional, then points of space can enter causal contact much, much
more quickly.
They can enter thermal equilibrium much more quickly, and you can reproduce the observations
that you see in the CMB without the need to postulate an inflaton, without the need really
to postulate any new physics, just this kind of gradual cooling of the dimension.
So if that's really true, which we don't know, but it's a fun thing to think about,
if that's really true, then one would expect that although you would see almost perfect
accord with the predictions of inflation, because the conformal structure of the spacetime
you get is pretty much identical to that of inflation, there would be some small discrepancies.
So in things like the cosmic neutrino background, or in details of the decoupling time of the
cosmic microwave background, we haven't done the work of actually doing all of the kind
of theoretical cosmology yet, but it's become pretty clear just from the initial kind of
back of the envelope calculations that you can do, that for instance, you would expect
the recombination time and the decoupling time to be sooner, to be earlier in a model
which is based on global dimension change, than you would in a model that's based on
inflation, and that has consequences for things like the temperature of dark energy and things
like that.
That's one possibility, these kind of cosmological consequences of global dimension change.
Another possibility is essentially astrophysical consequences of local dimension change.
So in addition to the dimension changing globally, you could also imagine having kind of local
small scale dimension perturbations that propagate a bit like gravitational waves.
And again, those seem to be very generic features of the model, that it's not, it's almost
never the case that you get a Wolfram model rule where the hypergraph is exactly three
dimensional everywhere.
There are normally at least little pockets where it's like 3.01 dimensional somewhere
and 2.99 dimensional somewhere else, and those little perturbations will kind of propagate
like nonlinear gravitational waves, and those will in turn have kind of lensing effects
just like gravitational waves do, but their lensing effects will be different to gravitational
waves because precisely because of the thing I was saying earlier about the exponential
versus quadratic contribution to the volume.
So effectively, if you have a dimension perturbation and you compare that to a curvature perturbation,
the dimension perturbation will distort your light rays much more extremely than a curvature
perturbation because effectively one is contributing exponentially, the other is contributing only
quadratically to the distortion of the metric.
So this means that you do have a bit of trouble in principle distinguishing a very large curvature
perturbation from a comparatively small dimension perturbation, but at least in principle there
are ways that you could try and, you know, you see some perturbation in the structure
of space time, and there are at least heuristic ways that you could try and work out is this
a curvature perturbation or is it a dimension perturbation?
Yeah, again there's more I can say about that, but that's another possibility.
Yes another thing is there are extreme astrophysical events which in principle might kind of lay
bare the discrete structure of the space time.
So one example of this is in Black Hole Inspirals.
This is obviously a very trendy topic in astronomy right now because of LIGO and gravitational
wave observatories and things.
But so when you've got very very strong relativistic field dynamics then in effect because you've
got very very high curvatures, as the curvature gets higher and higher essentially you've
got your causal edge density or your hypergraph density becomes progressively lower and lower
right, in a sense it's like you've got causal edges that are getting more and more stretched
across space until eventually you know very very close to say a black hole merge when
you've got kind of the maximally strong relativistic field dynamics.
You actually expect that to be very very low causal edge density, perhaps so low that discretization
effects become significant.
And one possibility there is that you'd so and this relates to some work I did last
year on doing numerical simulations of things like black hole inspirals in the context of
the Wolfram model.
One thing you quickly discover is if you try and do if you extract the so-called vial curvature
to extract out essentially the quadrupole moment that you get from the gravitational wave perturbation
then depending on precise mass scales of the black holes you see some small scale deviations
from the expected quadrupole moment that you get from continuum general relativity and
those deviations are essentially discretization effects that occur as a consequence of the
causal edge density going way down when you have very strong relativistic field effects.
And so another possibility is that as our gravitational wave observatories get more accurate
we may be able to start seeing those small corrections that are really discretization
errors in the gravitational wave signatures of violent astrophysical events like black
hole inspirals.
That's another kind of rather exciting possibility.
Then there are kind of more speculative things like for instance I've mostly been talking
about relativistic you know astrophysical or cosmological predictions.
There are also kind of more quantum mechanical ones like for instance one thing that the
model predicts that's a little bit different from conventional quantum mechanics is that
it implies that there's a maximum speed with which microstates in the quantum system
or subsystems of the quantum system can become entangled.
So ordinarily in quantum mechanics there's no there's not really any limit to how quickly
two different subsystems can become entangled but because in the Wolfram model we have a
much more geometrical way of visualizing quantum mechanics where the tensor product
structure of our Hilbert spaces and therefore the entanglement structure is visualized concretely
in terms of these branchial graphs.
Well those branchial graphs have a metric and that metric means that there's a maximum
speed with which two states can become tensor producted together and therefore can become
entangled.
That speed is extremely high you're not going to encounter it in kind of everyday events
but again at least in principle there are laboratory experiments you could do to try
and measure maximum entanglement speeds.
So there are known bounds in existing quantum information theory like the Margolis-Leviton
bound that give you some restrictions on how quickly subsystems or quantum system can
become correlated.
In effect the Wolfram model formulation gives us a new set of bounds that could also in
principle be testable.
That's a slightly more speculative idea but it's at least another possible direction
for inroads for phenomenological predictions.
So yeah I'm cautiously optimistic that there will be enough features of the model that
are generic that we may be able to make phenomenological predictions sooner rather than later.
But I mean one problem which is a sociological problem is that we haven't if we look at the
people who've contributed most to the foundational development of the Wolfram model Stephen was
a first class phenomenological particle physicist in the 1970s but that's not really what he
does anymore.
I'm very much not and I have no real training in physics I'm a mathematician.
We have some people like Xerxes and so on who are theoretical physicists but again who
kind of really worked more on the mathematical side.
So part of it is part of the reason why we haven't made as much progress with the phenomenological
and experimental prediction stuff is just a personnel issue right it's that we have
we're pretty well represented for computer scientists and mathematicians and more mathematical
physicists.
We're pretty underrepresented for phenomenological theoretical physicists and what we need is
someone who's a it used to be said of Abdus Salam that he was like he was one of the last
people who could who could really interact with both worlds understood the mathematics
but also understood the experiments and was able to translate between them and what we
need is the mantra I have in my head is that what we need is we need the Abdus Salam of
the Wolfram physics project we don't really have that person yet.
Thanks for listening to the last theory.
Join me for fresh insights into Wolfram physics every other week.
Subscribe to the free newsletter, podcast or YouTube channel at lasttheory.com.
After all, this might be the most fundamental scientific breakthrough of our time.
