So let us give motivation for sheaves. So consider a subset of a plane. So this
square is a subset and consider differentiable functions on it. So say
you have some function going like this. Now this function is not
differentiable at this point. So at this point this function is not
differentiable. So it is not differentiable on this set. But if you
consider a smaller set, say if you consider another set inside it, now this
function is differentiable on this smaller set as you can see. Say on set U.
Now consider another function. Say you have another function which goes like
this. Now this function is not differentiable on set U. So it is not
differentiable right here. So that means it is also not differentiable on a
bigger set. As you can see U lies itself in a bigger set. But this function is
differentiable on a smaller set which is contained inside U. So say you have
another smaller set V which is contained inside U and both these functions are
differentiable on it. So V is richer than U. It has more differentiable functions
than U. So both these functions are differentiable on V whereas on U this
function in green this is not differentiable. So it is not differentiable
right here. So this gives us some kind of a correspondence. And the idea is this
that you have this set V which is contained within set U. And let us denote
differentiable functions by f of U. That is set of differentiable functions
which live on space U. Then as we have just seen V contains more
differentiable functions than U. So you have something like this. So obviously V
is a subset of U. If there is something which is differentiable on V will
obviously be differentiable on U. But as we have seen there could be more
differentiable functions in V compared to U. Just like this green function. So
this is the fundamental idea. So there is contra variance. V is contained in U and
this is the opposite direction. So obviously you could have another set
say W which is contained within V. And then you will have f of W right here.
So rather than composing like this and then going like this we should have
some arrow going like this. So that is this diagram should commute. You go from
here to here and then from here to here is same as going directly here. And that
is all what a pre-shef is. Now let us see this formally. So you first fix a
topological space X and on this topological space X you put a pre-shef.
So we will write pre-shef as this calligraphic f and this pre-shef of
abelian groups. So instead of abelian groups you could consider sets, rings or
modules. So you are going to put a pre-shef of abelian groups on X. So what
does this mean? For every open set of this topological space X you put a
abelian group f of U. So just like on an open set you put
differentiable functions you can put an abelian group. You denote this abelian
group by f of U. Now elements of f of U are called sections of f over U. So for
our example each differentiable function is a section. So this is the first
condition and the second condition is if V is contained within U then you have a
restriction map that is U restricted to V. So first U then V that is U
restricted to V. So restriction map is nothing but this group homomorphism from
f of U to f of V. So notice the contravariance. V is contained within U and
f of U goes to f of V. Such that row of U is an identity. So obviously what we are
talking about is f of U going to f of V. So obviously map going from here to here
should just be the identity. And for three open sets W is contained within V
which is contained within U. You have this condition. So this is more
understandable diagrammatically. So W is contained within V. V is contained within
U. So obviously W is contained within U. So all these maps are inclusion maps.
Now you apply your functor f to it. That is your pre-shef. The maps will
reverse themselves. Because there is contravariance. So all these maps have
reversed themselves. Arrows have reversed. So this first arrow is restriction of U
to V. Second is restriction of V to W. And third is restriction of U to W. All
these three maps are homomorphisms because each of them is a group. So this
is a group. This is a group. This is a group. So the restriction maps are
homomorphisms. And that is precisely this condition. From U to W this map is just
composition of this map. First apply restriction of U V. That is first apply
this map. And then you apply this map. Row V W. That's it. So this row is
sometimes written as restriction map also. So in some places you will find
this. And some places you will find this. So this is what a pre-shef is that we
have seen. Now we want to talk about sheaves. So for sheaves you have to have
two conditions which naturally occur. One is glue ability and the second is
uniqueness. So first we talk about glue ability. So say you have set U and the
set U is covered by three sets. Say U1, union U2, union U3. So say U1 is like
this. U2 is like this. And U3 is like this. And say you have some section S1
lying in U1. So say you have this section here. This section is S1. Now on U2 there
is another section say S2. So the S2 could have anything in U2 but it is the
same as S1 on the intersection. So the intersection they are the same. Say there
is another section S3 in U3. And on the intersection of U2 intersection U3 this
is the same. So the glue ability axiom just says that you can glue S1 with S2
with S3 to get a section S on U. So we can have a section called the section S on
this entire space U. And when it is in U1 it takes value S1. When it is in U2 it
takes value S2. When it is in U3 it takes value S3. Just like here. And more
formally we can write it like this. The glue ability axiom. So say U is covered
by this Ui's i lies in some index at i. This is an open cover of set U. And then
you have sections S i and f of U of i. So these are all in f of U of i. These
sections. So I'm just trying drawing on Ui but obviously each of these S i's are
actually say group elements. And then if two of them agree S alpha and S beta agree
on the intersection. So U alpha intersection U beta. So this is the same
intersection. Just like the intersection here. For all alpha beta then there exists
a section such that S restricted to U alpha as S alpha for all alpha. Precisely
here. This S is in U but restricted to each of these U1 U2 U3 you get S1 S2 S3. So
basically you're gluing this S alpha with S beta on the intersection. And you can
do this for all alpha beta. Precisely here. The second condition is uniqueness. And
that is essentially the same. So say you have two sets U1 and U2. And you have two
things. We have a section S and a section T. So say section S goes like this. And you
have another section T which goes like this. So that is on the two sets it completely
agrees. So on these sets it completely agrees. Then globally it should also agree. That is
there should be no divergence like this. These two will be the same globally also. That
is on say set U. And that's precisely what uniqueness is. That is if S and T are sections
such that they agree on all open sets. So they agree on U1. They agree on U2. So obviously
they will agree on U1 intersection 2. For all this alpha then S is equal to T. So sometimes
this uniqueness condition T is not written. So instead of T 0 is written. So this is called
uniqueness of 0. It means the same thing because we could have just written S minus T in the
previous one. And the only thing left is what is the null set. So the null set either you
can set it to 0 or the null set is the terminal or the final object in the category of groups.
So the terminal or final object has a very specific definition in terms of morphism
going into it. But here naively we can think of it like this. So let us start with this
thing here. So you have W is contained within V which is contained within U and so on. And
at the end you have the null set. Now you apply this F to it. These arrows will reverse.
So you will have F of phi, F of W, F of V. So all the arrows are now going in the direction
towards the null set. So this is, you can see the final object in the category. There
should be a specific morphism from here to here. But anyway you can see this is the final
object in the category. All arrows point towards it. They all point towards it. And
this is just 0 in the category of groups. So if each of them is a group, this is a group,
this is a group, this is a group, then this has to be 0. That is the property of category
of groups. The terminal or final object is 0. Same is true for modules and rings. So
before we end, we have to talk about an example of a pre-sheaf that is not a sheaf. So all
obviously sheaf is a pre-sheaf because sheaf has to satisfy the pre-sheaf conditions. So
sheaf satisfies the pre-sheaf conditions and it satisfies glueability and uniqueness. So
the answer to this question, you know, example of a pre-sheaf that is not a sheaf is bounded
functions on C. This is a pre-sheaf. So because you can take bounded function or set U and
then you can restrict them to a smaller set V and so on. But this is not a sheaf. It is
not a sheaf because if you have an entire function which is bounded on C, then by Louisville's
theorem it will be a constant. So you do not have functions anymore on the entire space.
So that's why it is not a sheaf. Now this obviously represents a problem, you know, pre-sheaf
not being a sheaf. And the way to solve this problem is by a sheafification and we will
see sheafification later on. So let us see some example. So first is sheaves on a complex
manifold. So we will get three examples of sheaves on a complex manifold. So first is
O of U, holomorphic functions on U. So U is a subset of a complex manifold. Then O star
of U. So this is nowhere vanishing holomorphic functions on U. Consider this as a multiplicative
group. And then you have P forms, holomorphic P forms on U, this omega P of U. Then we have
this important example of a skyscraper sheaf. So say P is an X and you obviously have the
inclusion map of point lying in space X. Then you have this sheaf. You write it as I P star
of G of U. This essentially is a notation for a push forward of a sheaf, but we will
come to this later. And this G is same as this G here. So this is a group if P lies
within the set U, otherwise it is 0 if P does not lie on U. So this is groups. So that's
why we are writing G for a group. You are considering 0 as an identity. So you have
to modify this identity to something else if you consider something other than groups
a ring or modules or something else. Or sometimes you would need 1 if you have just multiplication.
So let us see this why this is called a skyscraper sheaf. So say you have this variety as X or
space as X. So you pick some point P. At this point P you have the group sitting. So this
looks like a skyscraper at this point. So another sheaf is continuous complex valued
functions. Now in place of complex value you could put any topological group G. Or better
still you start with some abelian group G and you give it some indiscreet topology.
So continuous R valued functions and so on. Another example is extension by 0. So you have
say a sheaf on Y. And Y lies in another topological space X. So you want to extend the sheaf from
Y to X. And obviously the name says extension by 0. So on the space X minus Y this sheaf
is just 0. So more formally you write it like this. You can extend it to all of X by setting
F of U is F of U intersection Y U lies in X. So obviously this will make sense if U lies
in Y. But in case U does not lie in Y then obviously U intersection Y would just be null
set. And we have set this as equal to 0. And that is precisely why you call it extension
by 0. Because on X minus Y this sheaf takes on value 0. And on Y you already have the
sheaf. Now the most important example for algebraic geometry is this. On a fine variety
we have ring of regular functions. And I have talked about this ring in detail in the algebraic
geometry lectures. So entire algebraic geometry starts at this point.
