Imagine, if you will, a whole new dimension, a brief new world that you can only access
through the medium of a $300 electric blindfold, escape a material world that teeters on ecological
collapse and into a make-believe one where Half-Life 3 came out two years ago.
This virtual world is so immersive that you might not notice when your girlfriend moves
out and takes half the furniture with her.
But don't worry, because the only guys in the metaverse who don't have anime cat
girlfriends are the ones pretending to be them.
But all is not well in this digital paradise, it's being conquered by an artificial intelligence
known as the Zuckerborg.
The Zuckerborg might have convinced you that he birthed the metaverse from his own mind
folds, but its first bricks were laid decades ago.
And if we're going to understand what the metaverse, actually, is, then we're going
to have to understand the dreams and ideals of its reality and deodorant dodging pioneers.
The earliest development in virtual reality actually takes us all the way back to London
in the year of Queen Victoria's coronation.
In 1838, if you wanted to escape the reality in front of your face, you could either visit
an opium den or try out one of Charles Wheatstone's stereoscopes.
Charlie figured out that showing each eye two separate images taken from slightly different
angles gave the illusion of depth, and Victorians first harnessed this eye-tricking tech to
take little head holidays to famous landmarks.
And like nearly all modern VR users, the next thing they wanted to see was some 3D double
Ds.
Stereoscopic pornography was extremely popular, and this would start a trend that we'll see
with pretty much every subsequent virtual reality.
Once someone figured out how to stitch still images together and trick people into thinking
they were going to get hit by a train, the stereoscope was out and cinema was in.
For the next 60 years, a flat screen in a dark room was immersive enough for these 20th century
simpletons.
So there was no need to strap anything to your head.
That was until 1962, when one man was brave enough to ask the question, what if you could
smell movies too?
Morton Highlig was the inventor of the Sensorama machine.
And while its patent diagram might make you think it was designed to cook your head like
a succulent, microwavable meal, it was actually an immersive cinema experience.
In the Sensorama, your head could see, feel and smell five whole films, all farted straight
from Morton's own mind box.
And here, Morton is still leagues ahead of modern VR, where the only thing I can smell
is my own sweaty pits after a vigorous beat saver session.
These though were just the first evolutionary steps in VR.
The hunched over head mounted monkeys who had to walk before we could run straight into
our living room wall.
But in the same year that man walked on the moon, a computer scientist was taking the
first giant leap into virtual reality.
Ivan created a headset attached to a ceiling mounted system called the Sword of Damocles,
which allowed the user to see a virtual environment from different angles without snapping their
neck in half.
While Ivan could be considered the daddy of VR as we know it, his metaverse was nothing
more than a single wire-framed room, which he modestly showed off in this lecture from
1996.
As virtual reality became a reality, its pioneers had to cook up real-world reasons for the
government to spend millions on their made-up fantasy worlds.
By 1985, NASA had given up on sending people to the moon, but they still had enough cash
to spaff on VR motorcycle helmets.
NASA believed these headsets would be used to control robotic vehicles and that VR itself
would be a sort of virtual workstation and three-dimensional data space.
While NASA was limited by the technology of its era, virtual reality was being fully explored
in 1980s fiction.
In 1984, William Gibson published Neuromancer, the first of three novels set in the sprawl,
a science fiction world where drug-addled, sex-mad console cowboys entered a cyberspace
matrix to take on different physical forms.
An anime from 1985 called Megazone 23 also beat the Matrix to the punch with its whole
— actually, you're living in a computer simulation twist — complete with black-suited
agents, computer-simulated women, and some familiar dialogue.
Back in the real world, though, a video game developer and white dude with dreads named
Jaron Lanier was about to push us hard into the Matrix.
After making a ton of cash from developing games like Moondust for the Commodore 64,
Jaron started VPL, Virtual Programming Languages, a company that jump-started the first age
of consumer-focused virtual reality, with products like the Data Glove and the iPhone.
That's eye-like-eye.
That wasn't clear.
Finally, allowing users to finger the blocky inhabitants of the same virtual dimension
where those 90s bowling alley animations must have come from.
If you wanted to slip on a Data Glove, though, it would have cost you about eight grand.
And that doesn't include the $200,000 computer you'd have needed to run a simulation on
an iPhone.
Jaron was, and remains, a dreamer who had deep insights about where the future was going.
And he was as stubbornly committed to the future of virtual reality as he is to his
geeky ass haircut.
Jaron's ambition for VR predicted much of what actually did come to pass.
But they also went far beyond.
As soon as VPL's computers were powerful enough, they created full-body tracking suits
to show the movements of avatars and allowing VPL to live up to their acronym.
Modern VR users are still shackled to these ankle-bracelet things to track full-body movement.
Which is fitting because the only people who really use them are the inhabitants of VR
chat, most of whom should probably be under house arrest.
But naturally, virtual reality's most obvious application is as a tool to act out our most
violent fantasies without consequence.
I'm talking, of course, of video games.
As the World Wide Web went worldwide in the 1990s, the idea of a totally computer-simulated
world seemed a lot less far-fetched, even if some laughed off the internet itself as
a gimmick.
Consumers were finally vicarious.
So companies quickly cobbled together some cheap plastic headsets to strap to their masses.
Although not all of them made it to market, as was the case with Sega's VR glasses,
which got aborted faster than a premature prom night accident.
That same year, Dr. Jonathan Walden had slightly more success with his multiplayer arcade system,
virtuality.
A system where you could shoot each other on an arena of floating chessboards or beat
each other off in a simulated boxing match.
The company just about managed to stay in business throughout most of the 1990s, fuelled
by novelty, hype and a still-priving arcade scene.
But if you wanted to use a VR system that didn't need to be wiped down between each
user, your only option was to get your hands on a Nintendo Virtual Boy.
There was about five left in the country, I found one.
I should probably start by saying that the Virtual Boy wasn't really virtual reality.
It was a headset that was barely more sophisticated than Charlie Wheatstone's stereoscope.
By blasting two separate, slightly different red and black images into your eyeholes, it
created an illusion of depth and a sensation of having your retinas scrubbed with steel
wool, which Nintendo seemed to understand when they advertised it as a creature from
the furb dimension who wanted to give you an aggressive eye exam.
Only 22 games were actually released for the console, and I hear about two of them are
even remotely playable in the hunchback, airport, cavity check position that the console forces
you to play in.
But I'm going to let you in on a secret that you've probably already guessed at.
I have always wanted one of these things, because I am a massive Tetris nerd, and it
is the only console where you can play the worst version of Tetris ever made.
Playing Virtual Boy 3D Tetris is what I imagine it must be like to die on the operating table
while you're having a brain tumour removed.
The overwhelming black space is the incoming darkness, while the incomprehensible mishmash
of transparent red pieces represents the remnants of your threadbare and declining consciousness.
All the while the ghoulish cartoon face of your next piece mocks your every attempt to
escape the hell you're headed for.
The unbearable and increasingly tense 8-bit soundtrack is pumped directly into your ears,
making it feel like you're being forced to solve a Rubik's cube at gunpoint while simultaneously
standing in a German techno club while colour blind.
In summation, I fucking loved it.
Meanwhile the reality dodging dweebs of the VR industry desperately saw novel ways to secure
more funding for the future they were certain was just around a poorly rendered corner.
One successful application was in training simulations to replace learning on the job
where mistakes can be dangerous or prohibitively expensive, like in manufacturing or in surgery
where you can remove someone's spine without consequence.
Other uses though failed to take off, like VR immersion therapy, which was designed to
help users get over their fear of flying.
3D virtual modelling effectively replaced physical modelling in many design-led industries,
though there were still relatively few occasions where viewing it through a headset was better
than looking at it through a really big screen.
But if you're a kid with a data glove then every problem looks like it can be solved
with a bit of digital groping.
The VR community genuinely believed that they could see into the future, and I think even
their wildest, wrongest predictions are quite illuminating.
That when we put this thing on we have bookshelves in various places and they are in the places
where we put them last week or last month or two years ago and we go and get them in
the same way and some of those are encyclopedias and some of those are dictionaries and some
are stacks of transparencies that we put there two years ago, but we carry that with us and
those are just data files that are inside the small thing that hangs on our belt.
By putting on our own four-dimensional hindsight goggles we can see that this guy isn't predicting
the future of VR, he's predicting smartphones.
We do not talk enough, or we talk too much depending on your perspective, about how these
things are already augmented reality devices that have written the logic of the digital
world onto the physical one.
What these guys had literally blinded themselves to was that total immersion only really appeals
to a small cult of consumers who want to escape reality altogether.
Keep that in mind as we enter the next century and the origins of the metaverse, but first
a word from our sponsor.
If you want to surf every corner of the metaverse, you're going to need the bodacious protection
of Surfshark VPN.
Surfshark automatically blocks over one million malicious websites, phishing methods and
other threats.
It also encrypts your data when you choose to unplug from the metaverse, so you can browse
wiki feet on sketchy McDonald's Wi-Fi and no one will be the wiser.
With their tubular noogs policy, Surfshark doesn't keep your data, and it protects
you from the mega corporations who do.
No part of the web is off limits, easily unblock streaming platforms across the world, so I
can keep up with my Indonesian soap operas.
Bagus!
Surfshark is even useful during your shopping trip, keeping you from being the victim of
location-based price discrimination.
One subscription and you can run and install Surfshark on an unlimited number of devices.
With 24-7 customer support and a 30-day money-back guarantee, don't surf without the shark.
Get Surfshark VPN in the link below and use my code, OrdinaryThings, for 83% off and
3 months extra free.
Go on, do it.
They're good, I'll use them.
So what is the metaverse?
Well it depends who you ask and how much money they expect to make from their definition
of it taking off.
The meta wants you to believe that it isn't quite here yet, that it's the next evolutionary
step in the internet's life cycle, specifically the bit in the chart where we go from being
hunched over our screens to launch over our coffee tables.
Parasitic crypto types would have you believe that it's an investment opportunity.
The next gold rush for digital goods, land and services that will all be accessible in
the same cyber casino.
Metaverses argue that the metaverse won't be a head-mounted escape hatch from reality
at all.
Rather, it will be a sort of digital scab that will crust over meat space with the logic
of the internet.
But I'd argue, in a way, the metaverse is already here.
In fact, it's been here for nearly 20 years.
Twist.
The 2000s was a relatively quiet time when it came to VR tech.
The real innovations were saved for those small screens that you can cram in your pocket
and smear with sweet baby rays.
VR headsets looked set to be buried in the 1990s layer of the landfill, right next to
those floral sofas, furbies and copies of the OJ Simpson workout video.
And as the 21st century finally stopped buffering, the first metaverses came online.
Massively multiplayer online games like Second Life, which was called a metaverse during
this Google tech talk, which took place months before Facebook had even launched globally.
Like Hunter said, the basic idea with Second Life was, and it wasn't something that was
possible until five or six years ago to even really start working on, it was this radical
idea that, well, what if you could create a 3D immersive environment that looked as
good as a video game that was tactile and visceral and exciting and sexy, fun to be
in, but had the, of course, very web-like and very compelling property that everything
in it was built by you.
The game itself was released in 2003 to the rabid excitement of anyone who wanted to fuck
the Sims.
Over the course of ten years, its world grew to accommodate over a million active users,
and its pre-Bitcoin digital currency fueled an economy based on in-game real estate, clothing
and customisable genitals.
Manpower's virtual world's liaison Dan Darrow and his team have interviewed hundreds
of people from over 50 countries in Second Life, sometimes using instant translation
devices to communicate.
Part of the company's groundbreaking exploration of virtual work includes convening great thinkers
in Second Life.
Facebook's plan to launch its own cryptocurrency was killed by regulators before they'd even
had a chance to fleece people, but all the way back in 2006, Lyndon Dollars had funded
the fortune of the internet's first digital land baron, Anshay Chung.
The avatar of Aileen Grafe earned millions entirely within Second Life's economy, and
she wasn't alone.
CNN interviewed these specimens in 2010, who were living off the spoils of their own Second
Life real estate empire.
It's clear to see that Second Lifeers were living the dream, both on and off screen.
In a metaverse that pioneered the play to earn grift before it even had a name, VR didn't
make its comeback until 2012, when a 19-year-old named Palmer Lucky posted his plans to escape
from reality on Kickstarter.
He received $2.5 million, and the attention of anyone who still dreamed of mediating all
of their social interactions through a computer screen.
It's her one such dreamer, Mark Zuckerberg.
2012 was also when Facebook rolled out mobile targeted ads, a decision that would grow the
company's profits exponentially for the next 10 years.
It crammed ads into the parts of our lives that had hitherto been ad-free.
Now companies could reach you at the dinner table, in the elevator, or on the toilet, and
the world was better for it.
Or at least Mark thought so, but he dreamed of a further invasion, total dominion over
the world's eyeballs.
Starting small, Mark acquired Instagram for a measly $1 billion, and then two years later
spent over three times that amount to acquire Oculus, which tells you everything about what
Mark thinks about VR.
He is a true believer.
Since then, he has been promoting VR as the next step in personal computing.
And it's easy to see his lizard brain logic.
Computers started off squirrel the way in their own little room, but with the advent of PCs
and the smartphone, they've been slowly edging closer and closer to your face.
It only makes sense to Mark that humans will eventually end our decade long flirtation
with the screen and just bolt them directly to our skull.
So his mission for the last decade has been to fast forward this future into the present.
Presumably so, he'll never have to make eye contact with any of us again.
Since 2016, over 35 VR headsets have been released to a mostly uninterested public, and to a
rabid, red-faced cult of consumers who are keeping the industry alive.
Personally, I'd say I'm a sort of fringe member of this cult.
I'm enthusiastic, but would ultimately duck out the back exit if they started handing
out Kool-Aid.
For most of us, though, Virtual Reality's main appeal is a gaming experience that's
so immersive that it's absolutely fucking nauseating.
I'd say VR is the greatest way yet invented to purge that semi-dormant desire for violence
that lives inside all of our primate brains.
The only reason to play the buggy-as-fuck, unfinished, but incredibly popular blade and
sorcery is just how effectively it allows you to satisfy your inner sadist.
Best of all, because the screen is only visible to you, no one else can see the grisly game
of whack-a-mole that you're playing with a knife and some dude's torso.
If you do need to satisfy your bloodlust, though, it's still a lot cheaper to sprinkle
broken glass on the beach or poison food at your local homelessness shelter.
Most of the best VR games are only playable on an expensive headset that needs to be tethered
to an even pricier gaming PC.
The Valve Index and every HTC device require you to be tethered to your computer master
like the techno-gimp that you are, said the man in the leather jacket, which has really
limited their sales and prevented them from reaching widespread appeal.
To satisfy consumer curiosity, Oculus funded the Samsung Gear, allowing people to test-drive
the function of Virtual Reality by slotting their greasy smartphones into a piece of head-mounted
plastic.
The smartphone VR sold extremely well for about a year, at which point these devices
started gathering dust in garages across the world when people realised they were shit.
But their strong sales showed Mark and the wider VR community that this technology would
never reach widespread adoption until it was cheap, untethered and not shit.
The only headsets that have fulfilled these three criteria are the Oculus Quest and its
successor, the Quest 2, which finally offer users the best of both worlds, as it is untethered
but you can plug it into a PC if you want to experience good VR games.
And its base model is pretty cheap, or at least it's cheaper than an iPhone, or this
fucking mental Gucci visor I found, which presumably only appeals to the Goff Centurion
who rides horses on weekends.
Of course, you look nearly as socially defective wearing one of these in public, but it's
obvious why it's dominating the market, it's an amazing piece of tech, totally intuitive
and unlike anything on the market at a competing price.
Meta don't release their sales figures, but the best independent estimates suggest they
have sold over 10 million units this year.
And that is largely because people can actually afford them.
But Mark and his meta mates are probably losing billions in selling them.
I say probably because again, Meta are very secretive about their sales figures and overheads.
But their reality labs division that make the headsets have reported massive and metastasizing
losses.
Mark is doing this because he knows that widespread VR adoption needs to happen before big developers
will sink money into software.
It is hugely unlikely that Meta is making anything close to a profit with these headsets,
and it is still light years from mainstream adoption.
With Meta's other services showing signs of declining cultural relevance, the metaverse
is an enormous gamble for Mark to hedge his entire company on.
So Mark is bankrolling the entire consumer VR sector.
Without his initial investment in Oculus, the funding of smartphone tech or the Kamikaze
Oculus price tag, the whole industry would still just be a techy niche.
He has spent the last five years trying to sell VR as something more than a head-mounted
entertainment system.
Like in this bizarre presentation, where he appeared as a Wii Sports avatar in a disaster
zone to promote VR as some kind of empathy machine, while still lacking enough human
connection to pull off a convincing high-five.
More recently, Mark has tried to suck all the fun out of VR by promoting the Virtual
Reality Office.
To most people, having your workstation beamed into your eyes is a bit like having your brain
taken hostage.
Why anyone would suffer through the eye and neck strain of having a monitor attached to
your face when a screen or two do just as well is beyond me.
I don't think anyone's convinced.
I've scoured the internet and I have not found one piece of footage where people are
at Facebook HQ doing their work with a fucking Oculus strap to their head.
Then there's the Virtual Collaborative Office, which I think has only found supporters thanks
to pandemic-era brain rot disguised as innovation.
In a few years, these scenes will look as batshit as those water gun baptisms do now.
Meta's idea of a virtual workspace isn't completely off base, though.
The VR industry's main source of revenue, other than entertainment, is in enterprise.
Not much has changed since the 1990s.
It's still mostly used for highly specific scenarios where employees are being trained
to work in physical environments.
There are also training simulators that teach you how to do the soft-handed tasks of white-collar
workers too, like this one from Tailspin that teaches you how to fire an old man named Barry
and emotionally cope as you watch the life drain from his eyes.
Although it seems pretty limited, I fired Barry over and over and over again, and while
it did finally satisfy my need for virtual sadism, it didn't teach me what to do if
he showed up the next day with a bad attitude at an AR-15.
While Mark has been busy trying to show the world that VR is more than a neat toy, other
companies have been busy building their own mini metaverses.
These are game worlds or virtual experiences where you can make friends, explore user-generated
content and hopefully make some cash.
So for the last few weeks, I've been travelling the metaverse, trying to discover the future
and maybe myself.
But as far as I can see, it is mostly occupied by free main groups, children, crypto bros
and the sexually peculiar.
No judgement, but that's maybe free groups that you don't want hanging out in the same
space.
The most cynical metaverse type thing going on right now is Decentraland, a play-to-earn
metaverse built on the blockchain.
Try saying that word-salad sentence to someone who isn't terminally online and they'll
look at you like they just walk in on you, beating your sabre.
Despite this 2017 advertisement, Decentraland is currently still desktop only.
With shit-tier visuals, broken environments and nothing to do other than buy stuff, Decentraland's
main appeal is that it's an investment opportunity.
Plots of virtual real estate sell for thousands, sometimes millions, mostly to companies who
can afford to take a gamble on something so speculative.
J.P. Morgan has even opened its own branch in Decentraland, tucked away somewhere between
the crypto casinos and NFT art galleries.
During my travels in Decentraland, I saw just as many adverts trying to sell land as people
actually building stuff on it.
The fact that one of the only things to do in Decentraland is blow wads of crypto, a
cyber casino under the judgemental eyes of Pepe LeFrog tells you everything you need
to know about this metaverse and its inhabitants.
To their credit, Decentraland did try to spice things up with a metaverse rave back in December,
but it looked about as much fun as getting a root canal at the Holocaust Museum.
A real metaverse needs meaningful interaction, immersion and a successful simulation of something
that users can't get in the real world, which is why I can no longer avoid talking
about VRChat.
Depending on the stats you read, VRChat might be the most continuously popular community
in virtual reality, even though most users don't actually access this world with a
headset.
It's a game that has no objective other than socialization.
Users inhabit strange characters in user-generated worlds and simulate acts that are an abomination
before God.
And annoyingly, I must argue that this is genuinely groundbreaking.
Fifteen years ago, Second Life pioneered cyber sex when it allowed its users to customize
their balls and visit cyber brothels.
Some even found love, but injured even after they discovered their partner wasn't actually
a foreboobed succubus from Mars.
But VRChat's passionate community is now using cutting-edge tech and their degenerate
imaginations to take cyber sex to brave new heights.
Erotic Roleplay, or ERC, is a large part of VRChat's culture.
One thing I learnt during my travels in this metaverse is that you must stay away from
fur hub or club meeker if you value your sanity and or virtual personal space.
In this seventh circle of virtual hell, I found rooms that can be locked for privacy.
Custom avatars that were extremely unsafe for work and people using body tracking tech
to turn jerking off in front of their computer monitor into a performance art.
The VRChat community's commitment to debasing themselves has meant that it is now unmistakably
the most immersive social experience in all of virtual reality.
Users are so attached to their avatars that it's just as common to see crowds of users
standing in front of in-game mirrors as it is to see someone getting straddled by a wolf.
There is also a small community who sleep with their headsets on, aiming to wake up
immersed in the virtual world.
Some have become so immersed in this world that they allege they can feel the touch of
other users, a sensation they call phantom touch.
But considering one of the other things that VRChat is famous for is kids screaming into
the mic and running around these worlds, I'm a little worried about who's getting phantom
touched if you get what I'm saying.
While researching all this has made me want to cry in the shower, it shows you just how
immersive virtual reality has become for its most devoted users.
But its alienating weirdness also demonstrates how far it is from any kind of widespread
adoption.
Since Mark announced Facebook's desperate meta makeover in December, he has been pushing
his own brand metaverse, Horizon Worlds.
It's clear that it's been designed to appeal to a broader audience, and it's doing this
partly by alienating the kind of users who already love VR and make its worlds come alive.
First of all, there are no furries allowed in Mark's metaverse.
No, only floating torsos that are supposed to look like you after you've stood on a
landmine.
Having legs is a frequent cause of complication in other social VR apps.
This keeps Mark's world less janky, but it also conveniently keeps it free of genitals.
Although this hasn't stopped early testers reporting sexual harassment in Mark's brave
new world, forcing meta to hastily give people the power to set up their own little safe
space so no one can fondle the empty space where their balls would be.
In Horizon Worlds there are also no kids allowed, which, to be fair, is a really good idea.
One of the main complaints that a lot of users have with other social VR apps is that they're
filled with more screaming, unwanted children than an orphanage for arsonists.
But despite meta's 18 plus policy, their world is no exception to this.
With microphone-abusing infants somehow managing to bypass Mark's airtight security system.
The creator tools in Horizon Worlds are supposed to be inclusive too, and they are.
They're impressively easy to use.
This will allow more people to get creative, but their limitations will result in flat,
uninteresting lands with repetitive interactive features.
This will kill the service in the long run, as talented world builders will be attracted
to similar apps that are harder to use but are more rewarding.
Sometimes it looks like Mark has shot himself in the foot with the starting pistol before
the race had even begun.
To achieve profitability, the metaverse and VR needs to reach widespread adoption.
And honestly, I'm not sure I see that ever happening, but it certainly won't happen
if meta continues to alienate the people who already love VR.
Although if their latest Super Bowl ad is anything to go by, meta have realised the
error of their ways, and will soon be letting the furries fly their freak flag any day now.
I think that Mark Zuckerberg has fallen for the same fallacy that the VR creators of old
did.
They think that once the tech improves, once the screens get clearer and the headsets get
lighter, then everyone will be into VR.
Whether it's virtual reality, crypto or AI, smug, nerdy early adopters love to pat themselves
on the back about seeing what's coming next.
But in the case of VR, I think it will remain relatively niche.
Normal people are already scared of how much power their screens have over their daily lives.
If you're going to get them to enter a metaverse of some kind or another, you're going to
have to trick them.
That's why the metaverse I choose to smugly predict is on its way, is one based on augmented
reality.
The metaverse won't be a digital world that you can escape into, it'll be a digital
layer that none of us can escape from.
As QR codes plaster the planet and our social lives are mediated by technology, the groundwork
is already being laid.
Pokemon Go already proved that augmented reality could turn the normies into an army
of stampeding zombies competing for the ownership of a digital asset in the form of a Zubat.
Apple and Google are already hard at work on their own AR goggles.
Some might even be released this year, and meta are mapping the world with live maps.
Whether we view it through our phones or a pair of newfangled goggles or a non-invasive
brain chip, one day I think the internet will sort of infect the physical world.
And they'll sell it to us as an escape from the screen.
View a new world with new eyes, new eyes that will sell to you.
That's the future I reckon might be round the corner.
So if you don't mind, I'm going to forget about all that and go play some Tetris.
Oh, and if you could like, share and comment, subscribe, all that kind of stuff, that'd
be swell.
I can go this way.
Tetris.
