Hey guys, Dr. Z, welcome to the ZDoggMD show. Today I have a guest I've been wanting to get on
forever and ever and ever. You guys know I'm really interested in the social dilemma. In other
words, the effect that social media and these exponential crazy technologies that hack our
dopamine centers have had on us, the mental health of children and so on. A lot of my knowledge on
that comes from our guest today and his partner Tristan Harris who runs the Center for Humane
Technology. Daniel Schmackenberger is the founder and director of the Consilience Project and he
is an expert in the catastrophes that can end civilizations and how we might thread that narrow
needle to avoid them. Daniel, man, welcome to the show. It's good to be here with you, man.
Dude. Happy that we're finally here. It's, dude, I just saw you on Rogan with Tristan and I was like,
oh man, they're hitting all the buttons on civilization level threats. And then I thought,
well, what are we going to talk about when you come on my show? Because you just were on Rogan,
you've been on Lex Friedman, you've been all over the place. And then we started talking before the
show and immediately I was like, oh my god, this is a conversation no one's having. And it's a,
let's start it this way. We have these god level technologies now that really pray and I'm talking
about social media in particular, but there's other technologies that really prey on our innate
brain's addictive capacity and really hacks it in ways that are affecting our health,
not just individually, but the health of our entire society. Maybe that's a good starting
point for jumping into what you're passionate about because this is stuff that you've dedicated
your life to kind of studying. How do we can avoid catastrophe?
Okay, so you say godlike tech and if it's not obvious for people so that doesn't sound like
hyperbole, maybe we just take a moment and say what we mean by that. When we have the ability
to do synthetic biology, like actually make life, the ability for genetic engineering,
CRISPR, other methods to be able to change the fundamental base code of life,
artificial intelligence that can do calculations that no type of biological
intelligence can do, when we can extinct whole species, destroy whole ecosystems,
build new environments where the Anthropocene, the human built environment is the major force
shaping whole parts of the surface of the world, that's not the power of an apex predator, right?
No, like Orcas aren't doing all that. Are you sure? I don't know if you've read the
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, but I believe dolphins did a lot of damage.
So trying to model humans as one of the primate hominids and apply apex predator theory,
like it just clearly doesn't explain the kind of thing that we are, we've had a curve of being
able to develop tech faster than the environment can become resilient to the way we use that tech,
right? Predators increase, there's a co-evolutionary process where predators increase their predator
capacity through mutation at the same rate that the prey is increasing its capacity to avoid the
predators, the slower ones get eaten, the faster ones inbraid, that kind of thing.
We were able to increase our predatory capacity way faster than any animal was able to increase
their resilience to it, so we were able to over hunt an environment and then rather have our
population checked to that environment, we were able to move and become the apex predator in the
next environment. Polar bears are not apex predators in the savanna, Orcas aren't on land,
we went and became apex predators everywhere, we're able to over hunt an environment and then
enslave them through factory farming and things like that, so like this really different,
it's a different thing. We're a whole new genre of being, right, to be able to do that.
Not to derail you, but is that because we have the capacity for language communication across
large groups in flexible ways that say bees or ants don't have or orcas don't have?
Yeah, there's a type of abstraction that lends itself towards the nature of our language and
very specifically towards the nature of our tech. Obviously, we'll see that beavers use,
they modify their environment in a particular way, birds with their nests do will obviously see
whether it's birds or primates use of certain kinds of objects in their environment that we
can call a tool, but they're not evolving the way they do that as time goes on, they co-evolved
with some environmental capacity that they found, so a chimp will use a rock to cut something,
they'll experientially try one rock versus another in whichever one they can tell is
cutting better they'll use, but to understand the abstract principle of sharpness, what does
this one have more than this one to design one that is sharper is a thing they don't do, right,
but it is the thing that Homo habilis started doing, which was how do we actually start to
create stone tools because we understand the abstract principle of sharpness and can make
a sharper thing, which is understanding what all these have in common, but it's actually not any of
them. So that process of what humans were doing that was different started with the beginning
of stone tools, obviously it took a major jump with the agricultural revolution, took a major
jump with the industrial revolution, nuclear and then obviously with digital, so we find
ourselves in the verticalizing part, a long exponential curve of power, and you can say now
the power of gods and yet not necessarily a corresponding degree of increase in wisdom
for how to use that power and all of the existential threats are because of that,
because obviously stone tools or even agrarian tools can't destroy the whole world.
So catastrophic risks are always, although human-induced catastrophic risks are mediated
by the level of technological power we have that doesn't have adequate wisdom, prudence,
binding and guiding its use. So this is a great base to start this discussion from because this
idea of all of human history starting with Homo habilis, you said, so this was one of our
progenitors, able to use tools, abstract and actually understand the concept of potentially
of sharpness and that allows a kind of recursive improvement in tools that chimpanzee or a primate
can't do, because like you said they're co-evolving that use of tool with their environment, so they
maybe they notice experientially like you said that this piece of stone cuts a little better,
so they start using it, but they can't de novo go, oh it cuts better because of sharpness,
I bet I could design a sharper tool. So we have this really interesting ability to do that and
over tens of thousands of years of Homo sapien evolution, it's now reaching a phase maybe longer,
right? It's now reaching a phase of exponential growth because the technology itself is allowing
a recursive improvement in the technology, right? And so you know you were starting to talk about
addiction and kind of the hacking of dopamine circuits and reward circuits and one way to
think about that is that Homo sapiens are at least a few hundred thousand years old and obviously the
hominid precursors to that are at least a few million years and all of that genetic evolution
was fit for hunter-gatherer environments, right? Like we were evolving reward circuits that were
relevant for hunter-gatherer environments. Like what like sweet taste or yeah, so if we take
the reward circuits on food specifically, fat, salt and sugar create stronger dopamine
allergic process than green cellulosic stuff and whatever else, right? And dopamine's our reward
chemical to make it very simple. Feels good, do it again. Yeah. Dopamine opioid axis, right? Yeah. So
in an evolutionary environment, you didn't have a lot of salt, fat or sugar, right? The
sugar that you had was only pretty much going to come from things like fruits that were going to
be seasonal and before we hybridized the fruits, the fruits had way more seeds and way less fruit
than they have now, right? In terms of fiber to add a sugar content. Yeah. And so getting all of that
you could that had more caloric density meant that you had a better chance of making it through a
famine and possibly being able to feed more people. The same was true with fats and the same was true
with when you'd find a salt source. And so there was evolutionary selective advantage on
getting all of those you could. So those who had more reward circuit on those actually did better.
Once we figured out how to make all the salt, fat, sugar you want and be able to
combine them in the ways that maximized addiction, right? And remove all the micronutrients,
remove all the vitamins and minerals and just basically all of fast food is just combining
salt, fat, sugar and novel ways with maximum texture palatability and to drive maximum kind of
addictive process separated from all the micronutrients, you actually took something that
where the evolutionary reward was attached to a real thing. Now you have, of course, overweight
and obesity being one of the main causes of health issues and yet the reward circuit hasn't
changed. And so you're able to extract the active ingredient from the thing that it was bound to
that was actually useful. And the same is true with porn to sex. The same is true with social
media to tribal friendships. The same is true with productivity to meaning, right? Like there's a
whole bunch of places where the sexual impulse historically would have been attached to that
mating opportunity was bound to you were going to have children for your, there was all kinds of
intimacy and things that were required to have that happen. Just extract the hypernormal parts
and maximize them and you get porn. Same with likes on Facebook, right? You have no real friend
like you don't have authentic intimacy, you don't have authentic trust, but you have lots of positive
feedback of certain types, which of course then is going to give you the equivalent of overweight
psychologically, which is like narcissism and emptiness. So you can see that society has been
oriented to hijack reward circuits, be able to extract the active ingredient, double down on that
separate from the actual evolutionary beneficial thing that it was originally for. And that's
one of the things is like we're, we're not genetically fit for this environment. We're
not genetically fit for the Anthropocene. And yet we're an adaptive enough creature we can adapt,
but adapt the type of creature we become adapting to that environment might not be the type of
creature we would choose to be otherwise. Okay. This is like the, this is the central foundation
of everything we're going to talk about because the Anthropocene, this age of man,
it's so interesting that man has those capacities and involves to a point where it can generate
technologies in a society that actually feedback to its primitive brain in a way that it almost is
compelled to do like, oh wait, so sugar tastes good, fat tastes good, salt tastes good, fast food
inevitably emerges because we know, especially when you tie it, which we can talk about,
to economic incentives and capitalism, et cetera, that allow a feedback loop that's,
oh, you can actually get, you know, the productivity boost of like making money,
being secure, et cetera, from selling stuff that actually really plugs right into our limbic mind.
And now we have a world where we have this, you said it on Rogan, we have these Paleolithic minds
that are in a situation with this godlike technology that really hacks the Paleolithic
mind to a degree. So whether it's fast food, whether it's social media, whether it's porn,
and porn's something I've talked about a long time ago, but this, it is, it's a decoupling of
that reward dopamine circuit from all the meaning, the relationship, the intrinsic connections that
sex meant historically. Even when it was less of that, like, you know, there were polyamorous
societies and all this, that's all fine. But the truth is, it had more connection and meaning
than it does when you're surfing porn and masturbating. I mean, let's just, we won't take
too long with this, but you can take as long as you want with porn because honestly, I could talk
about it all day. Even if you look at the multi-male, multi-female earlier mating systems,
though you'd call polyamorous mating systems like the ones that Sex at Dawn talks about,
the Mosswa or the Canella people or whatever, the modern interpretation of them oftentimes,
the people who are proponents for it are failing to recognize that they had a completely different
social system that made that adaptive that also included a different economic system, right?
So you have multi-male, multi-female mating, but the whole tribe raised all the kids.
The woman wasn't left as a single mom because she lived with her family, not with her primary,
not with the partner that inseminated her. All of the fathers, because there was low paternity
certainty, all the fathers were contributing to all of the kids. You actually didn't have a primarily
private property based system, but commons based system. So like, you can't extract that one part
from the whole rest of it and have it work, right? So obviously that system could only be
adaptive within that context. This was actually a very interesting conversation Brett Weinstein
and I had many, many years ago because a lot of his evolutionary theory background was
primary mating systems. And he was- Monkey sex.
Arguing for why institutional monogamy did some really important things that a lot of people
didn't understand where the sexual revolution really damaged. And I don't want to put the
wrong words in Brett's mouth. I'm going to share kind of how I understand that it was inspired
by that conversation with him. He might hold this with more nuance, but it was actually upgraded my
thinking on it. He said, if you think about what institutional, like when you think about what we
call civilization to be civilized, this kind of a domestication program for wild humans to be able
to operate together at larger than tribal scale, right? And for hundreds of thousands of years,
we never got tribes bigger than about 150 people. They stayed at very small scales where everybody
knew everybody. So the sacrifices you made for others were non-anonymous people. They were people
that you knew really well and that you wouldn't do that at much larger sizes. And so then the
much larger thing, the thing we call civilization, you can also be thought of as a domestication
program. And the main things you have to domesticate out of people that make them not work together
well have to do with sex and violence. And so this is also where most of the psychological
shadow comes. And it's why the intersection of sex and violence is the deepest part of most
people's psychological shadow. They're kind of put into the same areas. But if you think about
what institutional monogamy occurring with that context, like one of the things that was designed
or a few of the things designed to do, if you couldn't have sex until getting married and then
you weren't allowed to divorce, and that was actually held and of course no system will be
perfectly held. But like just the idea, then in order to get laid, a guy had to get a girl's
parents and preacher and community to decide that he was an acceptable husband and father.
And that and the binding of his ability to get laid, to his ability to be a good father long
term meant that there was an incentive for him to actually be a good guy long term, which meant
him being a good guy for civilization and him being a good guy as a father
were bound to his need to get laid. And that there was a vetting beyond her who might have
already got oxytocin to not be assessing him well because of the crush that the father and the
mother and the whatever would also be helping to assess to grant the right to do the thing.
And then in the wedding ceremony, does anyone object if he had been an asshole to other people
and they got to bring that up? So he has to be an asshole to nobody, otherwise he's never
to get laid. Then this would also be even where the slut shaming came, which is such a terrible
thing in our modern context. But I was coming to understand where like a possible evolutionary
relevance of it was, was that if any women would start to have sex with guys outside of the marriage
context, which would mean that assholes could get laid, it creates an evolutionary niche for
assholes to actually be able to make it. And then those guys figure out how to get more women to
do that thing. And so the idea was almost like herd immunity. The idea was a collectivist idea,
you actually have to close the niche for assholes comprehensively. If you want a civilization to
go well, guys are going to do what they need to do to get laid. So if you bind the opportunity to
get laid to being a good citizen with multiple people vetting it, that's a good system. It's
actually interesting, right? Like most people, myself included, who kind of grew up in a more
post sexual revolution, liberated idea, thought of that as just oppressive nonsense.
Right.
And then I'm like, oh, that's actually interesting. So then the idea was that with birth control,
you kind of have a sexual revolution, it seems like it's liberating for women in particular,
because you decouple sex and reproduction for the first time.
Right.
Where historically, you could never really decouple sex and reproduction well, which is also why
that was going to inexorably affect her biology more than his, because he could possibly
get laid, have a genetic benefit to do so, and have no consequence, and she could not have no
consequence. It'd be a life or death possible thing for her, right?
Right.
And so of course, she'll have higher criteria and more bonding biologically oriented, which makes
perfect sense. It should be that way. But then she's able to kind of let that go and be a
liberated modern person because of birth control pill, but her evolutionary biology
hasn't changed. Again, just like, I can't eat all of the chocolate cake that I want and not get
fat just because I want to, right? Like the biology is the way that it is.
The biology is still there.
They don't get to just separate the reward circuit.
Right.
And so then the idea that after that, there was more of an evolutionary niche where assholes
could get well laid as a result of that, and that actually has a culture of damaging property.
So if you want to go the convention of marriage, if you want to not drop to pre-conventional
developmentally, meaning more selfish than the convention, but go to truly post-conventional,
the post-conventional has to be, okay, well, how do I have, how do the individuals have
more freedom than the institution of marriage to make that choice while still paying attention
to not creating niches for bad behavior to be able to propagate? Like just an interesting topic.
Hey, you know, it's, man, I didn't think we'd be talking about that, but it's fascinating.
And you know what's really interesting about it is it binds this idea that you have this
particular hardware, this biology that's evolved over however millions of hundreds of millions
of years, but then you have the software of the world that feeds back onto it and emerges from it.
So the particular constraints of the hardware may create a social dynamic where, again,
guys have to be good. They are vetted by the family, wait till marriage to get laid, reduce
asshole agenesis, and that helps civilization and helps the short-term marriage. And so that
dynamic feeding back with the biology creates the emergent civilization. Now we're in a situation
where we've, like you said, a good example of birth control. And again, neither one of us is saying,
oh, did you get rid of birth control? Go back to like the dowry, right? No, we're saying the
environment and the hardware actually interact. And we better be aware of how that happens,
because now it's happening in a way that may not lead to a civilization that we want collectively.
Yeah, I mean, you've addressed the thesis, antithesis issue, and kind of the distinct
moral intuitions that cluster more on the right and more on the left. And if you were to try to
make a dialectic like that, like say traditional and progressive, or conservative slash traditional
and progressive, innovative, one way of framing, there's lots of ways of framing this, there's
problems with all the things I'm going to say, because I'm, but one way of framing the
models are limited, yeah, the conservative or traditional intuition is the idea that if there's
a social system that made it through the trials of evolutionary history, and there's lots of them
that failed, it probably has a lot of embedded wisdom that isn't obvious. It probably made it
through for a reason. So go back to the old, keep the old thing, whether it's the founding fathers
or Christianity or whatever the thing is, right, that you're trying to conserve, that there might
be reasons why it worked, that we don't even understand well, that it was tested and tried
and true, and so there's kind of a conservation of that. The progressive intuition is we're
facing novel situations that we never faced, and that the things that worked in the past
couldn't possibly work for that innovation as needed. These are obviously both true and need
to be in dialectic. So the idea that either of those would be adequate is nonsense, because if
the new thing you're doing doesn't factor that most of the environment is still the same and the
things that might work for reasons you don't know and you throw the traditional thing out too fast
and realize it was doing things you didn't realize and you just fucked up, right? So the progressive
often doesn't pay enough attention to the traditional impulse and vice versa. A thousand percent,
and the way that's intuitively felt by people who I think, a lot of people in my audience,
and we use this term alt middle because it's kind of a Mimi phrase, but it's really not quite right.
It's a parody of alt right and it's saying, hey, no, we're actually looking for a synthesis
position. We're saying, oh, there's actually a higher order thinking and complexity that's needed
to integrate the two sides because each side on its own is missing a big piece of the complexity.
So how do we integrate that? And again, to have that standpoint actually or at least have it
aspirationally means inhabiting each side, right? And again, I promise we'll get back to the
Anthropocene and how the technology and all that, but to be able to inhabit each side is
necessary to emerge the thesis. Otherwise, we're stuck in this left-right sort of dichotomy or
thesis antithesis or whatever subject you're talking about where you have two sides or more
than two sides. There's a guy I know from the integral community, Clint Fuse, who did a doctoral
thesis I found really interesting several years ago in the field of developmental psychology,
what are higher stages of development? Meaning people who can process more complexity with
more nuance and what are the things that correlate with that the most? And for a long time, there
had been this idea that perspective taking was the key to the correlation of that. People with
kind of higher stages of hierarchical complexity could take more different perspectives. And the
nuance, if I'm understanding rightly what his work added was, it was actually not
perspective taking as much as perspective seeking. It was actually an impetus to seek the
perspective, not something the capacity to take them without doing it.
Oh, interesting. Intention, drive, motivation to actually see another's perspective.
And so it's interesting to think that the thing that would be the generator function of complexity
of thought the most is the innate impulse to try to understand where people are coming from
and be able to see their worldview and then be able to run parallax across lots of those.
So perspective seeking, then perspective taking, then perspective analysis. Can I error correct
them? Then perspective synthesis. Okay, so that's the process. It's interesting because I find that
one of the biggest rushes I get is when somebody that I disagree with explains their position
to me in a way that I deeply inhabit it. Like I'm like, oh my gosh, that's like a dopamine rush
in itself. Like I understand, okay, now I can actually, and I actually have that desire to
understand it, but there are some spaces where I'm much more closed off to understanding other
perspectives. Like if I'm having an argument with a friend or something else, there's more of a
block. So it's not a one size fits all, but in general, I think that intention, that desire,
that sort of little internal reward from getting to inhabit another perspective,
in other words, the possibility of it leads to the intention to some degree.
Okay, you just mentioned something that I think is really interesting. We'll go back to where we
were earlier, which is you said you get a bit of a dopamine hit from understanding the view of
someone that you hadn't previously understood where kind of the world opens up, that something
makes more sense. There's like a reward circuit on increased clarity or insight. The thing I'd
bring up here is that not all reward circuits are equally healthy, right? There are hijacked reward
circuits that are mostly entropic, and then there are reward circuits that are mostly
healthier, centropic. Entropic, meaning leading to disorder.
Mostly degrade the system. Degrade the system.
Basically, everything in the direction of addiction is kind of an entropic reward circuit,
or a kind of downgrading reward circuit. Almost all of the upgrading reward circuits
don't provide an easy spike of reward. They require some work and then reward occurs. This
is the one-marshmallow, two-marshmallow thing. Explain that for folks.
Very, very, very famous, classic, many times repeated study. There's a lot of interesting
nuance on the study, but basically you put kids in a room and the study is set up. There's a
marshmallow on the table. The researcher sets a clock for some amount of time, like 15 minutes,
says if you want to eat this marshmallow at any time you can, but then you only get that one
marshmallow. If you wait the whole 15 minutes and you don't eat it when I come back, I'll give you
two marshmallows. Well, first, assessing they'd rather have two marshmallows than one, so it's
an impulse, delayed impulse and impulse control kind of study. It was found that the kids that
eight could wait and got two marshmallows succeeded more at almost all areas of life.
The one-marshmallow kids had higher incarceration, did less well on their SATs, had more divorce rate,
all kinds of things, and that you could assess this starting at like age five.
So it's pretty almost bothersomely deterministic about how successful people would be based on
delayed gratification. Can I avoid immediate gratification associated with long-term goals,
because then it's basically an assessment of capacity for long-term orientation and intentionality.
There are two different reward circuits. There's two different relationships to the nature of that
reward circuit. And so as you were mentioning, you can hear a point of view that you disagree with,
where at first you might actually feel more uncomfortable. You might actually be squirming
in your seat like, fuck, maybe I'm wrong about everything. Which is the worst feeling.
And then you're like, oh, wow, I learned something. It's very much like the reward circuit of
exercising. Like at first, exercise doesn't give you the hit that just eating the chocolate cake in
the moment does. I get an instant hit of increased pleasure from the chocolate cake. Whereas with
working out like I'm sweating and it's painful and my muscles hurt and whatever, but the baseline of
how good I feel in my body as I keep doing that over time goes up. As I keep eating the chocolate
cake regularly, my baseline goes down as I'm getting more inflammation and obesity and those
types of things. So the chocolate cake reward circuit gives me an immediate spike and then a
drop. And then the drop says, now that I'm low blood sugar because the insulin overcompensated,
now I'm craving more sugar. As that keeps going, my baseline erodes. It's a downward spiral into
entropy. Yeah. With exercise, it's the other one. The same is true because what you just said is
when you listen to the point of view, you disagree with long enough and earnestly enough that you
understand that you get a reward on the other side, but the reward actually increased the complexity
and this accuracy of your thinking. There's a reward circuit on the chocolate cake side of this
one, which is the reward circuit on quick certainty. Being right. Yeah, certainty and
sanctimony. And obviously, this is what our information environment is optimized towards
right now. The Facebook news feed is going to show things to people that will maximize their
engagement and their stickiness. And most people, if you put a very long, nuanced research paper
in front of them that has views that they don't agree with, they're just going to bounce. Yeah.
They're only going to stay engaged because it makes them feel right or pisses them off or
scares them. It does some kind of limbic hijack and also in a short amount of bits,
because their attention span is bad. And the short amount of bits means inherently it won't
be complex or nuanced. So, okay, man, so much here. I don't know how you managed to tie it all
back to social media and addiction, but I'm going to give you kudos for that as somebody who does
interviews because I was like, how are we ever going to? So a couple of things you said, limbic
hijack. I just want to let people know hijacking are lower sort of brain functions of that primitive
Paleolithic mind that is susceptible to that, that dopamine addiction, the addiction circuits are
there, et cetera. And the idea that there's two sides of that. And in fact, actually, this is a good
idea to introduce this term of hormesis, which you and I were talking about offline. The idea that
you have this addiction circuit where you get a reward, but then you drop to a baseline that's
below the original baseline, and then it's a downward spiral versus hormesis, which is more
like exercise. Can you explain hormesis? Yeah. And I just want to say, because you have an educated
audience, we're simplifying everything for model purpose and speed purpose. Obviously, it's not
just dopamine. You can have a limbic hijack that is more around fear or outrage and it's
epinephrine and adrenaline and cortisol, but it is also going to create a certain kind of
motivational process. And so when we say dopamine reward circuit, we're really simplifying some
kind of quick motivational neurochemistry. 1000%. And even the neurochemistry, there's even
epiphenomenon around neurochemicals and glial cells and all of that. Again, all the models are
models. Useful to start to help understand the thing and then don't idolize them.
Yes. Okay, hormesis. So the idea with exercise is that if you're moving an amount of weight
that is really, really easy, you're probably not going to get that much muscle growth because
there's no reason for a bunch of muscle growth. Muscle growth, you're going to have to be able
to consume more food to support those muscles. There's energy involved in the anabolism. So
the body's only going to do it if it has to and it has to because you're stressing its current
capacity. So it's when you are at the edge of your adaptive capacity that the system says, oh,
we might actually not be safe if we don't increase adaptive capacity because we're having to engage
in situations that need all of the capacity we currently have, let's generate more. So
hormesis is the property of systems to upregulate their capacity in response to stress that is
near the boundary of what they can handle. And exercise is a classic example, but that's why
you do hot cold therapy is one of the reasons for hot cold therapy is you're creating a kind of
metabolic hormesis. And as you're exposing yourself to more variants of temperature,
the body actually regulates, it has an impetus to regulate its own temperature, which means more
kind of metabolic flexibility. But hormesis in general, like the two marshmallow reward circuits
are usually more hormetic, right? They usually involve stressing your current capacity and then
you get a reward on new capacity. But obviously, the addictive things generally don't require you
stressing your capacity, they give you some kind of hit within the current capacity limits and
usually in ways that downgrade the capacity levels. Overall, yeah. So there's a cognitive
hormesis, there's an emotional hormesis, there's spiritual hormesis, right? So the cognitive
hormesis, like if weightlifting or sprinting or whatever it is is going to be like a physiological
hormesis. The cognitive one is you're going to feel some kind of stress, pain associated with
being at the edge of your attention span. Like if I'm reading text and my mind's wandering,
it's the ability to keep fucking focusing my mind on purpose, it is growing attention span as I'm
like a muscular capacity. Yeah. But I don't get it if I'm not actually working at it. And if I'm
not at the limit of my attention, I'm not going to grow my attention. It won't push. Yeah,
it won't push through. So this idea that in a way when we're seeking other opinions or we're
trying to use an integral perspective, an alt-middle perspective to try to synthesize,
we're pushing ourselves through a discomfort, not to the point of failure where we've injured
the system, but to the point where the system goes, wait, humans are antifragile, which we'll
probably talk about where that kind of stress actually does create that hormetic effect where
the system then responds by getting more capacity. And then there's a reward circuit on that that
is fundamentally a healthier, more aligned one, both healthier for the being and healthier for
the way that being can relate with the world. Exactly. So it's actually a virtuous reward
system as opposed to the addictive reward system. So how then, now we have this human mind that's,
you know, paleolithic and it's now put in a world where we have a different technology
that is relying on reward circuits that maybe are not as virtuous as we would like. Is that
where we are now in this conversation? I would argue that capitalism can exploit one marshmallow
processes better than two marshmallow processes. Interesting. So are you some kind of communist?
I'm just going to establish this now. No, the critiques of, I mean, capitalism doesn't mean
one thing. For some people, they think about that as any system primarily based on private
property ownership, which would have included feudalism and a different version or whatever. And
obviously, Adam Smith, capitalism and Milton Friedman capitalism are not the same kinds of
structures within without a central bank, within without AI high speed trading of complex financial
instruments. They're totally different structures. I would say all versions of it are inadequate
for a long term viable system, but so are all versions of communism, socialism and other
economic systems as we've proposed them. So there's a lot to learn from all of them.
There's a lot about theory of markets that's important, but the long term, like, what do we
have to think about in terms of economics for making it through all of the catastrophic risks
the world faces? And if it's not obvious briefly what the catastrophic risks are,
you have all the environmental risks that are the result of the cumulative effects
of industrialization and globalization. And so dead zones and oceans overfishing,
biodiversity, lost species, extinction, topsoil erosion, climate change, blah, blah, blah, all
of those things, peak nitrogen, phosphorus, whatever. All of those are the result of being
able to extract resources from the world much faster than they can replenish themselves and
turn them into waste much faster than the earth can process them, i.e., a linear materials economy
running on a finite planet that is bound to a monetary system that has a need for exponential
growth to keep up with interest. And so the exponential growth of the monetary system forces
an exponential growth of depletion on one side and pollution on the other side. You get all the
planetary boundary issues. So that's one set of things. And obviously, there's an economic
driver associated with all that. We have to change economics to be able to make sure
that the social sphere and techno sphere are compatible with the biosphere. Right now,
the social sphere, techno sphere combo is debasing the biosphere they depend on.
And you can probably point at the root of that being the primary economic drivers now are one
marshmallow drivers that do not necessarily promote two marshmallow delayed longer term
thinking when it comes to those planetary boundaries. So in other words,
if I don't go out and fish the oceans, another country will. If I like sort of tragedy of the
commons, if I don't mind that particular or some other company will come and knock the
top of that mountain off and pollute the rivers and so on. And it's all in the service of the
particular economic model. That is, you're trying to generate revenue and those things are rewarded
in the current system. And you, you know, the economic system creates a discount rate on future
value. One, because you can't predict it fully. But two, the current value gives me the ability
to invest that capital and make compounding interest or other kinds of financial services
investments with it. It also gives me increased optionality in a changing environment.
And so not knowing what the environment will hold and wanting to do the best I can,
I want the most choice tokens, right? And the dollar is a choice token. It's the ability to,
with very high optionality and high liquidity, do whatever would be adaptive. Whereas if I have
a bunch of farmland, then the thing that I want in the moment is in farmland, selling it is going
to be take a while. If I have a bunch of mining rights or have a bunch of timber or whatever
it is, and especially if I have a bunch of trees that aren't yet timber. And then I decide that
I want to turn them in the capital for some purpose as a long lag time. So there's a game
theory optimization towards more optionality, which means that the thing that has no real value,
right? The dollar is purely representational value, but with maximum liquidity and optionality.
I don't want the things with real value. I want to convert things with real value
into the things with the only fictitious value, but that maximizes my optionality.
And that's, that's very much a short term interest multiplied by a,
a competitive collective action problem. That is just where each agent making the
choice that is good for them in the short term is creates a collective make maximally
bad choices for the whole for the long term. And that in itself, and this idea that cash is
king for that reason, the idea that those long-term choices are the potential civilization level
risks that we face, whether it's environmental, whether it's technological, whether it's
national defense, whether it's nuclear war, all the things that you talk about.
And I think going, so going back to the capitalism as a one marshmallow
sort of optimizer, how does that then relate to where we are technologically,
say with one civilization level threat, which is big tech, social media, attention hijack?
Yeah. I mean, it's like something that anyone would learn in the beginning of their business
career that every business wants to optimize the lifetime revenue of a customer. And addiction
is a really good way to optimize lifetime revenue of a customer. Every hustler on the
street knows this. And so I want, like the best business will apply to the most number of people
and have the most need for continuous purchases. And so it's like, it's hard to beat fast food,
right? It's hard to, like we can start when they're young, we can make it apply to almost
everybody and have it be like a daily point of purchase for forever. Like that's, and that's why
McDonald's became very big and Nestle and you know, whatever. And Coca-Cola and all those,
but even that is actually dwarfed by social media. Because obviously a kid can start with an iPad
before they can talk and start getting conditioned to a hypernormal stimuli and customized
environments to them. So we can start very young. The most time someone gets a Coke is still less
than they check their phone, right? And so the total number of points of contact and
it's optimizing for hypernormal stimuli across lots of vectors, right? It's getting your news,
media outrage, it's helping, you know, sex appeal, food that you're interested in stuff like
and social credit and it's personalized to you with AI optimization. Right. And so your news feed
is like, if I got to test every different version of salt, fat, sugar, artificial flavor
combinations that maximize addictiveness to you and hostess could do that for each person.
That's what social media is for the news feed. That's terrifying, but it's absolutely true.
Anyone who's seen the ads that they get directed, anyone's seen YouTube's, YouTube's algorithm I've
been noticing quite a bit lately because it is super natural at reading my mind. It knows how
to connect me to people that I'm interested in. It knows, interestingly, here's a scary thing as a
creator. It knows how to connect me to people who are making videos that create FOMO for me as a
creator. Oh my God, how did that guy interview so-and-so? I've been trying to get that guy in
my show forever. How did Daniel Schmackenberger? How do you get Daniel Schmackenberger?
Rogan, you loser? Like I put them up and it actually knows me in a way better than I know
myself. It's almost hacked into my brainstem and reading that and it's able to monetize that.
And so if it wasn't doing that for a fundamentally extractive purpose,
it'd be a pretty cool tech. It'd be pretty amazing if it could do something good.
If you could configure it to do that in a developmental direction. If you had some controls
over it. So there's a category of tech that I would say, there's a few categories of tech
that are distinct from previous categories. So for instance, auto-poetic tech, self-replicating
tech is different than non-self-replicating tech. And this is one of the reasons that
so many people have gotten really concerned about bio recently, whether it's synthetic bio
or CRISPR or whatever, is because as fucked up as nukes are, they don't make more nukes.
They don't automatically perpetuate more nukes unless you have a mutually assured
destruction type scenario, which is the deterrent to not use it. But if you release even accidentally
a living self-replicating thing, you've initiated a cascade phenomena that is way harder to predict
what it's going to do or ever stop. And we know it happens when you introduce an invasive species
to an environment where the environment didn't develop natural resilience, whatever that thing
does, it can really fuck up an environment. But what about if you release an invasive species that
is more different than anything else because it didn't even arise the revolutionary process?
Yeah. Well, it might just die off because it's not that hardy, but if it has faster
feedback loops, that could be destructive to everything very quickly. So biotech,
the soonest, but then nanotech and AI all have these kinds of self-replicating properties.
That needs to be its own risk category that's separate from everything else because the ability
to do risk calculus on it is so hard and the ability to ever do post facto mitigation is so
hard. There's another category, but you can say something about that. No, I was just going to say
you reach the end of your ability to model those things. They reach a kind of singularity where
they're doing things that you could never have predicted because of the emergent properties
of the system are way more complex than any model you have to model it. And that's what's
scary about it. That's actually the argument people make about GMOs and things like that.
And I'm not sure, you know, I don't think it's necessarily applicable to most GMOs, but in theory,
it certainly is. The risk reward calculus and the risk tolerance has to change under really
catastrophic risk possibility, even if it's very low possibility, very low probability.
But you're doing something that's going to have a lot of total numbers of things with that low
probability. What tolerance do we have for any probability of something that's totally existential?
And yet there's a perverse game theory in the incentive, which is whoever's oriented to the
opportunity will do better than whoever's more oriented to mitigate against the risk,
right? Because if I say, ah, the risk isn't that high, you guys are scared of a bunch of nothing,
you're being hyperbolic, look at the opportunity, we can blah, blah, blah, cure cancer, connect the
world, whatever the thing that the exponential tech can do in that positive application is,
they're going to go get the market share, get the money, whatever, and then the harms are going
to be socialized. They're not going to be held accountable fundamentally, or they'll figure
out how to bankrupt and restart, or whatever it is that is the legal strategy is a big company
with limited liability can use and good lawyers. And so they have the incentive, like you have a
lot of incentive on opportunity, and that's the kind of Silicon Valley move fast and break things
motto. And so you privatize the gain, socialize the losses, awesome. Now, if your focus is do
really good anticipation of second and third order effects, identify wherever there might
be an externality, figure out how to internalize it, you're just going to go so fucking slow and
spend so much research money that you just lose. You'll go broke. Yeah. Yeah. So unfortunately,
again, there is a perverse incentive to do the riskier versions, pretend they're less risky,
only do bullshit versions of risk analysis for plausible deniability that you did it.
Wait, why does this sound like everything Zuckerberg's doing right now?
You can pick him, but you can pick others too. I'll pick anybody, I'll pick anybody, but
so this is interesting. I imagine you've seen the movie Don't Look Up.
And I haven't actually seen it, but I know the thesis. So everything that you're pointing to,
everything that, and honestly, I watch the movie and I don't see it as a climate change thing.
I saw it as a COVID thing because you frame it however you want to frame it. Any catastrophic
risk. Any catastrophic risk. And COVID isn't really a catastrophic risk, but I saw it framed as
the science versus thesis antithesis kind of thing. It was so depressing to watch because
it held up a mirror exactly to these kinds of things. Like the short-term gain issue, they
want to mine this asteroid instead of destroy it. So the equivalent of Zuckerberg like decides
he's going to do this. I mean, it was crazy and I was watching it going, no, that's exactly what
would happen. That's exactly what would happen with our current thing. And the social media was
deployed tribalizing people. There's a meaning crisis and there's a sense crisis. Like what
even is real is the asteroid even there. Hence the title of the movie Don't Look Up. Well,
Don't Look Up or you'll see what's actually there. It's right there.
Yeah. So I mean, this is also important. Obviously, we live in a reality where
most of the stuff that feels most consequential that we believe we have no first person sensing of.
Right. We are getting it mediated through the 2D screen through other people's thinking and other
institutions and those types of things. That's significant, right? It's significant to
people's ability to have collective intelligence systems work. There's a book, I think it's called
The Politics of the Invisible that was looking at regulation issues after Chernobyl where
should farmers be allowed to grow food here and sell it that the countries had to deal with downwind
of where Chernobyl was given that the uranium was invisible. And for the first time ever,
not the first time ever, but for the first time it became really obvious that there was totally
invisible stuff that was totally consequential. So the farmers and the layperson had to trust those
who had the ability with the Geiger counters and whatever to tell us stuff that only the priestly
class that understood how to do that could do. Because now we're engineering in the invisible
in a really fundamental way. Which we're not designed to deal with as humans. You don't have
the ability to all check and balance and go through the same epistemic process. So unless
you happen to have the Geiger counters and the knowledge of nuclear physics and etc. And then
the biophysics to say well how much increased radiation of what type is going to create how
much mutation to then be able to weigh against the difficulty of the farmers not losing their
jobs and those types of things. And so having created a very scientifically advanced society
also means that then you need a lot of scientific insight to weigh in on the policy things. But
that also means now people have to just trust a priestly class. Or they all have to be
adequately educated and have access to all of those tools. And that like adequately educated
about virology and nuclear physics and epidemiology and climate and etc. Not possible.
So you start to reach information limits. So then you have to say well fuck it we need institutions
that are trustworthy that can do that. Well how do you get everybody to be able to trust
institutions? Even if you had an institution emerge that everyone trusted because it had
some transparent way of being able to show real good epistemic process and lack of vested interest
in rigor and checks and balances on power and it became a kind of legitimate authority.
There's so much power to being a legitimate authority to being able to be the arbiter of
what is real. That everyone who wants to win at the game of power will have a maximum incentive
to try to corrupt that thing. And so then who wins? The scientists and and mathematicians
and philosophers focused on the thing or the best players at the game of power who have
who are funding the thing who have a maximum incentive to start moving it in one particular
direction. So how do you maintain legitimate authority and have it not get captured? It's
a real tricky thing. Why does this feel so familiar Daniel to a certain experience we've had over the
past two years where there are factions who just there's no way to even make sense and
anybody can hijack the mantle of authority including the mainstream including the antithesis
including it doesn't matter put some letters after your name and say some stuff and how is
an average person without the education and virology epidemiology biostats all the other
stuff supposed to make sense of it and this has been a fundamental problem. Well I'll just say it
live on your show this is why since you do such a good job of steelmaning the various points of
view being able to look at synthesis and antithesis with regard to covid I mean thesis antithesis
I think it would be fantastic for you to get leading earnest thinkers on both sides of
the lab leak hypothesis the vaccine mandate the small molecule approach all of the major issues
and be able to facilitate a structured dialectic that identified what they agreed on where they
disagreed what the basis of that disagreement was what it would take to resolve it that used
really the oriented away from rhetoric and towards good formal methodology and everybody
got to watch and see I think that would be amazing and I think you're the right guy to do it.
How dare you number one okay number two what you're describing is a solution is one solution
to the sense making crisis which I think I feel I feel very strongly about as well this idea and
you used a term that I think we should explain steelmaning you said steelmaning so it probably
behooves us to to understand what a straw man is and then we can talk about a steel man so very
quickly a straw man is where you take up opponents argument and you actually distort it in a way
that you and you can correct me if I'm explaining this wrong and you put it out there and we'll see
what they're saying is that they want to kill all kids by not vaccinating them that's called a straw
man because you're building the straw man then you attack it because it's easy to attack right
so it's misunderstanding we're purposefully misrepresenting what they're saying to create a
straw man a steel man on the other hand is actually deeply reconvening what the argument is in a very
clear terms to where even the people who believe this argument are like yeah you nailed it that's
what we're saying yeah straw man's where you are obviously just putting them down and being pejorative
appeal to your own base but that's about it the worst straw man's are the ones that look like
they're steel manning but they aren't right you say well it's understandable why such and such
why they would think this and they care about this and this and it seems like you're empathizing but
it's a faux empathy because what you're doing is setting up what looks like you empathize so that
you're setting up what looks like a solid understanding of the thesis so that then you when
you critique and take it down people will assume that you understand it well except you constructed
it in a way that looked earnest wasn't and had weakness in it right so the the faux steel man
straw man is the most common dreadful one real steel manning is where someone who has actual
expertise in care on the other side would say I have nothing to add yeah like you you actually
comprehensively did the thing you got it good yeah and that's important because first of all then
it eliminates the straw man effect where you're deliberately weakening the opponent's argument
by misrepresenting it and ad homineming and all of the other stuff that you might throw into the
straw man cocktail and it shows that you actually understand what they're saying which means you
already have some degree of empathy with what they're doing which is important I think yeah I mean
it does several things it communicates enough respect for another fellow human being or tribe
or group of people that you took the time to see what they were saying and it shows that what you
say doesn't need to be dismissed instantly as you didn't get where they were coming from first
right which is important yeah and this is what like democracy requires this process
democracy like modern democracies the u.s. and other kind of modern european democracies emerged
out of kind of european enlightenment cultural enlightenment and this is why the founders in
the u.s. said this system only works with a comprehensively educated citizenry and George
washington said it's the primary aim of the federal government to ensure the comprehensive
education in the science of government of every single citizen science of government meaning
everything you would need to understand to know how to do collective choice making well so the
difficulties of game theory invested interest economics history all those things comprehensive
education of every citizen science of government is the number one goal of the federal government
because if the number one goal is rule of law you can do it with a police state if the number
one goal is to protect the boundaries you can do the military dictatorship if you have the
number one goal being anything other than the comprehensive education of every single citizen
it won't be a democracy because democracy is very fragile and requires that kind of thing
and it requires not only that everyone can make sense of third person reality together apply the
philosophy of science and kind of natural philosophy but that they can make sense of each
other's positions and value systems well which is the good faith discourse the empathy the hey
galleon dialectic can i really argue your position well without that democracy has no chance and so
when people have made their fellow countrymen the primary enemy they are actually in the short
term they think they're trying to win a battle about covet or climate change or systemic racism
or whatever the thing is what they're actually doing is waging a war against democratic process
writ large where as you're making your primary countrymen the the primary enemy where all of
the energy within that system goes to infighting and then you elect more polarized representatives
who get create more gridlock authoritarian countries are just going to do better geopolitically
across every way and then you're actually what you're really fighting for is the authoritarian
process to have more global influence over the 21st century yeah and fighting for china basically
so really the like democratic process requires an epistemic commons shared sense making and
shared meaning making to inform shared choice making democracy is a shared choice making process
but that means that we have to have some process to talk about what is right science making right
and some process talk about what do we want and i have to be able to understand the thing that you
want and understand that just fucking you with the thing you don't stop being a political actor
and then you're going to act even harder next time we're just going to escalate an arms race
so how do we make compromises that address what everybody wants and so the bad faith argumentation
destroys the social cons contract and the epistemic commons destroys democracy good faith
argumentation is not sufficient but is necessary and so the steelman is the beginning of a good
faith argument brilliant and i'll say this if you look at any comment on youtube
on say any of my videos you can find accusations of bad faith accusations of capture accusations of
all kinds of straw manning of my arguments and things like that and this is a common this is the
default comment that will rise in the rankings in terms of likes on a youtube algorithm or on a
facebook algorithm and so this then dovetails nicely into how is social media then kind of
weaponizing this process in a way that maybe wasn't intentional but is now the epi phenomenon of
everything from the incentives that set it up to the algorithms that now run it to our primitive
brains that are being addicted to it how then is it creating civilization level risks in us
including the simple question of are we generating a ton of like we talked about this offline a ton
of subclinical mental illness in people you know like what are we doing okay we've got like at
least three really important directions to go here the subclinical mental illness or kind of like
ubiquitous psychopathology of the whole population that is not innate to being human but
a epi phenomena of the civilization design and and honestly ubiquitous subclinical
psychopathology and physiopathology both right mental and physical illness yeah and when and when
when you say subclinical meaning it hasn't quite reached the threshold of being diagnosed
but in the direction of in the direction of and the other thing you said just to tie it in is that
the Anthropocene this this era of this technology feeding back to us is generating this this is not
something innate to us yeah it's a feedback with this okay so that was one thing the other is what
is social media do that is intrinsically destructive to the social construct the epistemic commons
democracy itself and maybe other stuff and that gets to I was starting to give the example of
there's a unique category of tech which is self-replicating tech just to basically there's a few
novel categories of tech that exponential tech makes the one I wanted to get into was social
media why it's unique category of tech so I'll add that in there let's do that uh-huh but then the
third thing that you brought up which was why do those comments that are cynical on you emerge the
most let me do that one real quick yeah let's do that by the way I never write shit down when I'm
interviewing but with you it's like we doing all this stuff I have to write it down and we'll never
come back to it they're they're all good and they're all interconnected we take any of the
directions to be perfect yeah hit me with the cynical comment piece so um kind of drawing on the
pre-trans framework that ken willber popularized I'll I won't even bother constructing that right
now people can look it up I'll just say I've talked about it before too yeah one kind of model of the
development people go through in terms of game theory like their own intuition of game theory
you could call naive cynical post cynical as a developmental process in the direction of
increased capacity to do citizenry naive is where you assume good intent on other
people's parts as a kind of default you assume that what people are saying is generally what they
believe and that other people's interior experience is probably a lot like yours and
and that where fucked up things are happening is probably mostly because of mistakes and things
like that and if you interact with the world in particular systems of power enough that will
become destroyed in you right and the naive it they will crash upon the rocks of reality and
then you'll move into a cynical place where you realize how much ladder climbing how much of
virtue is virtue signaling how much of communication as a whole is strategic where
someone is saying something for the effect they wanted to have not just for what they
maximally believe how much of the epistemic commons is the result of everyone's agentic
desire to make other people believe stuff rather than just what is true all those types of things
right and by the way and when you say epistemic commons you're talking about the the where how
we even get information by epistemic yeah yeah we could call it the knowledge commons which is
just the the available information that we can all look at yeah but it's not just the knowledge
because the methodology that produced it right the epistemic process is going to be key to whether
or not i believe it how i um factor it the all those types of things and then what do i do with
that there's an epistemic process of how do i factor that data to actually come up with
forecasts and conclusions and yeah so the data is not that interesting by itself the entire
epistemic commons how do we collectively make sense of the world together got it got it so
you have the naive then you had the cynical yeah now in cynical like so you read macchiavalley and
you get a good description of the cynical and that that type of court dynamic is actually playing
out and typically around any center of power there's something like a court dynamics around any very
wealthy person you watch in their social circle and there's something like court dynamics yes we've
all seen it we see it at cdc we see it at fda we see it every big institution and so then you end
up getting situations where whoever is in the position of most power will get a distortion bubble
of the type of feedback they get because people want something from them so there are certain types
of disagreements that won't happen so then you'll get the propagation of their own biases and other
people confirming it and all kind of nonsense like that right the steve jobs reality distortion field
type of deal actually that's a different kind of reality distortion this is one kind of vested
interest reality distortion and and if you like want an introduction to how to think cynically
the 48 laws of power is probably the best you can get 48 laws of power who's that by rubber green
got it okay and he's taking macchiavalley but also sun sue and von clausowitz and most of the
kind of strategic thinkers and giving a summary of like how does the game of power work yeah and
and you know you're in the cynical if you say something like if you don't know who the sucker
in the room is at you yeah right because you assume that the game of power is happening everywhere
there is some suckers they're getting taken advantage of etc yeah i think the key is that
there is such a thing as post cynical and the cynical would say the only thing that is not
cynical is naive because typically things don't even have an awareness of a developmental stage
that is beyond them right so that's where you get the mistake blindness yeah so um the
the post cynical says it is possible to authentically care about something more than just self-interest
in a way that you're actually willing to make real sacrifice for and that there are other people
who also can and that authentic relationships of trust can be formed hmm so i couldn't be
post cynical if i didn't believe that there were other people that could be post cynical
right because i have to believe i can have a relationship with trust of trust if everybody
else is cynical you can't there's no trust if everybody else is naive there's no you can't
do it if they're just naive yeah i can't trust them that much because on accident they'll get
played by the cynical people and even though they're trying to be loyal the whole thing will
still get fucked up so i have to know that the other people have an immunity to that process
that they're aware of it but they're also not bound to it this is in the world but not of it
right and so to be post cynical you have to know that other people can be post cynical and then
you have to be able to know how what is a legitimate basis of trust and how do i know that how do i
sense that and so what i would say is post cynical good faith communication is necessary for something
like a the continuation of anything that's at all democratic or republic like anything that
has participatory governance and is not just the people being ruled requires the people being able
to develop that so that has to become the center of the values of a culture that then develops that
in people and checks it reinforces it so does a post cynical this is fascinating does a post cynical
standpoint require the sort of transcending and including the naive and the cynical standpoint
so you have to be able to understand and inhabit the naive and the cynical
to develop a post cynical in the same way that a meta modern or an integral or a post post
modern system actually has to understand post modernist critiques on modernity well and also
understand modernity well right you have to understand the philosophy of science yeah and the
hegelian dialectic you have to understand the post modern critique of why there is no objective
fact right and why there is no objective absolute perspective and claiming it's probably some type
of imperialism or power game and that you can't separate the game of power from the propagation
of ideas yeah and then not just leave it there because that's an untenable place to leave it
and say how do we take that critique as a refinement because that's a deconstruction
process how do we take that deconstruction as a refinement to a constructive process which
means everybody can get on the same page or something other than the game of power because
if all there is the game of power and and all truth claims have no basis other than claim
power then you what you're actually doing is exalting power as the only possible thing
and that thing actually self terminates right a situation where everyone is just playing the
game of power with it means that the epistemic commons and the social contract break democracy
breaks you can't sense make climate change well enough to do any solution with it that half the
population doesn't resist or covid or ai or anything and so you have to come to a way of
being able to make sense of the world address values and cooperate beyond just the game of power
which you know kind of the modern thing so the same with the post cynical right the post cynical
understands why the cynical is there and has to be resilient to that
so like let's go ahead and see where say a left or woke perspective would say good faith just
means you're a naive sucker because let's say we're talking to native american about the history
of the us keeping its agreements with native americans and they're like okay well good faith
communication just continues to privilege the current power system because it's just as let's
all be polite and civil and whatever and not address the fact that the power system came the
way it was by some people totally fucking other people and there's no real push for them to change
it and the victors rarely just give that up and every time we made the agreement then they
fucking violated the agreement and the black community could say the same thing if you go
and look at the history of like oh emancipation proclamation but then fucking jim crow and peonage
and you're like okay so at some point oh i see your argument about being good faith is just
gaslighting you're not going to be in good faith you're going to pretend you're going to ask us
to be in good faith and just fuck us again and you're going to screw us yeah oh you see this
play out on social media all the time in which case cynicism then seems like the only informed
thing right and so you have to have some process to be able to say how do i show up to a good faith
process and really sense if the other side is and ensure they are in orient towards that
simultaneously because otherwise we get defect defect in the prisoner's dilemma how do we get
something to insure against defect defect and be able to have cooperate cooperate because
everybody rationally doing defect defect leads to catastrophe for everybody yeah yeah and that
that prisoner's prisoner's dilemma we'll talk about another time but the basic idea is that this
game theory and and uh this so this is fascinating because again all these pieces that we're talking
about are actually and i've never really fragmented them into these little bits that are actually
very helpful to make explicit this post cynical idea of discourse it is central to what i call
alt middle which is really again it's integral it's an integral perspective it's saying okay
how are we going to make sense how are we going to have dialogue how are we going to try to find
our way through the morass of what is and what ought to be if we can't even agree that we're
acting in good faith and that everybody's accusing everybody else of bad faith right so well and i'm
just so so again going boy i almost feel like we have to go back we should go and do one of these
other two because otherwise we could do a whole show on just that do you want to do subclinical
mental illness here or do you want to do social media as a destructive element of uh
they kind of feed into each other yeah you pick all right let's talk about subclinical mental
illness because i i'm obsessed with this idea you and i were talking about it before and i would
just yeah we need to talk about this because this idea that something in our Anthropocene and what
we're doing technologically sociologically environmentally etc is generating a pandemic
off multiple things narcissism anxiety depression and not not not all of this is being diagnosed
so we call it subclinical but some of it is emotional repression there there's a whole
web of things that's happening that is fed back onto and potentially in a causative loop with
the very technology that we're talking about here i'm curious how you think about this because
again we see it in same primary care there's a saying like hey 50 percent of what we see
is super tentorial above the tentorium of the brain in the cortex in other words it's
everything is biopsychosocial but this is particularly psychosocial and whether it's
depression or whatever and it's manifesting as a physical illness because everything is interrelated
everything is biopsychosocial so i'm curious how you think about this
humans are very adaptive biology in general is adaptive humans are particularly adaptive
it's actually the thing we're saying about humans ability to do tech
co-evolves with how adaptive we are in a way that's an important point to just take a moment on
other animals are shaped by their environment right a particular mutation either is more
advantageous or not in that environment the longer neck is useful if there's if there's
leaves higher up or whatever it is so the animals really formed by its environment
since the tool making process we were going to be changing our environments right we could
both move environment because we could put the tool of clothes on or go to the cold place or
whatever it was and we would start making dwelling units and other things change our environment
we couldn't be too genetically adapted to a particular environment since we're going to be
continuously changing it and so this is one argument on why humans are neoteness for so long
right why we're still kind of helpless and embryonic for so long compared to any other animal
is you know it it takes us a year before we're even walking and it takes a horse
five to 20 minutes to be walking and there's no way horses would survive taking that long
it takes a humongous amount of parental attention to keep these little things alive for so long
like why are we helpless and useless for so long because there's less inbuilt code on how to be what
we are because we're going to be exposed to new environments where we have to actually be be soft
wired rather than hard wired to the new environment we created so we're going to be able to learn
whatever language is here we're going to be able to learn how to use these tools the most fit person
in the Paleolithic era at being able to throw spears is not that good in the time we're texting
and other shit is more useful right so this so so this hardware this hardware of humans that
starts out so neoteness meaning we're baby babyish for so long yeah so we're saying so one of the
things that's unique to us is that our genetics selected for mimetics right meaning mimicry
meaning mimicry meaning not like meme like the memes we think about mi me yeah i i do mean the
memes we think oh okay the memes we think about online are an expression of online the idea of a
meme the way dockins coined it in the selfish gene that the what a gene is to biology which is a
little piece of code that codes a particular behavior and replicates itself a meme is to
consciousness or culture a little unit of code to code to behavior and and six to replicate itself so
beliefs aesthetics fashions whatever end up both making you behave a certain way and then as other
people see you behaving that way end up leading to they spread they spread yeah and so our genes
haven't changed a lot our memes change very very very quickly and our behavior changes and our
culture changes and our and our technos here changes so we are adaptive in a way nothing
else is adaptive because it's so software based right like our hardware selected for the ability
to fast software upgrades and so i wouldn't like it's weird to talk about mental illness because in
one way mental illness is a destructive normative concept because what we define as mentally ill
is based on the dominant paradigm of the time so obviously believing in in animism was mental
illness during oppressive catholic dark ages right right and uh you know women with mania
hysteria because they had a sexual impulse was a mental illness at a certain time and right so
to some degree it's like basically the psychiatric diagnosis is how to keep everyone behaving
within that civilization model yeah and it's saying anything outside of that is bad even
though it might be quite healthy and this was like christina marty's statement that um being
well adjusted to a profoundly insane society is not a good measure of mental health there you go
dsm five uh criticism right there and and yet on the other side we can say so one way we can say
the ways that people are are mostly actually the results of them being adaptive to their environment
not maladaptive right being adaptive but an environment that incentivizes you to lie and to
um not trust people and to even weaponize trust by creating fake trust in people so you can then
you know take advantage of them whatever if that's adaptive right you're actually being
environmentally trained to be that way that's getting feedback on being that way i'm starting
to smell narcissism undercurrent here right with social media so like you think about social media
there's a gazillion things about it but obviously
there most of what comes is very short number of bits with some kind of dope mean hit associated
i've got some pictures images whatever not that many bits in the next one nothing like very long
text field somebody's gonna bounce on that so it shortens attention span and and just hits a lot
of hypernormal stimuli which means then normal stimuli don't do anything right once you've
watched enough of the super airbrushed pictures then normal women start to look less pretty once
you've seen enough porn yeah then you can actually fetishize formally it meaning you can't eroticize
without it right in the same way that like fruits and vegetables don't taste good once you've done
too much mcdonald's right or even impossible or burger which is apparently all vegetables but tastes
like crack to me so you're you're providing a hypernormal stimuli that then desensitizes the
receptor to normal stimuli right which means that it's actually decreasing the potential from
happiness in contact with the world right now you need a narrower thing with higher amounts of it
and saturation to be able to get any effect at all same level and not even the same level sub sub
level yeah um so so social media does all those things but one of the things it does in the
customizing of it right the personalizing it to you if this is starting when someone's a kid
they're they have this experience that the world conforms itself to fit their preferences
in a way that no other previous technology would have ever had a corollary to and so if the whole
time i'm on the digital world uh it's can with very it takes very little action on my part right
i push a button um with very good ux to change everything so i get a lot of change from very
little action and it's all conforming to personalize itself to me the contact with the world of
atoms and the world of real people is going to suck the world of your house for example
well even remodeling my house i'm still it's going to take more work but i'm still trying to
personalize the world to me right but you but it but it's but there's a challenge in other words the
ux on the on the social media app you can personalize your world with a couple clicks way easier
but so much to say tribal dynamic that was an evolutionary process was nature is not modifying
itself what eric weinstein calls contact with the unforgiving it's not modifying itself to at all
the rose gonna fucking prick you if you touch it the so you have to modify yourself to work with
the environment and you have to really modify yourself to work with the tribe right the tribe
is not all going to bend over backwards for whatever your particular whim of the moment is so
is that conditioning narcissism at scale generationally in a way that nothing ever has
along with addictiveness short attention orientation to sanctimony certainty etc like
those are really so again you take the humans remote like all animals are molded by their
environment humans change their environment so we're more moldable to be able to become fit
to new environments we're making environments that are more radically different than our
evolutionary environments then we're becoming the psychological result of those things
and then are those the kinds of people we want to be okay those kinds of people we want to create
okay okay so man that's this idea that we are in equilibrium in some way with our tribe with
our environment with our built environment with our technology and it actually feeds back into
our own behaviors through these mimetic doses back and forth it really cuts to the heart of
now are these are is this where we want to go is this a civilization level threat that we're
developing that self-terminates and how does this relate to something like say Jonathan
Heights coddling in the American mind with a like off talking about exactly this like we're
now creating a generation of say fragile children and adolescents who have more diagnosable mental
illness who have more suicidality if not actual executed suicides and more inability to cope with
the challenges that say the previous generations did not have as much trouble with does this all
kind of tie together i'm curious your thoughts on that okay so let's come back to this kind of
ubiquitous subclinical psychopathology um just as a reference of you know like what what i mean
when i say subclinical is let's say we're talking about a nutrient deficiency there is a clinical
vitamin c deficiency which is scurvy which is a really really low level meaning you're acutely
dying are below that level scurvy naive you're losing teeth and all that but there's an ideal
level and there's a range in between the ideal level and dying of scurvy i would call that
subclinical deficiency yeah even though it's within the healthy range meaning not yet the formal
disease and so i would say there is a subclinical nutrient deficiency that's pretty ubiquitous across
lots of things um there's an acute level of poisoning of a particular kind of petrol toxin
or heavy metal or whatever but then there's any level above the evolutionary environment's
non-exposure to it that is causing some stress on the physiology that i would call subclinical
toxicity so the volatile organic commons coming out of the the paint and the and the carpet that
are carcinogens or neurotoxins or whatever so it's the idea that you can have something that is
disruptive to the ideal homeodynamics of the system but subclinical it's not yet causing
the like acute pathology but it's contributing to a causal cascade with a lot of other things that
can have an effect so that's examples of that physiologically the same is true psychologically
so before someone has diagnosable um you know serious depressive disorder they can be much
more depressive than would be an optimal state for someone we call it kind of subclinical before
they have generalized anxiety disorder diagnosably they can have a lot more background anxiety
than is necessary for the human experience and the same is true for ocd the same is true for
complex ptsd right complex ptsd where you have kind of an excessive trigger response sympathetic
response to some kind of trigger but instead of an acute ptsd where that's on one event it was a
complex ptsd meaning like something that occurred many times i would say it's arguable that like
people have complex ptsd on civilization right like they have this kind of continued trauma
associated with lots of things that creates an increased sympathetic response to lots of things
those are pretty common phenomena i just look at the pandemic i mean this has been happening
throughout you have this constant sort of fear people doom scrolling the all the stuff feeding
back together and then people afraid to leave their house people triple masking and then other
people saying i'm afraid my liberties are gone and and reacting that way it is this kind of
pandemic of subclinical and even clinical anxiety depression um i don't i don't think the narcissism
component is is there in that as much because there's a sense of lack of control to some degree
but who knows well i mean uh i would say sub like increased narcissistic trait subclinical
narcissistic personality disorder and i'm not saying this because i've done the stats on i don't
think anyone has done the stats that i would want to see so i am i'm speaking kind of intuitively
here um first i would say that many of these like whatever the official stat on how many
women have gone through sexual assault is it's just too low it's way too low for a bunch of reasons
meaning almost every buddy that i know has the shared consensus that a much higher percentage
of all the women they've ever met went through some form of sexual abuse than the one in four
that the statistics supposedly is it's more like 90 percent or 85 percent or something so i think
there is some kind of under reporting under assessing types of issues that are part of it
and so when we look at what percentage of the population has narcissistic personality disorder
whatever that might be wrong right like those those assessments might be wrong for any number of
reasons there's reasons to hide that signal if you can yeah but i would say that the percentage of
narcissistic personality disorder or antisocial personality disorder in the general population
is probably much higher than it ever was in an indigenous tribe in which case i would say it was
probably much much closer to zero because it would have always been found out and be non-adaptive
yeah and i would say it's going to be much higher as you climb up the stack of power and you have
to actually win at lots of power games to get up there and so you know there are some stats i don't
know if they're any good but it's like you know five percent in the general population and thirty
percent in the c-suite of four to five hundreds and probably something like 90 percent in the
c-suite of top financial services companies and yeah so it's adaptive in those locations yeah it is
selected for incentivized conditioned yeah etc all the above which then also means that
people with those conditions also have a disproportionate amount of power and influence
institutionally which feeds back on a population level because the institutions are a big part
of our socio-technological environment so do i think that you know narcissistic traits are
much higher than is native to the human condition under different developmental environments in
particular tribal like a tribal environment you're just not going to get away with lying very well
yeah there's just too much surveillance you're not going to get away with with hurting people
in a small environment where everybody knows what's happening with everybody you're not going to be
able to hide the effects of things right there's the increased transparency but as soon as the system
gets large enough that you can hide the effects then you start having an evolutionary niche for
those kinds of parasitic and predatory behaviors it gets right back to the asshole agenesis
exactly the same exact thing that now it becomes not just okay but there is a niche where it
flourishes and it may not it may not actually be directly incentivized but it certainly isn't
disincentivized and actually there are like you said selection factors that actually enrich it in
that population and then so this is interesting because the idea that this exists now at a higher
level say than in tribal times means that this is not something you reduce to genetics it's not
something you reduce to dna it's a complex biopsychosocial process that's an interplay between
us our environment our genes our hardware our software and everything else yeah let's say we're
looking at genes and some particular psychiatric condition or neurological condition it's like
does everyone with apo e4 get Alzheimer's no are there some people who have Alzheimer's that don't
have apo e4 yes so that's like part of that's one type of causal dynamic it is not a one for one
causation typically in biological situations it's not it's not simple as one cause right it's a lot
of things that collectively can reach a threshold and you have nexus causation that's right so are
there genes that predispose certain kinds of things but there's a lot of other attenuating
factors and whatever totally yeah that's what I think with regard I think that
the anxiety the depression the narcissism the short attention spans I think those are all
conditionable yeah and I think they're conditionable where you know I like to look at positive
deviance culturally like where a whole culture for some period of time had one or two standard
deviations more of some desirable trait so I like to look at genes for non-violence or buddhist or
quakers or and be able to see can you have a whole population which means all the genetic
mutation within that population and all the kind of variants but where the population as a whole
its median violence is a standard deviation better than everybody else so there's a group dynamic
which means that culture right actually was able to with factoring genetics whatever attenuate
that a lot and the same is like across very different environments do Jews usually educate
their kids better than a lot of other cultures do and reach higher level of education like it's
very clear there's a cultural effect that does that thing right and so then you start to think about
could you have something that had buddhist non-violence and Jewish education and whatever
types of processes in terms of like could you have a culture that was developing
the you know a different set of traits in people that made a different set of civilization
possibilities associated with a like increased post-cynical possibility now of course we're also
looking at the fact that the technology is developing people itself as we were saying just
simply the like simply the infinite scroll personalized to me type thing is going to have
effects on attention span it's going to have effects and having an effect on attention span
also means it's going to make me more one marshmallow everywhere including offline
because I don't have delayed gratification built in and we see that now yeah it means democracy
will end because democracy requires a long enough attention span a long enough working memory that
I can hear someone's perspective hear multiple perspectives hold them all in working memory
and try to find a proposition that would meet many of their goals right like if I really want to
be able to do collective intelligence well it requires that which is why you know Marshall
McLuhan showed that not only did the printing press occur as and the written word being accessible
to everybody everybody could get a newspaper so you didn't need a specialized knowledge class
out of access and everyone could get textbooks and read not only was the printing press a prerequisite
for democracy but the written word as the primary type of media was probably required for democracy
to work because it required people to think well enough that they could communicate in
writing in long form in a way that could then translate to legal code right to really think
through things formally and that they were reading which meant increased attention span
in a of non-documentary stuff which also meant enough work memory to hear multiple perspectives
to be able to find something that might work come with a good proposition it's like the Hamilton era
where you you know they would write these big treatisees and they would argue in like 20 pages
of text and it was beautiful prose and extremely compellingly well written and persuasion and
knowledge transfer all happened there as opposed to say what now where it's a
political statement on social media with like dislike anger that is designed to inflame rather
than necessarily educate I mean you're one of the very few public intellectuals I know who has
publicly changed a position okay first of all I take offense to the term intellectual all right
dumb as a rock number next yeah I've done that yeah I continue to do that actually
yeah it's super important but you can't have democratic process have any effectiveness if
people don't change positions right yeah because then otherwise what you end up getting is voting
on a binary right one candidate or another or yes or no on a proposition inherently polarizing the
population because what the proposition is created that benefits one thing but it leaves
some other stuff out or harm something else so the thing that you want it's going to help your
kids lives be better but it's going to fuck up the environment I care about now we're actually caught
in a like seemingly existential situation against each other all the energy goes to infighting I have
to be able to find out what you care about and craft a proposition that will actually be a better
synergistic satisfy and communicate to you in a compelling way otherwise democracy is going to
decay fairly quickly into this kind of situation and I think we're which means the ability to
upgrade my own position with new information the ability to model your position well the
ability to try to take a new position that's informed by yours that I didn't have before
so basically the the punchline is what we're doing now with technology or what's being done
what's happening is eroding the very foundations of our ability to be an effective democracy
whereas whereas is it affecting say an autocracy like China in the same way well we know they
controlled their internet because they were aware of this right they knew the like so the
the idea that both education and independent media were prerequisites for democracy was clear
from the beginning of modern democracies right the idea that an independent fourth estate was
actually requisite for an educated population so education means that they have enough history and
background knowledge and logical process that they can process information well in the newspaper
meant they they're continuously informed the idea that we can all get base facts on a situation
in common then we can disagree what to do with them or how to interpret them but we have some
shared base reality to agree on was obviously requisite for something like democratic process
that we've thought about it so you can think about the the engagement based personalized news feed
as not just breaking the fourth estate but being an anti-fourth estate it's really doing
the exact opposite thing because um a trump follower in florida and a um bernie follower in
portland their news feeds might not have a single piece of news in common not not but they're but
they're all going to cover covid and climate change in the ukraine and everything right they're
going to cover everything but with the most opposite valence the only version of the other
they'll get is a strawman version right and they will see so much news that conforms to their idea
that it looks like everybody smart agrees and only ridiculous people are on the other side
and the social network curates for people that are you know similarly agreeing on their side so
you get that kind of confirmation process can you run a democracy in a situation where and like okay
so remember how I was saying there was I wanted to mention why social media is a different kind of
tech it's its own unique class I would say anything that creates natural network based
monopolies met calf law mediated monopolies and that's important right there's a reason we
didn't like monopolies before is because you get unchecked power our whole system was like let
unchecked power becomes fucked up people don't deal with it well so let's try to create as many
checks and balances on powers we can we're leaving the kingdom for that reason to try to make a more
democratic union and so the state and the church and the market will all be kind of separate and
interacting that's a check and balance on power by itself the there won't be one state religion
there all the churches get a kind of compete with each other for the minds and hearts of people
the market means all the businesses compete with each other and the state has three branches
and the three branches have checks and balances on power with each other
so we didn't like monopolies because you could have a corporation if it has nothing that can
compete with it that and people start to need the thing that it produces that obviously can now
start to be abused the power become corrupt and it was competition that kept it from being able to
do that kind of basic market theory idea well typically the only way to get a monopoly was
to do some activity where you were forcibly crushing the competition through some kind of
you know fucked up practices or you got the government to grant you unique access rights
or whatever so there's a bunch of antitrust law stuff to prevent that stuff from happening
but with network dynamics specifically the internet made possible a natural type of monopoly
emerged it was totally different in its process it didn't require those same fucked up processes
and yet you still get the function of something that doesn't have competition checking in right
so metcast law basically says for something where the value of the thing is proportional
it isn't the value of the thing involves user generated activity and the more users that are
involved the more valuable it is it's not just linearly more valuable it's second power more
valuable and so a currency that only a few people use is not that valuable because I don't want a
currency where I have to have 50 different currencies in my wallet for the different
stores that all take different currencies one currency that's usable everywhere like a monopoly
on money which kind of the Fed is was of like there was a very high use value in that similarly
on Facebook every fucking person I know is there I don't want 30 different social networks we have
to have 30 different logins for different groups of people and I can buy everything I want on Amazon
and I can find everything I want on Google right so when you have a network type dynamic where the
more stuff you have the more value you have and as a second power once you get up to a certain
percentage of the population involved you reach an escape velocity where you will become a monopoly
and you'll have like one search engine that has radically more dominance in all the other search
engines one online store one social network that has radically more within its vertical
and you might get something that can get a lot of dominance but in a slightly different vertical
like Twitter relative to Facebook but it's a different media type right and so that creates
natural monopolies we don't currently have a way to check and a huge scale intrinsic to the process
it's at a huge scale of social influence right Facebook and Google both have like three billion
people which is the population of China and Russia and the US and Iran combined they're bigger than
nation states the bigger than all the biggest nation states yeah and so you're like oh okay that's
fucking huge deal there were there were no corporations that had that kind of thing before
and if it is customizing what they're exposed to with personalized data and AI optimization so
that combination of things so the Amazon recommendations are doing that and Google is
doing that YouTube is doing that Facebook's doing that then what we have is we have a massive scale
right maybe trillion dollar maybe multi-billion person massive scale population personal data
AI optimized behavior mod system with no checks and balances on the power of it that's not like a
company the way Adam Smith thought of companies right and when you take that that that if it has
an ad model where the more time people are spending on site and the more engaged the better the ad
revenue is going to do and it has a fiduciary response way to maximize value to shareholders so
it has to keep optimizing that thing the AI is going to optimize for engagement and the one
marshmallow sticky shit is just more engaging right because otherwise I don't plan my day and say I
want to spend seven hours upset scrolling Facebook I say fuck I don't want to spend any time on
Facebook I'm just going to check it real quick and then I get stuck because something that was
hyper normal enough brought me into a rabbit hole that obscured my prefrontal assessment of
the amount of time I don't want to spend on Facebook right you got hijacked I got hijacked
and so it does not have the incentive to keep me intentional it has the incentive to capture
my intention right and so if you have something that does that it's going to increase all limbic
process so outrage and addiction and etc which also includes polarization and tribal identities
and certainty and sanctimony right it's going to increase all those things so it'll double down
on bias rather than undue bias it'll double down on tribal in group kind of stuff and
and shorten the attention span so you couldn't even listen long enough to hear a counter
perspective and it wouldn't be dope meanergic enough to maintain the attention span so that
can't not polarize the population and so China was smart to be like no fuck it we're not going to
let that thing emerge like that would ruin our nation and so um so if you polarize the population
with increased certainty outrage everybody thinks their thing is an existential risk if
Trump gets elected it's the end of America if Trump doesn't get elected it's the end of America
whatever right then um they the people will select more polarized representatives the more
polarized representatives in congress and senate like that can't cooperate with each other at all
so everything gets gridlocked it's already everybody filibusters each other and whatever
an increased gridlock system can get slower and slower and more and more expensive capacity
to regulate tech that is moving faster and faster and if the regulatory system has slower feedback
loops than the thing it's trying to regulate we'll just lose the ability to regulate it
and so a tech that polarizes the population polarized the representative class that creates
gridlock that decrease the capacity of governance will make that governmental system lose to another
system that doesn't have those problems going on that doesn't have all of its energy going to
infighting that doesn't have gridlock in its decision-making process and has a longer term
outlook to it has a longer term outlook because you don't think that in four years everything
you did will get undone yeah um and so in the same way that the printing press kind of ended
feudalism and started to make modern democracy possible this tech is kind of ending democracy
as we know it and orienting towards authoritarianism unless we start to redesign it in a fundamentally
different way okay anybody who hears that and isn't absolutely terrified that the actual
possibility of complete societal and democratic decay is real as an existential threat was not
listening to what you just said and i'll say this because we've talked we've interspersed
throughout the conversation like what are actual possible solutions like how do you get to post
cynical reasoning how do you get to an integral level of thinking how do you have rational discourse
and make sense and have these sort of commonalities with social media and i'll tell you i've tasted
this because look i've two and a half million three million if you consider doc vader two
subscribers on facebook uh i don't know half a million on youtube i don't know what five half
a million on instagram so i am complicit in this this feedback loop and yet here i am saying you
know this is terrible we're all gonna die but there are these interesting there's these interesting
new emergence that are happening like little small spin-offs like locals say which it has
certain values like we don't we never cancel anybody we don't censor anybody the creators
set their own communities they set the tone and the and the spirit of what they're doing
and it's pay to comment so you there's a barrier to entry where you're actually paying for the
product you're not the product yourself there's no advertising um and i'm on that and the difference
in tone in post cynical thinking between facebook where i have people who also are in a supporter
tribe and they pay to to be there too and that place where the the whole structure of it is
different it's just it's a different application of the technology is night and day right people
who are in both places will tell you yeah it's like there's no competition people are more
they're more collegial they have different opinions i don't have to moderate at all even
though people get to post whatever they want so is it just a question of intelligent design of
this stuff that's looking at the outcomes we want even though we can't really always predict what the
second order and third order effects are yeah so this gets us back to the idea that
we make environments that are in turn conditioning us and yet we're not necessarily
being very intentional about all the ways that they're going to condition us we're making those
environments for usually some very narrowly defined purpose and usually some profit purpose one
marshmallow tricks yeah and so um everybody familiar with broken windows theorem probably not
so environmental psychology like it it just has a huge effect you take a uh ghetto area where you
got spray paint and trash and and broken windows and you just simply replace the broken windows
clean up the graffiti and trash and the crime drops something like 50 instantly and you take
an area that's good the windows break some graffiti comes you don't clean it up and crime
boosts almost instantly like this is the same people same genetics same neurobiologies and
whatever built who are more or less likely to be criminals simply based on what they're observing on
if the windows are broken or not like this is this is a pretty fundamental type of stuff
because of course one is signaling this is a place that nobody cares about this is a lawless
place whatever the other signaling something different that's just the beginning to the
field of environmental psych in the way that environments affect us and you you walk into
a cathedral and the the technology of the cathedral has an effect like you look up
and when you look up you feel small and you have some sense of vastness that starts to come and
you know even just I was mentioning that the volatile organic compounds built into the
paint in the carpet are subclinical toxins that you know like the formaldehyde the organophosphates
like we did not even evolve to process these things right right like they were not part of
what our liver and kidneys were supposed to deal with so that's a way that like we we built for
a very specific purpose or we started putting fungicides and paints to prevent internal mold
that then started to also make mutated species of molds and whatever we were designing the paint
for some very specific purposes but to produce second third or effects we weren't paying attention
to but even low ceilings whereas in a tribal people that mostly lived outside you looked up a
whole lot more there's neurology to looking up right it actually stimulates different types of
cognitive process yeah to have your head and your eyes go up so the cathedral knows that puts
things up there on purpose that stimulates a certain kind of process so that's like environmental
design right environmental psych applied to environmental design the term ontological
design is we're in we're designing environments that are in turn affecting our own future ontologies
our own future experience of the world beliefs ways of being etc and so I think most people know
that if you like have experienced if you're in an old growth forest or if you're in a beautiful
temple or if you're in a ghetto like you feel different instantly just simply based on the
nature of the environment the the lighting all those things digital environments even more so
right because digital environments can be so extremely different have such extreme
personalization and reward dynamics and all those types of things and people are spending
more of their time in digital environments that we're obviously not adapted to and that
are designed for mostly extractive purposes regarding you rather than developing you in
positive kind of ways so if you think about the like okay okay the first part is to say
tech is affecting our value systems and our experience of what it means to be people
individually and collectively tech is not values agnostic that's the first kind of
construction and I'll come back to this other part tech is not values agnostic if you read
Marvin Harris cultural materialism um to you know a very empirical school of cultural anthropology
that basically says the changes in our social systems and even the changes in our religion
and culture were usually preceded by changes in tech that coded for certain patterns of
pavier that coded for certain value systems that were associated so the plow for example
you want to give that one so you know people used to this is a fascinating one and and god this
you know this is central to our experience as humans and experience in health care like taking
care of sick people we don't we pull them out we left brain yank them out of their context
into a room that's cold and sterile and we say here's what's wrong with you based on these
extracted tests whereas we've totally de contextualized these humans anyway so back to this plow
pre plow um societies tended to be very interesting they had maternal female gods they had this kind
of idea that um that women would actually do a lot of the farming and stuff because they could
and the guys would go out and do hunter gathering and things like that and and it played to their
strengths at the time then the plow gets invented and this here's a technological thing now several
things happen first of all you you can use an animal to pull the plow which now changes the
theology and the animism around our worship of animals because now if you make an animal if you
elevate an animal to some sort of godlike creature and you're forcing it to do this manual labor
well that doesn't really vibe so now the entire culture shifts to where it's like no god gave
man the dominion over animals and so now use it as you will it's less than a sacred thing in itself
and women now in order to man sort of things like plows and things like that it becomes very
physically demanding they would have miscarriages etc so now it became disadvantageous for women to
do the farming so they ended up then taking different roles which then changed the because
the production of food is associated with deities etc now you have male dominated type gods and so
the entire course of civilization changes from an invention and these are spiritual changes these
are emotional changes these are social changes and they're technological changes and they all
interact in this web it's fascinating obviously the plow gave surplus in a way that we didn't
have before which was really key because now you can have grains and in a gathering environment
grains are not that useful you got to have a lot of grain to be really useful so the combo of the
plow and the basket means now we can have really meaningful caloric surplus so we can also grow
population much faster and we can make it through famines and we can start to have concentrated
wealth as a result of that ownership starts to mean something and property rights start to mean
something and then class systems start to emerge and then civilization structures to be able to
deal with class systems start to emerge and then if you own stuff then inheritance and so then the
formalizing of marriage and the changing of those contracts to be able to have paternity certainty
associated with the inheritance of the stuff like all of those things follow that kind of tech right
and that's a plow that's a plow so then I would say and of course the history of this is actually
a million times more nuanced I just want people to get the gist of the kind of thing but the animism
is just such a great example I can bow and arrow kill a bison and still pray to the spirit of the
bison and say when I die I want to become soil that becomes grass for the grandchild of this bison
and be part of the great web of life and everything but I can't take the bison and hybridize it into
an ox yoke it cut its balls off and beat it all day long to pull the plow and still believe in the
spirit of the buffalo right and so and so to use a plow require like the plow codes a pattern of
behavior which is beating an ox all day long and that requires a change of value system and yet the
tribe that doesn't do that is just going to lose because they have so much less caloric surplus
and whatever and the tribe that does that so this is an example of how the tools change the value
systems there are other examples where you can make value system changes independent tools that will
in turn change how we use the tools like the Sabbath was kind of a social technology for how do we
not use the tools for some period of time not do be hijacked by productivity orient towards the value
system in each other to make sure that we're in turn directing those things that's one way of
thinking about it so we have to actually get this direction of developing culture to bind
the tech and inform the social structures but you can also build tech that in knowing that
the tech is going to influence the psychology the values and the behaviors of the people
that should be in intentionally factored in the design process so then both the design of
Facebook the design of the monetary system the design of the Anthropocene the design of
the paints and the building and all those things you'd say if in addition to whatever it does right
it's supposed to answer phone calls it's supposed to be able to give me access to information it's
supposed to be able to keep rain off in addition to that it's also affecting the psychological
physiological relational health and dispositions of the people so we say the number one design
constraint of all the tech has to be that the the ontologic design effect it has is enlightening
to the people that it's interacting with right so how do you then the ontologic design question
how do you rebuild civilization from scratch how do we rebuild the technosphere and Anthropocene
from scratch to maximally enlighten the people that are within it right so both increasing
their own health happiness well-being and their sense making meaning making choice making capacities
for collective well-being i think that like when you start to realize it doesn't take everybody
having a deeper understanding of these things for them to start designing tech differently
that will start to affect everyone obviously it took not that many people to build facebook that
then started to affect three billion people and as a result also everybody right because in that
effect it was on broadcast media and culture and what the u.s government and military and
economies doing and it doesn't wouldn't take that many people to build something that was more
protopic in the nature of what the tech influenced people to do behaviorally and so yeah that is one
of the sources of optimism i yeah and i i'm actually it's tricky because threading the needle
requires the optimism that it can be done and i think it can be done but as you've said before i
think the narrowing of the window through which we thread this needle to avoid existential catastrophic
civilization terminating issues whereas you know if you look at the cosmos and go wire wire aliens
not here of course this is a very simplification is there a great filter out there where civilizations
all go through this procedure of narrowing and narrowing and narrowing until poof most of them
don't make it and are we going to be one of those so it's not you know i i i think adya shanti who's a
kind of a spiritual leader guy has said the entire universe could blink out of existence and you're
the true fundamental nature of the universe the true reality wouldn't even notice
and so this hubris that somehow we're special and and can survive i think is not quite right so part
of it is a more thoughtful design part of it is group sense making i think of like how are we going
to um what do we value what what matters to us you mentioned the sabbath with which i think is very
interesting my family and i and i've done videos on this do a thing called screen free sunday
where we turn off all the devices and we open up to each other again and we're very present and so
on and even my kids don't have social media or any of that but they do use devices for other things
and um it's it's been transformative for us even that one day right and i went on a meditation retreat
recently six days where i was completely unplugged and i'll tell you if we think we've permanently
damaged ourselves we're wrong yeah because i've i mean i was wide open connected feeling love for
people when i came back and did a couple shows it was actually against my will to some degree but
when i did it you could see those shows like it's a different me like i'm like guys like let's let's
let's really just try to connect this together and i think that's doable i think it but it takes
some collective will i have a colleague zach stein who helped build a system called lektica that um
is one way of assessing a certain kind of human development uh the complexity of someone's thinking
process and uh they're able to kind of look at someone's writing of certain types and be able
to assess the complexity and nuance in their thinking and made progress in being able to do
that with machine learning natural language processing so and what that would mean the
complexity and nuance of thinking is the ability to take lots of different perspectives the ability
to notice bias and error in those the ability to notice ways of synthesizing and finding higher
order reconciliation so let's say for instance and this is really just i'm throwing this out as like a
a suggestive way of where something could go not that this is the exact proposition so let's say we
built a facebook-like thing that had lots of different types of content that were being
personalized to the individual but they didn't have a business model that required ads to do it
so it had a different basis of optimization it wasn't trying to maximize time on site or
engagement in that way let's say that the thing it was trying to maximize was your lektical score
and so it was looking at where you were typing in responses and your general engagement and it was
wanting to see that your ability to and your disposition to seek and steal man more perspectives
and have more nuanced perspectives more um ability to orient towards um empiricism where it was
relevant etc that those were the things it was optimizing for and it was curating content to
you both based on what would be outside of what you were already exposed to but also in the zone
of proximal development that you could grasp it and again empirically up regulating in that way
that would produce really different results right you could be growing attention span rather than
decreasing it you could be growing multi-perspectal multi-perspectival kind of capacity through the
nature of what the that ai pointed at your brain is optimizing for okay i think that's a doable
thing it would depend on the again like you said what are you optimizing for in terms of also
incentives like facebook and viral because it's taking it's hacking into the capitalist incentive
of this is how you make money through ads and so on and it just became self replicating that way
but like sometimes youtube's algorithm will do that it's quite remarkable uh it will actually
point and i get this and this is why because people who um i do some meditation uh awakening type
content consciousness content and youtube's algorithm seems to feed that content to people
who have a vague interest in it but also may overlap slightly with health care it kind of knows
this in some way and people will message me and go i don't know what i don't know never knew who
you were but i'm a nurse and i've haven't i've been having this existential crisis and i found
your piece on whatever donald hoffman and then it went me it then youtube fed me a rabbit hole of
your stuff and i'm so much better for it because now i'm interested in this and i went to a retreat
and i did this so you can see the virtuous stuff happen so the question then that you bring up is
can it be optimized actually in a way that that's the end point you're actually looking for that
lektical score that zackstein you said uh is working on in development yeah that could be a great
guy to have on your show to discuss it tristan would be a great guy to have on your show because
youtube made some adjustments based on some of the criticism that happened and i don't he knows
this topic much better than i do in terms of where adjustments were made and where things have
actually progressed i'd love to hear that and where they could progress more um and i can like
there are reasons that you don't want to optimize for lektical score that's why i said it's just the
beginning of a thinking because if lektical score is the only thing you optimize for
someone who has more advanced theory of mind yeah without necessarily more advanced
compassion or embodiment can be a more effective sociopath psychopath yeah exactly and so so um
i i don't think you want to optimize for anything measurable right the thing that is measurable
will have externalities even a weighted algorithm of n measurable things will have stuff that's
really important that's not included in it that if you're optimizing for you'll end up having
externalities so you can optimize but you want to process that what you're optimizing for is
itself being continuously iterated a recursive process with the optimization parameters where
the externalities of what's being harmed by the optimization are continuously being internalized
but that means you also need a governance system that can do that which means you can't be bound
to something like fiduciary responsibility for profit maximization okay okay so to internalize
the harms that are being generated man that requires a whole different way of doing things right
because if if if the fossil fuel industry had to internalize the environmental harm of their
actions it would be a very different industry i mean how do you even begin to think about doing that
i mean it's interesting like you'd have you'd actually have to have a process to do that because
if you if you mandated today that the fossil fuels industry had to internalize all of the
cost of externalize the civilization collapse overnight yeah yeah because there'd be no uh
energy there'd be no energy yeah because the energy is just priced at how much it costs us to
extract it right and then a little margin to sell it right not the common costs of the harm not the
cost that took nature to produce it or that it would take for us to be able to produce it through
some other method and then the environmental harm social harms whatever that happened if i want to
be able to pay for all of those things probably my cell phone is ten thousand dollars yeah right
yeah and so there's a huge amount of externalized costs and energy is really fundamental in this one
um but but that is a perverse incentive right like there's a fundamental perverse incentive so you
you would want to be able to identify those externalities and internalize them
where and what that would do is it would bind the incentive of the agent with the well-being of the
commons right that the that the company only got better when it was doing things that were
comprehensively better for the world not got better well fucking the world in different ways yeah
so how do you internalize externality and make and like close perverse incentive niches is one
of the fundamental things humanity has to get better at right like we have to fundamentally
change our socioeconomic systems to do perverse incentive minimizing much better than they do
how to do that is a complex topic but and how much of this do you think is going to require
new technology that enables this kind of thing like you said like what
Zach is working on with the machine learning that can generate these lektile scores versus how much of
it is more related to your Sabbath point which is that's a technology depending upon how you want
to think of it right yeah that's a that's a social technology in the same way that like
whether it's institutional marriage or whether it's tribal council or whether it's you know Sabbath
it's basically that's that is a technique right right right that can be that also requires abstraction
to understand why it's an important thing and that can be taught and passed down right so I think
when I say social technology I'm not referring to things like Facebook I'm referring to things like
sweat lodges right that's what I was that's what I was getting at does it require that sort of
technology meaning self-awareness self-realization self-improvement technologies like sweat lodges
psychedelics guided psychedelic therapy meditation spirituality of any kind that sort of thing do
you think that's necessary for humanity to survive if just you'll appreciate this the first time I
got to do a sweat lodge it was invited to do it on a reservation the shaman leading it there was
one point where there's my first time there there's a another white guy there whose first time it was
who about three quarters of the way through freaked out at the heat and kind of ran out of the thing
screaming and the old shaman was sitting right next to me and he whispered in my ear he says we
never trust someone who'd bail in the sweat lodge because if he's so scared that it's bad that like
this is too hot for humans he just left us all in here and so either he really doesn't he really
knows it's safe and he can't control his mind yeah or he doesn't think it's safe and he was willing
to save himself and bail on everybody wow so you could see there's a social technology right
where it's going to get hot enough that you know because the guys who've been doing it before
generation generation you know intellectually it's not going to hurt you but it's going to get hot
enough that it feels like it's going to hurt you yeah which means that you have to watch that fear
and not succumb to it yeah and you're all in it together and you are experiencing a shared
hormesis right like you're overcoming some difficult thing but all together there's also
there's a million other aspects that we can be like oh wow that's there was a really fucking potent
insightful thing yeah they figured out that we have not replaced right we lost a lot of those
things and we don't have replacements and whether it was that or you know
we go into all the types of rites of passage and tribal technologies but like they
they weren't for no reason and they weren't just frivolous like they serve fundamental roles to
the social coherence it's funny because you know when i was a younger i was much more of a scientific
reductionist like i thought pretty much everything could be boiled down to processes that are
explicable in the third person and it's sort of domain and rituals like that i always thought
including religion including cathedrals including what a waste of money why are we doing this these
are dumb even marriages like this whole ceremony like let's just go have a civil ceremony this is
just dumb boy was i completely wrong the older i get the more i realize these are crucial interwoven
fabrics of human development and and social development and all the things you just said
so and and again i i constantly talk about this meditation retreat because
it's the most it's the easiest thing i can talk about is the most recent this idea that you get
30 people together there was a small group and a lot of them were my supporters on the show but
they'd been drawn to it because they feel the call to do this thing and this guy angela dilula
who's a physician who wrote wrote this book actually awake about enlightenment awakening and
it's really kind of a zen influence kind of thing and long story short we went there didn't
know what to expect silence but in the evening we would do group activities and those group
activities were everyone was reluctant like what we're going to improv comedy we're gonna
we're gonna do what this kind of stitch short circling and storytelling and emotion work
it was the most connected open amazing experience and it pulls into the real world a kind of like
i went to whole foods to order a slice of pizza and i was so i felt so connected to the guy making
the pizza who was having looked like he was having a bad day that he could feel that energy i mean
there was like this nonverbal communication that happens and he just gave me the biggest slice he's
like hey thanks i'll thank you i mean it's crazy stupid intangible stuff that sounds woo woo but
it's absolutely real so that's why i ask like how important is that sort of technology you know
so uh it's critical and it's not like
you because we've lost it to some degree totally um it's necessary
but it's not sufficient if we were to still be making physical tech that is also conditioning
human psyche and values and conferring power that was doing the opposite but with exponential
tech influence scale push and pull so we have to be designing the tech differently on the physical
side um designing the incentive systems and the deterrent systems differently and working at the
purely psycho spiritual cognitive culture level and so if you think about like the way
marvin harris talked about society or any civilization being a function of three interacting
things you have an infrastructure a social structure and a superstructure the infrastructure is
uh the physical tech that mediates our physical needs in relationship with the physical world so
water food transportation production waste management all that kind of stuff the and
obviously all all of the technosphere the social system is basically the collective agreement field
so government law economics the superstructure is kind of like culture it's like what is the
good life that we're coordinating towards what is the existential reason for any of it what is
the ethical basis and so we can see that religion has become pretty hollowed out we can see that
patriotism that most of the things that bound someone to more than themselves and maybe just
their immediate family are pretty hollowed out um and they're replaced with you know you talk about
kind of the quasi religions that are where people have some kind of tribal identity that feels like
it's associated to some preventing the rapture and making some kind of better heaven on earth or
whatever possible but they're shitty religions right like the the new ones are like fairly
poorly designed for the purposes right but um well while harris argued that
infrastructure drives changes in social structure and superstructure there are other
social philosophers who will argue why each one has causal errors pointing in the other directions
it's all true so what we could say is how to make a fundamentally viable civilization requires a
certain amount of changes in all three simultaneously that lead to a virtuous process now my social
systems let's just go ahead and take government as a basis or you know governing institutions
because the market will create a bunch of incentives but it'll have incentives to do some
things to suck for the whole which is why we have the idea of rule of law that we can collectively
say no we don't want to cut all the trees down we want national forests or we don't want um
organ markets or whatever it is so we'll make a law around that thing and then we'll give something
like monopoly of violence to be able to enshrine rule of law and do enforcement so that's able to
basically bind market and tech it's not anymore right it's been hollowed out in a way where it
really can't and that's important but if that is not derived that social structure that is designed
to guide the infrastructure and the power of it that social structure isn't derived from
the superstructure right which is that the consent of the govern is where the power of
the government comes from that it is a government of foreign by a comprehensively educated citizenry
then it will be authoritarian and so either you don't get institutions that can manage the
complexity and you get catastrophes or you do get institutions that can manage the complexity
and they create order through imposition and they're oppressive so you either get catastrophes on one
side or dystopias on the other or you have to actually have a culture that is developing the
capacity to make sense of the world individually and together to meaning make the world individually
and together to be able to do choice making individually and together so that a comprehensively
educated informed capable of post-senical good faith communication population engaging with each
other can create and oversight and watchdog institutions that have the capacity to engage
and bind the technology so that we are safe stewards for the power of exponential technology
all of those things have to kind of happen that's the thing they have to happen interwoven
in repenetrating it can't just be one or the other and again I feel like you know I'm going
to quote Ian McGillcrest who's written a book master and his emissary about the difference
between the right and the left brain and how the left brain really as the emissary that now
thinks it's the master really loves to take parts and work on parts and make holes out of the parts
instead of looking at a hole whereas the right brain silent doesn't really use direct language
but it sees things relationally and interwoven and so on and as as civilizations start to progress
it seems they shift to a more bureaucratic left brain kind of absolute certainty reductionism
etc and I worry that unless we can reintegrate with the right and you know form a kind of corpus
close on that connects the two we're going to fail at this avoiding dystopia or avoiding
catastrophic risk I mean I'm curious your thoughts on that
if people haven't seen them everybody should watch the dialogues between David Bohm and
Krishna Marti oh wow some of my most favorite dialogues ever and David Bohm is talking about
wholeness in the implicate order and why it is a fragment and you know people don't know
one of the top physicists who advanced quantum mechanics following Einstein
and but also a really deep philosophic thinker and so the dialogues between he and Krishna
Marti were super interesting on these topics I've heard about this supposed to be remarkable
yeah and Krishna Marti was of course always asking what is the fundamental basis of conflict and what
would it take to have a civilization that could actually deal with conflict but who was Krishna
Marti maybe fill these guys in so I mean there's a whole interesting story of his relationship
with the theosophical society and like that but just a very interesting 20th century thinker that
came from what would have seemed like a esoteric spiritual tradition but was a really really keen
uh intellect and was really focused on
what would a civilization that could actually deal with conflict well
require in the development of people um individually and at scale as our capacity
for the consequentiality of conflict is growing right post the bomb it's a different story
because conflict before had a limited scope of how many people would be harmed
and now you have a situation where conflict can't slay to kill everybody yeah and obviously
that was when you had one type of catastrophe weapon now with uh bio weapons and AI weapons
and cyber weapons and drone weapons we have way more catastrophic weapons in a much more
highly interconnected fragile world with a fragile ecosystem close to planetary boundaries with way
more actors that have it where you can't do mutually assured destruction so if you don't
figure out how do we deal with conflict better so of course one answer is we'll just ubiquitous
surveillance and control everyone which is the dystopia to avoid the catastrophe the other answer
has to be a like authentically better self-organizing collective intelligence and um and so this you
know christian marty was obviously prescient seeing this and being like we actually have to deal with
the origins of conflict better and so you can get into um marx's ideas of class conflict and
jurard's ideas of mimetic desire conflict and you know you kind of have to go deep on where
those come from to say what would it take to deal with them well right but uh but bomb bomb was looking
at um the orientation of a mind that mostly thinks in words of western mind you know in particular
uh to break reality into parts and make sure that our word the symbol that would correspond
with the ground there corresponded with the things that it was supposed to and not the other things
so try to draw rigorous boundaries to you know divide everything up led to us fundamentally
relating to everything as parts first and so then you get stuff that doesn't make sense like
you bring parts together and there's some new property that none of the parts have and you
have to call it emergence and it seems kind of wacky but it was only because that property
was there from the beginning and you took it into parts and oh fascinating so you call it
emergence because you you started with the parts and you built it up whereas it was a whole to
begin with and and ah so what was missing you're calling emergence exactly fascinating and so
whether you have one country trying to benefit itself at the expense of another country or all
of the countries trying to grow their GDP at the expense of the ecosystem or a proposition that
is benefiting something but harming something else and polarizing the population or a particular
metric you're trying to optimize for in healthcare that causes iatrogenic cascades to damaging
something else or whatever the highly interconnected world where the solution or what you're optimizing
for is made a narrow subset of everything the thing that you're doing is still interacting
with complexity so whatever it's affecting outside of what you're intending to affect will be negative
externalities some people will care about those they'll respond to those you'll keep driving conflict
driving externality with exponential population and exponential tech that thing self terminates
so how do we we can't do exponential externality so you have to do better than not doing externality
which means that the goal is not to optimize for GDP it's something broader than GDP it's not just
GDP per capita okay we need to add a genie coefficient yeah but that doesn't include
personal happiness whatever so we need to add a happy national happiness index yeah but that
doesn't include environmental stuff so we have to add a co2 thing but that doesn't include nitrogen
parts parts parts you keep adding and yet there will always be stuff in some finite
set of metrics you're optimizing for that matter that are outside of that set yeah
so how do you actually relate to the whole and say the thing we're trying to optimize for is not
definable right that's what i would say the first verse of the doubt aging was about right the
doubt that is speakable is not the eternal doubt and that's what i would say the no false idols thing
was about that as soon as you say the thing we want to optimize for is x it's not really it
right like that's not the thing you want to optimize for is the nature of the sacred you
try and define it you're gonna fuck it up yeah but you can sense it progressively better yes
and you can do a lot of defining around it but if you think your definition is it that's a false
idol i see and so how do we how do we not have metrics that create optimization systems that
then bind us right where now the board wants to hold the ceo to quarterly profit metrics to be able
to get the money back to the shareholders who invested so we create a law for the fiduciary
responsibility for profit maximization and now even if you see there's an external you can't do
anything about it because you're already bound to the metrics you're optimizing yeah so whatever set
of metrics that we're optimizing for we have to be able to pay attention to things that are outside
of those metrics that matter and be able to progressively internalize that which means we
have to create governance structures that can orient around the ability to do that okay
which also means you have to create minds that are oriented to do that and know that other minds
will notice shit that you don't this is where authentic diversity matters other minds will
notice shit that you don't and there's no way to notice all the things they do which way you have
to be in dialogue okay okay so my field healthcare everything you just said points to the root of
our dysfunction in what I call health 2.0 which is our mechanized reductionist metric driven
assembly line model medicine as machine is our current model where we have an electronic health
record that's really an apparatus to gather data and optimize processes based on metrics that we've
determined by fiat or by committee based on incomplete data and we reduce the the the human
health experience to a series of parts that can be optimized what's your human global A1C
what's your BMI do you smoke or not here's your depression screening index and start to optimize
metrics and measurements so that what used to be a right brain left brain collusion of seeing
intuiting a hole through personal so I'm with you Daniel I get a sense of who you are I can
intuit things that I could not even write in a note but it wouldn't matter because what I write
in the note is really to jog my memory it's not for anybody else it's not for billing or
anything in the old days right but but now I don't get to do that I don't get to see you
holistically I don't get to see you in your built environment I don't get to see you at home I don't
get to see you as part of your hole I see you as part and not only a part but all the metrics and
incentives that pay me and that govern me is that bureaucratic left brain stuff that reduces
everything to these series that I then have to click off which means I spend more time looking
at the computer clicking off the boxes than I do actually in a we space with you having an
inner subjective dialogue where you're not just a it you're an I and you're also a we
none of that is incentivized so what you're pointing at as civilization level threat is
already infruition in health care and it is a it is a self-terminating process in health care
because we can't keep spending 30% of our GDP on something that gets us the worst outcomes in the
developed world right so when I talk about the next transcendent health care 3.0 it is that integral
post cynical holistic dialogue authentic diversity everything that you just said is applicable in
that space that's why when you talk I just sit here going how do how do we actually make this
happen in health care okay so if you want to think about what is the future of health care you can't
think about it separate than the future of civilization giving that all the other aspects
of civilization are affecting human health I think that's a theme of the entire thing yeah and so
can you do a good job of health care without addressing agricultural practices that demineralized
soil no no how can you and so if you have ubiquitously demineralized soil and you use NPK
to get something that looks like a vegetable but doesn't have the same trace mineral density and
those trace minerals are important for the gazillion things are you gonna have a bunch of
subclinical deficiencies that cause you know problems and similarly now you're going to cover it
in glyphosate and so now you'll have deficiency in toxicity simultaneously right and can you have
something like hostess and Coca-Cola as multi-billion dollar multinational advertising conglomerate
you know capacities that are optimized for you know addiction optimization like can you have that
thing and have a maximally healthy population at the same time which also then generates an
epiphenomenon of a big pharmaceutical company that is designed to then patch up the holes created
by the addictive economy of our food and ecological mess yeah because I can just take the statin and
I can just take the insulin and not have to actually deal with the dietary thing it's
similarly a short-term parts-based you know etc and you know I think the thing I think medicine
is in a particularly like modern medicine is in a particularly exceptional job at is things that
have single point cause and where you can identify this absolutely cause so one gene or one protein
or one problem so acute medicine is always like that right and acute poisoning and acute infection
and acute injury is fucking awesome yeah you stab in the neck I can fix that and but the things that
don't have a single cause that have multiple causes particularly so complex causation
causal cascades that are delayed in time and where they're not the same in everybody right it's
not even it's these three things that cause it but it's some subset of these thousands of things
that end up causing so like the way I think about complex chronic disease whether we're talking about
neurodegenerative or autoimmune or like I don't think there is such a thing as MS or rheumatoid
arthritis as a single thing meaning that the same causal cascade happened for everybody right which
is why sometimes that gene is there and sometimes it isn't and sometimes I think of that more as a
set of biomarkers and a set of symptoms that cluster together usefully for a diagnostic code for
insurance purposes for regulatory purposes for pharmaceutical purposes but where the pathophysiology
leading there was different and which is why we don't do a good job at curing them is because we
don't do a good job at assessing the causation because it's not single cause right it's a
complex thing to figure out which is why I think the best stuff that's happening in functional
medicine is doing a better job when you look at like the work that Bredesen is doing with
Alzheimer's and dementia and I think Pearlmutter and others have kind of weighed in and some of
that work it's a personalized medicine approach to how to deal with it because it's not the exact
same pathophysiology in each case and but getting really interesting results so like
for instance and I'm just playing this out hypothetically somebody has MS
and you do a really detailed history intake and you know they had a head injury that maybe created
subclinical TBI meaning it didn't show up with morphological damage but it would show up on a
spec scan or on a functional kind of EEG and then they had mold toxins in their house and then they
had a really stressful divorce and they've had chronic sugar kind of issues and do you get each
one of those causing dysregulatory dynamics that eventually can cluster that way but in
a slightly different thing might be a rheumatoid autoimmune or something else but for someone else
it was like Lyme's disease and a certain amount of like petrol toxin exposure and some other
set of things and with more genetic precursor so the way so to how to even think about the
physiologic causal aspects of it has to involve a more complex epistemology.
Yeah and we don't train medical students to do that we train them in the reductionist model
as much as possible turn things into parts so that has to change like and that's part it's
got to co-evolve with civilization change it's got to go co-evolve with societal and environmental
change it's got to co-evolve with economic change and social change and all the other things and yet
what I find often is society in its ills the failures of civilization actually often end up
on the doorstep of the health care system and then what it does it ripples through the actual
health care worker population so you know we use terms like burnout it's really a kind of chronic
moral injury because these are good people who went in for good reasons and they find themselves
unable to help people because they're in a model that doesn't allow it and the holistic way of looking
at it is just it's not rewarded it's not paid for you're paid to turn things into parts to bill
by code well and I mean you know you've mentioned that the relationship to patent law and regulatory
process um and fiscal incentive all co-influence in a way it's like it's not some bad guy it's just
the nature of the system does that thing um if you want to go through if you have to go through
phase three clinical trials to be able to get the thing approved and that costs like a billion
dollars to do especially when you haven't realized that the some of them won't make it so for a drug
company get one that works you have some number that don't work you have to be a big fucking
company to be able to um do that thing and you can't just just insurance doesn't support general
health increase it has to be disease so you diagnose diseases in particular ways for kind of
insurance purposes and so like that whole cluster of things means and you you're not going to be able
to patent endogenous molecules and increasing the things that were there and youth anywhere
near as easily so it's synthetic molecules what's the chance that a some a deficiency in the synthetic
molecule is the causal reason that you got ill like that was not part of your evolutionary
environment or healthy people like it you don't have a circling deficiency it's a zoloft deficiency
it doesn't even make sense right like you would think okay well when the same person with the
same genome was healthy what was happening differently was a difference in endogenous
molecules right so can we study the molecules of health and how they proliferate and um but that
does require changes in the regulatory epistemic fiscal etc process and obviously if the people
are all getting fed sugar and stress and isolation to begin with they're fucked in first place right
and so when I think about the future of medicine I think about a system that is mostly preventing
illness but it's not preventing illness it's promoting health across all of the dimensions
and of course you can't define health you can kind of roughly define it but it's that same thing
um increased adaptive capacity to an increased number of stressors of any kind you can kind
of roughly define it right um but if you're promoting that then there's very little hospital
right it's mostly decentralized and same way we want education to be mostly decentralized you
want a civilization that's developing humans writ large not just at the school you want a
civilization that's promoting the health of people writ large not just at the hospital
and then when people do come to the hospital I would like it to be much more like a temple
I agree I've said this the future of medicine is more shamanic than you know than procedural
I mean people are gonna die there and people are gonna be born there and people are gonna
have near-death experience and come back like if anything should be a temple it should be a
fucking hospital can I tell you like as somebody who's spent most of my life feels like in a hospital
I mean I I'm a hospitalist that's my specialty the place is anything but a temple in many ways
and it's only made a temple by people's conscious efforts where you take a second to realize you're
in a sacred space with a patient who's dying or with a family who's having the worst you know
week of their lives or something like that then any space becomes sacred but it requires the
intentionality of the person there and if that person is so beaten down is so obsessed with
the parts just to survive then that gets taken away and they feel that and they manifest it
biopsychosocially in their own disease oh this is why I was mentioning the complexity of even
looking at the physiology right so of course looking at the physiology complexly like have I
am I looking at the subclinical deficiencies and subclinical toxicities and subclinical pathogenicity
I'm looking at the physiological structure and their dentistry and you know subclinical brain
patterns in their spec scan and whatever all the things some things that were uncurable become
curable when you really start to or treatable when you really start to go in deeper but
obviously I also have to be looking at their relationships have to be looking at their psyche
have to look at the environment because does their house have mold in it I'm not going to
necessarily get them better if I don't deal with certain of those things how how long does it take
to do that intake well like the doctors who I know who do a good job of this yeah like hours you
have a five hour intake yeah and then to be able to track what is working and what isn't and whatever
when you can't do perfect variable isolation and you really have to sense it like so how does the
economics of that system that requires doctors that are way the fuck more trained yeah then we
currently have and yet with that much time investment well obviously you mostly just want
to use the doctors a lot less because you have a system that is promoting health and then and then
if they're also more trained kind of to be able to do the psycho spiritual interface that is happening
there it's just a totally different it's a totally different thing and the friends that I have who do
this sort of medicine they're more in the concierge space so you know people pay a lot of money for
unlimited access and they'll do those five hour things they'll look at every aspect they'll no
stone will be on turn they'll come to the house that kind of thing and and it's unfortunately
the realm of the affluent totally um so how do you know I think it's doable in fact I've talked
about it this idea that you can actually do it and it requires a team it's not just a doctor
that's the other thing you can't you need an interdisciplinary group where everybody's practicing
the best that that they're trained to do and and they're they're feeding back to each other
in a huddle and we did that at our clinic in Las Vegas I mean it was this you had health coaches
who are drawn from that community who know that population you speak that language who know the
hope streams and fears and can get in people's heads and then you have doctors nurses nurse
practitioner a licensed clinical social worker does the mental health and care coordination and
all those other things and we call we would call them nurse innovators like why why why do we reduce
nurses to pill pushers and data entry clerks when there's so much more than that they were self-selected
for being nurturing types like what are we doing so all of that is is solvable but you need new
you need all the things you said that changes in incentive structures in in social structures in
governance in regulatory stuff all that yeah so I want the number of nurses per capita go way up
that would be nice I want the number of doctors per capita go up I want the number of teachers
per capita go way up so that the students have much more personalized attention and I want them
out we can train them to go up so you can really fucking train those people and really maximally
talented ones because are you going to get a maximally talented future generation if the teachers
are not the maximally talented people right and so how would you make an economic system that does
that yeah how do you do that well in the face of the increasing technological automation of so many
jobs and yet the increasing wealth that is produced by those things can you start to create new types
of economic systems and economic rewards to have a higher percentage of people doing these types of
very very high touch high complexity things and getting more rewarded to do so yeah intuitive
creative holistic things that require a human intelligence that that's enabled by tech right
so the tech actually can help offload you know like I don't know if it was Casper obviously said
it but he said you know that big blue or whatever it can beat any human alive but you give me big
blue as a tool and I'll beat any human or any computer alive right yeah and I think that's
true in medicine too we talk about AI replacing doctors I don't think that's symbiotic intelligence
between collective intelligences of humans designed well with the augmented computational
capacity yeah so the mechanical intelligence that computers are very good this is the same as
what the future of democratic type systems could be is you make something better than the fourth
estate which is something that is facebook like meaning it can curate all the information it can
do machine learning kind of parsing on it and customize news feeds but where it is optimizing
for things like the relevant comprehensive educatedness of a population for for things social
cohesion whatever and but you know this the same types of generative AI semantic generative AI
like GPT-3 that can make an infinite amount of super compelling deep fakes and fuck the
epistemic commons more can also parse Matt could be developed to parse massive fields of text to
see what is the distribution of the values that everyone has about a particular thing to take
as design constraints to try to come up with a better proposition that would be less polarizing
more unifying for the whole population like the opposite of what algorithms do now and it's not
that it's replacing human choice it's informing informing right one way that you get over the
data singularity of that there's more data than anyone can pay attention to is people don't actually
need to make they don't need all the data to make a choice they need the meaning which is
like a second or third derivative on the data which can I have the AI process a fuck ton of data
to be able to parse where there's incorrect stuff where there's high confidence stuff and put it
into the form that is decision informing and then what is relevant for decision informing
is stuff that people can actually keep up with and that is actually the application of big data
in medicine too like we don't need the data is too much there's tons of data you could have wearables
you could have all this other garbage doctors are terrified of that because what the hell are
we going to do with that data what we need is to parse it down into bits that then we can find
meaning and use our intuition which is that's why we do 10,000 hours of training right is because
that becomes an unconscious intuitive thing and and and only humans right now have the
inductive ability really to do that and I actually had Federico Fugina on the show he's a guy who
like co-developed the world's first commercial microprocessor with Intel and he wrote a book on
like look consciousness machines will never have internal state awareness because of the following
types of limitations in their intelligence and he makes these very you know absolute statements
which you could argue with but it was really you know this idea that humans do a type of
intelligence that's almost rooted in in the infinite it's almost rooted in the dow in the
sublime in the in in emptiness whatever spiritual term you want to call it's it's bringing forth
this thing that the computers can't do but that doesn't mean we can't use them as a tool but we've
devalued that aspect of humanity you know especially in medicine when you look at alpha goes
relationship to people with chess and then with go and then with video games
and you continue to forecast where that goes can AI in any way that you model how it's going to unfold
be humans at all definable games totally and that means military games that means
economic games can someone who can't do AI high-speed trading compete with someone who can't
know right and this is where the finitely definable game theory is not the only thing
worth doing right and that thing of course we do lose to ai's and so then it's a race of
who can deploy the ai's better faster but that is a race that the end points over not nice
and so but there's this is a fundamental question we're talking about the redesign of medicine you
think every sector has to be redesigned we're talking about the redesign of the fourth estate
and a democratic process the redesign of education what is the purpose of education in a post
technological automation post ubiquitous ai world where most of the things that we were teaching kids
to do have all been automated math etc well obviously to be able to answer what is the
future of education is what is the role of the human in that world and then because education
is to develop humans out of the capacities to do that thing and i think it happens to be that the
thing that humans do uniquely well relative to at least the narrow ai's that we currently have
are also things that humans have more intrinsic incentive to do the things that are easier to
automate are more rote usually you have less intrinsic incentive on and uh so you have to
extrinsically incent people so you get market dynamics of all these types as you're able to
still create wealth automate a lot of those things are the remaining things things that
have more intrinsic incentive plus you have more total resource to allocate like there's some
there's some interesting things in there that are possible interesting and optimistic yeah
interesting and optimistic i think you know that there's a future is very bright kind of vision
there that where humans are freed to actually be the kind of selves they actually want to be
right you know their own authentic self you know i gotta say man we've had a two and a half hour
conversation and my i'm looking at my my card here and i'm worried it's gonna like give up the ghost
as we reach the end of the capacity of that second card man i i could talk to you for like 17 hours
on any one of these things and we i still had other stuff that we probably won't be able to reach
this time but let's do another time would you do that yeah totally because you were kind enough
to swing out of your way today and this was a blast i love the type of public education you're
doing i think it's so so important and so i was really happy to come super enjoyed this
conversation and yeah there's a bunch of other places we could go i'm curious to hear what is
interesting what people have questions on disagree with from this piece and
um and i
yeah i i love the fact that you're uh publicly educating and learning publicly simultaneously
right and a medical expert who is actually learning updating their position and trying
to orient people towards synthesis of something that is otherwise uh culture breaking um and
i really want to see you do that thing where you get the experts and uh because i because it
needs to happen you're very kind we're going to try to do that i have to say this daniel like you
are one of the people that i consistently look at online in your resources to try to learn from
and you've been instrumental in my own understanding of these sort of civilization level threats and
how to even apply them down to my own field of medicine but even beyond that so i'm looking
forward to continuing the dialogue i'd love to get you know tristan and um uh zack yeah on the show
and talk to them about these things too because again i'm like the interest oh that'd be awesome
and uh where can we find you online there's a project that we started a little while ago it's
still in beta phase we have some super interesting things we'll be doing with it um in this next
year it's called the conciliants project conciliants project dot org and uh i have a personal blog
that mostly just has a list of podcasts up at civilization emerging dot com okay great i'll
put those links in and yeah those those interviews are fantastic man i think you did like a four hour
thing with lex freedman man i tell you next time we're going to do six hours just to beat lex he
spent the first half hour on ufo's which i didn't expect we were going to go there but yeah lex is
cool i heard i heard that night i remember thinking you actually know more about ufo's than you should
like where did you even learn about that well i mean just think about what a consequential topic
it is depending upon what is true the most so i think anything that is hard epistemically
to figure out if it's true or not but super consequential and differentially consequential
one way or the other is just innately really interesting yeah there you go well see that's
what i love about you is your your curiosity drives you to go from first principles to
establish really interesting thought patterns on stuff and you're really a unique guy thank you
guys you know what to do share the show if you really like what we do i was talking about locals
earlier i'm going to pitch it one more time zdog md.locals.com and you can join us there for
free or become a supporter for like five bucks a month and then we have this little internal
tribal dialogue that's looking for conciliants synthesis alt middle integral all the things
post cynical thoughts so thank you i haven't been there yet i've heard about i'll come find you on
locals find me a supporter and then poke holes in all the problems with locals because i know you'll
find him cool thank you brother take care
