Rhaid, mae'n gobeithio mefifysigau i'r ffysimoligau i'r holl, mae'n gobeithio mefifysigau i'r ffysimoligau.
Mae mefifysigau efallai ystod o realitio.
Mae'n gwybod o gwybodaeth yma, oherwydd mae'n gwybod o'r holl o'r holl.
Mae'n gwybod o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o ontology.
Mae'n gwybod o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'
o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl o'r holl
and what's it like?"
For example, I told you that hieroclitus postulated atoms
more than 500 years BC.
He didn't know what they were like except that, by definition,
they were the unsplittables,
because an atom was as far as you can go.
An atom of water is as far as you can go.
Sorry, I'll have the water down here, please.
I want them to drink it.
That's all right thanks. Just stick it down on the floor there.
Um where was I. Water.
Yeah exactly look here.
There are quite a few atoms of water on my finger.
Um but at some point you'll get down to something such that if you go below that
it won't be water.
It'll be CO2, it'll be a molecule but it won't be water itself
fod yn gyd".
Roedd ei 17 i wath arwyr sydd Wi'n iawn i'r cyfry deoeddion
hwn o Paef Msобo.
Yn syniadol, amsgau'r cyfry producef yn gyd.
Amser i worse arnynnuusri dweud
inga hynny im bee'r cyfrif diolch i紅有人.
Os gallu hynne i'r cyfrif Diolch,
roedd yi ddholdio'r roedd o bobl
yn podr â hyllnedd i cardi.
RydynALL y bae,
ond odi iecheleration serv Os gallu gyd,
roedd ymddwyr hynny ei neud yn ychynedig.
Romedaethwyr arna roedd hyn,
Wyf ei ddechrau y maen nhw iedd ein bodi gyda'r ymlaen oherwydd y mynd Areliadau –
a dyfodd b
чего directed clwy Nutburnt dobl yn fwy,
ac yn rhaid yr argynno ananciaent i y pwy fydd gennym yn cyd-agarr,
ar hyd yn dyn am ydym ni'n ni wneudír r roomm-wyl newydd,
sy'n rhan f themeddynydd ar hyn yn argynno.
F worldwide ni'n nadread 1972
yn addyn ni Abern Children Fund
Am ochr am yr hyn,
pan ydy'r cymryd yn âhrhar,
Eat flying in Switzerland.
Byddwn we find it, if we find it, then we're going to know more about it.
That's what we're doing. We've postulated it,
we've said this is on our list of things that exist, at least as a hypothesis.
Now we want to test that hypothesis and see whether it's true.
Metaphysics asked questions like what's there and what's its nature.
Now, many of these questions are questions of science.
Ond felly answered those on whether it exists, and what it is like.
These are questions for science.
Questions like, Coresation?
What is Coresation, does causation exist?
The relation between cause and effect.
That's not a question for science.
The scientists must assume that causation exists.
Philosophers ask, does it?
And what's the nature of causation?
Côr, could causation go backwards?
For example, could there be a cause that happens after its effect?
Is causation a relation between events or between objects or between facts
or what are the relator of the causal relation?
So these are all questions of metaphysics.
Epistemology on the other hand is the study of knowledge.
Felly,Onw ydyn ni bobl yn i gynvorith y bydd hynna stylo hwnneid fel hwnna a sealion ac mae pheth yn ychydig gan ferчики
ei hefyd warariaeth.
Mae sei bod fydd yn hwnneid er daddylau cyfle f Children, y gall Yd Transyl virtual
Creadread waspwyd, parwyr coesidol cyhoeddiol, raib ynבod at y combineirian yng Nghymru.
Felly, eich cymryd, ac eich cymryd, eich cymryd.
Grabriwch, eich cymryd, eich cymryd, y llり, יchyn wedi pillarwl,
노래 aは merely,
but what you hope to be is the one that you don't believe it is due to the latter.
But the study in what is the case, how it is how it is that it is and how it is
and what you know best to be the case, are two different questions
that yo u hwnf cael maen nhw gyda kin I a physigyn
the other to do it with epistemology.
Epistemology looks at what can we know!
Can we for example know that the sun will rise tomorrow?
Do you remember the motto we looked at
induction, when we started doing logic?
Can we know it
Well, we don't know for certain must knowledge be certain knowledge or could it be the case
that we know something that we don't know we know? Do you see what I mean? What is knowledge
like? So, actually, I should have put that here. What is knowledge? What can we know and
how can we know it? So, for example, if there are moral values, we don't know it by sensory
perception. I never see right and wrong, certainly not through my eyes or through tactile sense
or anything like that. So, there must be some other way. How do we know that two plus two
equals four? Again, you don't see that that's the case. How do you know that all swans are
white? I know they're not, but let's pretend for a minute. How do you know that all ravens
are black? That's a better one. Well, let's forget Albino ones. I know what you're like.
I could see you thinking that. How do we know that given that if you're going to say that
all ravens are white, you're talking about all ravens, even the ones that you've never
seen, even the ones that nobody has ever seen, even the ones on Mars. If there are ravens
on Mars, you're saying all ravens are black includes those ravens on Mars. Well, how can
you know that? Do you see what I mean? So, there are two different questions as what is
knowledge in the first place? Must we know that we know something or can we know something
that we don't know that we know? What's it got to do with justification? What's it got
to do with belief, et cetera? And how can we know these things? So, that's the distinction
between metaphysics. Metaphysics is to do with truth and what is the case and what's
its nature. Epistemology is to do with knowledge, justification, belief, and how we can know
whatever it is that we do know. So, that's the main distinction. Let me just pour myself
some H2O. H2O. What did I say earlier? I suddenly remembered that I heard myself saying
something false. Well, right. Okay, let's look at ontology, the study of what there is
or what exists. Okay, one question. I said earlier that there are many things that questions
of what is the case and what is its nature that are questions for science. But questions
like does God exist? In the God delusion, if any of you have read it, Richard Dawkins
claims that this is a scientific hypothesis like any other. Well, if that's true, it must
be possible to conduct experiments, observations, in order to determine the existence of God.
I have no idea what experiments or observations he has in mind, but I actually don't think
this is a question for science. I think Dawkins is wrong to think this is a straightforward
scientific hypothesis. I think this is a question for philosophy. Evidence, our reasons
for thinking God exists take the form of arguments rather than evidence or observations. For example,
the most obvious argument is the one I used earlier. God is a theoretical entity. He's
postulated to explain the existence of the universe. That's the simplest argument. It's
the argument that people have used from the beginning of time. Other people use different
arguments. For example, the moral argument. You don't need God to explain the existence
of the physical world, but how come there exist people like us who are capable of rationality,
who reason, who have free will, who make choices, and in particular make moral choices? People
like us who value things, who see right and wrong, good and bad, beautiful and ugly, and
things like that. Physics can't see right and wrong, good or bad, etc. This is not the
sort of thing that physics or any physical science can investigate. But you might think
that God is the explanation for the existence of things like that. Or you might deny that.
You might say, no, you don't need God to explain right and wrong. You can easily explain right
and wrong by peel to evolutionary biology. So altruism is a question of either kin support
or if I scratch your back, you'll scratch mine, etc. So if you look at Dawkins' chapter,
I think it's four, but I may be wrong about that. He offers four or five arguments for
how you can explain morality without God. So does God exist? Lots of different arguments
for the existence of God, lots of different rejections of those arguments, lots of different
comebacks on those rejections, and philosophers are going to have a job for at least a couple
of hundred years, I think. I think the God's illusion is far from the final word on it. But
there are other questions like that. That's a biggie, obviously, but there are other biggies.
Do moral values exist? Is there right and wrong? Does right, it's really a property of an
action being right or wrong? Or can we reduce the idea of being right to something some
people would say natural like happiness? So the utilitarians want to reduce happiness
to the, sorry, reduce right and wrong to the idea of the greatest happiness to the
greatest number. So there's no more to right or wrong than how many people you make happy
by an action that you do. Now what you're doing there is you're reducing one thing to
another thing. So here's something we don't understand right and wrong, and we think that
it needs an explanation, and we're tempted to postulate God for it maybe. But on the
other hand, if we can say, well, actually, we don't have an explanation for that, but
there's actually no more to that than this in particular combinations, and we do have
an explanation for this, or at least this is something for which we can think that there'd
be a much easier explanation than God. So on the grounds of Occam's razor, given two
explanations, both of which work, you always go for the simpler one. If you can explain
happiness, and you can reduce morality to happiness, then you haven't got a problem
with morality. You don't need to postulate God. See what I mean? So you might, I mean,
some people try and reduce the idea of God to, I mean, actually Dawkins again does this.
He thinks that God is the idea we all want for security, for a father figure, something
to rely on. So he's reducing God to that. The utilitarians try and reduce moral values
to happiness. Kant, on the other hand, isn't a reductionist. He thinks right and wrong
exist, that the moral law exists in and of itself, and that it's quite different from
anything else. So if you remember last week, for Kant, a moral action is an action that's
carried out because of reverence for the moral law. It can't be said to be anything else.
It can't be said to be something that, just as a matter of fact, produces the greatest
happiness or the greatest number. And reverence for the moral law, says Kant, is not something
you can reduce to anything else, something easier to understand. Another example of this
would be mental states. I thought I was going to come to mental states, but I say it's not
on there, so I'll put it in anyway. Do mental states exist? Well, what are mental states?
Well, mental states divide into two. There are the so-called propositional attitudes. So
attitudes to propositions, things like beliefs. You can't have a belief unless it's a belief
about something, can you? So I believe that Anne is wearing sort of maroon. I believe Anne's
wearing maroon. I believe when Anna's got a necklace on, somebody's got a lovely pink
jumper on just in front of Anna. Futious sort of colour. Okay, all of those beliefs have
a content, but there are other propositional attitudes, so I can have a desire to warn
towards the same content. Desire is a different attitude, but I could have the desire that
Anna's wearing a necklace, or I could wish that Anne is wearing, all the same names, is
wearing maroon. I could also intend that Anna's wearing maroon. I could set out to make
sure she wears maroon today, because I want to use her as an example. So these are lots
of different attitudes to contents, and you can get the same attitude and different contents
and the same content and different attitudes. So that's one type of mental state, the so-called
propositional attitudes. The other type is the so-called qualitative states. So when
I looked at this lady's lovely future-coloured cardigan, I have a certain experience. Okay,
there's something that it's like for me to see that cardigan. There's something that
it's like for me to see these chairs. There's something it's like for me to be in pain or
to feel a tickle or something like that. And these are qualitative states. They're states
that have a quality to them. So I'm sure you can do your own rough and ready distinction
now into states that have a certain raw feel to them and states that are attitudes to propositions.
Why do we think these exist? Well, how could I possibly explain your behaviour without citing
desires, beliefs, intentions, hopes, fears? You know, why did she suddenly get up and leave
the room? Answer, because she suddenly realised it was the wrong lecture. She suddenly realised
it was the wrong lecture. So she had a belief about what the right lecture was. She suddenly
came to believe that this was the wrong lecture. So she formed an intention to leave the room.
So in order to explain your behaviour, I postulate all sorts of beliefs and desires. But here's another
little story. Woodlice. Why do woodlice congregate under rocks and things? Tell me. It's dark.
Why do woodlice congregate where it's dark? Because they want to be safe or something
like that. OK. And they believe it's safe under rocks. OK. You're a bit reluctant to attribute beliefs, are you?
Well, don't give my story away. Yep, absolutely. OK. When we first see a woodlice and certainly if
we're speaking to a child or something like that, we would use belief, desire, psychology
to explain woodlice behaviour, because that's what comes very easily to us. So woodlice believe
that it's safe under rocks and they want to be safe so they intend to go under rocks. As
a matter of fact, the correct explanation of woodlice behaviour is that they embody a
mechanism such that when it's dry around them, they move. And they move in a speed that's
determined by how dry it is around them. And as it gets damper, they come to a halt.
And incidentally, they move in whatever direction they happen to be pointed. They don't sort
of turn around and make for that rock. If they're standing in that direction, there's a rock
over there, they'll go for that one. Except they're not going for that one, are they? They're
being pushed by the dryness. Now, once you know that explanation, have I got it right?
That's right. I wasn't going to use technical terminology, but they are. Okay, so that's
the proper explanation of woodlice behaviour. Once you know about canises like this, you
can explain the behaviour of any woodlouse anywhere at all, as long as it's a normal
woodlouse, anywhere at all at any time. Once you know that, belief desires have been made
redundant, haven't they? Why should you postulate woodlice beliefs now or woodlice desires? In
fact, all their behaviour is explicable in terms of things like canises. They're not
all canises, but they're things like that. What about your behaviour? Can I explain your
behaviour? Well, a lot of your behaviour, I can explain. If I chuck my chalk at you,
that shows how old I am, doesn't it? If I chuck my chalk at you, you're going to duck.
That's not a desire or belief-driven behaviour. That's just a hardwired response to the fact
that you see something coming towards you. If you put your hands on a hot plate, do the
same thing. So a lot of your behaviour, and that's just one, if you hear an ambulance
coming, you'll move out of the way. That's a classically conditioned response. A lot of
your behaviour doesn't need to be explained by appeal to beliefs and desires, but much
of it does, and this is why we postulate beliefs and desires. This is why we say that beliefs
and desires exist, but perhaps ethologists, people who study animal behaviour, are going
to find out one day that we can explain all our behaviour in terms of brain states,
and it might be that we can, one time in the future, we'll be able to saw off the skull
of newborn babies and fit a perspect dome instead, so that we don't have to go in for
all this interpretation, which we're actually not very good at, is it, trying to find out
what we're all going to do instead? We can just look at somebody's brain and say, ah,
okay, I know what you're going to do. Perhaps we'll all wear woolly hats so we can surprise
people or something like that. But do you see, if we could explain all our behaviour
without appealing to beliefs and desires, we'd no more have reason to think you had a mind
than we do to think woodlice do. So, again, the question, do mental states exist, is a
huge question. Lots of people try and reduce mental states to physical states, and then
explain physical states, it's much easier to explain physical states than mental states,
but if you don't want to be a reductionist, if you want to say you cannot reduce mental
states to physical states, and there are all sorts of reasons to think you can't, then
you're going to have to postulate mental states, you're going to have to postulate
contents and qualia, and the minute you do, you're going to have problems with functionalism,
with physics being able ever to understand mental states, and my goodness, you might
end up having to postulate God or something again, or maybe not, we don't know. So, again,
the question is, what is this? Does it exist at all? If it does exist, can we reduce it
to something else? If we can't reduce it to something else, what is its nature? Here's
another one, what about possibilities? Okay, I might have been wearing jeans, mightn't I?
Okay, that's a possibility. And what's more, it's a possibility that's actual, isn't it?
It's an actual possibility. Well, what is a possibility? What's the nature of a possibility?
It's not something that actually exists, is it? Okay, so maybe we've got to postulate
a different sort of existence now. There are things that actually exist, and there are
things that possibly exist, and there are things that don't even possibly exist. So,
there are square circles that don't even possibly exist. Unicorns might they exist
or not? Marianne's wearing jeans certainly is an existing possibility. Do you see what
I mean? You're now getting layers of existence, different levels of existence. Well, and that
little kitten on the floor down there, is it fat? You're looked. You understood what
my words were. Don't you need to postulate a little kitten down there in order to give
meaning to my words? Some people have thought that. If you do, then that little kitten exists,
it doesn't exist like Ann does, so you need again another layer of existence. Well, some
people have said that it's not really existence. Let's call it persistence instead. But the
thing is you've got to say, if you say that every, in order for you to understand the
meaning of that little kitten is fat, there needs to be a concept of a kitten or a kitten
or something. There's a kitten that gives meaning to the words, but it's not an existing
kitten like the kitten that some of you may have at home. So, it's a persisting kitten
or an imaginary kitten is another way of thinking about it. But do imaginary kittens exist? Well,
do they? In imagination, there you are. There's another way of thinking of it. So, it's existence,
different types of existence. There's existence in the real world and there's existence in
your imagination. There's existence in novels. I mean, when it comes up, this little kitten
down here, it could be black ginger or anything, couldn't it? I haven't told you anything about
what it's like. But we all know that Sherlock Holmes wore a deastalker, didn't we? Did he?
Something like that, wasn't it? Okay, so they've got, again, different levels of existence.
We all know that unicorns have horns. Well, there aren't any unicorns. Well, how can unicorns
have horns if there aren't any? Do you see? Anyway, so, do possibilities exist is a really
difficult one. That's the sort of thing that leads people to postulate the existence of
possible worlds. And I think I've mentioned possible worlds to you before. Lots of people
postulate possible worlds, but they're not realists about possible worlds. Mathematicians,
logicians, physicists, many of them, all those disciplines postulate possible worlds. Not
all people in those disciplines do. But if you postulate possible worlds, you can see
possible worlds as reducing to possible situations in this world, or you can see possible worlds
as real. And David Lewis, very famous philosopher, postulated the reality of possible worlds.
And he said, well, I've never really heard a very good argument against them. A look
of blank astonishment doesn't count as an argument. What about physical objects? Well,
you might say, well, obviously they exist. How can I deny that that exists? Okay, well,
let's do a Cartesian thought experiment. In fact, let's do the Cartesian thought experiment
when I have some water. Descartes was interested in the fact that we know that some of our beliefs
are false. But in the very nature of things, we don't know which those beliefs are. You
see what I mean? Would you like to tell me for sure that all your beliefs are true?
Right? Okay, what about you? No, it isn't. No, no, a lot of your beliefs are false. I guarantee.
If you believe it, you believe that it's true, that doesn't make it true. Does it? No. You believe
it's true exactly. But this is the problem with beliefs. Every belief you have, you believe
it's true because that's what a belief is. To have the attitude of belief towards a particular
content is to assent to, as philosophers would say, that content. So in believing that this
chair is blue, there's the content, that chair is blue, and I assent to it. I say that is true.
That's what a belief is. But, of course, I may be wrong. I may be colourblind or something like that.
Well, given the circumstances in this case, I probably would say I know. But the fact is,
let's not bother about that. I was just offering that as a... But you have beliefs about a lot
of things. The question is, you know that many of those beliefs are false, but you don't know
which they are. And in the very nature of things, anything that you believe, you believe to be
true because that's what truth is. You cannot have a belief that you don't believe to be true.
But you do know that not all your beliefs are true. Well, Descartes became very
interested in this, and he said, well, what I'm going to do is I'm going to take myself away from
the world. In the world, we have to assume that our beliefs are true because we have to act on them.
So in believing that chair is blue, if I'm looking for something to match it, I'll go and look for
something blue. We have to act on our beliefs. He's going to put himself away and think, okay,
how do I know that my beliefs are true? What is it that justifies me in believing that my beliefs
are true? And he thought, the method I'm going to use to do this is to treat as if false any belief
I can entertain the slightest doubt about. So if the belief that I believe to be true could be
false, I'm going to put it on one side as if it really is false. And by that means hope to find
something that I can that is absolutely certain. And from that, maybe I can build up the rest of
my knowledge. So it's a bit like, you know, some of the apples in your baskets are rotten, but you
don't know which they are. So you take each one out and any that's a little bruised, you put on
one side as being maybe that's rotten. And you hope to be left with only the good apples in the
basket. So Descartes wanted to look at his beliefs and say, if there's any about which I can entertain
the slightest doubt, I'm going to treat it as if false. Okay, so he's not saying that his beliefs
are false. He's saying it's as if they're false for this. So first, he went down three levels of doubt.
The first one was the argument from illusion. Okay, the argument from illusion tells us that,
well, our senses have deceived us. I expect all of you have been deceived by your senses. Sometimes
you've got home that wonderful skirt that you thought would go so well with that blouse and
you've got the colour wrong. The lights in this shop were the wrong colour or something like that.
We've all been deceived by our senses at some time. Well, if we've all been deceived by our senses
at some time, should we take all the beliefs that we base on our senses and put them in the
doubting basket, treat them as if they're false? Should we? If our senses has deceived us, should
we treat all our sensory beliefs as false? Okay, put your hands up if you think yes.
Okay, put your hand up if you think no. Okay, now tell me why you think no.
Why must there be that possibility?
Well, hang on, we've got two lots of can'ts nose here. What we're suggesting is that your senses
have sometimes deceived you. Does that mean you can never be sure that your senses are not deceiving
you now? No, you can't be sure. So sometimes we do trust our senses, don't we? I mean, as a matter
of fact, how do you know that your senses have deceived you? Well, hang on, you experiment,
you prove it. How? How do you do this? Through your senses. Can you give me an example? Possibly not.
Woo, yes. Yes, good one. Okay. So your belief that it was heavy, although that's actually not
a sensory belief, probably, is it? Well, yes, because you put so much anticipated. No, no, but it's
when your belief that the frying pan was heavy, you can't really look at a frying pan and tell it's
going to be heavier. Maybe you can, maybe you can. Let me give you Descartes own example, because I
think it's a good one. Descartes said, if you put a stick in water and it looks bent, okay, you've got
reason for thinking that the stick is bent. You take it out of water, woo, it's straight. You've got
reason for thinking the stick's straight. Well, okay, there are two possibilities, maybe. When you
put the stick in water, it bends it, or maybe it just appears bent. So how do you test this? You put
your hands in the water, you feel the stick when it's underwater and low, it's straight. Okay, so
you've now got two reasons for thinking the stick's straight and only one. But the thing is, you
couldn't even know that your senses were deceiving you unless you rely on your senses. So all we got
to hear from the argument from illusion is that we know that not all our sensory beliefs are true,
not all our sensory beliefs are true. Sometimes, usually in
unusual psychooptimal conditions, or maybe not unusual, but not perfect psycho physical conditions,
our sensory beliefs deceive us. But you can't go from the universal possibility of illusion
to the possibility of universal illusion. Would you like me to say that again? No? Oh, I like saying
that. Would you like me to say it again? Thank you. Thank you. You cannot go from the universal
possibility of illusion to the possibility of universal illusion. Are you with me? Okay, so all
those who said no, you're right. We do know that our senses sometimes deceive us, but that doesn't
tell us that we can put all our sensory beliefs into the doubting basket, because we would never
know that our senses deceive us unless we rely on our senses. So that's the first argument. The
second argument that Descartes went to was the argument from the demon, the demon argument,
rather than the argument from the demon. The demon, sorry, the demon, anyone who knows what
they're talking about will know that I'm talking rubbish. The second one was the dream, the argument
from dreaming. Okay, so you're sitting here, you're in the fire, the lights are on, everything's fine,
you're looking at your hands in front of you. How can you doubt that? Your senses aren't deceiving
you now, are they? But on the other hand, says Descartes, haven't you ever been in the situation
where everything has seemed to you to be a certain way, and then you've suddenly woken up
and found it wasn't that way at all? So it looks as if all the sensory evidence is in, and yet
you're still wrong, your belief is false. So you believe that the hand is in front of you.
It's exactly with you as it would be if your hand was in front of you, but your hand's not in
front of you. As a matter of fact, you're dreaming. Okay, does that mean we should put all our sensory
beliefs in the doubting basket? Put your hands up if you think yes. Put your hand up if you think no.
You're beginning to get this now, aren't you? Why not?
Man in white or beigey sort of jumper.
Sorry, I've picked on you and you don't have to.
Okay, would anyone else like to answer? Why can we not put all our sensory beliefs in the
doubting basket now? Because we wake up, and what does that tell us?
That we're not always asleep exactly, that sometimes our beliefs are true. Sometimes when I've
got my hand in front of me like that and I'm thinking my hand's in front of me, I am awake,
and the reason I know that is because if I didn't wake up, I couldn't know I was dreaming. So it's
exactly the same structure of arguments as in the first one. But where has we got rid of all
sensory beliefs that have formed in suboptimal psychophysical conditions here? Here, we've got
rid of a lot more, haven't we? Why? Do you want to? No, I was going to say that, but how do you know
you've woken up? That might be part of the dream we're talking about. Well, it's a contrast, isn't it?
Well, there are people who don't have that occasionally. I understand that it's very rare, but there are people who go
through this cycle of thinking they've woken up and then they wake up again themselves.
Right, but in order to know that they are like that, they must have woken up.
Well, okay, but with you, I'm quite sure you've had lucid dreams where you've had the dream and
suddenly you've woken up and you've thought, wow, you know, who could have believed that I was dreaming.
Sometimes you can know your dream, but it's the lucid dream that's good for this one.
But what have we lost here? What's in the doubting basket now?
No, instantly, there's another thing I want you to notice that lots of people think, I mean, it's
hell, sheer hell being a philosopher as a party. Because when people find out you're a philosopher,
they're going for little games like, oh, good, tell me that this exists. Does this exist? Why not?
And you say something and they say, oh, no, it doesn't, you know, tell me how, tell me how.
And they're playing a sort of skeptics game that's extremely irritating. I hope none of you ever play it.
Descartes found reasons for doubting, everything. He didn't just doubt. He took beliefs he believed to be true,
and he looked for a reason to doubt them. And it's only when he found a reason to doubt them
that he put them on one side. So he wasn't just doubting. He wasn't playing the skeptics game.
He was actually looking for reasons to doubt. So what are we lost here? What's in the doubting
basket once you've got the argument from dreaming? Well, no, because when you are, you know that
sometimes your belief there's a hand in front of you is correct, is true. So you don't lose
that you do sometimes see your hand in front of you. But what do you lose?
No. No, no, we're looking for certainty. We're wanting to know what isn't certain as a result
of this. Some things are left certain. I mean, it's left certain, for example. Well, okay,
I'm asking you that. What is left certain? That when you are awake, your beliefs, your sensory beliefs
if they're formed in optimal psychophysical conditions are true. You still got no reason to
doubt that. It's just that you can say that unless I know I'm awake, I cannot know for sure
that there is a hand in front of me. Okay, do I know that I'm really awake? Answer no, I don't,
because I could be having a lucid dream. But I do know that hands exist and that I can see them
and that chairs exist and that I can see them. Or if you don't like that, because I can, in our
dreams, we sometimes put together things in strange ways. I can know that blue exists and that
so you can go to simple things, horses, horns, whiteness, things like that. The simple things
from which we build up complex things. I know that they exist. So we're losing something of the
world here, but we haven't lost the whole world yet. There's still an awful lot that we know. I don't
know anything to be true now, but I do have reason to believe that it is true. It is true sometimes,
i.e. when I'm awake and I have these reasons to believe things. But then we get down to the demon argument.
And at the demon argument, Descartes says, okay, well, I'm assuming, aren't I, that
these experiences that I have as of my hands and of blwness and so on, I'm assuming that these
experiences are actually caused by something outside myself and that the experience that I have
is a guide to the nature of the cause of these experiences. So my experience of blwness as of
a blue chair is causing me to think that that experience is being caused by a chair that's
blue. And you've got a problem here because in order to know that A causes B, you've got to be here,
haven't you? You've got to see a correlation between A and B. In the same way to know that A
resembles B, you've got to be able to see both A and B. But are we ever in this position with
respect to our experiences and the causes of our experience? Never. We're always here,
aren't we? Didn't leave enough room for my arrow. We experience the world, if you like,
through our experiences. We can never get outside our experiences to see what the world is like,
to see what's causing these experiences. So it could be that our experiences are caused by
something completely other than we take them to be caused by. So here's the demon. Sorry, I know it
looks like a cat, but it's a demon. The demon opens up a gap between our experiences themselves
and the causes of those experiences, and it actually says, how do we even know these experiences
are caused? Why aren't they just experiences? One following the other, following the other,
following the other. And there's nothing out there at all. And actually Descartes at that point
says, I can't do this. I'm going to put the demon there because I find it impossible to believe
there's nothing other than my experiences. But I can think that there's some cause of my
experiences, which is completely other than I take it to be. And some people have tried putting
evil scientists in here, but that doesn't work because an evil scientist isn't magic.
What you're trying to do, the demon is just there because it's impossible to imagine that your
experiences don't have causes at all. So you're putting something there so that there is a cause,
but the cause is completely other than you take it to be. He didn't panic for that reason. No,
he just literally couldn't wrap his mind around the idea that there's nothing outside causing
your experiences. You try it. It's really very difficult to get yourself to the point where
you understand that there might be no physical world at all. Your experiences could be exactly
as they are, even though nothing else exists. So all there is is Ann's experiences as of
Marianne giving a lecture in philosophy. There's no Marianne, there's no philosophy,
there's no lecture, there's no blue chair. But it does seem to me very similar to what people have
of is this experience all a half. It's a frightening experience. It's nothing beyond that.
But it's nothing to do with God. Oh, no. I said that sometimes white people want to have a God.
Yes. I didn't actually say about God. I just said people worry that there is nothing after death.
Okay, but this is a different thing because it's not worrying about that sort of thing.
But it is a worrying thought. I mean, we want our beliefs about the external world to be true,
don't we? And yet what's happening is that we're discovering that what Descartes said was that
actually, once you've done this thought experiment, you realise that there's the world
and there's your picture of the world. Okay, all your beliefs that you've formed about the world
and you go through the world updating your beliefs all the time. But once you've retreated
into your picture of your picture of the world, which should be here, but I ran out of room,
the world actually becomes unnecessary because if all there was was this,
you couldn't ever get outside to see whether this is there or not. So once you've pushed yourself
back into a reflective position, you see that the world that you picture is quite different
from your picture of the world and that your picture of the world could be exactly as it is,
even though the world was completely different. And that's the Cartesian thought experiment.
That's hyperbolical doubt. At this point, you've started the question of how can we know? I mean,
we do take ourselves to know that there's an external world, a physical world out there.
But what possible justification could we have for this, given that all we can do is go and look
for more experiences? And our experiences are exactly what we are asking. Are they caused by
something? And if so, what? I can't step outside my experience. Of course, no scientific experiment
is going to tell you the answer between, are my experiences caused by an external world,
or are they caused by an evil demon? There's no, I can't go down and say, oh, is it a chair?
Oh, yes. Here we are. It's a chair. Why can't I do that?
All I'm doing is giving myself more experiences, aren't I? I'm now having a tactile experience
as well as a visual experience, and there's an auditory one there as well. But I mean,
there are only more experiences, aren't they? Who are you? Hang on. I'm having another experience
at this moment. It's an auditory one. It's as of someone.
They do, but no, no, hang on. You haven't got yourself into hyperbolical doubt, has she?
Why hasn't she got into hyperbolical doubt?
She's not looking at her picture of her picture of the world.
Yes, she still thinks that I should think that she exists.
I have very good reason to think I'm having experiences as of a female wearing maroon sitting
in front of me who's speaking to me, but these are just more of my experiences, aren't I?
I can no more get outside my experiences to check whether Ann's really there and whether
she's really telling me what I think she's telling me than I can to see whether the chair is there.
All I've got is more experiences. So all I've got is more of this
here, and I still haven't got this, which is what I need. So there's no point in looking for
corroboration, which is why there can't be any scientific way of testing which hypothesis is true.
So here I have my experience in the external world. Of those, I can be certain. I'm absolutely sure
now that I'm having experiences as of a lecture theatre, etc. What I want to know is are those
experiences causing me to form beliefs that are true, i.e. there is a lecture theatre. Now notice
the difference between I believe there's a lecture theatre and there is a lecture theatre.
The latter is metaphysics, isn't it? The former is histomology. I can be certain of the former.
I can be certain of my own beliefs, but I can't be certain that these beliefs are true, can I?
And it's at this level of hyperbolical doubt, at the third level of doubt that you start to wonder
do physical objects exist at all. Interestingly, Descartes thought that you could show that they
did. Descartes wasn't a sceptic. Lots of people think he was, but in fact he wasn't. He did this sceptical
thought experiment in order to pre-empt scepticism. He ended up believing in the existence of a physical
world, but he thought it was necessary to believe in God first.
That's right. Cogito ergo sum. And the reason he did that, can anyone think why he did that,
thinking of what I told you so far? What's that? That's right. Once you've got yourself back
into your picture of your picture of the world and your inability to determine the existence of
the world that you picture, the only thing of which you can be certain is that you're thinking,
isn't it? So here's my belief. The content of my belief is
the chair is blue.
I've got the attitude of belief towards that. I've now got another attitude, which is that of
doubt towards that belief. Do you see what I mean? You can't doubt your own beliefs without seeing
that you have these beliefs. And that's what Descartes says. He said, the very act of doubting
makes me see that I believe. And if I believe, I exist. I don't know what I am like, but I exist
because I exist as a thinking thing, as a thing that thinks. So I think, therefore I am, is because
that, once you've been in hyperbolical doubt, that is the only certainty you have. You actually
have a few more about what you think, but you don't need to. I think, therefore, I exist
encapsulates it rather neatly, I think. But you see, you cannot doubt your own beliefs without
seeing that you do believe something or other. All you don't know is whether that belief is true.
Could I come back to the argument from illusions and just sort of question around,
we're saying, talking about our sense data and so on shows that they're wonderful.
However, sometimes those are what? Sometimes those are true or can be believed.
But if you, I mean, looking at evidence, for example, from physics about the nature of the
universe, about sort of wave particle forms, about what the nature of the matter is, all that kind
of stuff, what we're seeing is an extremely distorted view of reality. Looking at the evidence
from psychology, our perception is a highly flawed, all our senses are highly flawed, our brains
are constantly filling in stuff that's around the edges and doing all kinds of fiddling about with
what actually might or might not be out there. So, actually, we know pretty much what we are
experiencing. Much of it is an illusion. I'm afraid that, in what you're saying, you'll make it clear
that you haven't got into hyperbolical doubt either.
Well, in that case,
well, we can, but we can agree with all that and accept. I mean, all Day Cuts asking is,
can we be certain that our experiences are being caused by anything? Secondly, can we be
certain that our experiences are a good guide to what there is? Now, what you're saying is that the
second, we know empirically that the answer to the second question is no. But, of course,
for him, the most important question is the first one, not the second one.
Is there evidence coming out about the nature of consciousness in the cell,
which the implication is that what we may perceive as being ourself is actually, again, quite illusory?
Yes, sure. But this is more grist to Descartes mill. It's either irrelevant,
excuse me, or it's grist to Descartes mill. I mean, you can add these in, if you like,
to the argument from illusion. But the argument from illusion is only the first step of Descartes
argument. And the step that really matters is this one. And that's the one that takes us
to hyperbolical doubt. And that's very definitely a philosophical or metaphysical question,
not an empirical one. There's no way science can show us.
Well, there still is, but the empiricism is nothing more than me testing out one experience
against another, which is a bit like testing out one newspaper against another. It's not going
to get you very far. Well, doubting is a form of thinking. No, you can't bring in other people.
No, you can't. You can't bring in other people at all. The doubting is not what you're certain of
by doubting is that you believe. Because in order to doubt, the thing that you doubt is a belief of
your own. Well, exactly. A belief is a thought. It's a type of thought. So you're doubting that
you're thinking and you try and doubt whether you're thinking and you will become completely
certain that you're thinking. And so Descartes says, isn't it strange because I would have thought
that the world was far more present to me than my own thoughts. In fact, my own thoughts have
always seemed to be rather shadowy things that I'm not really certain of at all. I can't hold
them or see them or touch them or so on. But having done this, I now see that my thoughts are far
more certain to me than the external world, which could be nothing. So he thinks he's gone from
something or he's found something really surprising once you move from the perspective of
picturing your world. So I'm thinking of the world that I picture, not my picture of the world.
Usually the only time I'm thinking of my picture of the world is when something's gone wrong.
I thought I hung my coat here. I believed I hung my coat here. I now have reason to believe it isn't
there. What's gone wrong? So I've been pushed back into my picture of my picture of the world
in order to question whether my belief is true or false. But of course, usually I come back almost
immediately. Oh, there it is. And so I immediately move back into my picture of the world, looking at
the world. But what Descartes did is he forced himself to stay here, where what he was reflecting
on was his picture of the world rather than the world that he pictured. So he's looking at his
beliefs and thinking, are they true? Are they false? Are they justified? Are they not? Instead of
looking at the chair and thinking, is it blue? Is it hard? Is it okay? Do you see why people are out
here, not in here? Ann isn't a belief. My belief about Ann is a belief. But Ann is here. And Marianne's
belief about Ann is what I am certain of. But I'm certain of it until I doubt it. And the minute
I doubt it, I can be certain of that belief, but I can't be certain that it's true. So whatever
Ann says is just more of my experiences. Ann, say, that's right. I believe that Ann says it's blue,
and I know that my belief that Ann says it's true does not make it true that Ann says it's true.
And you too will be able to do this when you become philosophers. Do you see what I mean?
Once you understand what you're saying, it becomes easy to say it, although now I can't say it again.
But I'll have to get the flow of it back. Do you see why people are outside?
When my daughter was little, she used to think we had two houses, and she thought we had one that
was down the end of the road that came from preschool, and one that came down the road from
school. My cat thinks we have two houses. I'm just wondering if it, but she would have had no doubt
about that belief. Was it when she began to doubt the belief, and then obviously then realised
it's not quite that much, because we've only got the one house. Is that almost the doubting belief
makes it real? I don't know. Well, there's a very interesting, between three and five,
children actually acquire the context, the concept of a belief. And until that point,
there's evidence to think that they don't properly form beliefs of their own. But there's an experiment
that goes, Maxie the puppet, whoever it is who's looking after Maxie, I can't remember,
puts a chocolate in a box, and then Maxie goes out to play, and the children are watching this,
and Maxie's mum comes in, takes the chocolate from the box and puts it into a cupboard or something
like that. Then Maxie comes in from playing, and the children are asked, where is Maxie going to
look for the chocolate? Now, all the three-year-olds say in the cupboard, because that's where they
believe the chocolate is. They know the chocolate is in the cupboard, so that's where they think Maxie
will look. The five-year-olds will all say she'll look in the drawer, because they've understood
the difference between appearance and reality. The world can appear to you to be other than the
way the world is, and what your daughter did, she linked up her two beliefs and saw, oh, that house
is that house. Hold was she? Yeah, she probably wasn't really having beliefs at that point.
The thought is you don't really have a belief until you have the concept of belief, because once
it's only when you've got the concept of belief that you have the difference between appearance
and reality, and you see that beliefs can be either true or false, so you can grasp the concept of
conditions of truth and falsehood, and at that point you can really actually believe something,
whereas up until then it's just that you're just responding to a world, because the world is,
you don't make any distinction between the world's being one way and it's appearing one way.
You don't see that those can come apart, no, no, except I mean we'd call it one
when we're speaking loosely, but no. Okay, right, let's move on a bit, because
I mean we've been doing a lot of epistemology here under the heading of metaphysics, but of course
actually there's the metaphysics of epistemology just to confuse you, because of course if you
want to know the truth about knowledge then you're doing the metaphysics of knowledge and
therefore the metaphysics of epistemology, so we were looking at ontology before we got onto
scepticism, so we asked ourselves whether these things exist, but we can then go on and ask well
what are they like, you know, if we believe that God exists is he all these things, how can he be
all these things, because surely there's contradiction here isn't there, if he's omnipotent he can do
anything at all, if he's omniscient he knows everything at all, and if he's benevolent or good
then how can he see the suffering in the world and not do something about it, so can God be all
those things, what about moral values, if they exist are they absolute or relative, do we all
have our own moral values or is there a moral law that's objective and that exists for all of us,
are there different possible worlds or only different possible states of this world
and what's the difference between those two, and what about physical objects, are they independent
of us or bundles of our ideas, Barkley, Bishop Barkley thoughts that scepticism was so threatening
the idea that we couldn't be sure we had knowledge of the external world, that what he thought is we
had to build the external world from what we could be sure about, so the only thing we can be sure
about is our own experiences, so what is the external world other than bundles of our own
experiences, now this may sound daft, you know, I mean there's more to Anne than my experience if I
touch her she'll say ow or excuse me or something like that, but actually there again what have I got
other than my own experiences, auditory experiences etc, so what Barkley was saying was actually if
you think of all your experiences and all your counterfactual experiences, in other words if I
came into this room at midnight that blue chair would still be there, do you see that's a counterfactual
experience, I would still see that blue chair, there is no more to an object than our experiences
or counterfactual experiences and actually you try and convince me that you have any reason to
believe that the physical world exists, that doesn't appeal to either an experience of yours
or a counterfactual experience of yours and you'll fail, counterfactual, it is, if I came into
this room last night at midnight that's that's not true, I didn't come into this room at midnight I
was past the sleeping bed, but had I come into this room at midnight last night I would have seen
that blue chair and that's part of my reason for thinking that that blue chair exists independently
of me is that it was here all the time, it would still be here if I came back tomorrow, but it might
well exactly and so what Barkley is saying is is that there is no reason I can give for believing
that that chair exists that doesn't depend on either an actual experience of mine, here it exists
you know and you're having experiences of this chair now as well if you exist
or counterfactual ones if I came in tonight it would still be here, I would still see it
that's true but I would still okay but that's
if I had come in last night it would have been there yeah but I should be able to answer that
and I can't because I'm tired, what about Boozies? If somebody had moved it I wouldn't have seen it
okay I might not be able to follow it but it's certainly true that I have reason to believe that
this chair would have been here simply because it's tied to the floor, I mean that's not conclusive
and that's not a very good response to what you're saying, I've no reason to think it won't be and
my what's more important to you try this as a thought experiment for yourself try and give
yourself reason to believe that something that you believe exists exists okay so you believe
this exists what are your reasons for believing it exists and see if you can find one that doesn't
depend upon your own experiences either your actual experiences I can see it feel it touch it hear it
or your counterfactual experiences if I was there then if I did this then if
do you see what I mean then I would so you won't be able to do it Barkley was much cleverer than
people think people tend to think that he thought of the external world as a ghostly sort of thing
but he's just offering another explanation for our experiences and the fact that we go from
these experiences to thinking there's an external world we do that immediately what why do we do
this okay so so this is that's metaphysics then moving to epistemology what is knowledge
okay do we have knowledge we've looked at that in some depth already do we have knowledge
Descartes would say we can't claim to have knowledge of the external world unless we can get over his
thought experiment which he thinks we can um what is knowledge though some people believe that
it's okay well let me ask you this what what is knowledge we've been talking about knowledge for
the last hour and a half or something but what is it that's very optimistic of him launching out
like that good for you go on see for you what do you mean my gathered
but we have knowledge of things that don't involve senses don't we two plus two equals four is not
sensory knowledge so what is knowledge we collect it and put it in our brains how do you put
something in your brain well actually you don't um i'm not sure you intentionally acquire knowledge
anyway most of the time the knowledge you acquire isn't acquired intentionally it just
um sorry what did somebody else say it's certainly acquired but what is it we acquire
memories involved but there's a difference between memory and knowledge isn't there
i mean in order to remember something that something has to have happened
um memory is important but memory is different from knowledge it's not the same thing memory is
essentially time related whereas knowledge isn't essentially time related it can be time related
but it's not essentially so in the way that memory is yeah well and i mean there are different
sorts of knowledge aren't there as well i mean i know how to ride a bike well i remember
do i remember it well it's not propositional knowledge
okay let me tell you what one answer the classical answer to the question of what knowledge is is
that it's justified true belief okay if you're going to have knowledge you must have a belief
that belief must be justified and that belief must be true so um you believe or you you know
that i'm wearing an aubergine dress don't you you will know that they have very good colour
concepts here you have a belief that i'm wearing an aubergine dress do you yep okay is that belief
justified how you can see it yeah okay you're justified in believing that and and let me tell
you that it's true okay so you know i'm wearing an aubergine dress so that's the idea that so if a
student comes to me and says well i day card said such and such and i say why do you think that
and he says uh i don't know and i say okay well what follows from that belief and he says um
i don't know uh and i said well why do you think that and he says uh don't know
he doesn't know it does it does he you may have a belief about that um but it's and it what's more
it may be a true belief but it's not justified therefore it doesn't count as knowledge he doesn't
know it at all um if you don't have a belief about something you certainly can't know it
but the other one and the one that most people get more worried about is that
you cannot know something false if you cannot know that i'm wearing a yellow dress for example
you can believe that you know something false but your belief that you know it is itself
false are you with me so if you actually know something that thing must be true so maxi comes
in from playing and she does she know that the chocolate is in the drawer no she believes
she knows the chocolate is in the drawer but what she doesn't know is that her mum took it out
and put it somewhere else so she has what she thinks is knowledge but it's not knowledge because
it's not true she's got the belief she's justified in the belief but the belief isn't true therefore
it cannot be counted as knowledge so you've got to again make that distinction between what you believe
to be the case and what actually is the case because you can believe you know something that's
false but you cannot actually know something false this is the the crux of william morris's
dictum only have in your house those things which you believe to be beautiful
or which you know to be useful yes i'm not sure it's the crux of that but it certainly comes into it
yes absolutely um yeah okay so um but here's a little problem for you getty a came up with
this little problem it's called and it's been called ever since getty a problems um you have seen
me driving a um a golf gti around oxford um you've come to believe that i own a golf gti as a
matter of fact there is a golf gti that i own but it's in my garage and the one that you've seen
me driving around belongs to a friend okay do you know that i own a golf gti i believe
no sorry you believe that you know but do you know no you don't know why not
well it is justified no you've seen me driving around in it you're perfectly justified
it is true i've got one in the garage
no you don't know that you don't know but you don't know
that's not the point
why not
but we do usually claim about claim to have knowledge without having certainty don't we
i mean you've seen me driving this car often um so you know you you think you're justified in
claiming to know that i now i'll tell you what's happened here is the conditions that make your
belief true i.e. the car that's sitting in my garage that you've never seen me in come apart from
the conditions that justify your belief the golf gti you've seen me driving around in and it's only
if the conditions that make true your belief are the same as the conditions that justify your belief
that you can have knowledge uh that what you have counts as knowledge so what gti a showed is that
it cannot be the case that knowledge is justified true belief justified true belief may be necessary
for knowledge but it's not sufficient you need some other claim that makes it impossible for the
truth's conditions
