Hello, I'm Tom Rollins, President of the Teaching Company.
These lectures are part of the Great Courses on Tape series.
The Great Courses on Tape cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes in length.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you could finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
The lectures on these tapes are titled The Quest for Meaning, Values, Ethics and the Modern Experience.
The lecturer is Dr. Robert Hillary Kane.
Dr. Robert Kane is currently a professor of philosophy at the University of Texas at Austin.
In 1995, the university recognized his disdained excellence in the classroom by naming him a university distinguished teaching professor.
Over his three decades on the Texas faculty, Professor Kane has won no less than 15 major teaching awards.
These include the Friar Society Centennial Teaching Fellowship, the President's Excellence Award, the Liberal Arts Council Teaching Award and the Delta Epsilon Sigma Award for Teaching Introductory Classes.
In 1995, he was named an inaugural member of UT Austin's Academy of Distinguished Teachers.
Before coming to Texas in 1970, he taught at Fordham University and Haverford College.
Dr. Kane is one of the world's leading defenders of an anti-determinist conception of free will.
He is internationally known for his efforts to reconcile such a notion with modern science.
His writings comprise more than 60 articles and reviews and four books, including Free Will and Values and Through the Moral Maze, searching for absolute values in a pluralistic world.
Professor Kane's most recent work, The Significance of Free Will, won the Robert W. Hamilton Faculty Book Award.
Each of Professor Kane's lectures is outlined in the course guide that comes with these takes.
The course guide also includes diagrams, a glossary, timeline, biographical notes and a bibliography.
You might find it useful to review the outlines before and after listening to the lectures.
Lecture 1 Values and Modernity
I welcome you all to a lecture series that's been a journey of discovery for me, and I hope it will be so for you as well.
Like many others today, I've been troubled by the moral and spiritual conditions of the times,
the widespread confusions and disagreements about values that seem to be all around us.
It seems like our moral and spiritual compasses no longer point in the same direction to a spiritual north pole as it were,
but instead they point in all directions, or they swing wildly about, buffeted by rapid change.
Many people wonder, I think, as a result, what common values and beliefs we can hold anymore,
or pass on to our children amid the challenges of modern life.
I've wondered about this too, and this series results from my own struggles with the question
over a 35-year period of research and teaching.
That teaching now encompasses nearly two whole generations of young people.
It surprises me to say that young people who are deeply affected by the value confusions of the times as many of the rest of us are as well.
I know this as a parent as well as a teacher.
Gene Kerr once said that the problem with children is that once you have them, you have them.
And one of the most important things we do for the next generation is teaching them values and passing our values on to them.
As a philosopher, I approach questions about values and beliefs through the study of the history of ideas,
trying to figure out how we got to where we are, what wisdom is worth retrieving from the past, and where we go from here.
This means looking into the details of the history of ideas,
but it also means trying to see the broader picture, the larger pattern, if you will, in that history,
to bring some order out of chaos, which I think is the main job of all teaching.
This is what this lecture series will attempt to do.
The first of its three parts, comprising the first five lectures,
will tell the story of how modern western civilization experienced what I'll call a loss of moral innocence over the past several centuries.
As ancient and medieval views of the world were overthrown,
these initial lectures will also begin to trace out how this loss of moral innocence has led to confusions and disagreements about values in our own times.
The second part of the series, Lectures 6-12,
explore the best attempts by the major thinkers of the modern age
to respond to this loss of moral innocence by devising new ways of thinking about values and ethics.
These modern thinkers will include some of the great philosophers of the modern era,
such as Immanuel Kant and David Yume and John Stuart Mill.
Fortunately, we have behind us a picture of Yume over here and a picture of Kant over to my right to guide us.
And we will also talk about some very influential 20th century thinkers as well.
The third part of the series, the final 12 lectures,
will explore the possibilities for renewing the ancient quest for wisdom and meaning in life
after these vast intellectual changes and challenges of the modern era.
And then it will try to apply what we learn to controversial moral and social questions of the day.
This third task will require that we make use of modern ideas discussed in the first 12 lectures.
But it will also require that we reach back to the wisdom of the past
embodied in the great philosophical and religious traditions of human history
and ask how that ancient wisdom can be retrieved and how much can be reconciled with modern thought.
And then we will apply what we learn from all this to some of the pressing moral and social controversies of the day
that I think reflect our current confusions and disagreements about bad.
Now to begin our story, I'm going to refer you back to a remarkable period in human history
that will play a pivotal role in this lecture series.
It's been suggested that current confusions about values suggest that we are entering a new axial period in human history
like the original axial period of 2,500 years ago.
This original axial period was a remarkable 500 year period from 800 BC to about 300 BC
in which a spiritual awakening took place simultaneously in many of the major civilizations of the world.
This axial period will be a kind of reference point, a load star if you will, for us throughout this whole lecture series.
The importance of this period was identified in the now out of print book written earlier in this century
by existentialist philosopher Carl Yaspers.
The book was called The Way of Wisdom, and it's Yaspers who gave this axial period its name for reasons that we will note in a moment.
For reasons still not entirely understood, during this axial period there was a simultaneous spiritual awakening
in different civilizations of the world, apparently independently of one another,
giving rise to religious and philosophical and scientific ideas that have guided the human race ever since.
It was as if the human race collectively reached a higher stage of consciousness in this particular period.
For example, in China the original axial period was the age of Confucius, and it was also the age of Lao Tzu,
the founders of two of the major philosophical traditions that have guided Chinese civilization ever since,
Confucianism and Taoism.
It's been said that every Chinese is a little bit of a Confucian and a little bit of a Taoist,
a little of both since they represent two sides of the Chinese character.
We'll have occasion to refer to the ideas of both these traditions in later lectures.
Moving now further to the west, to India, this same axial period 2,500 years ago is the age of the writing of the principal Hindu Upanishad,
which transformed Hinduism from a polytheistic religion into the sophisticated philosophical and religion that we know today.
Prior to the axial period, by the way, Hindu civilization was guided by a series of hymns and poems which were called the Vedas.
And the Vedas had many, many gods in them, gods of thunder and gods of fire and so on,
very much like the Romans and the Greeks had different gods.
But towards the end of the Vedas, and at the beginning of the axial period,
there is a realization that maybe underlying all the different gods, there is one single reality.
And the Upanishads developed that idea of an underlying reality came in Hinduism to be called Brahman, which underlies all the gods.
You can see here, I think, a kind of reaching of a higher state of awareness of what's going on here.
Well, toward the end of the axial period, the Hindu Bhagavad Gita was also written.
This is one of those books that has guided Indian civilization for centuries,
and it's a book we are also going to refer to in this series.
And in India also, the axial period witnessed the arrival of another great world religion.
It was the period that produced the Buddha.
And the rise of Buddhism in India, another tradition we'll refer to.
And it's the period of a third tradition in India not so well known of Jainism,
a smaller but very influential tradition founded in the axial period by a figure called Mahavira.
Mohandas Gandhi was a Jain by birth.
The term Buddha itself is applied, as you know, to a man named Gautama Siddhartha,
who was a prince who gave up his riches and his rich life in order to seek enlightenment.
The term Buddha itself is often translated the enlightened one, the one who is enlightened.
But in fact, the real meaning of the term, or the more direct meaning of the term, is the one who has awakened, the one who is awake.
The Buddhist image is something like this, that the Buddha, or a Buddha,
awakens from this life of everyday consciousness into a higher state of consciousness,
very much in the way in which we awaken from sleep in the morning into this waking state of consciousness.
As a consequence, some people have called the axial period the period of the great awakening after the Buddha.
Move further now to the west, to Iran, to Persia, as it was called in olden times, but nowadays modern Iran.
And the axial period is the period of the great prophet Zoroastra in Persia,
whose influence was very, very wide on religious thinking throughout the ancient world.
Move one step further over to the west, and we arrive at Israel.
In Israel, the period, the axial period is the period of the great transformative prophets, Ezekiel, Jeremiah, and Second Isaiah.
They arose during this period, and they in a certain sense transformed the traditions of Judaism to a kind of a higher level.
It was the period in which the Jewish people began to reflectively question their own traditions in some of these prophets, for example.
And in other works of the Bible, which were written in the axial period, like the book of Job, for example.
And we know the sense in which the book of Job is a form of higher order questioning of the ways of God to man, which was new to the Jewish tradition.
And in the Jewish tradition as well, in Israel, the axial period was the period in which the idea of a Messiah was first to enter Jewish history
and have a profound effect, as we know, not only on Judaism thereafter, but on Christianity as well.
And now finally, moving over to Greece, the original axial period was the period in which western philosophy and science arose, indeed western civilization itself.
Thales, who is said to be the first philosopher of the west, lived near the beginning of this period.
He's the fellow, as you know, who said that everything is made of water, a very, very poor beginning for philosophy, I think.
But a beginning nonetheless, Thales at the beginning, the first philosopher supposedly in the history book, lived at the beginning of the axial period.
And at the end of it, the greatest philosophers of antiquity, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, lived at the end of the axial period.
And they are ones we will be, thinkers we will also be talking about at some length in these lectures.
Now a question worth asking is, in these lectures, and we will ask it throughout, is whether we might perhaps be entering a new axial period that may be coming upon us in this new era,
the new era, a modern era, if you will, of what many people nowadays call modernity, which has been brewing in the western world for at least 500 years.
Why, by the way, did Yaspers call this the axial period?
Well, the idea seems to have been that the ideas created in this period are like a kind of axis around which human history and the ideas of human history have been revolving ever since.
Think, for example, of how Confucianism and Daoism are the axes around which Chinese civilization has evolved.
Hinduism, the axes around Indian civilization, think of Judeo-Christian culture plus the traditions of Greece as the two axes around which western civilization has evolved.
This seems to be his idea.
And the question arises whether these really are the axes for civilizations anymore, or whether we are challenging them throughout the world, modernity challenging them throughout the world.
So we no longer revolve around those axes.
That's the big question we need to ask.
Indeed, are we revolving around any single axis anymore at all?
So whether there is a new axial period upon us is going to be one of the big questions.
For there's no question the modern era has posed a threat to the ancient quest for wisdom and meaning embodied in these older religious and philosophical traditions.
And whether a new axial period is upon us is especially a fitting question today because the challenges of modernity that have been brewing in the West for 500 years in the 20th century have been spreading through the entire world.
They have been spreading through science and technology, the information revolution and global capitalism.
All features of modernity spreading to the entire globe the ideas of modernity which are challenging pre-modern cultures, established religions, traditional beliefs and ways of life that go back to the axial period.
But what are these intellectual challenges of modernity to traditional beliefs and ways of life?
Well a fitting parable for them can be found in a striking scene of a fantasy novel written by C.S. Lewis called Peralandra.
Lewis' story is the story of lost moral innocence.
The novel describes the journey of a man named Ransom to a planet called Peralandra in the novel.
It's kind of an Eden-like world of islands that float on water with exotic foliage and so on.
It's supposed to be Venus in the novel but the real Venus would seem to be very hot and high-pressured more like hell than the Garden of Eden.
In any case, Peralandra is supposed to be Venus but it is this marvelously exotic Eden-like world.
Ransom meets a solitary person there, a woman who says that she has been told by her god Mal-Eldil to seek and try to find a man of her own kind.
God has commanded her to do this.
Well Ransom's conversations with the woman are interrupted one day when he says that the floating islands thereon are making his stomach queasy
and couldn't they perhaps go over to the fixed land, the land that doesn't float on water?
Well the woman reacts to this suggestion with horror telling him that the one thing Mal-Eldil, her god has forbidden her to do
or anyone to do is go over to the fixed land.
And Ransom responds that this assertion he says is very strange because on earth where he comes from everybody lives on the fixed land
and nobody thinks it's wrong.
Well in her confusion the woman wonders whether there may be different meanings of good and evil right and wrong
and that God may command one group of people to live one way and another group to live another way.
And in her confusion she's tempted to go over with him to the fixed land if others can do it she reasons why can't I?
Seeing her confusion Ransom suddenly realizes that they are re-enacting the biblical story of the garden of Eden in this new Eden
and he Ransom is playing the role of the serpent tempting this new Eve and her alien Eden to do the one thing her god has commanded her never to do.
Now we know in the original biblical story the command is not to eat of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil right?
Let's get it right.
Eat of this fruit and add them also and by succumbing to temptation they come to know good and evil and are banished from the garden.
But in Peralandra Lewis is suggesting a different distinctively modern version of knowing good and evil.
The new awareness that tempts us to sin is the awareness that there may be more than one right way of doing things more than one right way of living
and that ours may not be the only right one.
Like the woman on Peralandra we may then say if others can do it why can't we?
Thus ends moral innocence.
The secure feeling that the rights and wrongs learned in childhood are the only correct or true ones.
Unchallengeable and unambiguous.
By knowing other ways of life and entertaining doubts about our own we learn something about the complexities of good and evil we did not know when we were children.
But the learning comes with a bitter taste having bitten into the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil in this distinctively modern fashion we live after the modern fall so to speak.
We no longer live in innocence.
George Bernard Shaw once said whenever you learn something important it seems at first as if you've lost something.
Not everyone lives in this condition of lost moral innocence even in the modern world.
Many still live and many more wish they lived before the modern fall.
Never doubting that their own views are absolutely right and unchallengeable.
In a quaint old melee saying this is like a frog living under a coconut shell.
But those who have lost moral innocence cannot easily go back any more than they can go back to believing the earth is flat or is at the center of the universe.
The question our question is how do they go forward.
Now this modern knowledge of good and evil that comes and confuses us as it did the woman on power lander is the awareness of different and competing ways of life and views of good and evil together with doubts about which are the true ones.
Let's refer to these two conditions as pluralism and uncertainty.
By pluralism I mean simply the fact that we live in a world of conflicting voices and philosophies and religions and ways of life and points of view on fundamental matters.
A pluralism of points of view made more insistent by two inescapable facts of the modern world we live in.
One of these facts is the global village created by modern information technology.
And the second fact is the spread of democratic and pluralist societies in the modern world.
The first of these conditions the global village creates pluralism between nations and puts us in contact with very different cultures.
The second condition democracy creates pluralism within countries and within nations.
Democratic societies are ones in which different points of view and ways of life are recognized and even encouraged.
Indeed I think the familiar image of a global village may be the wrong one for this new order of things since most villages of the past shared a common heritage of traditions and beliefs.
The better image for the modern condition is a global city in which cultures and ways of life mingle and are forced to confront one another.
The resulting pluralism of points of view inevitably makes thoughtful people wonder about the truth of their own beliefs just like the woman on Paralangra.
And it threatens the secure feeling that the rights and wrongs learned in childhood are assumed by one's own culture and religion are unchallengeable and unambiguous.
The best symbol of this new pluralism of course remains a biblical image and that's the ancient image of the Tower of Babel.
To be modern is to live in an age in a new Tower of Babel of conflicting languages, ways of life, and points of view on even fundamental matters.
But pluralism by itself would not be a problem if it weren't for another crucial feature of modernity of living after this modern fall I described.
An uncertainty about how to show which of the competing views is right. This uncertainty is based on a deeper philosophical problem.
In a world of conflicting points of view there's a profound difficulty involved in trying to show one point of view is right and every other one wrong.
To argue that one view, your own for example, is objectively right and others wrong, you have to present evidence.
But the evidence has to be gathered and interpreted from your own point of view. How else could it be?
If the dispute is about values, some of the evidence will include beliefs about good and evil that are not going to be accepted by those who have fundamental disagreements with your values in the first place.
Values have to be defended by appealing to other more fundamental values and beliefs that are also yours.
Perhaps you'll refer to some sacred texts, a Bible or a Quran or some other, which is not necessarily going to be accepted by those who have basic disagreements with your values in the first place.
Even those who share your sacred texts may not interpret it as you do. This is the modern condition.
There's a troubling circularity involved in such debates. The circularity of defending your own point of view from your own point of view, of defending your values in terms of other values you also hold but others may not.
The problem arises because as finite creatures we inevitably see the world from some particular point of view, limited by culture and history.
How can we climb out of our historically and culturally conditioned perspective to find an objective standpoint on truth and value above all the competing views, a kind of God's eye point of view?
This problem, which is the ultimate result of pluralism and uncertainty, haunts the modern intellectual landscape, and it will be a major concern in these lectures.
This problem is the source of trending new views that go by such names as postmodernism, which we will discuss later.
One sees variations of this problem of pluralism and uncertainty in many fields of study these days, and everywhere it produces doubts among reflective people about the possibility of justifying objective intellectual, cultural and moral standards.
If we are trapped in our own finite and limited points of view and perspectives, how can we make objective intellectual, cultural and moral judgments for everyone, or justify our own view as the correct one?
You can see from this why among the consequences of pluralism and uncertainty there's an temptation to embrace relativism about values.
Now relativism is the view that there are no objective and universal or absolute values that hold for all persons at all times.
You have your view, I have mine, but no one has THE right view, because all value judgments are valid only for some persons or times or societies, not for all.
They're relative to a perspective or to a point of view.
So who's to say who's right or wrong? Who's to say? That's the mantra of the present age, the mantra of relativism. My students are always saying who's to say.
A related consequence of pluralism and uncertainty that will also concern us in subsequent lectures is subjectivism.
Subjectivists believe that judgments of good and evil right and wrong do not describe objective facts about the world at all.
But rather they represent expressions of feeling or emotion or desire or preference, that they are merely subjective expressions of case.
Subjectivism is a form of relativism, of course, but it's a more radical kind that makes all values relative, not to cultures or societies, but to individual feelings or emotions or sentiments.
All is a matter of taste or tasting, as Friedrich Nietzsche said.
One does not have to be especially aware, I think, to see that relativism and subjectivism are pervasive threats to bad times, and both will very much concern us in these lectures.
But they also reflect something deeper, I think, that will concern us in these lectures, a widespread skepticism that there can be no progress in philosophical understanding of the big questions of life, such as we will be discussing.
Many people today believe there can be progress in science, for example, but nothing similar in philosophy and humanistic disciplines where we merely recycle old ideas and opinions.
Well, I don't believe this for a minute.
Skeptics and doubters about progress and history of ideas, I like those people who use a new kind of deodorant invented by a Canadian friend of mine, which he called Vanish.
This deodorant works on a different principle. Rather than taking away the odor, it makes you disappear, leaving everyone to wonder where the smell is coming from.
Skepticism, I think, is like that. Skeptics and doubters put their heads in the sand. The problems don't go away, but they do.
And then, of course, there's a class of cynics of another stripe who believe that the study of philosophy and the history of ideas yields only nostrums and not real understanding.
They believe it's sort of something like our remedy, which comes from West Texas, which is called possum earache medicine.
I have been in Texas 30 years, and I have picked up a few of the cultural forms down there.
But possum earache medicine is the following. You have a kid who has an earache, so you turn him over on his side and you put some drops of possum oil in his ear.
Doesn't do anything whatever for the earache, but after a while he smells so much like a possum, he forgets he has an earache.
And I think some of these cynics think that philosophy is sort of like that. It colors things over.
It makes us smell a certain way, only perhaps nicer, and doesn't really solve the problem at all.
No, I'm not convinced by such skeptical attitudes at all. There is progress, I think, in the history of ideas. Bad arguments and incoherent theories get exposed.
We learn from the mistakes of even the greatest thinkers. Some lines of thought turn out to be more fruitful than others, and so on.
I hope that this lecture series will convince you of at least some of this. But in any case, it will be up to you to judge.
Follow not me, Nietzsche said, but you.
Now I think one reason people think there is no progress in the history of ideas is because they confuse two things.
They confuse making progress in understanding and attaining the final truth.
We can progress in understanding, though the final truth may always elude us because of our finite condition.
But that's no different than in science. Sciences progress in their understanding of nature.
But the final truth about nature is not something they can ever say they have, either.
This point was well made by a lesser known figure of the original Axial period, the pre-Socratic philosopher Xenophonies, who said the following.
The gods did not reveal from the beginning all things to us, but in the course of time through seeking, men find that which is the better.
But as for certain truth, no man has known it, and if by chance he were to utter the final truth, he himself would not know it.
What's involved then in both philosophy and science is the idea of a quest.
In the course of time through seeking, we find that which is better, as Xenophonies said.
And so I titled this lecture series, The Quest for Meaning.
And I will be taking very seriously the idea of a quest in that title throughout the series.
To the thinkers of the original Axial period, the quest for meaning and purpose in life was a search for what was objectively real and objectively good for all persons and times.
It was called by the philosophers a quest for wisdom.
In the next lecture, we will ask what the ancient quest for wisdom and meaning amounted to in the original Axial period, by considering one of the most influential of all thinkers of that period, the Greek philosopher Aristotle.
And we will continue the task of inquiring how this ancient quest for wisdom and meaning was threatened in the modern era by the conditions of modernity besides pluralism and uncertainty.
There were, in fact, others, and we will consider them next time.
Thank you.
