Lecture 2 An Ancient Quest, A Modern Challenge
In Lecture 1 I said that the advent of modernity, the modern era of Western civilization, posed
the threat to the ancient quest for wisdom and meaning in life, that quest which was
part of the older philosophical and religious traditions of the original axial period.
But what was that ancient quest for wisdom, and why was it undermined by modernity?
What indeed is the wisdom and meaning that was sought and is now perhaps lost?
If we are to retrieve it, we must understand how it was lost, and we must first understand
what it was.
As a first approximation to understanding this, I am going to use an example of one
of the greatest thinkers and the most influential thinkers of the first axial period, the ancient
Greek philosopher Aristotle.
By contrasting his view with the modern, I think we can have a very much of a clearer
idea of how things have dramatically changed.
Aristotle is a good choice for several reasons.
He died near the very end of the axial period about 300 BC, and he summed up much of the
wisdom of that period which had gone before him in Greek civilization.
Second, along with his teacher Plato, who we will be discussing later, Aristotle is
one of the fountain heads of Western philosophy and Western civilization itself, as you well
know.
He not only influenced ancient Greek and Roman thought, but he so influenced Christian thought
in the Middle Ages that Dante in the Divine Comedy simply referred to him as the philosopher.
In addition, Aristotle had a profound influence that many people do not know about on the
philosophical thought of the Islamic and Muslim worlds, as well as on many Jewish thinkers.
As the familiar story goes, it was through the Persian and Arabic Muslim thinkers of
the Middle East and of Africa and of Spain that Aristotle's works made their way back
to Europe in the Middle Ages, profoundly influencing the later course of Western civilization.
So Aristotle's influence also was just tremendous in the ancient world.
A final reason for taking Aristotle as pivotal is that in the 20th century, as we are going
to see, many thinkers who have doubts about the course of modern thinking about values
and ethics have argued for a return to ancient modes of thought and medieval modes of thought,
such as virtue ethics and natural law theory, which have their origins in Aristotle.
So he's once again, as in the late medieval period, a figure of great influence on modern
thought, as we will see.
In summary then, our topic in this lecture is the ancient quest for wisdom and meaning,
what it was and how it was threatened in modernity, and Aristotle is our starting point.
Now let's begin with a story.
When commentators in late antiquity sought to bring together the recorded writings of
Aristotle, which covered virtually every known subject, they placed, there was a certain
book in there which was on the physics, and they placed after the book on the physics,
the commentators did, a book or collection of writings that dealt with the ultimate grounds
and explanations of things.
And this book, because it came after the physics, was called the metaphysics, Aristotle's
metaphysics, the Greek term meta meaning after.
Well, fortuitously, it turns out that meta also means, in addition to meaning after,
it means beyond or above, and metaphysics was indeed about questions, the deep questions
of reality that go beyond physics as well.
And so this very subject matter of Aristotle's book came to be known as metaphysics in the
history of Western fort.
But interestingly, Aristotle's own name for it was not metaphysics at all, but it was
simply wisdom.
In Greek the term is Sophia.
He also called it first philosophy, protephilosophia, and it was the love, filia, of this wisdom,
Sophia, that of course gave philosophy its name.
Now wisdom or first philosophy, as Aristotle understood it, seeks true and comprehensive
answers to the questions what is and why.
It seeks to know the way things really are in the most comprehensive sense, what is.
But more than that, it seeks to know why things are as they are, their causes or their first
principles, and why it's reasonable to believe or accept any answers that may be given.
In this respect, as Aristotle says, the lover of wisdom, the philosophos, is a kindred spirit
to the lover of myth, the fellow mythos.
Both the lover of wisdom and the lover of myth seek ultimate explanations of the way
things are and why they are.
But the lover of myth does this uncritically, he says, and the lover of wisdom critically
and self-reflectively, the philosophos.
Now for Aristotle, ultimate questions and explanations sought by the lover of wisdom
are of four kinds.
Of anything in the universe, whatever, we could ask, he said, four questions, and when
you had an answer to each of those four questions, you'd have an explanation of the things meaning.
These are often designated Aristotle's four causes, the material cause, the formal cause,
the efficient cause, and the final cause.
But I think we do better to think of them as four different kinds of questions that
you can ask about anything whatsoever, and if you get an answer to them, you understand
that very thing.
First question, what is it made of?
It's matter, for that will tell you how much or why it behaves as it does.
This is the material cause.
What is its inner form or essence?
This is the formal cause, which we'll talk about very shortly.
Third, what caused it to be and to behave as it does?
This is the efficient cause, more or less like what we would call a cause today in modern
science.
And finally, special to Aristotle, what is its final end or purpose, its final cause?
What goal does it seek?
What is it after?
What does it want?
The main point here is that you must have an answer to all four questions to understand
those things in all four ways, to really understand them, and hence to have wisdom.
You can't leave anything out, and in particular, you can't leave out the purposes or the final
causes of things, what they're aiming for, and what will fulfill them.
You really don't understand them unless you understand their purposes.
And there's more.
If we knew this purpose, this end or final cause, that would define the good for each
thing.
The value gets into the picture in Aristotle's scheme of things as well here as part of wisdom.
Aristotle in fact says the end or final cause is the good, and the proper end of each thing
is its true good.
If we knew one, we would know the other.
And the goal of wisdom includes finding this out, what the good for each thing is.
For human beings, of course, their final cause or true good is what Aristotle calls happiness
or e'u daimaniya is the Greek term, which means literally good spirits.
Daimon is the Greek term for spirit, and e'u is the term for good.
So e'u daimaniya is what he means.
Happiness, you know, what is it?
After all, I'm in good spirits.
Things are going well.
Life is good.
He thought we could attain happiness or e'u daimaniya by exercising certain virtues or
excellences of character, such as courage and self-control and justice, and ultimately
by a life of contemplation.
But we are not quite so sure today, as Aristotle was, that we can define the ultimate end for
human beings just so precisely as he did to say exactly what will get us to that kind
of happiness.
And this is the one of the points in which modernity has intervened upon the ancient
quest for wisdom.
With the rise of modern science in the 17th, 16th, and 17th centuries with figures like
Galileo and Newton and Copernicus and their successors, the place of purposes and final
causes in the universe has become problematic.
I think we are all generally familiar with that particular phenomenon.
No longer was it necessary to explain the movements of the heavens or of the falling
of rocks in terms of their purposes or goals or what they were heading for.
And so, for example, held that the heavenly bodies move in perfect circles because they
are trying to imitate the life of God as much as they can by engaging in continuous eternal
motions since God is eternal and the life of God is eternal.
It's as if something inside them was saying, keep moving, don't slow down, don't change
directions, and don't turn around, a kind of inner imperative to be the best they could
be in their own material way.
A dean at our college always likes to tell a story about graduation where we have so
many people in the college graduating that they have to keep coming up on the stage and
get that diploma right away, keep moving, so the dean always keeps saying, keep moving.
And a student came back one time about 10, 15 years later and she said, you know, dean,
she said, I learned from you the most important thing in life at graduation, something you
said.
And of course he was all built up with the thought of what wisdom he conveyed at the
time and he said, what was that?
And she said, keep moving, deflated a little bit.
If the heavenly bodies go in circles because that is their purpose to imitate the best
they can be, the divine life, then heavy things like water and earth, like a rock, for example,
they fall downward when you let them go because when left to themselves, they also seek their
natural place, which for heavy things, water and earth is downward.
Something in the rock says, go down, just as something in the planet says, go round
and round.
And so with the other elements, air and fire, they go upward, likewise seeking their true
good.
These quaint explanations in terms of purposes of final causes were, of course, overthrown
by modern science.
Rocks fall not because it is their purpose, but because of gravity and the planets do
not move in circular orbits because they are trying to imitate God because of the forces
of gravity.
And in fact, those orbits aren't circular, they are ellipses, as Kepler told us, and
that has a gravitational explanation, too.
If modern physical sciences chose, it's as if, shall we say, that modern physical sciences
chose to focus on two of Aristotle's four causes, the material cause, of course, where
things are made of, and now instead of four elements, we have what is it, 92, and they
keep getting more of them, but that's the same idea.
And the efficient causes, which are very much like what modern causes are for Aristotle,
they are what propel or push things and create things or make them come into existence.
But they left out Aristotle's final cause.
There was no more, any longer, a need for it.
And the result is that the modern scientific view of the world became to be known as mechanistic,
if you will, namely based on material and efficient causes alone, antecedent causes,
with purposes of final causes left out of the picture.
This came to be called the mechanistic view of the world.
And it contrasts with Aristotle's view, which is usually called teleological, after the
Greek word telos, which is his word for final cause or purpose.
Telos.
So Aristotle's teleological view of the world, where purposes must explain everything, is,
if you will, overcome in the modern picture.
Putting it another way, that's going to be important in our lectures, we can say that
scientific explanation in the modern era was sundered, if you will, from purpose, and hence
from value, whereas for the ancient scientific explanation and purpose and value tended to
merge in an overall quest for wisdom.
If you answered all the scientific why questions, you would know the purposes of things, and
you would know their value.
Aristotle made no distinction, for example, between scientists and philosophers.
Both were lovers of wisdom, philosophical or philosophoi, if you will, and both were seeking
to explain all things in all four ways, including purposes.
Thus in the West, both science and philosophy arose together in the original axial period,
in opposition to traditional myths and religion, and there was no clear distinction.
So the sundering of science from philosophy itself is itself, and scientists from philosophers
fax about the modern world, among those sundering of modernity which have changed, and so to
speak, cut down the middle, the ancient quest for wisdom.
C.P.
Snow, as you know, spoke in this century of two distinct cultures in our universities
and our societies.
The science is on the one side and the humanities on the other.
This is what I mean by the sundering here of value and purpose which philosophers are
concerned with, and the humanities we're concerned with, from the explanation in terms of merely
material and efficient causes, which the scientists concerned themselves with.
Colleague of mind, the University of Texas, likes to say, we scientists, he's a scientist,
of course, we scientists deal with the facts, you people over there in the humanities, you're
just whistling.
And furthermore, he says, you're all whistling different tunes, and of course we don't whistle
too well either when you think about it.
Aristotle himself, of course, was both scientist and philosopher.
Darwin said, for example, Charles Darwin, that Aristotle was the greatest biologist
who ever lived, and I guess that was, you know, before Darwin, when wonders.
And Aristotle's own father was a physician.
He was, in fact, doctor to King Philip of Macedonia, Macedonia being the northern province
of Greece, which is now still part of Greece and a little bit of Yugoslavia, as we know
full well these days.
Philip, of course, was the father of Alexander the Great as well, and later on when Aristotle
got his training, he went back and tutored Alexander, the son of Philip.
In the meantime, Aristotle's father, of course, was a physician, and he sent Aristotle at
a young age down to Athens to study at the best university around.
In fact, the only one in the ancient world, Plato's Academy, which is, in effect, the
first university in human history, and we're going to come back to Plato's Academy later
in this lecture series because it's a very important feature of our story as well.
You could figure that Aristotle's father wanted him to become a physician like himself, come
back from the university and be a doctor and serve the court of Philip of Macedonia.
That's an old story, of course.
I guess that a large majority of modern professional philosophers in the world today, like me,
were such that their fathers and mothers wanted them to be doctors.
And when they chose philosophy, there was much moaning and gnashing of teeth, if you
will, how they're going to make a living and all that.
With all that intelligence, why did you choose to pursue wisdom?
At least as a doctor, you could do good and do well at the same time.
Okay.
Well, the mention of Aristotle's interest in biology and living things takes us to another
chapter in our story of modern science and its attack on final causes.
Two centuries after Galileo, Charles Darwin, who I just mentioned, in his theory of evolution,
extended the mechanistic worldview to living things, explaining them in terms of chance
and natural selection without referring to purposes or design in the universe.
To fully understand Darwin's contribution to this story, we have to consider yet another
of Aristotle's four causes.
Recall now, I said that the material and efficient causes were taken over by modern science.
They are part of the mechanistic view of the world.
Final causes were passed by the wayside.
But what about the fourth one, the formal cause, so to speak, the form or essence of
things?
Herein lies an even more fascinating part of the story of how modernity changed the
ancient quest for wisdom.
What Aristotle meant by the form or formal cause of a thing is not just its shape or
physical structure, but something much more, its significant form.
Here's a story to explain how form can make a big difference in things.
There was a Parisian milliner who was very good at making hats, and this lady, he told
this lady that he could make a beautiful hat out of a ribbon.
It's a big, thick ribbon and very, very long.
And she said, well, I doubt it very much, and this milliner took the ribbon and he twisted
it and turned it and made it all a nice, beautiful hat, put it on the lady's head.
And she said, oh, it's absolutely beautiful.
How much is it?
He said, $100.
She said, $100, she said, it's just a ribbon.
So he took it and he shook it out and let it out into ribbons.
He says, madame, he said, the ribbon is free.
And another way to illustrate the significance of form here is in the terms of a cube, which
astronomer Philip Morrison has suggested.
He said, take a little paperweight cube that's made out of a series of different kinds of
metals, and it's only about this thick and you could use it as a paperweight and so on.
But it has many, many, maybe two atom thick layers of different kinds of metals, copper,
tin, bronze, so on and so forth.
And he says, let the chemists and the physicists look at this thing and study it completely.
Find out all about its material cause and all the things that efficiently caused it
to be what it is.
Give us a complete physical chemical description of the cube.
And they do.
And those are Aristotle's two causes, the material and the efficient.
We have a big book about the chemical structure and everything.
And Morrison says, unfortunately, they left out the most important thing.
They couldn't capture the physics and chemistry.
The cube tells the story of Huckleberry Finn.
It's coded.
That's what Aristotle means by form or the formal cause.
That's why we associate the formal cause with the idea of the meaning of a thing, the meaning
that is in it.
In fact, the key term nowadays would be information, which is the big word of the age, of course.
That we put information into the physical structures of a thing.
And that is, after all, the meaning in it.
Now if you want to understand Aristotle's world, think of it this way.
Aristotle think there's a code in everything.
There's a code in that rock that says, go down, right?
And there's a code in those planets that say, go around.
Everything is coded.
Everything has information.
That's why everything has a goal, if you will.
Everything is sort of like the cube.
Now one of the terms Aristotle uses for this formal cause is the notion of a, is the Greek
term logos, which means we get it into words like logic and all the other ologies, if you
will.
But it means a discourse or a structure or a meaning that's in things, it's words and
ideas almost at the same time.
In fact, you know at the beginning of the fourth Christian gospel, the one attributed
to St. John, but may have probably been written by a Greek thinker to begin with, there's
a very famous beginning, as you know.
In the beginning was the word.
The Greek, which is probably the original language of that gospel, says, anarcha en halogos.
In the beginning or in the source of things, at the depths and depths of things, there
was the logos, their meaning, their inner structure, what it's all about, if you will.
And that's the way Aristotle understands the formal cause of all things, what they are
all about.
In living things, for example, it would be a code within them, which tells them to grow
and become something.
The code in the acorn, which tells it be an oak, just like the rock has a code that says
go down.
And the code in the horse embryo that tells it be a horse, not a pig or human or whatever.
Of all the biological sciences, being the son of a physician, Aristotle loved embryology
the most.
It fascinated him.
The comparison between his formal cause then and something we know very well, namely the
DNA, the genetic code, is very, very close, I think.
It suggests that there is a connection here between Aristotle's notion of a formal cause
and that notion of a genetic code.
Some codes in the universe, and this is the way Aristotle sees it, that all things are
coded, some codes in the universe, of course, are simple, like the rocks, of course, and
others which make living things much more complicated indeed, but the fact that they
all have them is the essence of Aristotle's teleological view of the universe.
And indeed, it's because the final and the formal cause are connected.
Notice that what the code says in a thing is where it should go, what its goal is.
The formal cause in the thing tells you where it's going, what its ultimate goal is.
Formal cause and final cause are very close, which means meaning and purpose are close.
That's why when we ask the question, what is the meaning of life, we can almost substitute
purpose in there without hardly any change of significance.
What is the meaning of life, what is the purpose of life?
But you might be thinking now, wait a minute, isn't Aristotle's view of forms and final
causes vindicated then by modern biology?
After all, if not in the physical sciences, we have final causes.
Perhaps now with the genetic code, we have them in the biological sciences.
Well that's true enough.
People was onto something about genetic codes, even Darwin was not fully aware of.
But there are two caveats we have to mention here, which is part of our story.
First, it shows that individual things have goals, and that is genetic codes in them,
have goals like health and survival and perpetuation of the species.
But these biological goals don't take us very far in the quest for wisdom and meaning when
it comes to human life.
Most of all comes down to survival and perpetuation of the genes and nothing more.
A second related point is that humans have free choice.
Genes are not destiny, they only take us so far.
Even for Aristotle, the uniform or formal cause of the embryo of any living thing tells
it to become an adult of that species.
To the acorn become a full grown oak, to the human embryo become an adult capable of reproducing
new members of your own kind.
But while that may be enough for oak trees, it's hardly enough for humans.
How many of us have got to age 18 or 20 or so and said, well now I'm an adult, but now
what the heck do I do with myself?
And that's just where modernity has doubts about Aristotle's scheme.
We're no longer as confident as he was that our genes or biology or human nature, what
he called our formal causes, give us enough information to tell us how we should live.
Or what the meaning or purpose of life should be.
And we wonder whether science by itself, whether physics or chemistry or biology, can tell
us these things.
Well then, what about the human sciences of psychology and anthropology and sociology
and the like, so-called behavioral and social sciences?
What can they tell us?
Don't they, after all, traffic in meanings and purposes also?
And if so, wasn't Aristotle also right about them?
Does the human sciences require references to formal and final causes as well as material
and efficient causes?
Yes, they do.
Human beings and groups use languages which have meanings like Morrison's Cube, and they
have purposes which social scientists must study.
Social science, in a certain sense, is like a form of cryptology, of cryptology on codes.
We have to decode the meanings of languages and cultures to find out what the meaning
is there, as we would have to decode that cube.
If we heard messages, say, from outer space, or let's say there was some regular, in some
sense some regular, messages of electronic radiation coming to us from outer space, imagine
the different ways in which a natural scientist or a social scientist would look at that.
The natural scientist would be looking for some regularity, some laws, and might determine
that it was, say, a neutron star or some other quasi or something new that had a regular
rhythm and so on that fit his laws.
But what if there was some suspicion that there was some meaning in it, that it was
a message from somebody?
Well, he wouldn't be doing natural science anymore.
He would be coming in there and doing social science.
It would be our job now to decrypt it as we decrypt the code.
So clearly, unlike the natural sciences, the social and behavioral sciences do traffic
in values and meanings.
In fact, Aristotle was very right about those sciences.
We have to look at all four questions in those cases.
But the social sciences have a different problem.
They present us, not with too little meaning, but too much, too many different values, cultures,
societies, points of view.
The natural sciences describe a world without value, hence they give us a kind of value
neutrality.
But the human and social sciences present us with a world with too many values, hence
they tend to lead to value relativism.
That's a kind of double-edged sword, if you will, that haunts our modern world.
And furthermore, scientific objectivity says that you can, in effect, say what others believe
is good or bad or right in different cultures and different societies, but it offends against
scientific objectivity to go on to then say, and yes, and this one is the right one.
Anthropologists, of course, were criticized about going on into primitive cultures, so
to speak, and imposing their Western views on them rather than just understanding them.
To sum that up, then, for most ancient thinkers like Aristotle, scientific inquiry on the
one hand and purpose and meaning and value on the other merged in an overall quest for
wisdom.
You search for one, you find the other, not so for us moderns.
The quest for wisdom has been splintered.
That is one of the stories, I think, of modernity, of the modern era.
The 19th century philosopher Hegel was one of the first to point out that the modern
age is characterized by various sunderings of certain fundamental contrasts.
There are three such sunderings of modernity I want to draw your attention to because they
especially concern our problems about values.
The first is the sundering in modernity in the modern era of scientific explanation
from purpose, which we have just been discussing.
The second is the sundering of fact from value, which tends to go along with it.
Facts are one thing, values are another.
If you know all the facts, you still would not know what the good is.
And the third sundering is the sundering of theoretical inquiry in the sciences from practical
inquiry about the good.
For the ancients, all of these things were, if you will, one part of an overall quest
for wisdom.
Scientific explanation and purpose, fact and value, theoretical inquiry and practical
inquiry about the good.
All of them merged in an overall quest for wisdom.
In the modern era, the way to think about it is that all three are sundered.
We don't know that scientific explanation will tell us about the purposes of life.
We don't know that knowing all the facts will tell us what good or is good, and we don't
know whether our theoretical inquiries will necessarily tell us how to live.
The question for us, of course, nowadays is how to put all this back together again.
How, if at all, can the sunderings of modernity be overcome and the ancient quest for wisdom
renewed?
In the next two lectures, we're going to look more closely at how these sunderings of
modernity arose in the modern era of Western civilization, thus undermining the ancient
quest for wisdom.
And perhaps from that, we'll get some clues about how to renew that quest.
Thank you.
