Lecture 3
Pluralism, Religion, and Alien Cultures
Lectures 1 and 2 have identified three conditions of modernity
that have tended to threaten the ancient quest for wisdom
and given rise to modern confusions about values.
The first of these conditions is pluralism, the second uncertainty,
both of them the subject of Lecture 1.
The third condition is what I called in Lecture 2, the Sundarings of Modernity.
And there are three of these that we distinguish,
the Sundaring of Scientific Explanation and Purpose,
which we discussed with Aristotle, the Sundaring of Fact from Value,
and the Sundaring of Theoretical Explanation from Practical Inquiry about How to Live.
In this lecture and the next, we're going to look at how these three conditions arose
at the beginning of the modern era in Western civilization
and how they ultimately affected our thinking about values.
We begin in this lecture with the Western world's confrontation with pluralism
and uncertainty at the beginning of the modern era.
Now, you may recall from Lecture 1 the confrontation with pluralism and uncertainty
as described in the story of Paralandra.
The new knowledge of good and evil that tempted the woman in Paralandra
is the awareness of alien worlds, if you will, and alien ways of looking at things,
in her case the ways of another planet Earth conveyed by her space traveler, Ransom.
Well, so it was at the beginning of Western civilization in the modern era
during the 15th and 16th centuries and beyond
when the medieval view of the world was being overthrown and giving way to the modern.
There was no beginning date, of course, to this vast process of intellectual change,
but if we had to focus somewhere to get our bearings,
I think the year 1500 would be a good way to begin, give or take a few decades.
It helps that 1500 provides a nice 500-year frame of reference
with the year 2000 almost on us here
because 500 years was exactly the length of the original axial period.
But we're not choosing 1500 simply because it provides a neat frame of reference.
For consider, not eight years before 1500,
Columbus discovers the new world in 1492
and this discovery had a profound impact on Western consciousness
and is very much a part of our story.
17 years after 1500 and 1517,
Martin Luther nailed his dissenting theses to the church door
at Wittenberg and the Protestant Reformation
began another major transformation of modern culture.
It's meaning we'll try to explain.
26 years after that, after 1517,
we have in 1543 a Polish astronomer named Nicholas Copernicus
publishing a book which placed the sun at the center of the universe
rather than the earth shattering Western consciousness in another way.
In addition, by 1500, the Renaissance,
the so-called revival of ancient learning, was well underway.
What we call that Renaissance, or rebirth of learning,
had been brewing, of course, for several centuries prior to 1500,
but by 1500 its challenges to medieval ways of thinking about the world
and its championing of new ways was pretty well entrenched.
Major Renaissance thinkers like Erasmus and Thomas Moore
were flourishing around in just after 1500.
So 1500 is not a bad place to begin.
For our story is about the confrontation of the Western world
with pluralism and uncertainty, and it was well underway by 1500.
Let's begin with uncertainty.
Consider the uncertainty of suddenly realizing through Columbus voyages
that the earth might be round and not flat.
It surely looks flat.
Can we trust our senses any more?
Or consider the uncertainty of discovering that the earth was not, in fact,
at rest in the center of the universe.
As Copernicus was now telling us,
the earth doesn't seem to be moving.
Again, can we trust our senses?
People couldn't believe it was moving because they had the feeling
that they would all be tilting sidewards with the force of the movement of the earth.
And if you think that's funny, you should consider
that about 75 years after Copernicus, Galileo was still having to argue
against arguments of this kind in order to defend Copernicus's theory
as a famous story in which Galileo, when he was dragged into court
and made to renounce his defense of Copernicus's theory,
he did renounce it.
But when he was leaving the courtroom,
he said to the guard on the way out in a very famous one,
a poor se movee, he said,
still it moves, whatever I had to say in there.
Galileo was a very contankerous fellow,
so one feels a bit sorry for the pope and others who had to deal with him.
He would have been a heck of a bad employee
because he was that kind of original mind.
The two centuries after 1500 were an age in which certain
these of this kind were being overthrown left and right.
Consider another one, perhaps less well known.
Aristotle had claimed that in the far distance skies of the heavens,
the fixed stars, as was said in the ancient times,
there was no real change.
They moved in these circular orbits all the time,
imitating God, no real change out in the stars.
The planets, of course, wandered, so they were called planetae.
Wanderers a little, they moved back and forth in the skies and so on.
But the fixed stars were always very uniform.
And yet in 1677, the famous astronomer, Johannes Kepler,
discovered a new star in the heavens,
shining very, very brightly for a full two months or so.
Well, what was it? It was a supernova,
an amazing thing, of course, an exploding star.
They are very, very rare in our galaxy, close enough to be seen by the naked eye.
But fortuitously, at this time, there was one,
and it really blew people's minds,
thinking that the heavens are not supposed to change,
and here is a holy new star out there.
By the way, there had been a supernova.
There's only three known ones, I think, in our galaxy,
visible by the naked eye in history.
The other one took place in the Middle Ages,
and nobody in the West recorded its taking place.
The only reason we know it occurred was because the Chinese astronomers noticed it.
And it turns out to be what we now call the crab nebula,
because when those supernova go, you know, they leave this remnant and so on,
that's crab nebula.
But nobody in the West, nobody in the West noticed it at all.
And that's because they believed,
there was no change in the heavens,
they were following Aristotle's belief.
It tells us, of course, that there's more to seeing
than what strikes the eyeball.
And the Chinese astronomers were not misled by any such belief.
So, as I said, there were these changes
and undermining of various forms of uncertainties.
On top of all that, the Renaissance revived ancient schools of skepticism
about this time.
Famous Renaissance thinkers like Michel de Montaigne
argued vigorous against dogmatism and claims to certainty.
And they argued for tolerance in the face of differing
and conflicting religious beliefs,
since none, they argued, could claim certainty.
Finally, we have Descartes,
the so-called father of modern philosophy,
whose meditations in 1641 begin with the following kind of statement,
almost everything we have been taught,
he says, has turned out to be wrong.
He wasn't kidding.
Descartes vowed, therefore, not to trust his senses,
nor the authorities of the medieval schools,
but to doubt everything, as you recall,
Descartes' famous idea of methodic doubt,
until he could find something he couldn't doubt.
So modern philosophy was born in doubt and uncertainty.
A world in which the poet John Dunn lamented
that all coherence was gone.
And modern philosophy, beginning with Descartes,
begins as a struggle to get some of that certainty
and coherence back.
Such was the confrontation of western civilization
with certainty at the dawn of the modern era.
What about pluralism?
Here the story is even more fascinating.
Start once again with the discovery of the new world.
It's alarming enough to think that the earth is not flat,
but round.
But add to this the discovery of a whole new world
previously unknown to western civilization,
people with alien creatures,
with very different beliefs and ways of life.
Imagine the impact on us
if and when we discover alien life on other planets.
So it was for the European civilization
when they discovered these holy new peoples in a new world,
a case of the perilander story
confronting alien civilizations, but in reverse.
Now we know there's much dispute, of course,
about whether Columbus, in fact, discovered America,
whether some of the Norsemen didn't get there earlier.
It may very well be that Leif Erickson or others
got to Newfoundland 500 years before Columbus,
or so they say, and it may well be.
But still, Columbus' voyages would be crucial
for the earlier discoveries, even if they did occur,
had no general impact on European consciousness,
whereas Columbus' voyages changed Europe
and its way of thinking about things forever.
So it was much more than just a discovery.
And very early on, questions arose
about whether the Indians in the New World,
these alien peoples, these natives, had souls,
and whether they were really human or truly alien beings.
It seems strange to us today to think about that,
but it was seriously debated.
Consider the incredible story of Batala May de las Casas,
one of the true heroes of the modern age,
and he's not very well known.
In 1503, only three years after our target date of 1500,
and only 11 years after Columbus' first voyage,
de las Casas arrived among the first Spanish colonists
in the New World.
That's about 100 years, mind you,
before James Town and Plymouth in North America.
His father, Pala May's father, had sailed with Columbus
and had been granted a plantation on Hispaniola,
which is that large island that is one half Haiti now
and one half the Dominican Republic.
Young Batala May came to stake out His father's land,
but when he saw how the colonists were treating the native Indians
like slaves and chattel,
he rebelled and became a friar,
defending the cause of the Indians,
who by that time were dying out in large numbers.
Friar Batala May engaged in a heated controversy
with a fellow named Sepulveda, another friar,
about whether the Native Americans had souls.
Sepulveda said they did not,
and there were, of course, vested interests
leading many colonists not to want to believe they did.
Friar Batala May persisted, however,
and went back and forth to Spain,
being named finally by the Spanish crown protector of the Indians.
But then he made the great mistake of his life.
The slave trade, you know, had already begun from Africa
and had already begun in Europe, at least.
Batala May had noticed that the African blacks
had more stamina and disease resistance
than the Native Americans of Hispaniola.
So he suggested they import Africans to the Caribbean
to relieve the burden on the Indians.
But he soon realized his terrible, terrible mistake
when he saw that the black slaves were treated
as cruelly and harshly as the Indians had been treated.
Friar Batala May began taking up the cause of the African slaves
as well as arguing against fierce opposition,
that they had souls as well.
So the great irony is that this sensitive man
was the cause, ultimately, of the slave trade,
beginning to come to the New World.
And as if in repentance to the rest of his life,
he took up the cause of both the Indians and the Africans
arguing for their humanity.
He wrote a book, in fact, called All Mankind a One.
There's a lesson here, I think, in this remarkable story
about confronting pluralism.
We're inclined to dismiss the alien, the other, than us,
because taking them seriously as real persons
challenges our beliefs, just as we found in the Peralandra story.
The woman on Peralandra might have dismissed earth dwellers
as insignificant creatures in the eyes of God.
Instead, she wondered, does God allow different ways
to different people, different creatures,
who are as good and deserving of respect
in the eyes of God as I am?
It's in such wondering that the love of wisdom begins.
Western civilization, after all,
had always been aware of alien cultures,
non-Christian civilizations.
We all know about the Crusades.
They confronted Muslim civilization
and others living along the borders.
But this was a case on both sides, as we all know.
Christian and Muslim.
Thinking of the other as the infidel,
as a Christian believer who had to be converted.
And if out of perversity or ignorance,
they could not be converted,
then we would have to subdue them by the sword.
But the kind of confrontation of pluralism
represented by Friar Bittolome was more than that.
One has to begin looking at alien cultures
to understand them, the other,
and in doing so, to understand oneself.
That was the kind of awakening to a new mode of consciousness.
But confronting alien civilizations
was only one aspect of the modern era's confrontation with pluralism.
Another very different part of it, but absolutely crucial,
was the story of the Protestant Reformation,
which officially began with Martin Luther in 1517, as I said.
The Reformation shattered the religious unity of Europe,
eventually leading to a devastating period of religious wars
between Catholics and Protestants
that persisted for well over a century after Luther.
They culminated in the bloody wars in Germany
from 1618 to 1648,
which are known to us as the Thirty Years' War.
It's difficult to over-emphasize the impact
of these religious wars on European consciousness,
at least as great as Columbus' impact, for sure.
They shattered the belief that reasonable people could agree to disagree
without bloodshed.
It's one thing for a culture like Europe to confront alien cultures.
It's quite another for the authority in that culture
where the authority of the Church and the Papacy,
which had held European civilization together for a thousand years,
was now being challenged from within by Christians themselves.
How can we trust authorities
when there are competing claims to authority?
And how do we live together with competing beliefs
without resorting to the sword?
Consider the interesting story of King Henry IV of France,
a man well ahead of his time.
He tried to institute an era of pluralism and tolerance
for different religions and points of view,
particularly the Catholics and the Protestants,
in France, only to be assassinated in 1610,
just prior to the Thirty Years' War,
as if people really weren't ready for this yet.
Europe was not ready to cope with pluralism through tolerance,
but it was going to have to face the issue sooner or later,
as we all do.
An indication of this fact is that the idea of a social contract
suddenly comes to the fore in Western philosophy
at just this time, near the end of the Thirty Years' War,
middle of the 17th century.
In such figures as Thomas Hobbes and John Locke,
social contract theories existed earlier in Western thought,
but they took on a special urgency in the modern era,
in part as a way of coping with the differences of points of view
and the religious wars.
Let's agree to disagree and find a way to live together in peace.
The idea of a social contract has since been central
to the modern world's confrontation with pluralism
in ethics and politics, as we are going to see.
But we must now turn to yet another very different
but crucial aspect of the Western world's confrontation with pluralism.
This came surprisingly from knowledge
that was now filtering back to the West from the Far East,
from missionaries in the Far East, in China and in India,
about those exotic civilizations.
Here again we have that notion of the alien.
Philosophers of the 18th century period, known as the Enlightenment,
were beginning to take the ideas of these
Eastern and Middle Eastern civilizations seriously,
especially China, not as enemies, but again, as sources of ideas.
Historians tell us that one of the obsessions of the 18th century Enlightenment
was alien cultures and alien points of view.
In France, in 1721, the French political theorist Baron de Montesquieu
published a famous book that became a sensation
over Europe called The Persian Letters,
and it was a book about some visitors to Europe from Persia from the Middle East,
and they told stories about Europe and it was a sort of a story
whereby all these European customs, how strange they are to these Persians
and when, of course, they were told, they did seem strange
when you look at them from the point of view of an alien culture.
It was an exercise in seeing oneself as others see you,
an essential step in awakening to a higher state of self-consciousness.
But the most striking example of Enlightenment thinkers
who were absorbed by the problem of pluralism
is the rationalist philosopher Gottfried Leibniz,
one of the greatest philosophers of the modern period.
Leibniz, who lived at the end of the 17th century and the beginning of the 18th century,
was an ecumenical Protestant who tried to find common intellectual ground
between Catholics and Protestants.
But he also tried to find common truths between the religious
and philosophical ideas of the West and the thought of the Chinese civilization,
which was now filtering back to Europe from Christian missionaries.
Just before his death in 1716, Leibniz wrote a treatise called
On the Natural Theology of the Chinese,
in which he defended Neal Confucian philosophy from the charge of atheism.
This was a big issue at the time in intellectual circles in China and Europe.
It had been started by a Jesuit missionary, Mateo Rishi,
who lived in China from about 1587 until his death in 1610,
when the Emperor of China gave him a state funeral.
He lived in the Chinese court there,
sending back messages about the Chinese.
Rishi argued that the Chinese believed in God in the Western sense,
variously referred to by the ancient Chinese terms,
and they had several of them.
It could also mean T,
Supreme Lord was one,
Tian was another.
It means heaven, but it could also mean Lord as well.
And Tian, by the way, is in the Chinese Tiananmen Square,
which is Gate of Heaven,
a square at the center of Beijing.
The situation was complicated, however,
by the fact that Chinese culture had other names for the supreme reality,
such as the Daoists,
which literally means the Way of the Universe.
It's this God.
And Li, another word, which means rights or propriety,
but the Neo-Confucians had extended this to be the underlying reality of things.
And another one they had was Taiji, the ultimate force of things.
You have probably seen the Chinese who like to make these slow, easy movements,
which we call in the West now, Taiji.
That's getting into harmony with the rhythms of things,
because the ultimate force in nature is what it's all about.
Well, okay.
But which of these refers to God?
Or any of them refer to God?
And which one should we translate as God?
Opponents of Rishi said none were God.
The Chinese were literally atheists,
because they had not any exact equivalent of the true God,
the Judeo-Christian God of the West.
Such was the big controversy in China at the time.
What Rishi's opponents and successors did was to insist that no translation be made at all,
but rather the Latin term for God, Daos, be used in preaching to the Chinese.
Well, that was an unfortunate mistake,
because that reminded the Chinese, through the Buddhists,
of a Japanese term that sounded just like Daos and meant the Great Lie.
Clearly that didn't help them very much.
And the new practice was bound to make the Chinese God seem alien,
and it set back missionary efforts in China for a long time.
Leibniz took the side of Rishi and others,
who were insisting that the Confucians were theists.
They believed in God, but they called God by different names.
And that their God really wasn't unlike the Western one.
But that was by no means all that Leibniz did
in the confrontation with pluralism and in debates about it.
He went on to suggest that we should create a universal symbolic language
in the hope of finding some universal philosophical truths
that would transcend cultures and that we could all agree on.
And presumably we would find out if we had such a language,
whether there were commonalities here in terms of belief in God and others.
In the endeavor to do this, Leibniz turned out to be the precursor of modern symbolic logic,
which has since used some of his ideas.
But unfortunately, he didn't find a universal language
that would allow people with different beliefs and values to find common ground.
That hope of the Enlightenment philosophers was not to be realized.
It turns out, by the way, that symbolic or mathematical logic,
as it is now often called, remains one of the great achievements of the 20th century.
Unfortunately, it's too abstract, as you would expect of logic,
to settle our differences on the great questions of life, as Leibniz hoped.
But the search for a universal language in the Enlightenment period
did have one fascinating outcome related to pluralism,
with which I want to, in a certain sense, conclude this lecture.
This was the story of La Baye-Lepay.
La Baye, of course, is the French term for father.
Father-Lepay, if you will.
One of the great unsung heroes, I think, of human history.
His story was nicely told by psychiatrist Oliver Sacks in recent years,
but it's such a wonderful story about the Enlightenment and the West's confrontation
with pluralism that it is certainly worth retelling.
This La Baye was a humble priest ministering to the deaf mutes of Paris
in 1760, but he also thought of himself as something of a philosopher,
and he was very excited and much taken by the ideas of Leibniz about a universal language.
And, of course, he knew that the languages that all of us spoke, the different languages of Europe,
couldn't possibly be the universal language, because, of course, they were all very, very different.
He had an idea that maybe the universal language was the language of sign,
that some of his deaf mute subjects, whom he ministered to in the streets of Paris,
spoke in a very, very crude way.
They had invented a few crude signs for themselves.
And this led the La Baye to study their language in the hope of finding
Leibniz' talisman of the universal language, and he developed it further.
It was very crude, but he developed it further and turned it into a language
that the deaf and the hearing impaired, as we would call them today, could use.
Their crude signs into a genuine language, which today is very much like the language of the deaf
and the hearing impaired that we know.
And the La Baye-Le Baye's ideas spread like wildfire throughout Europe,
to Russia, to the New World.
It was like a miracle.
The deaf were freed from their prison of silence, as Oliver Sacks likes to say,
by sign language.
And people began to realize that they were intelligent human beings.
Like the Native Americans and Africans to Friar Batala May, they had souls.
They were fully and completely human beings who had been encased in a sad and tragic situation.
And it was no small coincidence that the Abe's great book, which spawned his movement,
sometimes called the Emancipation Proclamation of the Deaf, appeared in 1775,
the year in which the U.S. Declaration proclaimed that all men are created equal.
I have always thought that this story, the contestants of what the Enlightenment was all about,
that is to say, the emancipation of human beings through greater knowledge and understanding.
This is what Friar Batala May himself sought for the Indians and for the Africans
who came to the New World.
And it's what the Abe sought for those deaf urchins of Paris,
to liberate them and for us to treat them as human beings
and not something much less than human beings.
In summary, this lecture has looked at the Western world's confrontation
with an uncertainty on the one hand and pluralism on the other,
at the beginning of the modern era and up to the Enlightenment.
In the next lecture, we'll be concerned with the third condition of modernity,
the sundering of fact and value and theoretical from practical inquiry.
I've already talked about the sundering of scientific explanation from purpose in lecture 2
and in lecture 4, I'm going to focus on one of the most fundamental difficulties
for modern Western consciousness, and that is the break of the split
or the sundering between fact and value.
We're going to take a closer look at that sundering in the next lecture
and in the next, after that, lecture 5, we're going to look at the whole question
of the objectivity of value in a deeper way.
Thank you very much.
