Lecture 4 Our Values Subjective
In the previous lecture I sketched some confrontations of the modern era with pluralism and uncertainty.
From the 16th century up to the 18th century Enlightenment.
In this lecture we are going to turn our attention to the third condition of modernity, the sundering
of modernity.
We began the story of these sundering in lecture 2 by talking about the sundering of
scientific explanation from purpose in Aristotle, as you recall.
We are now going to turn to the second of those two sundering, the sundering of fact
from value and the sundering of theoretical explanation from an inquiry, from practical
inquiry about how to live.
And so I want to turn first to the gap, if you will, between fact and value.
That gap has been so central to the way in which the modern era has dealt with questions
of values that is something we must indeed attend to.
Our objective, the idea was, out there in the world to be studied, whereas values, it
is often said, are merely subjective expressions of personal taste, feeling or attitude.
That is the essential gap we are talking about here.
The idea, of course, that values are subjective expressions of feelings or attitude or taste
is the doctrine of subjectivism, which I defined in lecture 1.
In this lecture, we are going to consider trends of modern thought that have led to
subjectivism about values.
And then in the next lecture, I'm going to come back and talk about countertrends that
may lead in the direction of talking about the objectivity of values.
I think the best way to illustrate the force of subjectivist thinking in modern times is
to focus on two of the most influential movements of philosophical ideas of the 19th and 20th
century.
I have in mind two movements, one called positivism and the other existentialism.
No two contemporary movements of thought in the history of ideas could be more different.
Positivism and existentialism represent entirely different and opposed human attitudes and
temperaments.
And yet, and here's the curious thing, both of them have led in their very, very different
ways to subjectivism about values, and we want to see how.
Positivism is the view that science gives us all the objective knowledge about the world
we can have.
All objective knowledge comes through experience as interpreted by and filtered through the
scientific method, the experimental methods of the sciences, such as positivism.
We know how deeply ingrained that attitude is nowadays, even among people who don't know
the official name for this particular doctrine.
Existentialism by contrast is a complex movement, much more difficult to define than positivism.
Yet in many ways, the two are polar opposites.
Where positivists emphasize the detached observations of scientific experimenters, existentialists
emphasize the engaged and unique experiences of individual persons, personal existence
from which existentialism receives its name.
Where positivists emphasize objective scientific truth, existentialists emphasize what the Danish
thinker, Søren Kierkegaard, the first of the existentialists called subjective truth,
the truth that I am and that I live, rather than the truth that I know in some detached
way.
Where positivists emphasize abstract reason as exemplified in mathematics and science,
existentialists emphasize more concrete experience and even emotions, if you will, as revelatory
of the human condition.
Indeed, in the popular imagination, existentialists seem to be obsessed by morbid emotions, like
despair or dread or anxiety or angst or guilt or boredom or even nausea.
That word nausea, of course, is the title of Jean-Paul Sartre's, one of his most famous
novels, La Nose in French, but nausea in general.
And by it, Sartre meant, of course, a kind of a metaphysical feeling of ennui, if you
will, not the feeling you get in your stomach after eating a jalapeno pizza.
It's true enough that in the popular imagination, existentialists are the sorts of persons who
believe that every silver lining has a cloud.
But their concern with negative emotions is not just a sign of a certain morbidity of
temperament, I think, but rather they see these emotions as revealing something important
about the human condition.
And I think they are right about that, as we are going to see over the next couple of
lectures.
Finally, where positivists emphasize the scientific study of human beings and may tend to see human
behavior as determined product of our biological and social inheritance, most existentialists,
just the opposite, champion individual freedom and the idea that we're not already made
by nature, that we make ourselves by our own free choices.
So in all these ways, and there are more as well, positivism and existentialism are two
entirely different and opposing points of view.
They represent, I think, in a way, two sides of the modern persona.
On the one hand, it's very positivistic and respectful of science as an arbiter of disputed
questions, and yet on the other hand, it's interested in personal and individual feelings
and emotions and expressions and in individual freedom.
The striking thing is that these two movements, so expressive of two sides of the modern persona,
should both of them, in their different ways, have led to belief in the subjectivity of
values.
One interesting way, I think, to pursue this is by way of focusing on two of the most famous
philosophers of the 20th century who represent each of these two movements.
The first one is Bertrand Russell, the British mathematician, logician and philosopher.
The other is Jean-Paul Sartre, who I mentioned earlier, the French existentialist, whose
writings before and after World War II popularized existentialism throughout the world and gave
it its name.
What's interesting about Russell and Sartre, it seems to me, is that they have been notable
public figures in the 20th century as well.
Almost everybody knows their names for one reason or another, not always as philosophers.
People who have little idea of their philosophical theories.
Russell, for example, was a dedicated activist for world peace, won the Nobel Prize for peace
later in his life.
Sartre was a famous novelist and playwright as well as a philosopher.
He won the Nobel Prize as well in his case for literature.
Though it turned out that he declined the prize, and he was also engaged in political
causes.
In fact, the two of them, Russell and Sartre, joined together in the 1960s to protest the
Vietnam War.
They spearheaded an effort to accuse the United States and other countries involved in that
war with crimes against humanity.
It's always seemed to me to be a supreme irony that these two figures, who spoke out with
such passion on worldwide causes, and particularly against universal wrongs and crimes against
humanity, were both ultimately subjectivists about value, believing that all judgments
about right and wrong were matters of personal taste and expression and subjective choice.
Of course, both men argued that such a subjectivism was perfectly consistent with making strong
personal commitments.
After all, one can have feelings, if you will.
And if one had strong feelings about something, then one had the right to express them.
They did have strong feelings.
But a question arises about what causes you might be committed to if subjectivism is true.
Russell himself, frankly, admitted, if someone disagreed with him and felt differently, say
a committed Nazi or a Stalinist, he had no principled argument to show that he was right
and they were wrong.
Because there was no objective right or wrong about the matter at all.
And Sartre comes to similar conclusions about ultimate existential choices, arguing that
for such choices, we make the thing right by choosing it, it's not the other way around.
But of course, they came to these very similar conclusions, the two of them, in very, very
different ways.
Russell was a scientifically oriented thinker who first became famous as a logician and
a mathematician.
Perhaps the most powerful influence in Russell's life was that he lost both his parents at
the age of three.
He went to live with his grandparents, and his grandfather, by the way, had been a politician
and a prime minister in England.
But the grandfather also died when Russell was but six years old.
So he was thereafter raised by his grandmother.
She was a kind woman, but a stern Victorian lady, and Russell ultimately revolted against
her religious and moral beliefs.
The result was that Russell had an incredibly lonely and morose childhood.
Nothing it seemed made up for the early loss of his parents, which is, of course, one of
the greatest calamities that any child can endure.
What saved him was two things.
His grandmother's lavish gardens, which he spent a tremendous amount of time in, and
his discovery of mathematics when at the age of eleven, his brother gave him a book of
Euclid's elements.
Russell contemplated suicide several times in his life.
The first time was at age seventeen, and he was saved by mathematics.
He was at that time so absorbed in it that he wanted to stay alive to learn more about
it.
Now, I don't know of anyone else in the history of mankind who has been saved from committing
suicide by mathematics.
On the other hand, I know a lot of young people who have contemplated suicide because of mathematics,
myself included, the other way around is surely more common.
Many a school child has indeed contemplated suicide over mathematics, and indeed we are
told, probably apocryphally, that the pre-secratic philosopher Pythagoras was reputed to have
killed himself because of mathematics, because of the discovery of irrational numbers.
We don't know whether that's a true story or not.
What attracted Russell to mathematics was the desire for certainty, and that ought to
be familiar to us by now.
For Russell, I think the loss of certainty had a very deep personal meaning for him,
probably tied up with the early loss of his parents.
His desire for certainty also takes us back to a theme of the previous lecture, of course.
Modern philosophy was born in uncertainty and was a constant effort to retrieve lost
certainty.
Such was my thesis.
Russell saw himself as a new Descartes.
It was Descartes, you recall, who I said, the father of modern philosophy, beginning with
doubt and trying to retrieve that certainty that had been lost.
The original Descartes was like Russell, by the way, of course, a great mathematician,
inventor of analytic geometry, of those graphs we draw, as you know, in vectors and
things of that kind, which made modern science possible.
Russell's own chief contribution to the modern search for certainty, for which he became famous
at a relatively young age, was the writing with Alfred North Whitehead of a book called
Principia Mathematica.
This influential work attempted to provide the foundations for mathematics in logic.
Mathematica logic had just got started.
I told you that Leibniz was one of its precursors, but it was underway at this time, and the
great task was to try to align it with mathematics in some way and show what the relationship
was.
Russell and Whitehead never did quite succeed in reducing mathematics entirely to logic,
as Russell hoped.
Paradoxes arose.
In fact, some of the paradoxes were discovered by Russell himself, making it impossible.
But they did manage to link the two together, logic and mathematics, together inextricably,
and to advance the development of what came to be called in the 20th century mathematical
or symbolic logic.
This, of course, was Leibniz's original dream in the Enlightenment, and has become one of
the great achievements of the 20th century.
In fact, Russell's other favorite philosopher besides Descartes was Leibniz, the only philosopher
he wrote a full book about.
Russell was also one of the founders of analytic philosophy, still the dominant trend in modern
philosophy in this century in the English-speaking world, and now spreading to many other parts
of the world, to Europe as well.
It's a kind of philosophy that focuses on the analysis of concepts and of language.
So clearly, Russell's influence is tremendous.
After mathematics and logic, of course, the greatest influence on his view was empirical
science itself.
He knew, of course, that physics and the other sciences could not have the certainty of mathematics
or logic, but he thought they came as close as we could to objective knowledge of fact
because they did rely on mathematics and the precision of experiment.
In short, the spirit of Russell's thinking was just positivistic right to the core.
He felt that philosophy should be based on science, not only interpreting the results
of the sciences, but emulating their methods of careful analysis of evidence and experiment.
It's true now, and I don't want to confuse people here, that Russell did reject a modern
version of positivism which was called logical positivism.
This claimed that all metaphysical speculation, anything we said beyond science, was not
only false or unverifiable or whatever, it was purely and literally meaningless, gibberish
that only science talked meaning, and beyond that was just wild and meaningless speech.
Russell in fact engaged himself, and he rejected this logical positivist view.
He himself engaged in considerable metaphysical speculation, but he always insisted that such
speculation had always to be based on what was known in the sciences.
In fact, he claimed in his autobiography that all his philosophical speculations were an
attempt to synthesize four different sciences, physics, physiology, psychology, and mathematical
logic.
There's a well-known story that illustrates Russell's positivist leanings.
He was asked one time what he would say as an atheist if after his death he was to confront
God, and Russell replied, I would ask him why he didn't give us more evidence.
Perfect expression of the positivist mind, right?
But our main concern is with Russell's views on ethics and values, and here his positivist
leanings come across loud and clear.
As he said, and I'm quoting, is traditionally regarded as a branch of philosophy, but I
hardly think it belongs there.
The reasons are that all knowledge is limited to science, and science has nothing to say
about values.
Why not?
Because Russell said value judgments are not about objective facts out there in the world
at all.
Here's another quote.
When a man says this is good in itself, he seems to be making a statement that could
be true or false, just as much as if he said this is square or this is sweet.
I believe this is a mistake.
I think what the man really means is I desire this, and I wish everybody desired it too,
or would that everybody desired this as I do.
The statement is merely an affirmation of his own personal wish, unquote.
No clearer statement of subjectivism could be made.
Russell's particular version, in fact, is called sometimes emotivism in the 20th century,
since it reduces judgments of value to expressions of desire or wish.
We can also see right here the connection between subjectivism and positivism in Russell's
statement that science has nothing to say about values.
To be sure, this statement has to be qualified.
We've seen that the human sciences of psychology, anthropology, history, etc., have a lot to
say about values.
But they say what people or societies or cultures think is good or evil, right or wrong.
Not what really is good or evil.
It's one thing for an anthropologist or historian of religion to say that this or that culture
or religion holds such and such values.
It's quite another to say that one's own cultural values, say Western culture, has the right set of values.
And other cultures are wrong.
That would offend against scientific objectivity.
And in Russell's terms, it would amount to the social scientist imposing his own personal
preferences or wishes on the data.
So in a curious way, the scientific ideal of objectivity itself provides further support
for subjectivism about values.
That really is a curiosity, but is one of the interesting ones of our present day and
present age.
Such is the root to subjectivism by way of positivism.
When we turn to the existentialists and to a figure like Jean-Paul Sartre, we're traveling
down an entirely different road.
And yet, curiously enough, the road also leads to subjectivism of values.
Consider Sartre's famous essay, one of the most famous philosophical essays of the 20th
century.
Existentialism is a humanism.
Sartre says there that existentialism is defined by the formula essence precedes existence.
Excuse me, it's the other way around.
Existence precedes essence.
By this formula, he says, now, existence precedes essence.
By this formula, he said, we mean that man, first of all, exists, encounters himself, surges
up in the world, and defines himself, that is, defines his essence or his form, only
afterwards by himself.
And he elaborates, I quote here, if existence precedes essence in this way, one will never
be able to explain one's actions by reference to a given human nature.
In other words, there's no determinism.
Man is free, stressed this feature of existentialism earlier.
Nor on the other hand, he says, if God does not exist, are we provided with any values
or commands that could legitimize our behavior.
We have neither behind us nor before us a luminous realm of values and a means of justification
or excuse.
We are left without excuse.
How did humans previously justify their actions and decide how they should live, Sartre asks.
They appeal to human nature to give them direction, as did the ancient Greeks, for example, like
Aristotle.
But human nature, he says, isn't precise enough to help us.
In fact, our most characteristic trait is our freedom and our free will, which means
we are free to choose anything, and that leaves us little direction.
Persons also appealed in the past to the commands of God or some other divine or human authority
to justify their actions.
But that will not do for Sartre either, not only because he, like Russell, is an atheist,
but also because, as he says, it would be up to us in the last analysis to choose which
God or which authority is the one we will follow.
So again, we're thrown back on our own resources.
It turns out that Sartre, like other existentialists, is here attacking two roots of Western culture.
The appeal to human nature was the standard appeal in values of the ancient Greek and
Roman thinkers.
We see that in Aristotle.
And the appeal to the commands of a divine authority, obviously, is the appeal of Judeo-Christian
culture.
Greek and Roman culture, Judeo-Christian culture.
Athens and Jerusalem, the two roots of Western culture, Western civilization.
pagan Greece and Rome on the one hand and the Judeo-Christian tradition on the other.
And for Sartre, neither can any longer give us direction in matters of values and ethics
that we crave, or so he claims.
Now if both fail, we're thrown back on our own reason.
But Sartre says that reason itself cannot help us either, for it does not give us clear
direction about what values must be ultimately chosen.
Sartre illustrates this with a now famous story you may have heard of a former pupil
of his who faced a moral dilemma during World War II.
This young man's brother had been killed by the Nazis in the German conquest.
The German conquest of France, that is, in 1940.
And the boy's father had been a collaborator.
The boy's dilemma, which he posed to Sartre, his teacher, was whether to go off and join
the resistance movement or stay behind with his ailing and now sad mother, who'd lost
one son already.
Sartre put the whole matter pretty bluntly to him.
What could help this young man resolve this dilemma and choose?
Should he consult his human nature?
And how would that resolve the problem?
His natural inclination pulled him in both directions.
What about the commands of God?
Well, there's a commandment to love your mother and your father, but also to love others and
fight against evil.
What about appealing to reason for an ethical commandment?
How about Kant's categorical imperative, something we're going to talk about in more detail later
on, which says to always treat others as ends in themselves, worthy of your concern and
never as means?
Well, Sartre says, if the young man remains with his mother, he shall be regarding her
as an end and not a means.
But by the same token, he's in danger of treating as a means those who are fighting
in his behalf and for whom he wants to join in the resistance.
Sartre concludes, and I quote, if values are uncertain, if they are still too abstract
to determine the particular concrete case, nothing remains but to trust our instincts.
That is what the young man did.
And when Sartre saw him last, he said, the young man that is, in the end, it is feeling
that counts and the direction in which it is really pushing me is the one I ought to
choose.
So in the end, says Sartre, the boy just had to choose, and he would make one value the
strongest by choosing it.
His feeling for his mother was determined by the young man precisely by his choosing
to stay with her as he, in fact, did.
And that choice had no higher principle beyond itself, according to Sartre.
Here in a remarkable and startling way, we arrive back at subjectivism of values, from
a root entirely opposite to Russell's.
And yet a root that many other people have taken in the 20th century.
I think, indeed, these are the two roots, as I have suggested, to subjectivism.
You can come through science and be an objective type of thinker.
You can come through your personal experience, as Sartre did.
And either way, there is this danger of coming to the view that all values are merely subjective
expressions of private taste and feeling or emotion, a great danger of the age, I think.
And notice, by the way, how pluralism and uncertainty have come back to haunt both Russell
and Sartre.
For Russell, social scientists study different cultures and ways of life, pluralism.
But scientific objectivity prevents them from imposing their own views and saying that one
culture is right and all others is wrong, uncertainty.
For Sartre, we're faced with a plurality of choices, existential choices, based on competing
values, with no certain guidelines to choose among them.
That is to say, many choices, pluralism, and no certainty.
Recall, if you will, Russell asking God why he did not give more evidence.
If Sartre had put this scene in one of his plays, it probably would have come out like
this.
God would reply, if I gave you enough evidence, Mr. Russell, I would have taken away your
free choice.
When there is certain knowledge, there's no room for faith and real choice.
Strangely enough, many religious thinkers such as St. Augustine, perhaps the first existentialist,
said the same thing centuries ago as regards religious faith.
But the question is, when we make such leaps of faith, do we have nothing more to go on
than our subjective feelings, as both Russell and Sartre believed for entirely different
reasons?
We are going to address this question in the next lecture because I think it is one of
the most important and fundamental questions that faces modern culture and the modern era.
What I've tried to do in this lecture is to show how the thinking of the modern era
has represented both on the personal side to existentialists and on the scientific side
to positivists and others who are moved by the modern scientific spirit and think science
is the final arbiter of things.
How both of them, these two very, very different kinds of personalities and peoples, but both
of them influencing us, I think, in the modern world.
We are all, so to speak, in a way divided ourselves, I think, by these two different
kinds of positions.
We want to, being modern people, respect science for what it is and its objectivity, and yet
we are sometimes frightened by where it seems to be leading us.
And at the same time, we have our own personal existence and we know that we face difficult
choices in life for which there often is no clear authority.
And we ourselves, it seems to me, are divided in these two ways as represented by these
two movements, and both of them in different ways project us and push us towards subjectivism
of value.
I want to ask in the next lecture whether there's any chance we can resist and how we
should resist and look at some other aspects of modern thought that may give us some clues
as to how we may go in the other direction and think more positively about the possibility
of values being objective.
And one thing to think about, I think, that's very important, are all moral dilemmas like
Satras.
In a way, you know, the dilemma about the boy, it is very difficult to resolve.
There may, if you think like me, there may not be a clear answer to that dilemma.
But the question to ask yourself is whether all moral dilemmas are really like that or
whether we can look at them another way.
You seem to be telling us that, hey, look, there's no clear answer here, so the boy just
has to go with his gut.
But then he seems to be suggesting to us, aha, but that's the way all moral dilemmas
are.
And I think that's a very, very mistake and move, and we'll see if we can do better next
time.
Thank you.
