Lecture 5 From Experience to Worth
The previous lecture presented the modern case for the subjectivism of values.
By discussing two of the most influential figures of the 20th century,
Bertrand Russell and Joan Paul Sartre.
But the modern era has not spoken with one voice about this question
of the subjectivity or objectivity of value.
Not everyone agrees with Sartre and Russell.
In this lecture, we're going to consider the opposing case
for the objectivity of values in modernity.
Now even if you are a little skeptical
of the extreme subjectivist views of Russell and Sartre,
as I certainly am, it may have occurred to you
that something seems right about the subjectivist idea
that values are somehow related to our feelings and our emotions,
our desires and our personal choices.
That surely seems to be right in some way.
If we had no feelings, no emotions, no desires and choices,
if we were unfeeling and thoughtless beings like rocks or machines,
we'd have no values.
So there's a connection between values
and the emotional feeling side of our nature.
That, I think, is what gives subjectivism its hypnotic appeal,
we could say.
Values do arise in feelings, emotions and desires,
but it need not follow from that fact alone
that they are merely subjective.
The gap between fact and value
would be as great as thinkers like Sartre and Russell suggest.
In fact, there's a growing tendency, I think,
in modern philosophy to recognize that fact and value
merge inextricably, in everyday experience,
in ordinary language, in human action,
in ways that bridge the fact-value gap.
And I want to discuss some of those ways in this lecture.
To understand how this can be,
I think it helps to consider that there are different dimensions of value.
It turns out that the fact-value gap
can be bridged in some of these dimensions,
but not so easily in others.
Failing to see this,
that there are different dimensions of value, I think,
is the source of many modern confusions about values.
To sort them out, we will consider in this lecture
four dimensions of value.
And all of them, in some ways or another,
have risen in modern debates about it.
Each higher dimension, I will say, of value
includes the lower dimensions as a three-dimensional space,
include second-dimensional lines and first-dimensional planes
and first-dimensional lines.
This spatial metaphor is crude, if you think of dimensions,
but I think it's suggestive, as you'll see before I'm done in this lecture.
The first dimension of value is experiential.
One of the greatest thinkers of the early modern period
of the 17th century, we haven't mentioned,
is Baruch Spinoza.
And he pointed us, I think, in the right direction
on this question of the first dimension of value,
experiential value.
Spinoza, along with Descott and Leibniz,
whom we talked about earlier,
was one of the three great rationalist philosophers
of the 17th and 18th century.
Jewish by origin,
Spinoza was exiled from his Jewish community in Amsterdam
for holding unorthodox views about God.
But it is his novel views about values that interest us here.
Spinoza noted that our first encounter with good and evil
is experiential.
It comes through experiences of certain characteristic kinds
we all have, such as joy and sadness.
Let's call these experiences basic value experiences.
And we'll call the negative ones basic disvalue experiences.
Basic value experiences include such things as joy and delight,
amusement, pride, sensory pleasure, enjoyment, comfort, love,
exhilaration, contentment, ecstasy, and so on.
While basic disvalue experiences include sadness and frustration,
pain, loneliness, boredom, grief, humiliation, anxiety,
embarrassment, disappointment, despair, and so on.
Some of those existentialist virtues, as I like to call them,
which we mentioned in the last lecture.
We may think of all of these experiences good and bad,
respectively, as prima facie, good and bad.
That is to say, they're good and bad in the first instance,
or unless they are overridden, let us say,
in some higher dimension of value.
Thus, for example, the delight that a small child takes
when first seeing a squirrel in the park, right, is one thing.
The delight that a terrorist takes in torturing a prisoner
is quite another.
Spinoza would say that in the latter case,
the delight is overridden by a higher value and becomes evil.
Using our dimensional metaphor, we could say
that the value of delight takes on a different coloring
when it's viewed from a higher dimension,
if it's the delight of a terrorist, let us say,
or someone else of that ilk.
Now, why are these basic value experiences seen as prima facie good,
good in the first instance, if they're not overridden?
Spinoza was right again, I think, when he said,
it's because we initially learn what good and evil mean
by having such experiences.
Our notions of good and evil are initially defined
in terms of them.
They are like windows through which value first enters
our human world.
The poet Friedrich Schiller made this point
for basic value experiences when in his ode to joy,
he called joy the torch of the gods,
lighting an otherwise dark world.
We know that Beethoven put Schiller's words to music
in some of the most joyous music in the western tradition
in his ninth or choral symphony.
We don't often attend to the words of Schiller's poem,
the ode to joy, which Beethoven set to music.
It starts Freud, Scherner, Goethe, Funken,
joy, beautiful torch of the gods,
and then Tochter aus Elysium,
daughter from Elysium from the Elysium Fields of the gods.
Glimpse's joy is in Schiller's poem
of the divine in us.
Now, I want you to notice two things about value.
Oh, and I should also mention, by the way,
that if we reach back to the original axial period,
we can see the same thing being said by the Buddha
about basic disvalue experiences.
That is to say how fundamental they are.
When shortly after undergoing enlightenment,
the Buddha enunciated four noble truths.
And the first of these truths was that all existence
was suffering, whereby suffering he meant
first experiential evil in one form or another,
sadness, frustration, pain, loneliness, and so on.
Now, I want you to notice two things about value
in this first experiential dimension.
First, at this elementary level, value is already plural.
Many thinkers try to reduce all experiential value
to pleasure or pain.
But that's too simple.
Feelings of delight and amusement and pride
are quite different from each other
and from pleasures of taste and smell,
yet all are basic value experiences.
Boredom is not the same thing as sensory pain,
nor is either quite like loneliness,
humiliation, or grief,
yet these are all basic disvalue experiences.
In other words, value has different modalities,
different, it's plural,
even in this most elementary level
where we first encounter good and evil.
The second point to notice is even more important
for our purpose.
And that is value in this first experiential dimension
is both objective and subjective.
It's an objective fact about the world,
whether some creature somewhere
is or is not experiencing joy or sadness,
euphoria or pain,
though the experiences themselves
are in another sense subjective,
directly accessible only to the subject who has them.
I want to get across to you the idea
that there's no inherent contradiction
in something's being both subjective and objective.
Every time you or anyone feels pain,
the gap between fact and value has already been bridged,
even if only initially for you.
The good or evil of the experience
is only prima facia, to be sure,
and is potentially overriding when placed
in a broader context.
The pain, for example, may be necessary
to attain some higher good,
but when not so overridden,
it's objectively bad for the person who has it.
Let's turn now to the second dimension of value.
Some basic value experiences are momentary,
analogous to points on a plane,
while others, such as listening to a symphony,
are stretched out in time,
like lines on a plane.
Experience when stretched out in this way
is what we call sentient life,
and when this life involves propulsive activity,
we arrive at a second dimension of value for human beings.
In this second dimension,
we are talking about activities of individuals
who are pursuing plans and intentions
and interests and purposes.
We build houses to shelter ourselves
or impress our neighbors,
plant seeds to grow, food to eat,
and to adorn our environment with flowers,
play games to win, sell goods to make money, and so on.
The value or this value in this second dimension
is in the fulfillment or non-fulfillment of the purposes
and whether they give us satisfaction
of our desires and preferences.
Again, notice, in this second dimension,
value is also plural.
Isaiah Berlin says,
the purposes and ends of human beings are many,
and they often come in conflict with one another.
Here again, value is both objective in a sense
and subjective in a sense.
There is an objective fact of the matter
about whether activities succeed or fail
in fulfilling or satisfying our purposes.
Yet value in this second dimension
is also subjective and relative.
For the fulfillment or satisfaction
that defines purposes and interests and desires
is the fulfillment or satisfaction
of particular subjects or agents
that are manifested in their experiences.
The second dimension of value includes the first.
Insofar as propulsive activity
involves a succession of experiences through time.
Propulsive activity is something lived through,
and it includes diverse experiences such as enjoyment
when you undertake a project or a goal or a task.
Experiences such as enjoyment,
exhilaration, exhaustion, disappointment,
and so on as one-dimensional lines
are encased in two-dimensional planes.
So the second dimension of value, in addition,
can override first-dimensional experiences
as when short-term enjoyments or pleasures
like drinking an extra glass of wine
are sacrificed to attain longer-term purposes
like perhaps losing weight.
What's prima facie good in the first dimension
becomes bad in this broader context?
Similarly, when something's prima facie bad,
such as the pain of suffering,
then it can still be good if, for example,
it results from stretching a torn ligament
which needs to be rehabilitated.
So the bad in a lower dimension can become good in a higher one
and the good in a lower dimension
can become bad in a higher one.
Similarly now, let's turn our attention
to the third dimension of value.
We find that it includes the other two
and yet it transcends and can override both.
In this third dimension, activities and experiences
are not merely viewed in terms of what we can get from them,
but in terms of how they define what we are.
In this dimension, for example,
the hunter in a primitive tribe
does not merely hunt for food,
which is a second dimensional concern,
but takes pride in his skill with the bow
because of what it says about his standing as a human being.
The activity signifies that he's an excellent archer,
for example, or a good provider for his family,
a loyal member of his tribe.
It defines what he is, not merely what he does.
Note, in the second dimension, he goes out for food.
He has a purpose and he tries to realize it.
In the third dimension, there's a good deal more to it.
It's a question of what it means
and what it says about what he is.
The idea is that the value of activities and experiences
in the third dimension
derives from their role in forms of life
which give them meaning and significance
and from the pursuit of virtues or excellences
characteristic of those forms of life.
The influence in archery, for example,
fidelity to one's family, loyalty to one's tribe.
What we call the moral virtues such as loyalty and fidelity
were lumped together by the ancient Greeks
with other kinds of admirable traits
and referred to generally as arati or excellences.
Such excellences of all kinds, including moral virtues,
are the stuff of third dimensional value.
The third dimension of value thus includes
what contemporary philosopher Charles Taylor calls
strong evaluations.
Those that define, if you will, and note this distinction,
are ideals rather than merely our interests.
Third dimensional value also includes
what contemporary philosopher Alastair McIntyre
calls the values embodied in practices and traditions.
This is a very, very interesting idea
if you are trying to think about values,
the idea of a practice.
By a practice, McIntyre means a socially established
human activity through which we strive to achieve
various standards of excellence.
As examples, he cites and think of these as practices,
architecture, physics, medicine, law, painting,
violin making, chess, football, politics, teaching,
the making and sustaining of family life,
among many others.
Think of the different kinds of excellences
that humans can pursue that are required for
and can be attained in these different practices.
And then you have some idea of how third dimensional
values can be plural and of many, many different kinds.
When the pursuits of human goods in practices
extend through many generations,
they become traditions,
and even ultimately what we call cultures,
which are also the embodiment of third dimensional value.
Now notice, third dimensional value
includes the other two dimensions,
just as second dimensional value includes the first.
Second dimensional value includes the first
because activities in life, projects,
things we undertake,
include a succession of experiences,
both good and bad, from disappointment to exhilaration.
Third dimensional value includes
propulsive activities as well,
but it raises them up, if you will,
to a higher dimension of meaning
and gives them greater significance,
just as planes would be encased
in third dimensional spaces.
The activities and experiences of the first two levels
are raised up in the third dimension
to give them meaning and significance.
The first two dimensions involve value, so to speak,
but as a struggle for survival.
To seek meaning in life,
we must move up to the third dimension.
But for this very reason, third dimensional value
is also more objective in a stronger sense
than either of the first two dimensions of value.
Whether or not, for example, somebody exemplifies
a virtue or an excellence
as defined by a given practice or a form of life
depends on standards that go beyond
what the individual may think or feel about the matter.
It's not merely subjective anymore.
A skater, for example, may take a drug
which makes him feel like he gave
a dazzling artistic performance on skates
when, in fact, he stumbled all over the ice.
What he thinks, subjectively, is not what counts here.
What counts are the standards of excellence
by which persons pursue various kinds of goods.
So we have raised, by the third dimension,
into a higher level where we've put more objectivity
into the situation.
But even though third dimensional value,
so conceived, is objective,
there's nonetheless a sense
in which it is still relative value.
And here we've got to have a deeper understanding
of these two terms, subjective and relative,
because they are not quite the same.
Third dimensional value is more objective
than the first two dimensions, but it's still relative.
But now, in this case, the relativity
is not to individual beliefs and feelings and so on.
It is to practices and forms of life,
common values rather than individual ones
based on personal feeling or desire.
In the third dimension, we make a decisive step
beyond the subjectivity of value
by linking ourselves up with something greater than ourselves.
But not yet entirely beyond the relativity of value
because we link ourselves up with practices and traditions
and ways of life and communities of people
and with others.
Now, this does not mean we can't go even further here.
It doesn't mean that the excellences
or virtues of a given form of life
cannot have a non-relative or universal worth,
which transcends every particular form of life.
But to have such a transcendent value,
we would have to raise third dimensional value
to a yet higher level or fourth dimension of value,
and it's to this possibility we now turn.
To many modern people,
the first three dimensions of value
exhaust the dimensions of value in human life.
As the three dimensions of space of ordinary experience
exhaust the dimensions of space.
What I have in mind by a fourth dimension of value
is something a little more mysterious,
something like a fourth dimension of space would be,
more elusive, less familiar,
a little bit more beyond our ordinary experience,
if you will.
So much so that many deny it exists at all.
But I think the belief in a fourth dimension of value
is presupposed by much of what humans say
about the good and the right.
Without such a dimension,
what we call ethical or moral value
would not be what most people take it to be.
And why is this so?
Well, many virtues and excellences
defined within forms of life
have an ethical or moral thrust.
Clearly, loyalty and fidelity and honesty
and some of the other virtues
that we define in our various forms of life.
But a crucial part of what we call ethical or moral value
does, I think, lie in the fourth dimension.
It's that part, for example,
which says that each person has dignity
and is worthy of respect as a person
by every other person.
In other words, fourth dimensional value,
to put a name on it,
is non-relative or universal worth.
Not worth from this or that particular perspective
in this or that form of life,
for this or that person or culture or society,
but worth from every point of view.
Whether appreciated in every point of view or not,
I call this objective worth.
Such worth or fourth dimensional value
includes the other three dimensions of value,
but it transcends them.
Just as the other dimensions include
but transcend those below them.
To see how fourth dimensional value
transcends the other three,
suppose there are persons who agree with you
across a broad spectrum about what's necessary
to live a happy and flourishing human life.
The problem is they care only about
whether they and their group attain such a life
and they don't care at all whether you do.
Their society, let's say,
attains very high degrees of excellence
in science and in art and in civic life
among themselves.
That's third dimensional value.
While they marginalize and exploit other groups,
including yours,
we might think again of Hispaniola
and the Indians and so on.
Perhaps your marginalized group
is the product of ethnic cleansing.
Now, look, you have no disagreement with them
about the nature of human happiness
in the other three dimensions.
You agree with them about what it is.
It's just that they have a good measure of it
and you don't and they don't care that you don't.
They neither acknowledge your dignity
nor any right of yours equal to theirs
to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
Such acknowledgement for all other persons,
independently of what they could do for you,
would be the recognition of fourth dimensional value.
I think you can see why I said
it was an important dimension of ethical value.
Let's put it this way.
Third dimensional value tells us
what a flourishing life would be,
what we need for happiness.
But it doesn't tell us who deserves such a life
or who is worthy of it.
That would be fourth dimensional value.
This will also help to explain
why I said at the beginning of this lecture
that there's more than one gap involved
when people talk about fact and value.
The first gap is the gap between
the subjectivity and the objectivity of value.
The second gap is the gap between
the relativity and the non-relativity of that.
Now most people confuse these,
but we have to keep them apart
if we're really going to understand,
I think, what is going on in the modern situation with values.
This is one of those potential confusions, I think,
that mark the modern age
whenever it begins to try to think about these things carefully.
The first gap between subjectivity
and objectivity of value
is already bridged in the first three dimensions of value.
As I said, insofar as it is an objective fact of the matter,
whether someone is not having a basic value experience,
or whether certain purposes or desires are fulfilled,
or whether various virtues or excellences are realized,
there are objective facts about these matters.
But these values, while objective,
are less relative to the persons who have the experiences,
or the purposes, or share the forms of life.
Fourth dimensional value is another matter altogether.
It is non-relative or objective worth
for all persons, whatever their form of life,
or whether in fact it is recognized as worth or not.
It is like objective truth.
Objective truth does not depend upon whether others do or do not recognize it.
The objective truth of Einstein's theory of relativity
certainly does not depend on whether some illiterate tribe
accepts it or understands it or appreciates it.
If it is true, then if they have a different opinion about it
or cannot understand it, it is still true and they are wrong about it.
Objective worth or fourth dimensional value is like that as well.
Whether others can appreciate it is not what matters.
It is an objective matter one way or the other.
Like objective truth, it does not depend merely on what societies or groups think is correct.
So the second gap between, if you will, relative value
and non-relative value from all points of view
is the gap between the first three dimensions of value
and the fourth dimensional value.
And that is the really difficult gap for modernity to bridge, quite obviously.
What I am suggesting to you in other words
is that the gap between subjective and objective value
is already bridged in the first three dimensions of value.
The one we really have to worry about
and is really a problem for modernity
is the problem of fourth dimensional value.
In other words, objective value where I can say
my way of life or my culture, my third dimensional culture, if you will,
is the right one or is objectively true,
not just good for me but good period, if you will.
That is the really difficult gap to bridge
and that is the relativist gap.
In short, this really helps us, I think,
to understand what relativism really means.
You remember in lecture one I said that relativists hold
that all judgments about good and evil, right and wrong,
are not true period or from all points of view,
but only true for or relative to this or that person
or group or culture or whatever.
Relativism we can now see as just the view
that you can't get beyond the first three dimensions of value
to a fourth dimension above all different forms of life
any more than you can get beyond the first three
familiar dimensions of space into a fourth elusive dimension.
Our limitations, say relativists, will not allow it
because as finite beings we necessarily are embedded
in historically and culturally limited points of view
or third dimensional perspectives
and we can't get above them all, so to speak, to say,
which one is right?
That's relativism.
You can't get there from here, so to speak.
You can't get up there above them all to say that.
I think if you put it this way and understand it this way
you can see why relativism haunts the modern intellectual landscape
and why so many people drift towards relativist views.
In the face of pluralism and uncertainty
and the sunderings of modernity
they just can't see how to get above the fray
of competing third dimensional perspectives
and practices and ways of life
to say what's good and right from all points of view
to say what you'd like to say about that Einstein theory
that it's right, it really is right no matter what other people may think.
We've been talking about subjectivism till now
especially in the last lecture
but I think subjectivism can be answered.
The really difficult problem for modernity, I believe, is relativism.
Subjectivists are right in saying that all values arise in feelings
and emotions and desires.
We have to go through the first dimension of value first
but while values may arise in feelings and emotions
they are not ultimately justified by feelings and emotions.
To find meaning in life
you have to expand your consciousness
and move upward through higher dimensions
where values become progressively more objective
and free of the subjective bias of one's own experiences alone.
But the question is
how high can one take it?
To a level that transcends
particular individuals, societies and cultures altogether
that's the problem of relativism
which has haunted modern philosophy and modern life.
In the next part of this lecture series
we're going to ask how the great philosophers of the modern age
try to respond to this extremely difficult but crucial problem.
Thank you.
