Lecture 6, Hume and the Challenge of Relativism
The previous lecture has led us from the problem of subjectivism about values to the problem of relativism from the first dimension of experienced values all the way to the fourth dimension of objective worth.
Now I'd like to say something about that distinction between the third and fourth dimensions of value which came up at the end of the last lecture because it's a very difficult one and a possibly confusing one.
Let's think of it this way. Let's think of the third dimension or even the first three dimensions as a world of different cultures and societies, each of them having different values, different points of view and so on.
That's the third dimension, the world we really live in, the world of pluralism and so on. The fourth dimension would be a dimension whereby we could get up above them all, look down on all of them and say, that's the right one or that's the right one.
Are those others are wrong? A kind of Archimedean point, Hilary Putnam, the Harvard philosopher has called it the God's eye point of view. Some people call it the absolute perspective but I don't like the word absolute because it suggests certainty and I don't want to necessarily say there's certainty about the fourth dimension.
I just want to say maybe we can access it even if we can't be certain about it. So it's that idea of being able to get above it all and say whether it is right or wrong.
And the relativist is precisely the person who says you can't do it, you can't get up there. You have to just say it's right for me or it's right for my society or my culture, you see, you can't get up to that fourth dimension.
I think indeed we can say a lot more about the possibility of how we might be able to get there but that in any case is one of the major problems of the whole lecture series, you see.
And it is the problem of relativism because relativists say basically when they say it's all relative to culture or society, another way of saying it is hey you just can't get up there and get that God's eye point of view, it's just not accessible.
So I hope that will help to explain one of the more difficult aspects of the previous lecture. Now in this lecture we're going to begin to consider the responses of major philosophers and thinkers of the modern era to this challenge of relativism.
And we could put their problem as how can you get up there above it all and say what's ethically right or wrong for everybody, if you will.
Are there ethical truths that hold for all persons and all points of view? That is the problem. And if so, how can they be grounded?
The next seven lectures, six to twelve, will consider how some of the most influential thinkers of the modern era actually tried to do that.
The first step, however, is I want to clear away one other possible confusion about relativism.
Some people simply define it as the view that no point of view, no religion or specific religion or no culture or no society is any better objectively than any other as far as what it says about values.
They all have their different views, but no one is better. Now this is one way of defining relativism. No one's better than any other, etc., of common one.
But the British philosopher Bernard Williams is called this vulgar relativism. And the reason is that most philosophers believe that this view, the view that, hey, no view about values is any better than any other.
It's all a matter of perspective, if you will. Many philosophers, in fact most philosophers now believe that this vulgar relativism was refuted a long time ago by the ancient Greeks.
And why? Well, think of it here. You probably have heard this argument. Vulgar relativists claim that no view about values is objectively any more correct than any other.
While at the same time they suppose that their own relativist view is more correct than any other, thus contradicting themselves.
Now the ancient Greeks pointed out that there was a problem already in this vulgar relativist view. It's as if the vulgar relativist is himself jumping up to the fourth dimension of value above the fray,
looking around and seeing all the different religions and all the different points of view and saying, hey, no one of these is any better than any other.
But the problem is, how did he get up there? Since he believes as a relativist that we all have to see things from our own very, very private and personal or cultural, at least, point of view.
They are doing, the vulgar relativist is doing exactly what they claim cannot be done. Vulgar relativism is thus very confused.
And philosophers have been offering facile refutations of it for centuries. But these refutations often leave thoughtful people, the rest of us, unsatisfied and for good reason.
For refutations of vulgar relativism leave untouched the real relativism that troubles most people.
What bothers most people is the thought that you can't make any judgments about values that are not from some limited perspective, your own point of view, your own culture, your own society, your own religion, and so on.
In other words, the problem about relativism troubles most people is that you can't jump up to the fourth dimension at all.
Either to say, this view is the right one, or my view is the right one, or to say, no view is necessarily the right one, they're all the same.
You can't jump up there for either purpose. So the vulgar relativist is making the same mistake as the person who would claim that they can say one of the views or their own or something else is the objectively right one.
They are making the same mistake. But this then is the real relativism, I think, that troubles people, and we don't want to be misled by the idea that vulgar relativism can be refuted.
The way the argument usually goes nowadays is someone will say relativism is a view that no view is any better than any other, but the Greeks showed and we can show that that's absolutely false, it can be refuted because it's self-contradictory.
You're claiming your view that no view is any better than any other is more right than any other, and that's wrong.
So relativism is self-contradictory, therefore you don't have to worry about it. And of course, that's a terrible mistake.
What bothers most people about relativism is something quite different than vulgar relativism.
It's the idea that you can't get above it all to say what's right or wrong in general for everyone, that everything is a matter of perspective, everything is a matter of being ensconced in a finite point of view because we are finite creatures after all.
And so everything is really relative. Don't say your view is right, just say it's right for you. And that's the problem.
So while philosophers have been offering, if you will, facile refutations of relativism, they really haven't got it yet.
The only way to really refute relativism is to show us how we can climb above all the different points of view and up to a higher dimension and say in a certain sense which one is right.
To give us some universal values of some kind, to show how we can get them, that's the only way you can really refute relativism and that's a constructive task.
That's not some kind of gotcha type of refutation, which is much too simple.
Now, it seemed an easy task to people of the past as to how to get to the fourth dimension, how to get to some objective absolute values, if you will,
because peoples of the past, many of them tended to believe the values of their own society or culture or religion were in fact the absolutely correct ones.
That seems to have been the normal tendency of human culture and human history to think so.
They knew it from their myths that their view was the right one or they had heard it from their gods.
Their beliefs were the true ones. Their way of life was the superior one.
These peoples traditionally were in effect projecting their third dimensional individual points of view into the fourth dimension and taking it for granted that it was the true one.
In fact, in a certain way, they didn't even appreciate the distinction between the third and fourth dimension.
It took modernity really to grasp that particular distinction very clearly.
And so it seems to have been the natural tendency then for people to think that their view was the right one.
It was beautifully expressed by a Cambridge, England clergyman in Victorian times who was very distressed to find that the trains were suddenly running between London and Cambridge on Sundays against the usual tradition of keeping the Sabbath holy, if you will.
And this Victorian clergyman said about the trains running on Sundays, he said it is equally displeasing to God and to myself.
Apparently there being no difference.
Well, I'm suggesting to you that for many peoples of the past there was no problem here. Their own view was the right one.
They were jumping up from the third to the fourth dimension without even realizing it.
But of course, modernity has, with its pluralism and uncertainty, have pointed out to us that it's not so easy to do that anymore.
In fact, that's what I'm suggesting is the main problem with pluralism and uncertainty.
It's telling us in a certain sense that it's not so easy to leap up to that fourth dimension and say what's true for all of us, including saying that your own is such.
And this then became the problem and the project for modernity.
The project for thinkers of the modern era from the 17th and 18th century onward was to try to say how we could get to some universal perspective above it all,
so that we could get back the idea that people so long and so strongly had held that there were objective and absolute ethical principles that held for everyone from every possible perspective.
How can we get that back given the modern turn to pluralism and uncertainty?
The attempt of modern philosophers to do this is what is called the project of modernity in ethics, as I shall call it.
It's the goal of trying to rebuild ethical thought on new foundations.
And to do so, of course, without appealing to either religious authority, because now after the religious wars and the Reformation and so on, religious authority is conflicted.
So we couldn't get back up to the fourth dimension by appealing to religious authority because one group would appeal to their authority,
maybe their sacred text or whatever, and some other group would refer to their authority.
So the modern philosophers held we can't just do this by appealing to religious authority anymore because authority is conflict.
But at the same time, we can't do it by just also appealing to human final causes in nature as Aristotle and others had done,
because now, of course, there were doubts in science about there being final causes in nature.
So ethical thinkers since the 17th century have pursued this task of figuring out how we could get to some universal ethical values without either appealing to merely a religious authority or final causes in nature.
This is what I call the project of modernity in ethics. How can we retrieve what we have lost when we lost moral innocence here?
And I'm going to suggest to you and discuss four major ways or alternatives in which modern philosophers have undertaken this project of modernity.
Four major trends in modern ethical theory which searched for some kind of universality here that was lost.
And I will discuss each one of them over the next six or seven lectures and we'll look at them, the pros and cons of them,
and also follow their history into the 20th century where they are still, of course, being debated.
First of all, some people, some thinkers, appealed to a common human nature in the form of common human feelings and sentiments that all humans share.
This was what we will call, because philosophers often call it this, the sentimentalist option in ethics of the modern era.
It was pursued by various enlightenment figures like the philosopher David Hume whose picture is right here behind me,
and Adam Smith, the founder of modern economic theory.
Other thinkers, and that's the first option, the sentimentalist option.
The second option is the rationalist option. Other thinkers appealed to a common human reason,
not sentimental feeling, but a common human reason to derive ethical principles that all humans could arrive at despite their cultural differences.
This was the rationalist alternative taken by Emmanuel Kant and other thinkers including Spinoza and Leibniz, other rationalists.
So that was the second option of modernity, the rationalist option.
Still other modern thinkers appealed to utility are the greatest happiness of the greatest number, defined in terms of pleasures and pains,
which are common, presumably, to all humans, first dimensional value.
This was the alternative of the utilitarians such as Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill, still a popular doctrine today with many, many followers.
That's the third option, the utilitarian alternative in modern ethics.
Still other thinkers appealed to a social contract that all reasonable persons despite differing values could agree on.
This was the contractarian option inspired by Thomas Hobbes and John Locke in the 17th century and later Jean-Jacques Lousseau in the 18th.
You will notice that in different ways each of these modern options in ethics, the sentimentalist, the rationalist, the utilitarian and the contractarian,
are all trying to look for that kind of universality.
What can we find in common between all peoples and all cultures, whatever their differing beliefs, that will give us a foothold to stand on and say what is right and wrong for everyone?
I call this the project of modernity in ethics and each of these four traditions, they don't exhaust the field these days of ethics,
but they certainly cover an awful lot of it and each of them has come into the 20th century.
We'll try to follow its fortunes all the way down if we can.
All right, and in addition to that, in lecture 12, I'm going to consider some modern thinkers who think that the whole project of modernity has failed utterly
and they either want to go on to a new post-modern era or perhaps go back to the ethics of the ancients, to virtue ethics and so on.
So we're going to look at the whole picture over the next six or seven lectures of modern ethics, its trajectory and its difficulties.
So let's begin with the first alternative of the project of modernity, the appeal to a common human sentiments.
As a chief representative of this view, I'm going to focus first on one of the greatest philosophers of the modern period,
the 18th century Scottish philosopher, David Hume, as I said, his picture right behind me on the wall.
Hume is generally regarded as the chief representative of the sentimentalist option in modern ethics and he deserves careful scrutiny.
Now those who know anything about the history of Western philosophy know this much about David Hume.
He was one of the so-called British empiricists who believed that all knowledge comes through experience.
And favoring experience as he did, Hume is also known as a skeptic about the powers of reason to solve the great problems of philosophy.
Whether it be to prove the existence of God, Hume criticized the attempts of philosophers to prove the existence of God by reason alone,
or even the existence of a continuing self, Hume was skeptical about that idea as well.
He raised doubts about all these matters, so we're not surprised to find that when Hume turns to questions of value and morals,
he's also skeptical of the powers of reason, reason alone, to provide the answers,
and tends to look instead to human feelings, desires and sentiments when it comes to matters of value.
According to Hume, philosophers like Plato and St. Thomas Aquinas and many others in the ancient and medieval period
had claimed that morality like truth could be apprehended by reason.
But this cannot be so according to Hume, because reason by itself, he says, is inert and can't tell us what ends our goods to pursue.
What impels us to action and defines the goods we seek according to Hume are our emotions and desires or sentiments.
To use the ninth 18th century term that Hume himself prefers, what drives us to actions are our passions.
If we are hungry, reason may tell us what we should do to get food.
If we are fearful, reason may tell us what to do to escape danger.
If greedy, how to amass money.
But what moves us to act in the first place are our desires and feelings of hunger, fear, greed, and for fame or love or whatever.
In a famous line, Hume says, reason is and ought to be the slave of the passions and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and obey them.
Well, what then does Hume say about moral judgments, ethical judgments, about right and wrong actions or virtue and vicious actions?
Being consistent, he says, that these two are expressions of feeling, but of a certain kind, what he calls the calm passions.
He says, and I quote, when you pronounce any action or character to be vicious, you mean nothing but that from the constitution of your nature.
You have a feeling of sentiment or a sentiment of blame from the contemplation of it.
In other words, a feeling of approval, if good, a feeling of condemnation or blame, if bad.
Here is the appeal to sentiment in its starkest form.
And you'll no doubt be a little puzzled or at least you ought to be, because this looks like subjectivism, pure and simple.
It's a matter of feelings of approval or feelings of disapproval or condemnation.
Indeed, Hume is often identified as a subjectivist about value, and he's often said to be one of the first modern philosophers to clearly identify the gap between fact and value.
So this is very puzzling, and if you're a bit puzzled here, you should be.
Don't worry about that.
And yet, as I said, Hume's view is very subtle and complex.
What saves him from subjectivism is another feature of his view that marks him clearly as an enlightenment thinker.
That is to say, while Hume did believe that judgments about good and evil, virtue and vice, are rooted in feelings and sentiments,
he also shared the enlightenment faith that some human sentiments, like sympathy and benevolence, are common to all human beings.
And these, he thinks, could be the basis and are the basis for a common morality.
Thus, Hume talked about common human virtues, among which he included sympathy and benevolence and friendliness, kindness, integrity, honesty, gentleness, cheerfulness.
He had no doubt that all right-thinking human beings would prefer these virtues and shun such vices as cruelty, treachery, dishonesty, and so on,
because, as he said, the listed virtues were socially beneficial and the vices socially harmful.
Here, then, is the sentimentalist alternative, an appeal to universal human sentiments which ought to be cultivated because they're socially beneficial,
which saves Hume from mere subjectivism.
Notice we're looking for the common.
We want to get up there above all cultural differences and see what we can find, and Hume looks for it in common human sentiments.
It was a doctrine that appealed to many other 17th and 18th century thinkers, as well as Hume.
In fact, it appealed to one of Hume's best friends and fellow Scott, Adam Smith, author of The Wealth of Nations and founder of Modern Economic Theory.
Hume and Adam Smith are the two most influential figures of the so-called Scottish Enlightenment, and they were close friends and frequent companions in Edinburgh.
Another well-known figure, by the way, in the Scottish Enlightenment and an acquaintance of both Hume and Adam Smith was James Boswell,
the biographer of Samuel Johnson, very well known, and all three of these Scottish friends valued wit and had the usual reservations about the English.
Samuel Johnson, for example, once chastised Boswell because he said that the Scots ate oats for breakfast.
And he said, in England, he said, we wouldn't think of eating oats.
He says, we feed oats only to horses.
And Boswell replied, well, maybe that's why in England he says you have better horses, and in Scotland we have better men.
That is a very good example of relativism, shall we say.
Well, as for Adam Smith, we know that in his economic theory, he stresses the fact that individuals, by each seeking through industry their own self-interest in a free marketplace,
will bring about the good of society as a whole.
Thus Smith's economic theory seems rooted in self-interest.
But it is less known that Adam Smith wrote another book earlier than The Wealth of Nations, which was called The Theory of the Moral Sentiments,
in which he traced the roots of morality to common human sentiments like sympathy and benevolence, much like Hume and other Enlightenment thinkers.
In fact, he was influenced very much by his friend David Hume.
And it's in this earlier book, by the way, that made Smith famous long before he wrote The Wealth of Nations.
Adam Smith was aware of the potential dangers of the unfettered free markets and the economic accumulation of wealth.
But he shared with Hume the Enlightenment optimism that human nature was basically good,
and that natural sentiments of sympathy and benevolence in human beings would curb the dangers of the marketplace.
The invisible hand, if you will, guiding the free market needed some help from human nature to oppose greed and other dangers,
according to Smith, but that help would be there in the form of common human moral sentiments.
Clearly, the question of whether we can share Smith's Enlightenment optimism today about the ability of human nature to curb the dangers of the marketplace
remains one of the burning questions of the day.
In fact, it's a question we're going to come back to later.
For the moment, it's worth noting that Hume, Adam Smith, and other Enlightenment thinkers did not invent this sentimentalist option in ethics.
They refurbished it for modernity, putting an empiricist and scientific cast on it.
But the sentimentalist option is also very old, and in fact, it goes back to the first axial period, like so much else does.
It's especially interesting, I think, to compare Hume and Smith's ideas about sentiment to those of a Chinese philosopher of the original axial period
by the name of Mencius, or in Chinese, Mengtze, who was the principal developer, Mencius, of the views of Confucius in China,
and one of the most influential thinkers in the history of Chinese civilization.
Mencius' view is very similar to Hume's.
Like Hume, it appeals to common human sentiments to ground universal morality.
And like Hume, and also following Confucius, Mencius refers to a certain humanity or humanness, which is the font of all moral virtues.
The Confucian term for this humanness is ren.
Frequently, you will see this term transliterated from the Chinese with a j, spelled J-E-N.
Actually, it's pronounced ren, so the J should be an R, if you will.
Ren means literally fellow feeling, and is thus close to Hume's sentiments of sympathy and benevolence.
According to Mencius, and again, this is Confucius as well, ren is the font of all the virtues,
and from it flow all the other Confucian virtues, such as E, which is righteousness in the Confucian tradition,
and Li, propriety, or the collective name for all the rules and principles and rights.
These are the basic virtues and obligations later spelled out in Neo-Confucian philosophy
that have been the basis for Chinese culture for centuries.
They define relationships to family members, siblings, parents, to the state, to most every other social relation.
But the basic idea, every one of the ideas, in fact, flows from the idea of ren,
a kind of fellow feeling for others, not just for oneself,
a sense of one spirit expanding again to take into account other beings, rather than just oneself.
The Neo-Confucians, in fact, made Mencius writings the basis for Chinese education in the virtues for centuries.
It was Confucian, of course, but Mencius was Mencius writings that were largely used.
The sentimentalist option, then, is not new to modernity by any means.
The appeal to human nature in the form of common moral sentiments is a perennial appeal in human history.
But it was retrieved by Enlightenment thinkers like Jung and Adam Smith and given a modern caste
in the attempt to deal with relativism as an answer to how we could get above all of our cultural differences,
how we could find some commonality between cultures and traditions and perspectives and points of view.
But does it succeed in overcoming relativism?
You may be entertaining some doubts here yourself.
Despite the perennial attractions of the appeal to common human sentiments, there are many questions that arise about it.
And critics have been very keen to point these out.
Might it not be the case that feelings of approval and disapproval, and hence what counts as virtue and vice,
differ too much from person to person, culture to culture, to yield the universal morality,
yume, and Mencius believe they should?
Do we really escape relativism in this way?
It's notorious that tables of virtues have differed dramatically down through the centuries,
even within Western culture.
In heroic societies such as the one vividly portrayed, for example, in Homer's Iliad in Odyssey,
courage and glory are excellence in battle or contests, are central virtues,
along with the virtue of cunning, which is especially exemplified by Odysseus, as you know, in his journeys.
But glory and cunning are not central to other traditions like the Christian.
Conversely, humility and gratitude are important Christian virtues,
but they are not listed among the virtues of Aristotle's ideal or great-sold men,
nor are they listed among the virtues of many other ancient thinkers.
Gratitude is the happy acknowledgement of indebtedness to others,
whereas great-soldness for Aristotle is the awareness and insistence upon being self-sufficient
and not being indebted to anyone else, and that's the highest value.
The central Christian virtue of humility is not only shunned by heroic societies
and by ancient pagan writers, but by yume as well,
who listed among what he calls the monkish virtues of medieval times
that he thinks would be rejected by most quote-unquote right-thinking persons.
Religious persons might very well disagree.
We're going to talk more about that in the next lecture.
In the next lecture, we shall look into issues of this sort,
about the variability of virtues and other issues raised by the sentimentalist option
in ethics favored by yume, Adam Smith, Confucius, Mencius, and others.
And we will pursue the debates over the appeal to sentiment and to a common human nature
down into the 20th century, where the human sciences of anthropology,
psychology, economics, and others have gotten into the debate about human nature
and human sentiments. Thank you.
