Lecture 7 Cultural Diversity, Human Nature, and the Social Sciences
David Hume and Adam Smith shared the Enlightenment faith that a common humanity based on human
sentiments such as sympathy and benevolence could be the basis for a common morality.
This is the sentimentalist option in modern ethical theory as I called it.
We began to discuss it in the last lecture and we're going to continue to follow that
option down into the 20th century in this lecture, an appeal to universal human sentiments.
It's very old as an option in ethics and it's a very popular appeal.
We found that it also has roots in the original axial period with such figures as Confucius
and Mencius in China.
But while we can appreciate such a view, there are also some difficulties with it.
It has a great many attractions I think as you could see from the last lecture, but there
have been difficulties that critics have pointed out about the sentimentalist option and we
want to consider some of them.
Consider the question posed at the end of last lecture.
May it not be the case that feelings or sentiments of approval or disapproval and hence what
counts as virtue or vice, good and evil, right or wrong differ from epic to epic in
human society from culture to culture, too much to yield perhaps a common morality?
Do we really escape relativism in this way?
We saw examples of this variability at the end of the last lecture.
In the virtues for example of heroic societies of Homer's Iliad and Odyssey, of cunning and
glory which were important virtues there but not necessarily in other societies, or in
Christianity where humility and gratitude are primary virtues but not necessarily in
other societies.
But we can also see the problem in Jung's own theory of ethics.
We talked of common virtues, you recall, such as sympathy and friendliness and kindness,
integrity, honesty, gentleness and cheerfulness.
Jung had no doubt that all right thinking persons would prefer these virtues and shun
the opposite vices because as he said, the virtues were socially beneficial and the vices
socially harmful.
Now Jung as I said was a skeptic about many matters including religion.
We know that about him.
And he castigated a certain other set of virtues that were popular in medieval times which
Jung famously called the monkish virtues, obviously to put them down a bit.
And they included things like celibacy and fasting and penance and mortification, self-denial,
humility, silence and solitude.
Jung felt these monkish virtues, as he called them, were not beneficial to society and that
everywhere would be rejected, as he put it, by men of sense.
But who are these men of sense?
Are they the same in all times and places and might not even some of the monkish virtues
be beneficial to some societies at some times?
Perhaps a coincidence that Jung's list of virtues which include gentleness and cheerfulness
and so on very well befit a gentleman of 18th century Edinburgh and one wonders whether
people choose the virtues that they themselves exemplify.
That's one of our problems here.
But on the monkish virtues, Alastair McIntyre, who's one of the most transient critics of
modern ethical theories, including a critic of Jung's, has suggested that what we need
in these morally dark 20th century times is a new Saint Benedict to preserve us from
barbarism, moral barbarism, which McIntyre sees all around us today, as the original
Benedictine monks preserved the early Middle Ages from the total darkness after the fall
of the Roman Empire.
Clearly, McIntyre does not agree with Jung about the value of the monkish virtues.
No would many religious people.
Such considerations, therefore, about the possible variability of virtues is one thing
that makes most critics uneasy about the appeal to common human sentiments as a way out of
relativism, as a way of finding universal values.
But in fairness to Jung, he was a great philosopher and he did not overlook the problem.
One of the traits I think of the really great ones is that they don't overlook many problems.
They try to answer most of the ones that would come to people's minds right away.
And Jung himself did not believe that the appeal to common human sentiments could by
itself entirely escape relativism.
He was especially aware, for example, of a very common criticism, a second criticism,
we might say, along with variability, of the sentimentalist option, namely the second
criticism is that human beings have many different sentiments and passions that incline them
to vice as well as to virtue, towards selfishness, vanity, greed, and envy, acquisitiveness,
and so on.
We're certainly all familiar with that.
There were in this world what Jung called, in his quaint 18th century phrase, sensible
naves who sought their own self-interest and Jung didn't think they were being irrational
just for that.
They might be evil but not irrational.
Now interestingly enough, Mencius and Confucius and Aristotle, three figures of the original
axial period we have talked about, were also aware of this problem as clear-headedly as
Jung.
None of them believed you could rely on an untutored human nature as the basis for morality.
The solution to the problem was the same for all four of them.
Moral education, which is going to be an important theme of these lectures as well later on.
Humans by natural sentiment, they all agreed, had a bit of the beast in them and a bit of
the angel.
This is a piece of ancient wisdom that goes back to biblical times, of course, we're
half beast, we're half angel, we're somewhere in between, if you will.
Humans had to be molded by moral education so that their natural humanity would come
through and not be overshadowed by the selfish and vicious instincts that they also have.
Thus as we saw Mencius argued in the Confucian spirit for an elaborate system of educating
the young in the Chinese tradition into Li, which is the proprieties, all the relations
of parents to children and vice versa and to society and community and so on, which
are part of the Chinese tradition, was absolutely essential, otherwise human nature untutored.
As for Jung, he also conceded that unless people were properly brought up, they would
not have feelings of approval for virtue and feelings of disapproval for vice, for the
right things.
According to Jung, you have to be trained to this, he thought, like you are trained to
appreciate, say, good music or painting.
Moral education for Jung was like music appreciation, a case of tuning the sensibilities, of course,
he's concerned with sentiment, so one has to tune them.
This is an interesting analogy that Jung introduced to the modern theory of ethics, that teaching
morals is sort of like teaching music appreciation.
An interesting thought, it's not so clear, but something we need to think about.
But it would seem to point also to another difficulty with the sentimentalist option,
which is another problem that critics have pointed out.
If education and social environment and conditioning are so crucial, then does not relativism come
back to hunt us once again, since education and conditioning may differ from society to
society.
It's interesting to recall here, once again, Jung's friend, the founder of economics, Adam
Smith.
Smith felt like Jung that if virtuous sentiments like sympathy and benevolence were cultivated,
they would provide constraints against the competitiveness of the economic marketplace,
which played such a role in Smith's economic theory.
But notoriously, in the 19th century, in the next century after Smith and Jung, Carl Marx
was to come along and make precisely the opposite argument to Smith.
Marx was one of the first to draw people's attention to the powerful influence that economics
and economic forces in society have in shaping people's characters, sentiments, and the ways
they think.
This was another new idea for modernity, by the way.
And for Marx, it was especially so in the modern era with the rise of capitalism, which
is another defining feature of modernity, by the way.
It happened in the 16th and 17th centuries.
Economics and capitalism, as Marx was one of the first to see, were reshaping the way
modern people think about everything, including Marx.
Marx thus posed this question to Smith, would human instincts towards cooperation and benevolence,
which let's agree we all do have, put sufficient brakes on the competitiveness and self-interest
of the economic marketplace, as Adam Smith supposed in his theory of the moral sentiments,
or was it likely that the competitiveness and self-interest of the marketplace would
eventually undermine traditional morality and erode natural human instincts towards
sympathy and benevolence, as Marx thought?
Well, obviously, this question still haunts us today, and it's hardly clearly decided.
Now, it's true enough that Marxist socialism, the Marxist alternative to capitalism, is
dead.
Officially, I guess it died in 1989 when they tore down that Berlin Wall, right?
Because in a sense, Marxist socialism doesn't work.
The Russians used the joke that Marx said under capitalism, man exploits man, and under
Marxist socialism, it's the other way around.
And so in a certain sense, that doesn't work as well.
And at the same time, while Marxist socialism is pretty much dead these days, Marx is still
a person worth discussing, and philosophers still are concerned with him.
And the reason is that Marx's key idea is still with us, and it's still important.
And his idea was that economics was becoming a dominant force for shaping human consciousness
in the modern era, for shaping human thinking.
And with the advent of the global marketplace today, the global economy, the effects of
the marketplace and economics on morality has become a central issue throughout the
world and an issue, I think, for a new axial period.
But now, I want you to note that this debate about economics is very much like the problem
of education and social conditioning that bedeviled Hume and Mencius.
If anything has changed our ways of thinking in the 19th and 20th centuries, it's this.
We have become more aware of how different social and cultural conditions mold human
sentiments in different ways for good and evil, thus raising, once again, the specter
of relativism and variability in a new way.
This is how the debate about the sentimentalist alternative in ethics has projected into the
19th and 20th centuries.
And it shows why the newly emergent social sciences, such as anthropology, sociology,
economics, and others, have come to play a central role in 20th century debates about
relativism and about questions of whether there are any cultural absolutes.
This is nicely illustrated by the history of modern anthropology.
When anthropology was emerging as a respected discipline of study in the early 20th century,
you had anthropologists fanning out throughout the world studying primitive cultures.
It was a big thing in those days.
One of the early reactions to these field studies was sheer amazement at the diversity
of human cultures, unusual social forms, morals, sexual practices, and so on.
This is obvious fodder for the popular imagination.
A lot of popular books came out at the time.
Ruth Benedict's Patterns of Culture in 1931 was one of the most famous of these particular
books, enormously popular, and they stressed diversity.
They made a point of it, you know.
If they had TV in those days, undoubtedly there would have had a really good time as
well showing all these crazy and diverse human practices.
But the upshot was that this new field of anthropology was fanning the flames of relativism.
Quite obviously showing all this diversity.
Many anthropologists like Ruth Benedict herself, in fact, defended an outright relativism.
She used all sorts of examples.
She pointed out, for example, that homosexuality in some cultures in Oceania and others was
actually revered and given a certain special place in society.
She pointed out that in some societies like Japan, as we very well know, suicide is something
that is a good thing under certain circumstances, where, of course, it's a sin in Christian
culture, in our Western culture, and so on and so forth, all this diversity of belief,
and she argued for relativism.
But now about mid-century, around World War II, some noted anthropologists began to worry
about the emphasis in diversity, maybe we got over excited about this business of diversity
in their discipline and its contribution to relativism.
One thing that contributed to these worries, that anthropology was maybe giving rise to
relativism, was, in fact, the Nuremberg trials, which occurred after World War II.
You recall these were the trials in which the Nazi war criminals and generals and others
were put on trial for crimes against humanity during the war.
If relativism was true, what could be said to Nazi war criminals and generals who claimed
they were just doing their duty, as it was understood in the society of their time?
It's a perfectly relativist kind of argument, right?
Well, some anthropologists in America, like Clyde Cluckholm and Malinowski, began suggesting
that their discipline had overemphasized diversity in the human species and cultures, that it
was time to write the balance in search for cultural universals, human uniformities that
might ground some common values and some ethics.
This was obviously a return to the enlightenment ideals of Yume and Adam Smith.
And this trend in America was paralleled in Europe in post-war France by the rise of what
had come to be called structuralism, a portent 20th century movement.
The leading proponent of structuralism in France was an anthropologist, a famous one
named Claude Levy-Strauss.
And Levy-Strauss was also looking for underlying universal structures in diverse cultures.
That was the idea of structuralism.
Now the search for cross-cultural uniformities in anthropology and other social and biological
sciences has yielded a considerable amount of fruit in this century, especially since
the Second World War.
But has it been enough fruit to overcome relativism?
That's our question.
And I think the best way to pursue it is to look at some concrete examples rather than
discuss the issue in the abstract.
What are some of these cultural universals that anthropologists and others have discovered
in recent decades?
First of all, modern research has pointed to many structural uniformities imposed by human
nature on all human societies, by the existence of two sexes, for example, the helplessness
of human infants, stages of the life cycle, and so on, things you would expect.
Humorist James Thurber once remarked that, and I'm quoting here, dogs are raising families
of their own before the first anniversary of their birth, and so it goes among all animal
species-saved man whose young are practically no good at all until they have wobbled around
the house for nearly a quarter of a century.
And we all know about that if we have raised children.
So anthropologists like Clark Coleman Malinowski tell us that there are these commonalities
in human societies.
For example, all human societies have a division of labor and of social roles to fulfill basic
needs.
They all have families with needs for support for the nuclear family, which tends to be
a problem in our time.
No place importance on kinship relations.
All of them have restrictions or taboos regarding sex, though these may differ from society
to society.
They all have rights of passage of one kind or another to mark various stages of life,
and all have rituals that bind them together and give meaning to their existence.
The great ethnologist Conrad Lorenz, who some of you may know, author of the book On Aggression,
has noted that very little in human behavior is unritualized, and entirely unritualized
behavior such as scratching or picking one's nose is often regarded as obscene.
There even seem to be certain virtues that are universal.
For example, courage and bravery, universally valued in some form for obvious reason that
every society has to be protected.
Self-control is also valued because individuals can't take more of their share of society
if it is to endure, and so is responsibility, doing your job, making your contribution,
and so on.
Interestingly, these three virtues, courage, self-control, and doing your share and not
taking more than your share, are three of the four mastered virtues endorsed by Plato
in the Axial Period, the great Greek philosopher.
Plato gives the name justice to the third of these virtues, that is, doing your share
in society and not taking more than your share.
So courage, self-control, justice, three of Plato's four primary virtues, called in
medieval times, which medieval Middle Ages took them over as primary pagan virtues to
go along with the Christian ones.
These three virtues, or among the four, were called the cardinal virtues in medieval times,
and it seems like they have a universal basis in social needs.
Plato's fourth virtue, of course, is wisdom, and that's, as you know from lecture two,
a central notion of our lecture series, and we're going to come back to that one.
So here, then, is the beginning of a list of cross-cultural uniformities, which seem
to suggest common values and virtues.
What do relativists have to say in response to this?
That, it seems to me, is the interesting question, because they do look like uniformities that
have ethical significance.
Well, relativists raise a number of interesting questions, both the philosophical relativists
of whom we have many today, and also the anthropologists.
Clifford Geertz is one of the most famous modern anthropologists, and he has raised
some of the relativists' criticisms of this search for uniformities.
Geertz argues that the cultural universals his anthropologists colleagues have found
are certainly important, and we ignore them at our peril if we want to understand human
nature and how to live.
But he adds that they're often too general to resolve the really troubling disagreements
about ethics that make relativism a problem.
For example, Geertz argues that the division of labor is common, yes, but how societies
actually divide labor differs dramatically from an ethical point of view.
Many societies have practiced slavery, indentured servitude, and other practices that exploit
various laboring classes to meet their needs.
All societies may also require nuclear families, this seems to be a human universal, one form
or another, and rules for kinship relations.
But actual forms of these also differ from society to society, and many have been exploitative,
especially of women.
Indeed, this is an interesting debate in itself that has been going on since the 1960s, when
the women's movement got started, about the prevalence of so-called patriarchal societies
in human history, societies where males rule or have the upper hand, if you will, in terms
of the status, roles, and all the rest of it.
It's been claimed that patriarchal societies have been nearly universal throughout recorded
history.
Think of all modern-day societies right across the globe, from China and India to the West
and so on, Islamic civilization, even the West, Christianity, Judaism, wherever you
wish to go, except perhaps there are some possible exceptions in small and isolated cases in
Africa, Oceania, and South America.
But does this make such practices right?
Does it make patriarchal societies right?
Well, no more than if slavery would be right if it was shown to be universal up until now.
And indeed, slavery in one form or another, according to Amnesty International, still
exists today in the world.
It's not very well known that it does, but at least in 15 or 20 known countries.
Nowadays, it usually takes the form of these countries selling young girls or boys to foreigners
as prostitutes or sex slaves, but it's still going on in the world quite widely, and most
people are really not aware of it.
And so patriarchy persists in most major cultures, East and West.
But the point is, of course, is that something has always been so, or everywhere still is
in existence, does that make it right?
So Geertz argues.
Geertz goes on to note that while all human societies may have rights of passages and
rituals also, some of these involve human sacrifice and other cruel practices.
And even while all societies have common virtues like bravery, ideas of bravery differ.
And some of them can be very cruel as when you require a warrior to go out and do brutal
things to prove his bravery, for example.
In some, critics like Geertz are saying, within the universal structures such as the division
of labor, family, ritual, there's a variability in how it is culturally realized from culture
to culture.
And in the variations, we find behavior that ranges all over the ethical spectrum from kind
and generous to cruel and vicious.
And the ethical disputes usually lie in the variations.
So how will the uniformities, in a certain sense, solve the problem of ethical relativism
such as Geertz's argument, and it's a very powerful one, obviously.
Well so much for the structural uniformities in all human societies, aren't there also
certain social motives in humans, inclining them to be moral?
The kinds of motives, like sympathy and benevolence, that human menace has put so much emphasis
on?
Yes, anthropologists and others have found such motives as well.
Let's look at them.
There's a very interesting book written in the past 10 years by George Pugh, which is
called The Biological Origins of Human Values, worth reading, which has attempted to synthesize
the contemporary biological and anthropological data regarding human values.
And Pugh lists a number of social values, which he says are common in the human species.
For example, human beings need to be nurtured and loved when young.
Well that's as clear a candidate for a human universal as one can find rooted in the dependence
of the human infant from birth.
But Pugh adds that humans also generally desire quite a few other things that are social motives
as well.
For example, they desire the approval of their peers, social acceptance, admiration from
others for their accomplishments.
And they also generally crave love and sympathy and affection from others.
According to the distinguished historian of ideas, Arthur Lovejoy, moral philosophers
of the 17th and 18th centuries, classified these four desires, approval, acceptance,
admiration, etc., as the desire for approbation from others and regarded their satisfaction
as essential to a fulfilled human life.
And I think as I look at it, and as Pugh says, that modern research really does support
this claim.
It's an essential piece of enlightenment wisdom that you and Smith were on to.
The need to be appreciated, says William James, the American philosopher, is perhaps
the deepest of all human needs, and as I get older I think I realize that more and more.
You can see it in children, by the way, their desire to be appreciated for what they've
done, whether it's a little drawing or a painting or whatever.
Absolutely inexhaustible.
I mean, you could spend your whole life doing it, right?
And without it, of course, they grow up pretty sadly often, indeed.
As Ashley Brilliant said, of course, he said, appreciate me now and avoid the rush.
And I guess that's the way we all feel.
In his book, The Descent of Man, Charles Darwin, who worried very much about the implications
of his own theory of evolution for morality, he also argued that universal human desires
for approval and sympathy from others were the primary reinforces of morality.
In this Darwin, which, of course, was following Yume and Adam Smith.
And there are further social motors mentioned by Pugh, gregariousness and the desire for
conversation.
Just think of these in terms of your own existence, and those you know.
The desire for friendship, the enjoyment of working with others in cooperative enterprises
and tasks.
The desire to be part of a community of persons who share a common form of life.
The desire for roots, which is a big one, of course, a historically defined sense of
belonging to traditions that give meaning to one's past.
All recognizably human and apparently important.
So these social values and motors would appear to be a promising point for morality and ethics.
But the problem, as Pugh points out, is that these motives of the social kind are balanced
in the human makeup with egoistic motives.
We also have desires for power and control over others, to excel, to be superior to others
in some way or another.
We all have those desires, whatever it is, to be a better writer or a better parent or
a better this or a better that, a better teacher, and so on and so forth.
We are brought back here to the point that human nature is divided between the angel
and the beast, between the selfish motives and the social motives.
And we are a mixture of the two.
And of course, this was the original problem that bedeviled Jung and Mencius about the
sentimentalist alternative, and modern anthropology has not taken it away.
Indeed, the real problem is that we may satisfy both sides of our human nature, and think
about this now.
We may satisfy both sides of our human nature, social and egoistic, selectively.
That is, and many people do this, individuals might seek healthy doses of approval, social
acceptance, love and sympathy, friendship and community, from a limited circle of other
people in order to satisfy their social needs, while otherwise they live lives of selfish
accumulation and dominance and power and wealth in dealing with strangers.
In other words, they may satisfy their social motives selectively with an eliminated group
or circle, while treating others immorally.
In fact, this playing on both sides of the fence seems to me to be the main form of immorality
in human life that we find everywhere around us.
And it's not ruled out by appealing to human nature, as Jung or Mencius do or other people
do, because human nature is divided in this way.
Mere appeals to a common human nature, a common human sentiment, will not rule this out.
So in summary, in the past two lectures we've been considering the sentimentalist option.
It has much to teach us, but it also has some very serious problems as well.
And yet we can learn from it and use it, but perhaps its problems require that we appeal
to something more than human sentiment, maybe to human reason.
That's the option we're going to try next time.
Thank you.
