Lecture 8, Kant's Appeal to Reason
The previous two lectures dealt with the first four of the major alternatives in modern ethical theory,
the sentimentalist option of David Yeum and others.
We are now going to turn to the second major option, which is the appeal to reason,
the rationalist option in modern ethics.
And our starting point for this option will be another towering figure of modern philosophy
and of the Enlightenment period of the 18th century, Immanuel Kant.
Kant's picture is to my right over here on the wall as Yeums is behind me.
Yeum and Kant are regarded by many today as the two greatest of the 18th century philosophers.
And they are often contrasted as regards to their ethics, the one appealing to feeling or sentiment for universal values,
the other appealing to reason.
Now Kant would certainly share many of the criticisms we made of the sentimentalist option in the previous lecture.
Like many others, he was suspicious of the appeal to human sentiments or desires
because he was well aware that feelings and sentiments are variable from person to person, society to society.
And so Kant did not share Yeums' faith that sympathy and other human social sentiments could alone bridge this relativist gap.
For Kant, only an appeal to a universal reason could bridge it.
Now everything in Kant's life and background pushed him in this direction, away from feeling and sentiment toward reason.
He grew up in a pietistic German home which emphasized the stern moral conscience, control of the passions, and religious piety.
Kant's father was a harness maker.
But Kant himself was so notoriously clumsy with his hands, he was not a craftsman.
Much to his father's distress could not go into his father's business.
So as a bright young man, he did the next best thing, he became a philosopher.
Kant's father taught him to be industrious, upright, and never tell lies, a fact that will have a lasting influence, as we'll see.
Kant especially recorded one incident of his childhood where his father became involved in a labor dispute between the harness maker's guild and the saddle maker's guild.
We don't have labor disputes like that anymore, but of course we still have labor disputes.
Kant records that both his parents conducted themselves during this heated labor dispute with such forbearance and love, and that's as a quote, an honesty to their opponents.
That, he said, the thought of it, though I was only a boy, will never leave me.
To me, this is one of the striking instances of how morals are only lastingly taught to children, by example.
When Kant's mother was the greatest influence on his life, she had imagination and encouraged his intellectual interests, teaching him about nature and the starry heavens, and so on.
Kant reflects her influence when in a famous passage of the critique of practical reason he says, quote,
Two things fill the mind with ever new and increasing admiration and awe, the starry heavens above me and the moral law within me.
Kant's mother died when he was 13, undoubtedly the most profound incident in his life, but these two things she taught him to admire remained in his consciousness and were cornerstones of his philosophy thereafter.
They were her memory in him.
Given this pietistic background, it should not surprise us that the idea of duty, the moral law within us, was the key concept in Kant's thinking about values and ethics.
And Kant was fully aware that duty is often in opposition to our desires and feelings, so he couldn't side with you.
Duty had to come from some other source besides desire or feeling, since it was so often opposed to desire and feeling, and that other source for Kant had to be reason.
Kant knew that in the past, of course, duty was a matter simply of following the commands of God, for most people, that it had always been that way, and it was still that way.
God or some external authority, human or divine, parents, teachers, rulers, etc.
But as a true representative of Enlightenment modernity, Kant also believed that duty could not be based on mere external authority if it was going to command us.
Since we had to choose the basis on the basis of our own reason, which authority we would follow, or whether we would follow any authority at all.
So duty, like belief in God, and Kant, by the way, believed in both, had to have its source in our own autonomous reason, not in some external source.
To be motivated, we had to internalize it.
Kant, in fact, wrote a short essay, a famous short essay, called What is Enlightenment?
In which he said that Enlightenment was overcoming the tutelage of childhood, in which we blindly accept the authority of others, and to learn to think for ourselves.
This was the motto of the Enlightenment, he said in this little essay, in Latin, sapare aude, dare to know, dare to use your reason and think for yourself.
This was, in fact, the new motto of modernity.
The problem was that by Kant's time, the course of modern thought had shown that human reason had its limitations.
Reason had great successes, as we know in science and mathematics, understanding the starry heavens above us, one of his mother's concerns.
But it had sown confusion and skepticism when it came to questions of values and ethics and religion, the moral law within us.
Reflecting on this, Kant asked a fundamental question for modernity.
Why are modern science and mathematics together so successful in giving us objective knowledge of the physical world,
while we find it so hard to get such objective knowledge and agreement about the great questions of metaphysics, philosophy, religion, and ethics?
With this question, Kant was putting his finger directly on the third of our Sunderings of Modernity, which were discussed in lecture two.
The Sundering, in this case, of theoretical inquiry about the heavens and practical inquiry about how to live.
Theoretical and practical inquiry, of course, had been merged and unified by the ancients as we saw in Aristotle, but no longer since the rise of modern science.
Now Kant's answer to his question was as revolutionary as the question itself.
Modern science and mathematics, he said, were so spectacularly successful because they deal only with the way things appear to us, not the way things really are in themselves.
By contrast, the big questions of metaphysics about God, about the soul, about freedom and the good concern things as they are in themselves.
The world studied by science, Kant held, is the world that can be experienced by our senses.
And in order to be able to experience that world, we have to impose on it like a grid, certain forms and categories which make experience possible, such as space and time, causality and substance, action and reaction.
Science succeeds because it stays within the limits of these categories, which define the limits of our possible sensory experience.
But this very strength of science is also, for Kant, its limitation.
For as a result, it tells us about the world as it appears to us through our experience, but not as it really is in itself.
By contrast, the concerns of metaphysics, what Aristotle called wisdom as we learned in Lecture 2, concern the way things really are in themselves according to Kant, and that's inaccessible through science.
Its questions, those of metaphysics, go beyond the bounds of experience, beyond space, time and matter, as in the case of the existence of God or of the soul, beyond nature and physical causation as regards things like free will and values.
These themes about the limitations of theoretical reason in science and mathematics were the themes of Kant's great work, The Critique of Pure Reason.
If Kant had stopped with this work, his contribution to the ancient quest of wisdom would have been wholly negative, as many of his contemporaries took it to be.
In fact, the poet Heinrich Heiner said that the ideas of this little man, Manuel Kant, struck more terror into the heart of Europe than any tyrant could, because of course he questioned whether we could really ever answer any of the big questions, which go beyond science.
But Kant himself did not stop there.
He went on to write other works, such as The Critique of Practical Reason, whose theme was this.
If the big questions of life about ethics and the soul and free will could not be accessed through scientific reason alone, they could nonetheless be accessed in another way, through practical reason.
In short, he made a distinction, a sharp distinction between theoretical reason where we study the physical world and practical reason where we think about how to live.
That is practical deliberation about how we ought to live and how we ought to act.
But to access the big questions through practical reason, Kant thought we had to get beyond our own individual desires and purposes.
We had, so to speak, expand our vision.
Practical reason itself is concerned with how we ought to live and act, but the concern must be not merely with how we ought to act if we wanted or desired this or that, if we want to access the big questions.
For humans have different desires and purposes, as we know.
Kant put the matter this way.
Most of our everyday concerns, when we reason practically, are with what he called hypothetical odds or imperatives.
That is, those that have an if in them.
You ought to do this if you want that.
If you want to stay healthy, you ought to eat right and exercise.
If you want others to trust you, you ought to tell the truth.
If you want to become a doctor or a lawyer, you ought to study hard.
Practical life and reasoning are full of these hypothetical imperatives.
And hypothetical simply picks up the word if, right?
So everyday life is full of these imperatives, as Kant calls them, hypothetical ones.
Nowadays, of course, they get very confusing.
We were told for a time that, for example, eating chocolate was very bad for you, but now it appears from the newspaper that chocolate has antioxidants in it
and can be good for you.
These things drive us crazy.
I have a lot of friends out there who are eating all the chocolate they can before the next study comes along contradicting this one.
But in any case, these are the stuff of everyday life.
If you want to stay healthy, do this.
If you want to get sick, do that.
But notice that such practical hypothetical odds or imperatives cross the fact value gap we were talking about in lecture five.
The is-ought gap.
Why? Well, I get this.
If you want to be healthy, that's, you know, a simple fact, an actual want, in the if clause, then you ought to do to exercise.
So given a certain fact about yourself, then you ought to do this.
The if clause is about what you actually want, while the then clause is about what you ought to do.
But of course, as a consequence, hypothetical imperatives imply only to those people who happen to have the desires of the wants, right?
And the desires of people differ and may be morally indifferent or even possibly evil.
These were problems we discussed in the last lecture.
If you want to become an effective terrorist, you should learn how to make bombs as just as true as any other hypothetical imperative.
For Kant, by contrast, duty or morality does not have an if in it, so to speak.
It is what anyone ought to do, period, no ifs, ands, or buts, no matter what our particular purposes or desires.
And this, of course, goes back to his pietistic training, of course, as we mentioned.
Kant calls such non-hypothetical imperatives categorical imperatives.
What everyone ought to do without qualification, no ifs, ands, or buts, categorically.
For example, a categorical imperative would not say, don't lie if you want to be trusted by others, as we often tell children,
who are not ready for categorical imperatives there at the hypothetical stage, so to speak.
Don't lie if you want to be trusted by others, hypothetical.
But don't lie, period, no matter what you want, no matter who you are, that's categorical.
And that's, of course, what Kant is looking for, because that's what he thinks duty is, if you will.
Such categorical imperatives for Kant represent the idea of duty, which applies to all persons,
and is not relative to individuals, to cultures or points of view.
So it's his way of getting beyond relativism, as you can see.
But now what Kant asks could motivate us to adopt a categorical imperative,
since doing so can't depend, as hypothetical imperatives do, upon our particular desires and purposes.
What could then motivate us? Kant puts his own question this way, and I'm quoting.
But what kind of a law can this categorical imperative be?
The thought of which, even without regard to the consequences expected from our action,
has to determine the will if it is to be called good, absolutely, or universally.
And this is his answer. Quote again,
Since I have robbed the will of every inducement that might arise as a consequence of obeying
any particular hypothetical imperative,
nothing is left but the conformity of actions to universal law as such.
And this alone must serve the will as its principle.
That is to say, I ought never to act except in such a way that I can also will that my maxim or art
should become a universal law for everyone to follow, without exception, not just me.
And this is Kant's famous categorical imperative.
Act only on that maxim or art, that's his term for arts, his maxims.
Act only on that maxim through which you can at the same time will that it should become a universal law for everyone to follow.
Now you may feel that you've missed something here in Kant's derivation of this principle.
Well, if so, don't feel bad, because even the best philosophers have had trouble following his reason
as you perhaps well know.
Philosophers have pondered and debated this argument perhaps more than any other in contemporary ethics.
And many of them think it doesn't work.
Of course, there are still modern Kantians who are still trying to make it work, working with it.
Kant still exercises the tremendous fascination on modern thought,
because he obviously has some interesting things to say here.
But in any case, it is very, very difficult to understand.
But it exercises that fascination because it seems to be a way to get above the relativist fray
to some universal ethical principles that are absolute and not relative by reason alone.
And that's certainly a difficult thing to do, but very important if you could do it.
Well, let me suggest an interpretation here that may help to penetrate the fog a little bit.
When we exercise our practical reason, we're legislating for ourselves.
We're making laws for ourselves to follow. That's what we're often doing.
In most everyday cases, we legislate for ourselves hypothetically.
If you want to get this, then you should do this.
But suppose we wanted to know what was universally the right thing to do,
not just for ourselves, but for everyone, no matter what their differing purposes or desires
or whatever culture they might be in or whatever.
Well, you can only do this, Kant is suggesting.
If you're willing to rise above your own particular desires and purposes
and legislate universally for everyone, not just yourself.
That's, if you will, how you manage to get above the third dimension of value
with all the different points of view to some higher perspective.
So you've got to be willing to be a universal legislator, if you will.
But to do this, you have to adopt only principles of action
that you could will that everybody followed, not just yourself.
And this, of course, is the categorical imperative.
Act only on that maxim through which you can will that it become a universal law for everyone to follow.
Think of it this way.
This is Kant's way of projecting himself beyond the first three dimensions of value,
his own point of view, his own limits of everyone else
into the fourth dimension above the individual perspectives.
And to do it, he's saying, you have to rise above your particular desires and motives.
This is in practical reason.
In theoretical reason we say to get above it and see the real truth from all the different perspectives
you have to exercise your mind and your thought in science or in other ways.
But in practical reason, to get above the fray and up to that higher dimension
where you can see it all, you have to rise above your own desires and purposes
because that's what values, of course, are all about.
Now Kant emphasizes that only rational beings can do this.
Only such beings can imaginatively place themselves above their own particular desires and purposes.
What non-rational, what animals can do that?
And so they rise above their physical and biological natures.
Only by reason can we attain such a higher dimensional perspective,
not by sentiment as Hume held according to Kant.
That's why appeals to human nature, he held, would not work
because we can't get there by our biological nature alone.
We have to rise above those desires and purposes and so on.
Putting it this way, I think, we can see that Kant has an interesting idea.
A brilliant one, in fact.
His categorical imperative is meant to be an answer to relativism,
a method of getting above the fray.
And yet, as brilliant as it is, there are troubling questions about Kant's categorical imperative
when we try to apply it to actual questions and problems of everyday life.
One of the first of Kant's critics, and there have been many in modern philosophy,
was the most important philosopher among Kant's immediate successors.
And this was the German philosopher Hegel.
Yes, this is the same Hegel we identified in lecture two
as the person who first identified the sunderings of modernity.
And Hegel also was a critic of Kant.
And he made what is still the most often made objection to Kant's categorical imperative.
He argued that Kant's categorical imperative was an empty formalism, a famous phrase,
that cannot give us concrete practical directions that Kant supposed about how to live.
It's as if Kant, imaginatively attempting to get above the fray into the fourth dimension,
above all competing points of view, had reached a state of such high abstraction
that his formula was utterly empty of any concrete content for the ethical life.
Many modern philosophers, quite a few in fact, have followed Hegel in making this criticism of Kant.
But let's take a look at it to see if it's justified,
because Kant does have some answers to it as we are eventually going to see,
or at least he tries to answer it.
Consider some of Kant's well-known applications of the categorical imperative to various questions,
like, for example, making promises, a famous example Kant himself used.
A person may selfishly make a promise without intending to keep it
if he can get some benefit from it, right? That's a hypothetical imperative for you right there.
But can one will it to be a universal law for everyone to follow,
that is, to make promises always without intending to keep them?
That's what Kant's categorical imperative requires one to ask as a universal legislator for all.
In other words, take any maxim you are about to follow and say to yourself,
could this be universalized? Could it be something that anyone could follow?
And that will be the test of whether you're really rising above your own desires and purposes,
trying to see things from a broader perspective.
Well, with regard to promising, the maxim I will tell a promise without intending to keep it,
Kant says you can't do that and universalize it consistently,
because if everyone acted that way, the very institution of promising would break down.
If everyone made promises without intending to keep them,
then strictly speaking, there wouldn't really be any promises anymore.
Since it's part of the presuppositions of practical reason,
if you make a promise, a real promise, if someone made one to you and said,
well, I didn't intend to keep it, he says, well, you never promised, right?
Now, we might think Kant's reasoning here, and this is where things get a little tricky,
we might think Kant's reasoning here is that a world in which no one could trust others,
if you were the universal legislator, here's my world, if you will,
a world in which no one could trust others to keep promises
would be a pretty nasty and horrible world to live in.
So that's why we shouldn't legislate against it for all.
But interestingly, that's not the way Kant reasons.
He wants actions to be right or wrong in themselves, independently of their consequences.
If we brought in consequences, someone might be willing to say this,
I wouldn't mind living in such a world, let's say a tough guy, all right?
I wouldn't mind living in such a world where people couldn't be trusted, if you will,
and I'm willing to take the consequences.
Might be nasty for some, but I'm a nasty guy and I thrive, okay?
Such a fellow would be saying, yay, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
I will fear no evil, for I am the meanest SOB in the valley.
You can universalize bad maxims like this if you are willing to accept the consequences,
and some people are, that's the problem.
Somebody in a criminal syndicate, for example, might say,
if somebody informs on us, we kill them, or we make them a promise they can't refuse.
And, of course, if they want to universalize, they've got to say,
then for me also, if I inform on somebody, I expect to be killed, universalized.
It seems to conform to Kant's imperative, this is part of the problem,
as Hegel says, kind of an empty formalism seems to let too much in, okay?
Even though Kant has a really interesting idea of him getting to it, you see.
Kant wants to avoid this kind of reaction, of course,
because different people are willing to accept different levels of consequences,
and that'd be relativism again.
He wants to say rather something different.
He wants to say that universalizing the maxim of not keeping promises
would undermine the very institution of promise keeping itself,
and therefore it would be something like an inconsistency,
a contradiction within practical reason.
Now, we are familiar with contradictions and theoretical reasons.
Something is round and square at the same time.
Kant is introducing an idea here of a contradiction in practical reason.
To make a promise without keeping it is not to make a promise at all.
It undermines the very thing, so to speak.
Something like Groucho Marx saying that he wouldn't belong to any club
that would have him as a member, right?
Or Yogi Berra saying of a certain nightclub that nobody goes there anymore
because it's too crowded.
Such things are very interesting because they are, in a way, contradictions, inconsistencies,
but not exactly like the theoretical ones of round and square.
So critics of Kant begin to ask the question,
is he perhaps begging the question here about what's rational?
Because, you see, Kant thinks that there's an inconsistency in this promising matter,
and even the mean fellow in the valley who says he's willing to take the consequences
according to Kant is really being inconsistent and not being fully rational
if he denies that breaking promises is wrong.
That's the strong claim Kant wants to make.
And the critics are saying, well, gee, isn't he begging the question here about what's rational?
The criminal or the mean guy in the valley, they're evil all right,
but are they really being irrational?
Are they really making some kind of rational mistake here?
It's not even clear, by the way, that the institution of promising
need be totally undermined at all, as we can see from another example.
Consider the selective moralist we discussed at the end of the last lecture.
This is the fellow who's prepared to act morally toward those of his own group
or class or race or society, all right,
but not to those outside his class whom he thinks less worthy of his concern.
His duty and his morality are selective.
I suggested this is the major form of immorality in human life
as far as I can see in human history.
His maxim would be, I will keep promises and not tell lies to those in my own group,
but not to outsiders or strangers.
Practice of promise keeping will not break down in this case,
for it still has a place inside his society, and his society may be very large.
It might say be the whole United States, let's say, and everybody outside,
no, if you will, so it still goes on, and he can will that his maxim be universalized
since he can say in effect, I'm willing to accept the fact that those outside my group
may not act kindly towards me and I'll be on my guard.
Perfectly consistent, if you will.
Actually, he might have little fear of his group as the most powerful and meanest in the valley.
He would then be like a dictator who makes laws for everyone to follow,
but they happen to favor his or his own group.
Again, a very common picture of human history.
It appears that Kant's categorical imperative, once again, allows in too much.
Now consider another example that Kant himself uses that's very interesting.
To explain his categorical imperative.
Kant thinks that suicide is always wrong, as it is a sin, of course,
in the Christian tradition of which he was a part.
But Kant thinks suicide is always wrong because people generally act,
he thinks, out of a concern for their own good, naturally,
and he thinks you can't universalize the maxim out of a grounds for concern for my own good.
I will put an end to my life.
Kant thinks that's some kind of a contradiction of practical reason, too.
Going against oneself here, out of a concern for myself, I will end my own life.
But suicide, you recall, is one of those really tricky cases for relativism,
as the anthropologists pointed out last lecture.
In Japanese culture, for example, suicide can sometimes be right
if staying alive would bring great dishonor to oneself or one's family.
The maxim would be this, the Japanese maxim.
Out of grounds of honor to myself and love and honor to my family,
I ought to commit suicide on some occasions when not to do so would bring dishonor.
There's no inconsistency in willing such a law for everyone.
Caring about one's own honor and family is certainly a kind of self-concern.
Well, one might say the categorical imperative would allow different rules then for different societies.
But again, that's not Kant's intention.
He feels strongly that moral rules must apply to everyone without exceptions.
That's why they're universal. That's how we get above the fray, you see.
So there are problems with Kant's categorical imperative, at least in this first formulation of it.
It doesn't always seem to get the results that he wants,
even though I think Kant is on to a very, very important idea here
that we're going to take up later in the lecture series.
And in the next lecture, we're going to see how Kant tries to respond to these objections
and formulates a second version of the categorical imperative that's even more important than this one.
And then we're going to move on to the third alternative, utilitarianism. Thank you.
