Lecture 9, Bentham, Mill and the Appeal to Utility
This lecture will compare Kant's approach to ethics with another modern ethical theory
with which Kant is often contrasted, namely utilitarianism, the third alternative of the ethical project of modernity, as I have called it.
First, we have to complete our account of Kant's ethics.
Kant's formulation of his categorical imperative was met, as we saw in the previous lecture, with some criticisms.
But Kant offered a second formulation of his categorical imperative that many philosophers have found more promising.
The first formulation, as you recall, goes like this, act only on that maxim through which you can will that it become a universal law for everyone to follow.
Kant's second formulation of the imperative seems on the surface quite different.
He calls it the principle of humanity as an end.
Act so that you always use humanity in your own person as well as in the person of every other, never merely as a means, but at the same time as an end.
This is Kant's famous injunction to treat all persons as ends in themselves, never as means to one's ends.
What does it mean?
You use someone as a means to your ends when you subordinate their purposes to your own.
You lie to them, you cheat.
You use them, if you will, as means.
By contrast, you respect them as ends when you respect their purposes as worthy of being realized, not trampled on.
This is an important principle that has exercised an equal fascination on modern moral philosophy.
And in fact, it's going to play a significant role later in our lectures.
But how is it related to the first formulation of the categorical imperative?
Kant claims they are the same principle in different forms, but this is far from obvious and most philosophers have doubted it.
To understand how the two are related, I suggest we go back to the idea that's crucial to the first formulation.
The idea of being a universal legislator, making laws for everyone.
Remember, the idea that is to know what's universally right to do for all persons, that is to overcome relativism.
We have to be willing to rise above all of our particular desires and purposes and legislate universally for everyone, not just hypothetically, for ourselves.
Now, Kant emphasizes that only rational beings can do this sort of thing.
Only we can imaginatively place ourselves above all the competing points of view, including our own, and above all of our particular desires and purposes.
And so we rise above our physical or biological being.
Animals and beasts can't do that.
Now, this second version I think you can understand and its connection with the first.
When we reflect on the fact that we are such and can be such universal legislators and realize that our capacity to do this places us above the animals and other living things and gives us dignity and moral worth as persons.
That's the way Kant reasons.
The capacity for universal self-legislation, which gives us such dignity, Kant associates with our autonomy or free will.
Autonomy from the Greek word meaning giving a law to oneself.
Kant's idea of free will is that as long as we are moved by desires and feelings that nature has given us, we are like lower beings who are determined by the laws of nature.
We have instincts and desires and passions and that's of course what Kant wants to rise above.
It's only when we use our reason to act on a universal principle and not just for our own desires and instincts that we become truly free.
We have free will and we are autonomous agents.
We rise above nature's laws.
That's his idea.
Kant has no explanation of just how such freedom from the laws of nature is possible.
Kant can't explain it, he says, since science must see things governed by causality and laws.
So science tells us we're determined by our desires and passions.
When the social scientists study our behavior, they have to explain why we did what we did, what was his beliefs, what was his motives, and so on.
And sooner or later you know everything about why they would have acted as they did.
That's the way science goes about it.
This kind of freedom from the laws of nature is something that goes beyond the bounds of possible experience in science, says Kant.
Theoretical reason can't explain it, yet practical reason must presuppose it as a precondition for believing that we are morally responsible agents.
So this second version of the categorical imperative follows from the thought that since this freedom and autonomy is what gives us dignity and worth and places us above the beasts,
we should respect what gives worth in anyone who has a similar capacity.
All humans, therefore, are to be respected as ends in themselves because they have the ability to make their own ends for themselves, to design their own purposes.
This version of the categorical imperative is an improvement on the first, and it escapes some of the criticisms of the first, but not quite all of them.
Consider the suicide example once again.
Kant argues that the act of suicide always fails to respect humanity in one's own person as an end.
But as we saw in Japanese culture, sometimes committing suicide shows a high degree of respect for one's own dignity and the honor of self and family.
What counts as respecting humanity, in other words, in our own person, may apparently differ from culture to culture, from individual to individual.
In addition, there's another difficulty with Kant's second version of the categorical imperative that his critics have often noted.
Why should we go from respecting our own freedom and autonomy to respecting everyone else's?
This is quite a leap in Kant's argument.
Kant does try to explain this leap.
He argues that only if we act by the moral law or the categorical imperative are we really free and autonomous
because only then do we rise above all of our particular desires and instincts.
In other words, we are not driven or determined by our desires in that case.
But actually, is acting by the moral law the only way to rise above our desires and be truly free?
Well, it's true, as Kant says, that we're only really free when we can control our desires and not be controlled by them.
That's fair enough, but is acting by the moral law the only way to do that?
Well, Nietzsche and other critics of Kant have argued that we can be free and autonomous when we exercise self-control and self-mastery over our own self-destructive desires
in order to excel at something, say, to become a great artist or a great writer.
We do not have to treat everyone else as an end to attain autonomy or self-mastery.
So says Nietzsche and other thinkers of his ilk.
These critics of Kant, then, like Nietzsche, are saying in effect something like this.
Kant seems to be narrowing the scope of autonomy or freedom too much by suggesting that only the moral person can be truly autonomous and free from his self-destructive desires.
Just as, for example, with the first imperative, the critics were saying that Kant seems to be narrowing the scope of rationality too much by suggesting that only the moral person could be rational.
So to sum up on Kant, though there are difficulties in his actual view that almost everybody acknowledges today,
his original ideas have continued to exercise a fascination on modern thought.
His ideas about universality, about rising above our particular desires and purposes, about self-legislation, which is an important idea, giving laws to oneself, and treating others as ends and not means.
All of these are important ideas that have exercised continuing fascination on modern thought, and we will be coming back to many of them even though there are difficulties in Kant's own ideas.
Many philosophers today have tried to revive some of these ideas and reconstruct them into something that will work, granting that there are some difficulties, some serious difficulties with Kant's own idea.
Okay. With this in mind, we're going to return to Kant, as I said, in the second half of the series.
But I'm going to turn now to the third option of the project of modernity, which is often contrasted with Kantian ethics.
Namely, the utilitarian option, the appeal to the greatest happiness of the greatest number.
Utilitarianism, like Kantianism, has had a tremendous impact on modern ethical thinking.
Indeed, in the teaching of ethics in the universities these days, all across America, in all of the English-speaking world, for that matter,
these two philosophies are generally the dominant ones, wherever analytic philosophy is taught in most of the English-speaking world and now increasingly around the world in general.
Kantianism and utilitarianism are treated in modern ethics as the two main alternatives in modern ethical theory, and they are contrasted in the following way.
For Kant, actions are right or wrong in themselves and not because of what consequences they have.
We've seen that clearly to be the case. If lying or cheating or breaking promises is wrong, then they are wrong in themselves.
They do not become right because they might, in some cases, have good consequences.
There's never an excuse for lying. Kant always insisted.
By contrast, utilitarians like Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill, the two most famous figures in this school, they argue that actions can be judged right or wrong only in terms of their consequences.
If we couldn't consider consequences, there would be no way to decide, so the utilitarians claim.
And so they are consequentialists in ethics. This is the common term now used in modern ethical theory.
They are consequentialists about ethics. Kant is not, if you will.
And moreover, the utilitarians believe that the consequences that make actions right or wrong are that they bring about the good ones, that is, bring about the greatest happiness of the greatest number of people.
This is the famous principle of utility of the utilitarians, sometimes also called the greatest happiness principle.
To utilitarians, it's a terrible mistake to abstract as Kant does from consequences when thinking about the rightness or wrongness of actions or rules.
To do so, to abstract from any consequences, they say, is to court empty formulas that give no direction.
So in a way, they also agree with Hegel's criticism of Kant.
Or worse, even, you might be pushed to extremes, as Kant seems to have been, like allowing a lie, not allowing a lie or breaking a promise, even to save the life of an innocent person.
Kant was very much a rigorous, especially about lying.
Utilitarianism seems, in this respect, a very down-to-earth, commonsensical philosophy.
Indeed, Bentham and Mill put it forward as a kind of formalization of common sense.
It's the greatest good of the greatest number.
And utilitarianism has come to influence a good deal of everyday thinking about ethics and social policy in modern pluralist societies.
Without knowing the details of utilitarian philosophy, many people today tend to think vaguely in terms of the greatest happiness or the greatest number when they think about, say, the justification of social policies in society.
Rules and laws and institutions of all sorts.
The utilitarian formula has become something like a mantra of modern ethics.
Everybody knows the greatest happiness or the greatest number as a kind of formula.
Indeed, from its beginnings, utilitarianism was always associated with social policies, the good of society, the reform of public institutions, and with issues of morals and legislation.
For example, the founding book of the movement was by Jeremy Bentham, and it was entitled An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation.
Bentham's book was published in 1789, the year of our U.S. Constitution, interestingly enough.
And only one year after Kant published his Critique of Practical Reason, which we discussed in the last lecture.
Bentham was one of a radical group of thinkers in the late 18th and 19th century in London who were interested in reforming society.
This publication date, 1789, by the way, is very interesting because we usually think of utilitarianism as a 19th century movement in philosophy.
But Bentham, though he lived a long life till 1832, was very much an 18th century thinker.
He shared the optimistic vision of the Enlightenment that individuals free of the superstitions and prejudices of the past and armed with reason and modern science could make a better world.
In lecture three, for example, I suggested that better treatment of the deaf or the hearing impaired was one of the quintessential Enlightenment accomplishments.
And in the case of Bentham, Bentham took to heart the idea of making similar reforms that would make life better for a greater number of people true to his utilitarian roots.
He was especially interested in reforming the laws and practices of criminal justice and punishment.
Bentham, by the way, had studied law, but he never practiced it.
Being a wealthy man, he set out instead to reform British law for human betterment.
The differences, in fact, between Bentham's view of criminal punishment and Kant's, is very, very striking.
And it's an excellent way of explaining the difference between these two opposed views of modern ethics, Kantianism and utilitarianism.
On criminal punishment, for example, Bentham held that the only way we could justify practices of punishment in society was in terms of their social consequences.
Greatest good of the greatest number, just as you would expect.
And this meant we should concentrate on whether punishments actually deter crime and criminals and deter future crimes being committed.
For that was the social payoff. That was the social consequences here of any kind of punishment.
So look to whether it deters, Bentham said.
We should not worry about whether a punishment is right in and of itself because it fits the crime.
An eye for an eye, so to speak, as Kant would have said.
We should rather consider only its consequences for the good of society.
Bentham would have probably agreed with Gandhi who said, if everybody insists on an eye for an eye, after a while the whole world becomes blind.
Thus Bentham condemned, for example, capital punishment.
Not in general, but for offenses other than murder, which were held in Britain at the time and in much of Europe.
There could be capital punishment for many crimes, not just murder.
Bentham condemned this because he thought it was cruel, excuse me, not because he thought it was cruel.
He condemned it because he didn't think it deterred crime.
He said that juries would be reluctant to convict for lesser crimes where the death penalty was required.
If it's required after all for stealing or for something of that kind, they would be elected to convict.
This is a good example of Bentham's practical orientation, his utilitarian orientation on things.
And this, by the way, is a very modern theme.
Modern opponents have used this utilitarian argument to say about capital punishment that if studies show it doesn't deter from murder either, then it should be abolished.
On the other hand, the Kantians say, even today there are many of those, that deterrence is not all that matters in criminal punishment.
The capital punishment is deserved sometimes because of the severity of the crime, whether or not it deters at all.
And this is the way, of course, the debate about capital punishment goes on today with, if you will, the utilitarians on one side of the fence and the Kantians on the other, the retributivists, as they are sometimes called.
Bentham also made the point that the harshness of punishment cannot substitute for the certainty of punishment.
This is a very, very prescient idea that's supported, in fact, by modern criminological studies.
The idea is that the most important factor in preventing crime is how likely you are to get caught and actually punished, not how harsh the punishment is.
No matter how harsh the punishment, if criminals think they're going to get away with it, it won't deter.
And most criminologists today think that indeed is correct.
Again, Bentham a little ahead of his time on that particular issue.
Some of the things, however, were a little wilder that Bentham proposed this social reform on utilitarian grounds.
For example, he opposed flogging on the grounds that floggers might take bribes from richer criminals who would fog them less harshly.
An 18th century problem we don't have anymore, although you have probably heard that some people nowadays would like to bring back flogging.
There was that incident, I guess, in Southeast Asia, the caning, I guess it was, right?
So some have wanted to bring it back.
But in any case, it certainly was used in Britain in the 18th century, and Bentham was really worried about it as a social reformer.
Again, the idea that the flogger might be bribed to go easy is one that boggles our mind.
In fact, Bentham even went so far as to propose that a machine be made out of his, he said, elastic rods and canes and whale bone to do the flogging.
Then the judge could set it and arbitrariness would be removed from the flogging.
He even suggested a maximal deterrence.
He said there might be public flogging with these machines hooked up to many people all at once in the public square.
Well, as enlightened as Bentham was, reform had a long way to go in the 18th century, as you can see.
Now, the reforming spirit of Bentham's utilitarianism is admirable.
But there turned out to be many problems with his philosophy of utilitarianism, the philosophy that lay behind these reforms,
and particularly with the principle of utility or the principle of the greatest happiness of the greatest number.
We need to look a little bit more carefully now at debates between utilitarians and their critics on the principle itself and their philosophy.
To judge whether an action is right on the utilitarian view, you have to be able to compute that it will produce the greatest happiness of the greatest number of people.
But how in heaven's name do you do that for every act? Do you have to count everyone? And what is happiness anyway?
Well, Bentham defined happiness in terms of pleasure and pain, those sovereign rulers of the human makeup, as he put it.
And it was a greater balance of pleasure over pain of the greatest number of people that he said would make the difference when we were judging the actions right or wrong.
But again, how are pleasures and pains to be weighed against one another?
Bentham set out to handle this problem with the same diligence that he set out to handle flogging.
He suggested we needed a calculus for measuring pleasures and pains along seven different dimensions, intensity, duration, certainty, remoteness and time, and extent on numbers of people affected and so on.
Now much fun has been made of this hedonic calculus of Bentham's, which seems unrealistic at least in terms of making these measurements.
In fact, Carl Marx, who spent much of his life in Britain and was buried, as actually buried in London, you should perhaps know, he knew the utilitarian philosophy well because it was big in Britain at the time he was there.
And Marx called it contemptuously a philosophy for accountants, or perhaps we should say bureaucrats, bean counters, how much pleasure here, how much pain there, and so on and so forth.
There was another more conservative critic of utilitarianism, Thomas Carlisle, who some of you may know as a literary figure of the 19th century.
Carlisle called libertarianism the universal calculus of sentimental babble, a good Carlisle quote.
But of course the utilitarians got back at Carlisle.
One of them pointed out that Carlisle, who was a notorious misanthrope, and his wife was equally dour and difficult to deal with.
One of the utilitarians said, it was good of God to have allowed Mr. and Mrs. Carlisle to marry each other, thereby making only two people miserable instead of four.
And thereby of course increasing the utilitarian calculus of the greatest overall happiness in the world.
Nonetheless, the difficulties Bentham had with quantifying pleasures and pains has really always bedeviled utilitarianism.
Are all pleasures the same? Can we put them on the same quantitative scale?
Most philosophers don't think so anymore, or are they of different kinds?
The greatest of the utilitarian philosophers after Bentham was John Stuart Mill, the great 19th century philosopher.
We're going to come back to Mill on his book on liberty in the second half of the series, which is a very important account of modern liberty.
But in any case, Mill potted company with Bentham on this very question of pleasures and pains and whether they can be measured in some sense.
In fact, what Mill did to add to Bentham's theory was to distinguish between higher and lower pleasures.
Higher pleasures for Mill, like listening to music, to good music, or reading poetry, more than merely the sensory pleasures mattered.
And Mill said that the estimation of pleasures shouldn't be based on quantity alone, they were qualitatively different pleasures.
Better said Mill in a famous line, to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied.
Better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied.
But if Mill was right, and there are higher and lower pleasures, then the principle of utility, and notice this,
if he's right, then the principle of utility can't be the only principle necessary for judging which actions or ways of life are the best.
Because we have to figure out which are the higher and which are the lower principles, and that would require some other principle.
And Mill was rather vague about what other principles might be involved to distinguish higher and lower pleasures.
We have to fall back on our instincts, apparently.
But then again, what if people disagree about their instincts as to what's higher and lower, we are back to our problem.
Another problem with the utilitarian formula concerns the problem of evil pleasures.
How about the pleasures of torturers, bullies and sadists, or tormentors?
Are they going to count in the overall utilitarian equation with the greatest balance of pleasures over pains, the greatest number?
It seems that in some ways evil pleasures shouldn't count at all.
But of course that would mean you would have to have some other ethical principle that superseded the greatest happiness principle
to tell you in advance which pleasures to include in the calculation, and which ones to keep out.
Maybe some principle like Kant's, if you will.
Some utilitarians have actually tried to get around this problem by saying, for example, that if it was a case of torture,
that the pleasure realized by the torturer was outweighed by the terrible pain suffered by the tortured person.
So the principle of utility could handle this particular problem.
Apparently they have never met Hannibal Lecter or other demented sadists, and how much pleasure they can get from things.
Suppose, for example, we increase the number of people getting pleasure out of the torturing to a very high point where it outweighed the suffering of the poor.
Perhaps we'd put the scene on video screens and show them all around the world and get enough people, so to speak,
who are receiving pleasure that it would finally, finally outweigh the pain.
Would that finally make the act right?
Suddenly the greatest pleasure, the greatest number, seems totally irrelevant here to our ethical intuitions.
Even when the utilitarian calculus gets the right answer, it seems to get it for the wrong reason, if you will.
And it seems that the torturer's pain really shouldn't count at all and should be an irrelevant consideration.
This problem is connected to another major objection that's been made against utilitarianism, of both Bentham and Mill.
The greatest happiness principle seems to lead to unjust consequences.
Suppose, for example, we could prevent a riot and the resulting harms to people if we convicted an innocent man of a crime.
Because let's say everybody thought he was guilty.
The greatest good of the greatest number would result from this action, but would it make the action right?
The end would be justifying the means here.
In other words, utility, the greatest good of the greatest number, and justice, fairness to this innocent man,
would seem to be often in conflict with one another.
This is probably the deepest criticism and problem of utilitarianism in philosophy.
Consider, for example, also the notion of a society in which, say, 90% of the people were living the good life,
high degrees of pleasure and happiness, while 10% of the population were living in misery and poverty.
But in order to raise up that 10%, we had to make everybody else so much worse off that the greatest good of the greatest number would go down.
Then the utilitarian principle would say, that's the best way to do it.
The greatest good of the greatest number means having 90 living well and 10% living poorly.
Again, justice seems to be one of the casualties of the utilitarian principle.
You can see, I think, here why there is a tendency among contemporary philosophers
of trying to combine elements of Kantianism and utilitarianism.
Certainly, there's something right about the greatest happiness of the greatest number, to be sure,
but this principle of justice is a problem.
Maybe we need a little bit of the Kantian principle of treating everybody equally as an end,
mixed in with the two, so that the tendency is to try to combine the two together.
Despite these problems, utilitarianism, as I said, remains an influential and vibrant alternative
in contemporary theory, ethical theory, and we're going to come back to some of its insights.
I think it has some insights, but I also think it goes wrong in certain places.
Modern utilitarians have taken various steps to counter the problems we've been discussing,
measuring degrees of happiness.
In fact, some of them have employed the techniques of modern economics
to try to determine people's preferences and choices,
and in that way measure what would make most people happy.
There's always been a tie-in between utilitarianism and economics.
Indeed, the very notion of marginal utility in economic theory comes from the utilitarian's idea.
Modern utilitarians have tried to deal with the problem of justice
in many different ways, perhaps combining utilitarianism with other views like Kant's.
Some of them have shifted to a rule utilitarianism,
which says we should use the greatest happiness or the greatest number
to decide on the rightness of rules or principles, not just individual actions.
That's too hard to compute.
And through all this, utilitarians insist that when we think about public policy issues
and social ethics, we can't avoid considering the greatest good of the greatest number,
however we go about defining it.
And this seems true.
Whether we're thinking about health care policy or criminal justice or economic justice,
educational welfare, whatever may be the difficulties of the utilitarian principle,
we do indeed think about, in some way, the greatest happiness of the greatest number.
In this respect, modern utilitarianism remains true to its enlightenment origins,
dedicated to the reform of social policies and making things better for everyone
for the greatest good of the greatest number.
And for this reason, we will try to fit utilitarianism into our future thinking about ethics as well,
despite the difficulties which it faces.
In the next lecture, we're going to turn our attention to the fourth alternative
in the ethics of modernity, the contractarian tradition.
Thank you.
