Lecture 11, Social Contract Theories, Part 2
Rawls, John Rawls' first principle of justice, is familiar to the social contract tradition.
The idea that we should all have equal liberties consistent with the liberties of others.
It's his second principle that is a real innovation in the social contract tradition.
It says that social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are to the
greatest benefit of the least advantage.
Now Rawls thinks contractors behind a veil of ignorance would choose this principle because
they would not know where they would end up in society and they might be themselves among
the unlucky or disadvantaged down at the bottom.
But at the same time, as you recall, he reasons that they ought to see some advantages in
having disparities of wealth and income in society because it could be to the benefit
of the whole society, to pay physicians more if we get better medical care, for example,
to pay entrepreneurs more if they make products and services useful for society, and so on.
Or even if they make jobs for other persons who wish to work for them.
But of course, while allowing such disparities, Rawls' principles of justice impose limits
on them.
If better medical care does not benefit everyone in society, including the least advantage,
then it is going to fail Rawls' principles.
If entrepreneurs who make a lot of money don't pay some of it back to society to help the
disadvantage, then that is going to fail Rawls' principles as well.
And then, of course, there is a second part of Rawls' second principle of justice, which
is the idea that there should be fair opportunity for everyone to get to these higher positions
of greater wealth and income.
And in our own society, of course, that means an educational system that gives equal opportunity
to everyone to have a chance to get ahead and be one of those persons who make more
money and so on.
So the theory, I think, as you can see, is a very ideal one, and our real society falls
short of it in many respects, even if it does allow disparities of wealth and income.
So Rawls' theory of justice is clearly then not socialist or communist in any normal sense
of that term, since it allows differences of wealth and income, and indeed allows considerable
private property as well.
But it is, nevertheless, liberal, a liberal theory of justice, in the modern sense of
that term, and indeed in both modern senses of the term liberal, Rawls is usually regarded
as the chief representative these days as someone presenting a liberal theory of justice.
And liberal, I mean, in two senses.
First in the classical liberal sense that maximizes in society individual liberty for
everyone consistent with the liberty of others.
That's the first principle.
That's classical liberalism.
Rawls' theory, by virtue of his second principle, is liberal in the modern welfare sense as
well.
That wealth and income ought to be distributed and balanced so that there is a substantial
safety net for the disadvantaged.
So Rawls' theory is liberal in two modern senses, the classical sense and the modern
sense of the word.
But Rawls' way of getting these results, which are fairly common results, is quite original,
I think, as I hope I've been able to convey in the last lecture and give you some sense
of why his theory has been so influential.
Indeed, Rawls' theory has been attacked from all sides in the contemporary political spectrum
by socialists and communists on one side, by libertarians on the other, maximizing freedom,
by conservatives, social conservatives against the liberal aspects of his theory, and by
communitarian theorists, a new set of theorists who are concerned with community and oppose
individualism.
I think it's a good idea here to look at the various critics of Rawls' theories because
it's almost like a barometer for all of the political and social debates that are going
on today, both in ethics and political theory, to look at the various critics of Rawls and
use him as a kind of barometer for the major debates of the day on these subjects.
So interest us, and that's what I am going to do here in this lecture.
First, let's look at the libertarian criticisms of Rawls' liberal theory of justice.
The most well-known of these, the libertarians, is Robert Nozick, another Harvard professor
whose Anarchy, State, and Utopia, a well-known book these days, came out about a couple
years after Rawls in 1973.
Things like Nozick are, of course, for individual liberty, as we know, and minimal government
interference in both the economy and private life.
Because they advocate minimal government interference in the marketplace and low taxation, they're
often aligned these days, as we know, with conservatives in general, but they tend to
differ, of course, and to separate themselves from social conservatives by being for minimal
government interference even in private life and in social affairs as well.
So libertarians like Nozick have no problem, whatever, with Rawls' first principle of
justice.
Each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive basic liberty compatible with
a similar liberty of others.
Indeed, that's the reigning libertarian principle.
But they say it's the only principle we need in political theory.
What they object to, as you might expect, is Rawls' second principle of justice.
The part that says that economic and social inequalities should be expected to be the
advantage of all, including the least advantaged.
Libertarian critics like Nozick argue that there should be no expectation or requirement
that inequalities benefit all.
In a free society, the economic and social chips fall where they may, says Nozick.
As long as property is justly acquired and transferred, he says, and is not stolen or
forcibly taken from someone else, then persons are free to do with their own property and
money whatever they will.
They may give it to charity, of course, but they cannot be constrained to help the needy.
Well, we know that is quite familiar libertarian doctrine.
But what is the critique of Rawls?
Well, what the libertarians like Nozick say is that his derivation of the second principle
of justice is flawed.
We call how it goes.
Behind a veil of ignorance, we wouldn't know what our positions were going to be in society,
whether we'd be rich or poor, advantaged or disadvantaged.
So fearing that we might be at the lower end when the veil is lifted, we would want to
ensure that we were not too bad off that there would be a safety net there and the advantages
of inequality would be shared.
That's Rawls' argument.
But the libertarian critics say, this assumes that choosers behind the veil of ignorance
are averse to risk.
We choose, Rawls assumes, we choose the safest course just in case we might be among the
unlucky.
Note that that assumption is there.
Suppose, however, the libertarians say, like Nozick, that we were risk takers Las Vegas
types, let's say.
What turned us on most was the chance of having a lot more money or a really good life, and
we were willing to take the chance of being at the bottom to have the chance of such success.
Now we might, if we thought that way, of course, end up choosing a libertarian society, quite
different than Rawls' libertarian liberal society altogether, with greater disparities
of wealth and power and status, less taxation, and so on.
But notice, isn't this risk-taking behavior precisely what often distinguishes libertarian
and entrepreneurial and individualist types of people in the first place from others,
leading them to choose a more free-wheeling society?
Now libertarians argue that Rawls begs the question by making his choosers behind a veil
of ignorance risk averse, thus getting just the society he wants.
Now this libertarian criticism, in fact, points to a really general and deep problem for Rawls'
contract theory.
For Rawls retains one feature of all social contract theory going back to Hobbes, despite
the constraints behind the veil of ignorance, Rawls' contractors choose for their own self-interest.
Their concern is, how are things going to turn out for me after the veil is lifted?
Justice and fairness are supposed to come in because we don't know where we'll be in
advance, not because we're naturally benevolent or kind to others.
That's where most social contract theorists differ from sentimentalist options like Youm
and Mencius.
It isn't a matter of natural benevolence, it's a matter of rational calculation about
our future good.
But then critics of Rawls have argued, and not just libertarian critics, that the results
can be rigged one way or the other by what you allow the contractors to know behind the
veil.
What you put behind the veil of ignorance and what you don't, in other words, what kind
of rabbit you put in the hat will determine what kind of rabbit you pull out.
That's their complaint.
Rawls' contractors are not supposed to know their positions in society or the details
of what they will want in life, okay?
But they have to know something according to Rawls, or they couldn't choose at all.
For instance, he says, we will have to say that they know they want certain primary goods
as he calls them.
They're going to want liberty, they're going to want opportunity, they're going to want
some wealth and income, because they know without these they couldn't get anything else.
So we have to put some knowledge behind the veil of ignorance, otherwise we wouldn't have
any grounds for choosing anything at all.
But then you see, that opens the door to just how much more the contractors should know
or should not know.
For example, according to Rawls, they're not supposed to know what their specific talents
or capacities will be.
For example, if you knew you were going to be intelligent or clever, you might choose
a different sort of society than if you knew you were going to be slow or taciturn or have
some impairment or other, right?
So he says, we should not even know our talents or our capacities.
But again, that means one could get different results depending on what we put behind the
veil, and that opens the door for libertarians and other critics to come through and say,
well, what about whether we were risk takers or not risk takers, and so on.
Such is the libertarian critique of Rawls, and we'll see in a moment how Rawls has tried
to respond to it in his most recent work a little later.
Rawls has been attacked, of course, from all these sides over the last 30 years, and he
has himself attempted to respond, and in his recent work he's tried to adjust his theory
a bit, and we're going to see how that works a little later.
But this is, in any case, the libertarian critique of Rawls.
Now let's turn to the opposite end of the political spectrum, where socialists and communists
have attacked Rawls for an entirely different reason.
They say that Rawls and other liberals, and libertarians too, for that matter, are naive
to think that disparities of wealth and power will have no effect on fundamental freedoms.
In other words, from the socialist Omox's perspective, differences of wealth and income
that Rawls allows by his second principle of justice may, in fact, undermine the very
freedoms that he allows by his first.
That's the drift of their critique.
The two principles may be at odds with one another.
Now socialists and communists are here borrowing, of course, a fundamental case and argument
from Karl Marx that he used against capitalism.
Marx said that the bourgeois rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness promoted
by capitalist societies would be a mere facade if there were vast disparities of wealth and
power.
Well, I think you're perhaps familiar with that argument of Marx.
As the Marxist argument goes, for example, money from wealthy individuals or corporations
could be used to influence politicians and elections, so the fairness of the political
system would be corrupted by unequal distribution of wealth.
Remember one of Rawls' fundamental freedoms is the freedom to vote, participate in the
political system.
But what will wealth and disparity of income do to that?
So would, say, these critics, so would freedom of speech and expression be compromised since
money could be used through media and advertising to influence public opinion.
Disparities of wealth could also affect criminal and civil justice and the ability to get
a fair trial.
If you're rich, you have a better chance of getting off.
We have experiences of that in modern American social life.
And disparities of wealth can also influence fair opportunity in regard to education and
so on.
And so the argument goes that it's naive to think that perhaps differences of income
and wealth in the second principle of justice will not actually affect the freedoms of the
first.
In short, Rawls' theory may be too idealistic, say, his socialist critics, and does not take
account of the real world dangers, disparities of wealth and power.
And this problem they add is especially acute when we turn to the disparities of wealth
and power in the new global economy with the growing power of international and multinational
corporations which have made this a continuing problem worldwide.
Now, how does Rawls respond to these libertarian and social critics?
In his recent writings and particularly his most recent book, Political Liberalism, Rawls
has backed away from some of his earlier positions, as described in the last lecture, but not
from others.
He still seems firmly committed to his two principles of justice and the philosophy behind
them.
But he now relies less on the formal apparatus of the original position and the veil of ignorance
to derive them.
Rawls is now less enamored of the idea that all rational beings in some non-obituary original
position would have to choose his principles of justice.
Remember the risk a person would not and others might not.
No, now he thinks that the contractors would have to already have some shared commitments
to liberty and fairness before they contracted.
They would have to share what Rawls now calls an overlapping consensus.
This is a term that has entered modern ethical and political thought through Rawls and is
much used.
They would have to share an overlapping consensus to things like liberty and fairness before
they even got into the contractual situation.
And not everybody obviously would share those things.
You have to be ready for it.
Now this seems to weaken Rawls' position, because instead of arguing sort of like Kant
that any rational person who got themselves into this contract would just have to choose
his principles, now he thinks they would only be chosen by people who are disposed in a
certain way to begin with, to certain ways of living and favored things like liberty
and fairness.
But that doesn't bother Rawls, it doesn't deter him at all.
For he thinks that this overlapping consensus, this commitment to liberty and fairness and
to including everyone in the contract, not marginalizing everybody, he thinks this overlapping
consensus is now being widely shared among those today who believe in the value of free
and democratic societies and want to live in them.
Now if his argument is no longer universal, it's at least now very general.
One may even in optimistic moments see signs that the world is moving towards such a consensus,
fitfully and with many setbacks of course, moving towards democracy in a certain way.
Rawls is certainly optimistic about that, but his view now requires that people incline
this way to begin with.
The overlapping consensus of commitment to liberty, fairness and not excluding anyone
would imply for Rawls now that the contractors are willing to accept only such principles
to govern society as all other reasonable parties to the agreement could freely assent
to.
That's the new idea here.
We will accept only principles that all reasonable people could agree to.
Rawls would thus now get the difference principle, the one about equality, in a different way.
Those at the bottom of the social and economic ladder, if they were reasonable, would certainly
agree to a society that would see to their needs and provide them with a safety net.
But the contract must be one to which all contracting parties could reasonably agree.
Similar approaches have been developed by other influential modern social contract theorists
like Thomas Scanlon and Brian Barry, who think Rawls was on the right track, but he
went wrong in requiring the contractors choose between an artificially contrived veil of
ignorance.
So in response to the socialists and communists, Rawls would also appeal to this overlapping
consensus to liberty and fairness.
Most people today would reject societies, he says, which try to equalize wealth and
power as they have indeed rejected, that is completely equalized wealth and power,
as they have indeed rejected communism, because such societies would have to restrict too
many freedoms.
Rawls thinks there's an overlapping consensus developing in the world today on that very
point.
We have, in fact, rejected communism and socialism, and we are leaning in that direction.
You may think he's too optimistic, but that's where Rawls is going in his later work.
Whatever you want to agree, may agree with us, but on his new theory, Rawls does not
require universal proof anymore, but only widespread consensus.
And if there will necessarily be disparities as a result of freedom, the best we can do
is ensure they will benefit all, including the least advantaged.
Well this seems like a more plausible and realistic picture of social contract theories,
but the debate goes on about whether Rawls' overlapping consensus really does exist or
what it consists in.
When we say that part of the overlapping consensus is that contractors should accept only such
principles as all other reasonable parties to the agreement could freely assent to.
How do we define reasonable parties?
Some people may never agree to a liberal contract such as Rawls and other contractarians like
Scanlon and Barry suggest.
Are these people therefore who would reject it necessarily unreasonable?
These questions lead us to a third influential group of critics of Rawls, the communitarian
critics.
Communitarianism has become a new catchword in recent ethical and political debate.
Communitarians may come from all parts of the political spectrum.
They may be on the right, they may be conservative, they may be on the left.
Some of them may be in the middle.
But what they have in common is that they lament the breakdown of community and shared
values in modern day liberal and individualist societies.
And they lament the breakdown or lessened influences in society of institutions like
the family, churches, civic groups, close-knit neighborhoods and towns, all these things
which support communities and provide a sense of belonging and shared purpose.
Communitarians are concerned that we are losing these things in modern free societies because
of our excessive individualism, our tendency for everyone to want to go their own way.
And so all these communal-type bonding institutions that hold us together are being lost.
So the communitarians will argue.
So I think you can see by the way that communitarians and communitarian critics of Rawls have
a lot in common with various social conservatives on some of these matters.
Though communitarians, and I want to be careful about this, do not always share the same goals
as social conservatives, because some of them come from the left and some of them come
from the middle, not necessarily in the right.
But whether they come from the left, right, or middle of the political spectrum, communitarians
tend to attribute the decline in morals and public spiritedness and shared values and
other problems in modern societies to excessive individualism and the undermining of communal
bonds.
And some of them are trying to find ways to get those things back.
And they are likely to believe, as do many social conservatives, that Rawls' liberal
overlapping consensus, which does not endorse any particular theory of the good for society,
no particular religious view or other such view, encourages individualism in the breakdown
of communal bonds and social morals.
Two of the most well-known communitarian critics of Rawls are Michael Sandel and Alastair
McIntire.
Sandel's book, Liberalism and the Limits of Justice, is one of the best-known critiques
of Rawls.
In it, Sandel, a Harvard political scientist, argues that Rawls' account of the original
position behind a veil of ignorance, pictures the self or individuals as subjects apart
from and prior to any of the specific desires and purposes and bonds and places that we
all have in society.
It detaches us as it were from our concrete existence.
Remember behind Rawls' veil of ignorance, we're supposed to forget everything that we
are and what place we might have in society and put aside most things that would seem
important to us except the very basic primary goods I mentioned earlier as well.
And Sandel argues that this is a flawed way of looking at the self and of our social experience
in general, for it does not recognize that our moral experience and the very meaning
of what we are cannot be understood apart from communal bonds and social roles which
define our place in the world.
This is the communitarian idea, and communitarians think that modern societies are losing a
sense of that communal bonding.
McIntyre, the other critic, communitarian critic I mentioned, puts the matter concretely
this way.
He says, I am someone's son or daughter, someone else's cousin or uncle.
I am a citizen of this or that village or city, a member of this or that guild or profession,
a teacher or a lawyer or a physician, a parent, an aspiring writer or journalist, a member
of this ethnic group or race or this religion.
Hence what is good for me is good for one who inhabits these roles.
McIntyre thinks that's the way we think about the good and ethics and life and so on.
It's always situated in some place.
The good was traditionally defined, he says, and say other communitarians, relative to
communal and social roles one inhabits, not in abstraction from them.
Indeed one's very self is defined that way.
That's what Sandel calls a situated or encumbered self, not an abstract one as in Rawls.
Now I want you to notice here that McIntyre and Sandel are here reiterating against Rawls
a communitarian point that Hegel made against Kant.
In order to arrive at an answer to the question of how we should act, Kant tries to rise above
all the specific desires and purposes and social roles that we inhabit to see how we
should act, period, categorical imperative, totally abstracted from all the specific desires
and social goals and aspirations that we have in everyday life.
No one has said, Hegel, that Kant arrives at an empty formalism which gives little direction
and allows conflicting results.
Well, according to Sandel and McIntyre, Rawls has a similar problem.
Rawls also asks us to abstract ourselves from our concrete position in society.
Our particular plans, goals, aspirations, religious or other affiliations, placing us
behind a veil of ignorance as if somehow we could do that without losing ourselves.
No wonder then that Rawls' case, in Rawls' case as in Kant's, we get conflicting results
from these procedures.
The procedures are too abstract and formal, say the communitarian critics, to define our
concrete moral life, if you will.
The sociologist, Robert Beller, once said, the human race is too large for anyone to
identify himself or herself by saying they belong to it.
One has to, in a certain sense, say something a lot more specific about oneself.
What religion am I, what nationality am I, what family am I, and what role do I play
in society, what's my job, and so on and so forth.
We have to be situated or encumbered in a certain way to have a full and complete, concrete
moral life.
That's what the communitarian critics are saying, and they think a lot of modern ethics
is too abstract.
It's talking too much at a high plane about everybody, and so it misses out giving us
a full picture of the moral life.
Similarly, Rawls also demands that principles of justice be neutral with respect to any
theory of the good.
But communitarians insist, in other words, that the government and the basic principles,
if you would not say, this theory of the good is better than that one.
No, they let all the citizens choose whatever theory of the good they want, and the government
should stay neutral.
That is, nowadays, very much a liberal idea.
But communitarians insist that we can't be neutral to all conceptions of the good.
Such neutrality is not enough to hold communities together and give them a shared sense of purpose.
Societies must be bound together by more concrete agreement on the nature of what is good than
merely the agreement to respect each other, or there will be not sufficient shared purposes
to bind society together.
I think this is a crucial and very, very important issue that we're going to take up at great
length in the second half of this particular course.
To what extent, nowadays, with a pluralist society, with everybody having different values,
must we respect these differences, and yet, at the same time, to what degree is it also
true that society is held together by common goods?
The main problem in modern societies is we have lost a sense of shared values because
we do believe that everyone is free to go about designing and working with their own
life.
It's a very difficult tension here, a very deep and difficult tension that we see in
the arguments between Rawls and his supporters and the communitarians who oppose him.
Rawls' overlapping consensus, the communitarians say, is too thin.
Rawls, of course, thinks otherwise, though his overlapping consensus is a lot thinner
than most communitarians and social conservatives would like, he thinks it's the best we can
do under modern conditions of pluralism and uncertainty.
And that's a very, very interesting challenge to think about.
Well this lecture concludes our survey of the four chief strands of the project of modernity
and ethics, the sentimentalist option, the rationalist option, the sentimentalist of
Jung, the rationalist of Kant, the utilitarian option of Bentham and Mill, and the contractarian
option of Hobbes and Locke and Rousseau and Rawls.
In the next lecture we're going to hear from those who believe that the whole project of
modernity, the whole hope of modern philosophers, of trying to reconstruct ethics on the basis
of reason and science, these critics who think that the whole project of modernity has failed,
some of them want to return to earlier pre-modern, medieval or ancient modes of thought, some
of them want to go on into a brave new post-modernist world.
Let's look at those critics next time, thank you.
