Butcher 12, some critiques of the modern project.
The preceding six lectures have discussed the project of modernity in ethics.
It's the project undertaken by modern philosophers of trying to find common or universal values
that all persons could agree upon despite uncertainty and pluralism.
In this lecture, we're going to consider some influential thinkers of the present day who
think that this project of modernity has failed.
One group of these thinkers, represented in this lecture by Alistair McIntire, who's been
mentioned several times, believes that the modern project of finding new foundations for
ethics has failed because it has neglected and departed from the wisdom of the past.
Critics like McIntire argue for a return to ancient and medieval ways of thinking about
values and ethics, which emphasize the virtues and notions of the good life.
Either we have to go back, they say, and retrieve the wisdom of the past or fall into relativism.
Many people do, in fact, believe this today, and McIntire is one of their most influential
representatives.
Another very different group of critics of the project of modernity includes the postmodernists,
represented in this lecture by the French philosopher Jean-François Lyotard.
Postmodernists such as Lyotard believe that the project of modernity was doomed to fail
because it's impossible to rise above finite points of view to make universal or general
claims that apply to everyone.
Postmodernists like Lyotard therefore argue that the various options in modern ethics
that we have been considering simply do not work.
The sentimentalists, the rationalists, the utilitarian, the contractarian, all fail in
their attempt to overcome relativism.
Does this mean that postmodernists are themselves relativists?
Well, there's a bit of a dispute and some confusion about this.
Many of them reject the term relativists.
They don't want to say they are.
But what they are usually rejecting is what we called in lecture six, vulgar relativism.
The vulgar relativism requires that we rise up above all the different perspectives, third-dimensional
points of view or ways of life, into a fourth dimension, and from there pronounce that no
point of view on values or ways of life is any better or more correct than any other.
And postmodernists, for the most part, don't think you can do that.
They don't think you can get up there.
The more consistent postmodernists like Lyotard argue that you can't rise above all finite
points of view and ways of looking at things to make sweeping universal and absolute claims
at all.
No God's eye point of view, if you will, whether to say that no view is better than
any other or to say that one view is the absolutely right one.
But this idea that you can't rise above all the different points of view to a higher level
is what I called earlier relativism.
This I think is the real relativism that bothers most people today and troubles them.
The denial that you can make any universal or absolute claims about anything, about what's
good or right for all persons, whatever.
It's the denial that you can get beyond the first three dimensions of value, as I called
them, to a fourth dimension above them all, to a God's eye point of view.
And most postmodernists, in fact, I would say, pretty much all that go by that title
do in fact hold that.
In some, then, to critics on one side of the project of modernity, such as McIntyre, the
failure of the project means we must return to pre-modern modes of thought.
And thinking about values and ethics.
To others such as Leotard, we can't go back, but must go forward beyond modernity to a
brave new postmodernist world without the crutches of belief in absolute values.
And we're going to consider both of these critiques in the present lecture.
Alastair McIntyre, who represents the first, is a British philosopher of Scottish origins,
who has taught at major universities in Britain and the U.S. during the productive academic
career.
His intellectual odyssey has been very varied.
Early in his career in the 50s and 60s, McIntyre flirted with Marxism and was an atheist.
Later he rejected atheism, becoming a religious believer, and increasingly he has turned back
to ancient thinkers like Aristotle and medieval figures like St. Thomas Aquinas as guides
to his thinking, especially about values and ethics.
I spoke briefly with McIntyre at American Philosophical Association meeting several
years ago and asked him what he was currently writing on.
He said he was writing a book on the philosopher Martin Heidegger and also on the religious
thinker Simone Weil, a strange, strange combination.
But he said what fascinated him about both these two thinkers was that they, like him,
had had a complex odyssey of going from belief to unbelief and back again, seeking some kind
of meaning in things.
Well, McIntyre's most influential book is the one I wish to talk about.
It's called After Virtue, and it was published in 1981, one of the most influential works
of modern ethics.
McIntyre's book has played a role in the revival of what has come to be called Virtue Ethics
in philosophy and even in the public arena, since many people talk about virtue ethics
these days in public discussions.
Virtue ethics puts the emphasis in ethics on virtues or praiseworthy traits of character,
such as courage and honesty, loyalty, generosity, trustworthiness, and so on, rather than on
rules or principles which tell us what to do in various situations.
Looked at more broadly, virtue or character ethics emphasizes that ethics is about what
sorts of persons we are or should become rather than being a toolbox of rules for solving
ethical dilemmas.
The revival of virtue ethics in the past few decades has not merely been an academic phenomenon,
but it has worked its way into the general culture.
Indications of this are the growing popularity of virtue or character education and the teaching
of virtues in the schools.
From the elementary grades onward, as opposed to merely teaching values or respect for differing
values, as is sometimes done in pluralist societies, another indication is the popularity
of recent books on virtues, like William Bennett's The Book of Virtues.
But for the philosophy behind this popular revival of virtue ethics, one has to go to
books like McIntyre's After Virtue, which have been instrumental in the revival of
virtue ethics.
In After Virtue, McIntyre argues that the project of modernity in ethics, which he calls the
Enlightenment Project, was destined to fail because it abandoned the classical tradition
of thinking about values and ethics that goes back to Aristotle.
In this classical tradition, there's a fundamental contrast between human beings as they happen
to be, in fact, and humans as they could be if they fulfilled their essential or true
nature, what Aristotle called their formal cause.
Ethics, in fact, is the knowledge of how we get from this initial, untutored natural state
of human beings to the state of human fulfillment, the human end or purpose or telos.
The virtues or excellences of character are just those qualities that allow us to progress
from the untutored state to our natural end or final cause, a fulfilled human life.
So we have a very neat little picture here of what it is all about.
McIntyre is well aware that modern philosophy has rejected this teleological scheme based
on ends and final causes, which we discussed in lecture two, when modern science rejected
Aristotle's final causes in nature. But he argues that by rejecting this ancient
teleological scheme, they were throwing the baby out with the bathwater when it comes
to talking about values and ethics. For this ancient teleological scheme, in which we see
ourselves striving for distinctively human goods as final ends, is in fact, he thinks,
the scheme in terms of which we understand what it means to say that something is good
or right or the right way to live. Unless you understand values in terms of some such
scheme of going from an untutored human nature to some fulfilled state, then value loses
all meaning as a term. No wonder then that modern philosophers who rejected the classical
scheme of the virtues and the telos, no wonder they have fumbled around, McIntyre says, trying
to understand what terms like good or right could mean, and wondered whether they might
be merely subjective expressions of feeling or attitude. They had thrown out the scheme
that gave these ideas their meaning. These terms for value had been detached, if you
will, from the classical context of goals and human ends that gave them meaning. So
in place of virtues, the qualities of characters, the qualities of character that would allow
us to attain the ends we naturally strive for as human beings, in place of these, modern
philosophers sought to formulate various rules of behavior that could be assented to by everyone,
such as Kant's categorical imperative or the utilitarian principle of the greatest happiness
or the greatest number, or Rawls' principles of justice. Rules became central to modern
ethics as McIntyre sees the picture, rather than virtues. But the rules were very general
because they were abstracted from concrete ways of life, and hence they tended to become
empty formalisms. We noted in the last lecture how McIntyre criticized Rawls on that score,
and he makes a similar critique in After Virtue of Kant. McIntyre believes that a return
to ancient ways of thinking about ethics in terms of virtues is the only way out of these
modern confusions. But as a cod-carrying modern thinker, he's not so naive as to think we
can just go back to Aristotle or back to the Medieval's with their teleological view
of the world as if nothing had changed, as if modern science and modernity had never come
along to change things. So he aims to revive the tradition of the virtues and virtue ethics
on new foundations. To do this, he argues we must understand the role of virtues at three levels,
which he calls practices, narratives, and traditions. And I want to look at each of these
in turn. Virtue or excellence of all kinds, according to McIntyre, is defined in terms
first of what he calls practices. Now, we introduced this idea in lecture five briefly,
but it's time to take a closer look at it. By a practice, McIntyre means a cooperative human
activity through which human goods are sought by trying to achieve certain standards of excellence.
For example, we gave some in lecture five, but here they are, some of them again. Consider the
practices of medicine or law or physics, architecture or farming, violin making, horticulture,
painting, calligraphy, politics, teaching, the maintenance of family life, all different ways
in which human beings go about seeking excellence. We have to do it in some way or other, in some
context, with some group, in some community. That's why McIntyre is something of a communitarian,
we saw last time. It is through such practices that humans strive to attain whatever goods and
excellences they do attain. And the virtues, other skills, and other human qualities,
excellences, as the ancient Greek philosophers called them, that allow you to achieve the
goods distinctive of practices. To explain this, McIntyre makes an important, a crucial distinction
between what he calls goods that are internal to practices and goods that are external. In other
words, internal goods and external goods. For example, the making of an instrument with
excellent sound is a good that is internal to the practice of violin making. It's final
cause, so to speak, what violin making is all about. It's a good, by the way, that's internal
to violin making in the sense that it's a good that can only be achieved by making violins.
By contrast, money and fame and power and celebrity that a violin maker might acquire as a result
of making a wonderful violin, these are external goods. They're external to violin making because
money and fame and power and celebrity can be realized in many different ways, not just by
making violins. So we have a distinction between the specific goods that can be realized in any
practice, in architecture making beautiful buildings and functional buildings, in violin
making making beautiful violins, in sports being good at basketball or football or whatever it
may be, any kind of excellence that we may pursue internally, whereas the external goods are the
things that we can get by doing or pursuing almost any good whatsoever. Now there's a moral point
behind this distinction between internal and external goods for McIntyre. He's critical,
like many other people are these days, of modern societies which have lost a sense of the virtues
and as a result tend to privilege external goods over internal goods. Consider the examples and
think about modern American life. Doctors who are more interested in money or status of a medical
career than practicing medicine. A student comes into my office and says, I think I want to be a
doctor. I ask him why. If it's for the money, if it's for the prestige, think about it again. It's
about practicing medicine. It's about curing people and all the rest of that. How about craftsmen
and repairmen more interested in the fast buck rather than taking pride in the excellence of
their work? Well, met quite a few of those recently since my living room feeling caved in.
Politicians are more interested in power, for example, frequently than in serving the public
good, which is their excellence. How about athletes in athletic competition, compromised by
high salaries and fame? Everybody who's a sports fan like I am says, what about these high salaries,
these horrible, hideous high salaries, rather than just concentrating on practicing the craft?
You know the famous basketball player Charles Barkley, he's about to retire and he said last
year that he didn't want to any longer be a role model for youngsters. That may be perhaps the
reason why after he retires he plans to quit professional basketball and go into politics.
I don't know, but I wondered about that. Motion pictures. How about motion pictures and other
forms of entertainment made with more interest in the bottom line than in artistic excellence?
And in general, the whole fascination in our culture with celebrity in modern culture over
genuine achievements of excellence. For McIntyre, this is all symptomatic of the loss of ideas of
virtue and excellence in modern life. And McIntyre argues, and I think to some extent rightly,
that human fulfillment and meaning in life can only be completely realized by the achieving of
internal goods, not merely by external goods. Fame alone or money alone, all the rest of those
things, without any genuine achievement, is empty. That's the idea. But it tells us something, I
think, very, very important, something we're going to come back to later in this lecture series.
And that is that you have to pursue excellence in some concrete situation with other people.
That's what makes it so difficult, I think, to find out what's really objectively good from all points
of view, because we all have to be somewhere in the midst of things, in some concrete practice or
way of life, in order to pursue excellence. And that's a very interesting fact about human life.
While moving beyond practices, McIntyre moves to a second level in which virtues have meaning in
human life. Remember, there were three levels. There was practices, narratives, and traditions.
And he was going to try to reconceive the idea of virtue in all three. Moving beyond practices,
McIntyre moves to a second level where we find meaning here. We can only properly understand virtue
or excellence, he argues, also in the context of the narrative of one's life, which tells a certain
story with specific goals, the idea of a narrative. We are storytelling animals who understand the meaning
of our lives as narratives in which long-term goals play a crucial role. The virtues in this context
are the qualities of character that sustain us in our quests for the goods we seek in this narrative
of life. Aristotle had said in a famous quote when he was talking about happiness that one swallow
does not make a summer, he said. And you all are familiar with that quote that comes from Aristotle.
One swallow does not make a summer, nor one fine day. And so with happiness, it's not just a few moments
of good feeling that make happiness, but what you accomplish and what you do in an entire lifetime.
Now finally, at a third level for McIntyre, virtues ought to be understood within the context of
traditions. Practices after all, whether it be architecture or law or medicine or painting or
whatever else, practices change and develop over time. And when the pursuit of goods and practices
extends over long periods of time, they become traditions, and even what we call cultures.
The virtues in the context of traditions are just those qualities of character that sustain the
traditions and continue to make them productive of the goods they seek, like loyalty to a profession
or a tradition, fairness in judging other people's work, if you're a painter, for example, or a musician,
or whatever else you are, honesty in your own work, a scientist cheating on his experiments, for example.
And notice how these virtues are required to sustain the practices and realize the goods that are
involved in these very diverse practices. That's where the virtues have their home, according to McIntyre.
In such fashion, McIntyre presents us with a very rich and influential conception of the virtues
in terms of practices, narratives, and traditions. And he's undoubtedly onto something, I think, important
when he says that modern societies are losing this sense of virtue and excellence and degenerating
into cultures that are obsessed with money, fame, and celebrity, in other words, external goods.
And if McIntyre is right, you degenerate that way, you lose contact with the thing that really gives meaning in life,
which is excellence of achievement in some practice or other. In that case, our society, I think,
is in a certain amount of trouble. But then again, does McIntyre's account of virtues escape relativism?
As rich and as interesting as it is, we have to come back and ask that question as well.
Many of his critics, of course, say no, because virtues and goods, on his view, must be defined within
and relative to particular practices, narratives, and traditions. But practices and traditions differ,
and indeed, and here's one of the greatest problems for McIntyre, some of them can in fact be evil.
Torturing and terrorism are practices on McIntyre's account, just as well as physics and violin making.
And there are excellences specific to practicing torture and terrorism effectively as well.
Now, McIntyre is aware of this criticism, but he thinks that some traditions are intrinsically better than others.
And while he concedes not having any knock-down, drag-out kind of argument to show that one kind of tradition is better than another,
he argues strongly for the fact that traditions and practices and different views of the world can communicate with one another
and try to show that some are better than each other in terms of things that they can possibly share.
He has a faith that one can do that, at least. Other people have their doubts on that particular score.
Well, let's turn to the second critique of the Project of Modernity, the opposite postmodernist critique of Jean-François Lyotard.
In his influential work, The Postmodern Condition, French philosopher Lyotard defines postmodernism in the following way.
This is a well-known phrase. He says that postmodernism is the rejection of all meta-narratives.
Here, interestingly, this notion of narrative comes back into the picture. What does Lyotard mean by a meta-narrative?
He means any grand theory of God, or the absolute, or eternal forms, or universal history, or being in itself, which is supposed to be true for all times and from all points of view.
The very ideas that traditionally philosophers have tried to find, or religions, if you will.
As we saw in lecture two on Aristotle, it was such meta-narratives that the ancient quest for wisdom itself, or metaphysics, sought the ultimate story of what is real.
According to Lyotard, the postmodern condition has shown that there can be no such meta-narrative, no one true story of the world, if you will.
Such as philosophers and religions have previously sought.
We, each of us, have our different stories, our individual narratives, private ones, each of them to tell from different perspectives, embodied in our religions and in our myths and in our cultural legends.
But none of them is the true one about the nature of things. There is no such point of view.
There can be no one true story of the world, no grand theory, that informs us about the meaning of life.
And hence no account of good and evil that's true for all persons. This is, for Lyotard, the postmodern condition.
And what are the reasons for this condition? His answer is the standard one among postmodernists these days.
All knowing and understanding involve interpretation in terms of some framework or point of view.
Some conceptual scheme that we all have for interpreting the world, some theory, a language game, to use another favorite term of some of the postmodernists.
A narrative that's local in particular to us, to our people, to me, to our group.
It's impossible to rise above all such schemes in order to make the trans-historical, trans-cultural assertions which traditional philosophy and religion aspire to.
There's no neutral, trans-historical point of view for us humans to take.
And that's the problem with the project of modernity for Lyotard. Count and others were attempting to retrieve such a neutral, trans-historical, trans-cultural point of view
on the basis of human reason alone. And you just can't do it. It was doomed to fail.
Because for Lyotard, our human reason and our ways of thinking are conditioned by the language games we use and speak and the traditions we inhabit.
Indeed, what seems rational or reasonable from one perspective will not seem so for another.
There is no one conception of human reason either. This is also a key postmodernist idea.
Remember Raul's difficulties with trying to find out what would be rational to choose behind a veil of ignorance?
Or then later in his later philosophy, what kind of a social contract would all reasonable people agree to?
We need that to get an overlapping consensus. But the postmodernists, one of their key themes is there's no one conception of human reason
and hence there's no one sense of what's rational or reasonable to different people.
There's a lot of different senses. No meta-narrative, many different individual narratives as well.
Lyotard asks what of course makes people reasonable after all and doesn't reasonable must mean different things to different persons.
Postmodernists like Lyotard believe that ultimately that really does doom the project of modernity.
And indeed they would agree that it also dooms various projects like Macintyre's to reach agreement between different traditions and cultures.
Where Macintyre still holds out that hope that we might be able to communicate here and find what is the most reasonable view
by a clash of different kinds of traditions and views, if you will, the postmodernists have in effect given up on that idea.
I myself don't think we should give up on that idea at all, otherwise I would have ended this lecture series at this lecture.
But I'm going to give another 12 precisely because I don't think we should give up on this.
But that's really in a sense the way to put the difference between someone like Macintyre or even the moderns and the postmoderns
that he's in effect said we need to give up on this and live with it, so to speak, the postmodern condition.
Now postmodernism is a trendy new development in the academy and in society at large,
and even nowadays some people say that postmodernism is in a certain sense a trend that has passed its day.
Well, perhaps in a certain sense that may be true, but I don't think that should bother us a bit
because whether people continue to use the word postmodernism or whether postmodernism as a specific doctrine, if you will,
continues really doesn't matter. What does matter is that the idea behind postmodernism that we have been discussing
is still with us whether postmodernism as a trendy new idea goes by the boards or not.
The idea of it that we have been describing is the rejection of all metanarratives,
of any ideas of universal or absolute truth or value.
That challenge of postmodernism is going to remain with modern culture even if the term does not survive.
For many people today who would not call themselves postmodernists or do not even understand what the term means are imbued with this spirit.
Let's not call it postmodernism if you want. Let's call it the postmodern condition.
If postmodernism as a theory lives or does not, that does not matter.
The postmodernist condition is here and the spirit of it is the one that challenges us to try to find some way of looking at the world
that is not simply conditioned by our own finite and limited perspectives.
This challenge is the one we will have to deal with in the second part of this lecture series,
which is going to address the question of how at all the ancient quest for wisdom and meaning in life
can be retrieved in the new axial period that seems to be upon us.
We are going to begin that in the next lecture. Thank you.
