Hello, I'm Tom Rawlins, President of the Teaching Company.
These lectures are part of the Great Courses on Tape series.
The Great Courses on Tape cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes in length.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you could finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day
for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by the Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
The lectures on these tapes are titled The Quest for Meaning, Values, Ethics and the Modern Experience.
The lecturer is Dr. Robert Hillary Kane.
Dr. Robert Kane is currently a professor of philosophy at the University of Texas at Austin.
In 1995, the university recognized his sustained excellence in the classroom
by naming him a university distinguished teaching professor.
Over his three decades on the Texas faculty, Professor Kane has won no less than 15 major teaching awards.
These include the Friar Society Centennial Teaching Fellowship, the President's Excellence Award,
the Liberal Arts Council Teaching Award and the Delta Epsilon Sigma Award for teaching introductory classes.
In 1995, he was named an inaugural member of UT Austin's Academy of Distinguished Teachers.
Before coming to Texas in 1970, he taught at Fordham University and Haverford College.
Dr. Kane is one of the world's leading defenders of an anti-determinist conception of free will.
He is internationally known for his efforts to reconcile such a notion with modern science.
His writings comprise more than 60 articles and reviews and four books, including Free Will and Values
and Through the Moral Maze, searching for absolute values in a pluralistic world.
Professor Kane's most recent work, The Significance of Free Will, won the Robert W. Hamilton Faculty Book Award.
Each of Professor Kane's lectures is outlined in the course guide that comes with these tapes.
The course guide also includes diagrams, a glossary, timeline, biographical notes and a bibliography.
You might find it useful to review the outlines before and after listening to the lectures.
Lecture 13, Retrieving the Quest for Wisdom
Greetings. In this lecture, we begin the third task of the lecture series.
To explore how and to what extent the ancient quest for wisdom and meaning can be retrieved
and related to the ideas of the modern era that we have been discussing so far in this series.
This will require reconsidering some of the wisdom of the past that goes back all the way to the ancient axial period
we began to discuss in the first lecture. It will also require making use of some of the ideas of the modern thinkers
that we've been discussing in the last seven or eight lectures, and it will require doing some thinking of our own,
some rethinking about old issues in new ways.
The ultimate goal of this third part of the series is to find what convergences we can between ancient and modern wisdom
and see what they tell us about the modern world, and then to apply what convergences we do find to a host of contemporary
moral and social problems that lie, I think, at the heart of our contemporary confusions and disagreements about values.
So it's a big task we have for the next 12 lectures.
To begin, I want to draw your attention to the notion of a quest for wisdom or meaning, which has played such a big role
in the lectures so far, and I want to remind you of the title of the lecture series, The Quest for Meaning,
because from this point onward we're going to attend more carefully to that idea of a quest and try to use it
to help us understand some of the issues that we have been discussing.
Joseph Campbell, who some of you may very well know, the noted expert on mythology, has reminded us that the idea of a search
or quest for spiritual and worldly wisdom is a central theme of many of the great myths of human history.
We ought to think of ourselves here as engaged in a common quest as well for wisdom and meaning,
not necessarily processing the final truth, but searching for it.
I think such an idea, if we can learn to understand it properly, provides important clues for seeing our way through
the moral and confusions and disagreements of the times. That will be one of my themes.
And to illustrate, let's return to the themes of the opening lecture of this series, pluralism and uncertainty.
As we begin the second half of the series, we will in effect return to its beginnings,
and doing so will bring together some ancient and modern themes that have intervened in the lectures since.
Recall from lecture one that living in a world of pluralism and uncertainty and confronting other ways of life,
like the woman did in Paralandra, we learn something new about the complexities of good and evil.
But the learning comes with a bitter taste, as it did for her, the taste of lost moral innocence,
the innocence of believing that the values and beliefs learned in childhood are taught to us by our culture
or our history are absolutely true and unchallengeable. We come to realize, as did the woman on Paralandra,
that we are finite creatures who see the world from one among many particular points of view,
limited by culture and history, how else could it be? And there are difficulties in showing that one view is right
and others wrong from within any one point of view. This problem, as I said, haunts the modern intellectual landscape,
shows up in all sorts of intellectual trends, like postmodernism and others, which we have, in fact, discussed.
And everywhere it sows doubts about the possibility of justifying objective, intellectual, cultural, and moral standards.
Now, there's one natural but controversial reaction to this problem of pluralism and uncertainty,
a reaction which is all too familiar, because it's common in modern free and democratic societies like our own.
You may have had it yourself, or you may know many people who have, in fact, had it.
People think to themselves that since it seems impossible to demonstrate that their view is the right one from their point of view,
and since everyone else is in the same condition, the only proper stance to take is an attitude of openness
or tolerance, if you will, toward other points of view. People think that judgments about good and evil and right and wrong
are personal matters and should not be imposed on others against their will.
Again, I remind you, this will seem a very familiar position that many people take.
Hasn't much of the evil of human history come from those who thought they had the correct view and had the right to impose it on others?
Evil takes root, Russian poet Joseph Frodski has said, when one man begins to think he is superior to another.
But it turns out that such an attitude of openness or tolerance, though it comes natural to persons reared in free and democratic societies,
is often disparaged by theorists and social critics.
For example, you may recall Alan Bloom, who wrote a book about ten years ago called The Closing of the American Mind,
which caused quite a stir at the time.
Bloom argued that such an attitude of openness and openness of indifference, as he calls it, is the scourge of our times,
infecting society and education, young people in perverse ways, because it leads to relativism,
and hence to an indifference to objective truth and right.
In fact, Bloom calls openness or tolerance our virtue, the virtue of our democratic societies.
And instead of being, of course, he's being sarcastic as a virtue, he thinks it's really a scourge and a horror.
Now, relativism, of course, is the very danger we fear from pluralism and uncertainty.
We found that out in the course of this lecture series.
Bloom were right about the consequences of this attitude of openness.
It would indeed be pernicious, as he says it is.
But I think Bloom is wrong about the consequences of openness.
Properly conceived, it does not lead to relativism or indifference.
But quite the contrary, I think it leads to a belief in some objective and universal values.
Now, this may seem an awfully surprising thing to say in the current intellectual climate,
but I think it's true.
Those persons, and they may include you, who think in terms of openness in response to pluralism,
they're on to something. They've got something good in their mind here.
But it's very difficult to explain exactly what it is they're on to, and it's easy to misconstrue it.
To see why, the first step, I think, is to view openness to other points of view,
on matters of value or anything else, not as an invitation to indifference,
but as a way of expanding our minds beyond our own limited perspectives
to find out what's true from every perspective, not just our own.
That is objectively true.
Openness is thereby viewed as a way of searching for the objective truth about values,
not a denial of that objective truth, a way of searching for common and shared values.
Here, then, is the notion of search or quest, I promised you.
Openness is an initial step in a search or quest for objective truth and value.
Moreover, since it's a search or quest for objective truth and value,
this search has all the earmarks of the ancient quest for wisdom and meaning,
which we found have these two goals in lecture two when we were discussing Aristotle.
Namely, understanding what's objectively real or true, the way things really are,
and understanding what's really worthy and valuable and good.
Openness, then, is not to be viewed as a resting place in indifference or relativism.
I open my mind to all other views, I'm tolerant of just about anything,
but a first step, if you will, in a questing for objective and common or shared values.
It was set of Plato, for example, that later philosophers mistook his footsteps for his destination.
Well, here, openness isn't a destination, it is the beginning, it is the first step.
A first step, if you will, in retrieving the ancient quest for wisdom
and meaning that was the subject of lecture two.
Now, in fact, this is how openness or objectivity functions in the natural sciences,
where they function well, openness and objectivity.
That is to say, keeping one's mind open and trying to be as objective as possible,
requiring considerations as scientists do of other theories,
allowing other theories to be tested, those that are opposed to your own,
restricting undue bias in favor of your own theory or your own point of view,
all in the interest of limiting narrowness of vision and finding the objective truth about nature.
That's the way the scientists operate.
Well, why not think of openness in the search for objective value in the same way,
as a way of limiting narrowness of vision and finding the objective truth about value.
We all have our values, we all have our own views, but we get caught up in them.
Here, we wish to open our mind here to the values of others and the ideas of others,
as scientists are required to do, in order to be objective, if you will.
Now, the thought of doing this in the range of values may seem strange at first,
but only because of the obvious differences between fact and value,
which we have learned about in early lectures.
The suggestion that we think of openness analogous to the sciences
as a way of limiting narrowness of vision and finding the objective truth about values,
in fact, however, borrows from the ancient wisdom of the original axial period,
as well as from modern science.
Because looking at values in a different way here
is something that some of the ancients were aware of.
In the first place, for example, great sages of the original axial period,
like Confucius and Lao Tzu and the Hindu author of the Bhagavad Gita,
they remind us that systems of values are not just abstract theories
that can be tested in the laboratory, like scientific theories.
So there is a difference.
They are rather systems of values, that is, they are rather ways of life
that can only be ultimately tested by being lived.
In the Bhagavad Gita, for example, you have the practice of living the various yogas
of knowledge, of devotion, of good works, and so on, in order to get the truth.
You have to practice them.
You can't just do it in terms of abstractly of thinking,
what's the right way to live, or whatever, and so on.
You have to actually live it.
And so it is with the Chinese, too.
You have to actually live the way, the Tao, in order to understand it and the nature of things.
So they have to be tested, if you will, by being lived systems of values in some form.
This is an important piece of wisdom from the ancients.
We do well to heed.
Now, this is what it means.
If keeping one's mind open and trying to be as objective as possible in the sciences
means considering other theories and allowing them to be tested
in order to overcome narrowness of vision,
so openness to systems of value other than one's own
in the interest of finding out what's true from every point of view,
not just from your own, would mean respecting other ways of life,
letting them be lived or experimented with or tested in a way that's appropriate for values
as the ancient thinkers the axial period held,
that is, tested in action and practice.
But we can now see, I think, why people have shied away from this line of thought.
Does it mean respecting or tolerating every point of view and allowing it to be lived,
which would include, among others, the ways of life of the Hitler's or the Stalin's
or the ruthless dictators or killers and other evildoers of the world.
Then, indeed, openness really would amount to relativism and indifference
as critics like Bloom contend.
The interesting fact here is, however,
that openness does not imply respect for every point of view.
To the contrary, it turns out that you cannot open your mind to every point of view
in the sense of respecting every way of life.
There are situations in life in which it's impossible to respect every point of view.
And this fact is crucial, I think, for understanding values and ethics.
The idea is, open your mind to all other points of view
in order to find out the objective truth about values.
But the truth you find is not that you should open your mind to all points of view.
You can't.
Openness of mind is an initial attitude in the search or quest for truth.
But openness of indifference or relativism is not the final one.
Why is this so?
Consider a situation in which you're walking down the street
and see a woman assaulted in an alley.
If you do something to prevent the assault by intervening or calling for help,
you'll not be respecting the point of view of the assailant
because you'll be interfering with his desires and purposes, quite obviously.
But if you just walk on by when you could have done something to help
as weary city dwellers often do,
you will not be respecting the point of view of the woman being assaulted.
If you doubt that, the look in her eye when you turn your head
and ignore the situation, if you could have seen that look,
would have told you that you had chosen not to respect her desires and purposes.
The fact is, you can't have it both ways in such situations.
You can't respect both points of view.
When pirates under the command of William Kidd came into Philadelphia
in the 18th century sacking and pillaging and raping,
some of the resident men with pacifist leanings would not protect their women.
They were not there by choosing a nonviolent world
in which everyone's desires and purposes would be respected.
They were in effect choosing that it be the desires of the pirates
that would be respected and not the desires of their own women.
So there are situations in life in which when you are thrust into them,
you cannot treat every point of view a way of life with respect
no matter what you do.
You cannot be open to every point of view.
When such situations occur, let's say that the moral sphere has broken down.
I'll define the moral sphere as the sphere
in which every way of life can be respected by everybody else,
a kind of sphere of justice or peace where everyone can get along with everyone else.
When the moral sphere breaks down, we must treat some ways of life
as less worthy of respect than others
because we can't treat them all with respect,
in this case the assault victim or the assailant.
But which ones?
Well, May West had one answer.
She said, whenever I'm faced with a choice between two evils,
I always choose the one I haven't tried yet.
That won't help us much.
Yogi Berra is no help either.
He said, when you get to a fork in the road, take it.
Either one is not going to do much.
Much as I admire May West and Yogi Berra's truly American originals,
I think we have to do some work on our own here without their help.
The thing to do, I think, is to return to the original ideal of respect for all
or openness for guidance here.
Recall that this ideal was not assumed to be the final truth,
but was to guide us in the search for the truth.
Here the quest idea comes back again and is crucial.
The idea was to open your mind to every point of view
in order to find out what's true from every point of view.
Michel de Montaigne, the Renaissance thinker who was mentioned in lecture 3,
said that ideals are like the stars to the ancient mariners.
We never reach them, but we guide our path by them.
When the moral sphere breaks down,
we can't follow the ideal of respect for all through the letter,
but we can continue to follow it in spirit
by trying to restore and preserve conditions
in which the ideal of respect for all can be followed once again.
That is, when the moral sphere breaks down,
try to restore and preserve it by stopping those who have broken it
and made it impossible for others to follow the ideal.
This is as close as we can come to respecting the ideal
when we must violate it no matter what we do.
In our example, of course, it means stopping the assailant and the pirates
by force, if we must, since their actions broke the sphere,
which answers the question of who is to be treated as less worthy of respect
when the moral sphere breaks down,
and it's no longer possible to treat everyone with respect.
Now, needless to say, there are many complications and questions
about this line of reasoning that have to be addressed.
But lest we miss the forest for the trees here,
let's stand back a bit and try to see what it all means.
It means that the attitude of openness to all ways of life,
when put to the test in practice,
does not lead to relativism or indifference,
as critics like Alan Bloom have said,
but actually leads to the conclusion that some ways of life
are less worthy of respect than others.
In short, a relativism of indifference turns out to be an impossible ideal
when put into practice.
And this will be a result arrived at by anybody
who takes an attitude of openness or objectivity
in the search for quest for truth about value.
And what was said of the assailant and the alley and the pirates,
of course, can be said of all the Hitler's and the Stalin's
and the murderers and the rapists and oppressors
and exploiters and other evildoers of the world,
of whom we know of many in the news even as I speak.
We do not have to say that their ways of life
are just as good as everybody else's.
By their actions, they place themselves
outside the moral sphere, so to speak,
and make their ways of life less worthy of respect
by making it impossible for others to respect them and everyone else too.
There'll be a diagram on the screen here
and one in the booklet in which I have drawn five circles,
if you will, to represent different points of view,
different ways of life, five small circles in an array,
to represent different ways of life and different perspectives
and then around those circles I have drawn a big one
which represents the moral sphere.
All those within the moral sphere are worthy of respect
and can be respected.
I've also put an arrow taking one of those circles
right outside the moral sphere to represent that person
by making it impossible to respect them
and everyone else has broken the moral sphere,
thrust themselves outside it,
where they are no longer equally worthy of respect
along with everybody else inside the moral sphere.
They have made themselves less worthy
but by their own actions have they done so.
Here's another way of looking at the thought experiment
that we have in effect just performed.
In a pluralist world of conflicting points of view,
these circles that I have been describing,
we could say that there were two ways of searching for absolute values,
values that hold for all persons and all points of view.
The old way was to position yourself in one of those points of view,
usually your own,
and argue that it was right and every other view wrong.
Well, this is the way people have thought about establishing objective truth
and absolute value for centuries.
The way in which religions and cultures and ways of life
have tried to prove that they are right.
From their own point of view, position themselves there
and try to argue that we're right and everyone else is wrong.
The difficulty is that this old way of searching for absolute values
or searching for universal values,
this old way of doing so,
founders on pluralism and uncertainty
and the circularity problem discussed earlier.
Namely, when we try to defend our own point of view from our own point of view,
we tend to be going around in a circle, right,
because we have to defend our values in terms of other values we hold
but others might not hold who disagree with us.
We could, at this point,
given pluralism and uncertainty,
given our lost moral innocence here,
we could give up and say,
well, I guess we just can't prove we're right
but nobody else can prove they're right either.
We might at that point drift into relativism,
but be careful.
We could also continue the quest for wisdom
by trying some alternative path suitable to modern conditions.
And in fact, that's exactly what I am suggesting here.
The older path of looking for absolutes
or trying to show that your view is right
and everyone else is wrong,
that's what runs into trouble here in the modern world
with pluralism and uncertainty,
because we find ourselves trapped in a framework after all, right?
And we try to prove our view,
but it only appeals to those who share our premises,
maybe who share our sacred book, our Bible,
but not the Koran or not some other great text,
or share our culture and so on.
So we find ourselves trapped in this way,
defending our own point of view from our own point of view.
And the tendency here is to sort of give up and feel
that we're all trapped in our own narrow perspective
and can't get out of it.
But what I'm suggesting here is that rather than give up
and sink into relativism or a kind of indifference,
as Bloom says here,
that in fact we continue the quest and we ask ourselves
there must be some other way to look for objectivity here
suitable to the modern world,
an alternative path that is connected
with our own modern condition.
And openness suggests itself as an alternative here
because it takes seriously
the conditions of pluralism and uncertainty.
I'm not sure I'm right, I think I am,
but let me take into account all other points of view,
and like a scientist, be as objective as I can about the matter.
So the other way of searching for objective values
that hold for all persons and for all times
is to open your mind initially to all points of view
in order to find out what's true from every point of view
and not your own.
That's to draw the big circle, if you will, around everybody.
In this way, you lift from yourself the burden
of proving your view is absolutely right
and every other view wrong,
which is a possible burden to take on.
And you place that burden on everyone equally
to prove themselves right or wrong by their actions.
Some ways of life, some people then make themselves
less worthy of respect by breaking the moral sphere
and making it impossible for others to treat them
and everyone else with respect.
Well, what then about your own point of view?
What you'd like to know is the right one
since you believe it is.
Well, it's to be treated no differently than any other.
If you break the moral sphere,
then you make your view less worthy of respect by others.
Just as well.
This is burden of proof enough for anyone
because the proof, whether of your way of life
or of any other, is not carried out by arguing
in the abstract that one view is better than others,
but by how you live and act,
just as we should expect for a theory of ethics or values,
and just as was suggested by those great thinkers
of the axial period.
That's why, by the way, I think it's so frustrating
to argue with people about values,
especially when they have fundamentally
different presuppositions.
One tends to go around in circles
and doesn't get anywhere.
Well, the real proof in the pudding, so to speak,
is in the acting, not necessarily in the arguing.
I think arguing values in the abstract
can only get you so far.
What I'm suggesting here is the ultimate test,
and I take this from these axial writers,
is in the living and in the acting.
And some people prove themselves less worthy,
by the way they act
by thrusting themselves outside the moral sphere
and making it impossible for us to treat them
and everyone else with equal respect.
So summing up, I said that the idea
of a search or quest for spiritual wisdom,
as often described in the myths of mankind,
could actually lead us
to substantial insight about values.
When it comes to the objective truth about nature,
trying to be as open and objective as possible,
allowing each theory to be tested,
is the method by which the search proceeds
in the sciences.
Transferring this method to values,
in the manner suggested by some ancient axial thinkers,
leads to an initial openness or objectivity
toward ways of life,
which does not lead to relativism
or indifference at all, as one might think,
but ultimately to the belief that some ways of life
are less worthy of respect than others
and some ways are more worthy.
Moreover, the fault lines between the more and less worthy,
where the moral sphere breaks down,
are surprisingly consonant with traditional ethical beliefs
about right and wrong.
Because it does seem that things like lying and stealing
and so on and so forth are not respecting others,
are in fact breaking the moral sphere,
certainly killing and assaulting
and other things of that nature,
forms of breaking the moral sphere as well.
And these are cases where somebody thrust themselves
outside of the moral sphere
and makes their view less worthy of others.
So it would seem that the very fault line
we have found by this objective test
is the one that conforms very closely
to our ethical intuitions about what's right or wrong,
what ways of life are less worthy of respect
than others and which are not.
In fact, in the next lecture, I'm going to suggest to you
that the fault lines here of where the moral sphere breaks down
are very much consonant with and expressive of
the mosaic commandments,
not to kill, to lie, to steal, to cheat,
and also very much expressive of the golden rule,
which has been a part of the history of religions
and traditions going back to the axial period,
as we'll see in the next lecture,
first stated in many of the traditions
that I discussed in the first lecture from the axial period,
that we have arrived at this, however,
by an incredibly modern procedure,
which takes into account pluralism and uncertainty,
takes them into account and comes to a result
very much consonant with the ethical wisdom of the past
in the mosaic commandments, in the golden rule,
and in others by a procedure
that takes modern conditions very seriously.
This is what I had in mind by saying
that we were going to be looking for convergences
between ancient and modern wisdom.
We use certain thinkers of the axial period here
to give us a clue about how you deal with questions
about systems of values.
You can't test them in the abstract
or even just argue about them in the abstract.
They are parts of ways of life.
Values have to be put into ways of life
and tested as ways of life, as being lived.
That's why it is so hard to discuss them in the abstract.
That was the ancient axial idea that I took over,
and it's very much as scientists would say,
you can't argue about scientific theories in the abstract.
You've got to test them in the laboratory.
I'm suggesting to you, that's a very modern idea, of course.
We have combined modern science
with some old ancient axial ideas here
and said the same thing about ways of life.
You can't argue about values in the abstract.
They have to be embodied in the way people live,
and they have to be tested in that way.
Then when we test them in that context, we find
if we are consistently open and objective about it
that some ways of life turn out to be less worthy of respect
than others.
Let's look at some of the further consequences of this
in terms of the golden rule and other ideas,
like, for example, whether there can be exceptions
to moral rules and things of that kind
that have troubled and confused people for centuries.
Let's look at those questions in the next lecture.
Thank you.
Thank you.
