Lecture 16 Public and Private Morality Part 1
In this lecture and the next, we're going to turn our attention to contentious moral
and social issues of the day that are the inevitable result of living in pluralist societies
where people have differing values and conflicting beliefs.
These issues include, for example, the degree to which morals can and should be enforced
by law, censorship and freedom, teaching values in the schools, the limits of liberty and
the rights of privacy, the loss of shared values in modern societies, and the resulting
discontents about politics and public discourse, among others, all, I think, familiar to you.
I will not be discussing all of these in this lecture, but over the next two or three, we
will eventually get to all of them.
Such issues are part and parcel of our current culture wars, sometimes so-called, and I think
there's a good reason for their divisiveness.
More broadly conceived, they are the ultimate symbols, I think, and symptoms of pluralism
and uncertainty, symbolized in lecture one by the modern Tower of Babel.
The passions stirred by these issues are symptoms, I think, of geological shifts in ways of thinking
about values that are symptomatic of a new axial period.
They symbolize changes people fear and do not fully understand, and I think that's the
reason for the divisiveness and the passion.
Now among these changes is a growing importance of a basic distinction that lies behind, I
think, many of these contemporary moral debates, and we are going to begin with that distinction.
Living in modern pluralist societies means coming to grips with a distinction between
public and private morality.
Let's say that your private or particular morality is what you think is the right way to live
for yourself or perhaps for anyone.
If you do believe that your particular morality is, in fact, right for everyone, that would
seem to cover the field, of course.
What then could public morality be?
Well, public morality would be what you owe others even if they disagree with your private
or particular morality.
Such a distinction seems to be required by the pluralism of modern societies where individuals
commonly disagree in their private and public and particular moral views relating to a whole
host of issues, for example, abortion, capital punishment, homosexuality, physician-assisted
suicide, sex education, pornography, censorship, and so on.
Yet the distinction between public and private morality is controversial.
Many people think even making such a distinction is a pernicious error.
I mean, after all, if you believe your particular morality or your religion or way of life is
the right way to live for yourself or anyone, why not make it the public morality?
Isn't it difficult, after all, and perhaps even immoral, to restrain yourself and be
tolerant in the face of behavior you privately find deeply wrong and offensive as many people
regard pornography or homosexual behavior or abortion?
But as natural as this reaction may be, it leads to a central problem of whose particular
or private morality would become the public one and imposed on everyone.
For the interesting fact is that where the distinction between public and private morality
entirely collapses, we have totalitarian societies.
Some groups' morality is imposed on everyone and made the public morality.
This indeed is the essence of totalitarianism, which seeks total control over the actions,
minds, and consciousness of citizens.
Totalitarianism amounts to a complete collapsing of public and private morality into one.
In Nazi Germany, for example, Hitler made a law against even having homosexual thoughts.
That's the totalitarian mind at work, if you will.
And if you want to see it even more clearly, one can read justly famous 20th century works
of literature like George Orwell's 1984 or Aldous Huxley's Brave New World or Arthur
Kessler's Darkness at Noon, which is about communist control.
These are the great lesson works of the 20th century on the subject of totalitarian thinking,
along with Hannah Arendt's The Essence of Totalitarianism.
As the poet W. H. Ordner remarked, to be unacknowledged legislators of the world is not the dream
of poets and philosophers, as Shelley said, it's the dream of the secret police.
By considering the totalitarian alternative, I think we come to see why a distinction between
public and private morality is so crucial to free and democratic societies.
Yes, the distinction can be hard to live with, especially if one has strong moral views,
but it would appear to be the price we pay for living in free societies like we do.
I'd even go further.
I'd even say that at a deeper level, it's the price we pay for lost moral innocence
of the perilandra story of lecture one, when one confronts views of right and wrong radically
different from one's own as the woman did on perilandra.
The price we pay is having to make a distinction between public and private morality.
In other words, the public-private morality distinction is the further consequence of
having bitten into the fruit of the tree of knowledge and good and evil in this distinctively
modern way.
So not surprisingly, there's a great deal of resistance to this public-private morality
distinction throughout the world, wherever people are intent on hanging on to their traditional
ways of doing things and believing.
For example, in Islamic countries, fundamentalists want to impose the sharia, or Islamic law,
as the law of the nation, and in some of them, of course, they have done so.
It's now torn between its orthodox who want the country governed by biblical law and its
secularists who want a modern democracy in a pluralist state.
India has wrestled with traditional Hindu customs and having modern secular laws, especially
in regards, say, to the treatment of women.
In Catholic countries like Ireland and Italy and Spain, divorce has finally made legal,
even though a sin, according to the Church.
And now one fights over the legalization of abortion.
The point of all this is that the culture wars have become international, my friends,
wherever traditional ways are opposing new ways, suggesting, I think, a new axial period.
And everywhere these wars have to do with the encroachment of pluralism and other conditions
of modernity we've been talking about in these lectures.
But the question now before us is this.
If some distinction between public and private moralities is, in fact, required by free and
democratic societies, how are we to understand public morality?
What do we owe others, even if we disagree with their particular or private moralities?
One possibility is now right before us.
It is to say that what we owe others, even if they disagree with our private morality,
is respect for their ways of life or in the language of the Kantian ends principle, the
right to be treated as an end and not a mere means are used by us.
This way of looking at public morality recommends itself because it's the common core we would
arrive at if we started with an attitude of openness or objectivity in order to find out
what was true for all of us.
That something would be what we share despite our differences, in other words, a public
morality.
And if it should turn out that the principles involved should also express the golden rule
and the mosaic commandments common to traditional religions, this would further recommend it
as a candidate for public morality and for what Rawls calls an overlapping consensus.
Another suggestion might be to define public morality in terms of the Jeffersonian rights
to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
This in fact seems to constitute our public or shared morality in the U.S. today, as spelled
out, say, in our Bill of Rights.
But fortunately, it turns out that this would come to the same thing as defined in terms
of the Kantian ends principle, since to treat others as ends amounts to respecting their
rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
Abraham Lincoln, back in the 1850s when he was running for public office, speaking to
a group of American immigrants in Chicago, even in those days Chicago was a hotbed for
immigrants moving in there, during one of his campaigns referred to the principle of
U.S. declaration that all men are created equal and endowed by their creator with inalienable
rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
Lincoln referred to this quote, he called it, quote, unquote, the father of all moral
principle, which each of us, he said, even if we are immigrants to this country, and
he was speaking to immigrants from foreign lands, each of us has a right to claim it
as though we were blood of the blood, flesh of the flesh of the men who wrote the declaration.
Another way to put this, I think, is to say that the principle that all deserve the rights
to life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness is not the possession of any one people or
nation.
It's something anyone can come to if they are willing to open their mind in an effort
to overcome narrowness of vision in the search or quest for the objective truth.
Now some might say this is a good start into finding public morality, but it can't be the
whole story.
Does it have enough content to cover all the contentious issues we want to talk about?
It would seem to counsel only a respect for or a bland tolerance for different ways of
life, kind of anything goes attitude, if you will.
Well, there's a lot more to it than that, of course.
When translated into law, public morality, so expressed by the principle of treating
others as ends and not means, would lie at the basis of our criminal and civil law.
Water, theft, salt, rape, burglary, fraud, larceny, extortion, all involve treating
others as means.
There are level two breakdowns of the moral sphere where a guilty party can be identified
as we found in the last lecture.
Public morality so defined would also cover treatment of criminals, since deterrence of
crime is needed both to restore the moral sphere when it's broken down and preserve it in future
breakdowns.
John Locke said the main job of government was to take over the job of punishment from
individual citizens in the law of nature he held.
One of the things we have the right to do is to punish others.
One of the main functions of government is to take that right over.
And why?
Because if it's left to the citizens, we get fighting back and forth, we get vengeance,
we get the Hatfields and the McCoys and so on and so forth.
In the case of civil law, treating others as ends and not means covers fair contracts
and just resolutions of civil disputes and all conflicts of interest with second best
strategies such as we discussed in the last.
So public morality would have a lot of scope if we so defined it, either in terms of the
Jeffersonian principle or the Kantian principle.
It would not be without content.
But at the same time, what would it say about the more contentious issues of social and
public life?
For example, two issues especially need to concern us here.
Questions about the degree to which morality can be enforced by law and questions of what
the limits are of government interference in the private lives of individuals.
What would public morality so defined tell us about that?
Well, to deal with such questions, social ethicists and legal theorists have argued
that further principles of public morality are needed.
The further principles in question are often called liberty limiting principles, a term
that was introduced by Joel Feinberg in a very influential book of his called The Moral
Limits of the Criminal Law.
Actually it's a full volume work that has been very influential.
The most influential of these liberty limiting principles in current debates about social
ethics and law was first denunciated by John Stuart Mill in his classic work on liberty
which we've discussed and mentioned several times in these lectures.
The principle in question is often referred to as the harm principle or sometimes Mill's
harm principle.
It goes like this.
The liberty of individuals can be justifiably limited by law, government or society only
to prevent genuine harm to others.
Now Mill held that this was the only reason liberty could be restricted in a free society,
an issue we're going to have to consider.
Mill's harm principle seems simple enough, but in fact it has given rise to a series
of very interesting and difficult questions.
What exactly is harm and what is to count as genuine harm according to Mill's principle?
That many people are offended by such things as obscenity, pornography, public nudity
or other forms of behavior they regard as wrong or indecent.
These offended persons being harmed by the presence of such things in their community
even if they do not directly see them or partake of them.
In my town in Austin, Texas, a while back, oh I don't know how many years, a Baptist
minister and his congregation complained to the city council, they were down visiting
the city council and complaining about the fact that they felt they were being harmed
by the presence of porn shops and adult movie theaters downtown in the Pekin Street area
which is where a lot of the nightlife of Austin takes place, if you're ever there to visit
by all means come down to Pekin Street, there's a lot of activity.
The minister indicated to the city council that the presence of such smut in our dear
city made his stomach turn and that of his congregation too and that they were so offended
they were being harmed by the existence of this.
Well in a way he and his congregation were indeed being harmed, but is this the kind
of harm that's sufficient to limit the liberty of others according to the harm principle?
Can liberty be limited when it gives offense to some members of a community where offense
means something like shock sensibilities at the violation of one's deeply held beliefs?
Well most legal and ethical theorists, Feinberg included, have said not unless further conditions
are satisfied here because what has to respect to some degree the freedom even of those people
who do things that offend one?
In a pluralist society to limit liberty on grounds of offense alone would mean prohibiting
many forms of behavior that cause no harms beyond the fact that they offend someone or
other.
I think we can all appreciate that principle, but it causes a good deal of confusion and
difficulty in actually trying to apply it.
Consider the case of a nudist colony for example, isolated from the rest of the community with
access restricted only to those who wish to join.
Can it be shut down because some people in the community are shocked by its existence
even if they never see it?
Here's a clear example say legal theorists where private morality is conflict and public
morality must stand up for the rights of minorities in this case nudists whatever we may think
about them.
In our city I don't know about yours but there are also such things as nude apartment complexes.
Now I don't know why anybody wants anything like this but some people do.
Well the law says they can have them but they have to have high fences around them and no
not holes for the kids.
And you can see why again if you understand what kind of a condition or a principle might
be involved here it has been suggested by Feinberg and others that the qualification
we need is that those who are offended must find that the thing that offends them is not
reasonably avoidable if the offense principle is going to be applied, right?
So we need some kind of avoidability there and once we get that then of course the offended
behavior will be allowed if it's not otherwise harmful.
But on the other hand you see the more interesting question is when does offense if you will
actually become such that we can restrict it.
If we can't do it in the case of the nudist colony as long as it's isolated and we can't
get there.
What are the conditions under which offense can justify restricting the liberty of others?
Well it's one thing of course to have a nudist colony somewhere in an isolated spot or to
put a high fence around a new apartment complex if you will.
But how about nudity on Main Street or in the public park?
That's clearly going to be another matter if it would be thrown in the face of those
offended.
I remember when we lived in New York we went to a picnic in Central Park and there were
a lot of families sitting around on blankets and this fellow came by and he pulled down
his pants and he defecated on the grass and he said this is what I think of the chic of
weebanger or some unknown place I don't know anything about and he claimed this was freedom
of speech but of course they hauled him off for public nudity if you will.
And again what's the issue here?
Those who are offended it's thrown right in their face.
There is if you will no reasonable avoidability and that seems to be a crucial condition here
for offense.
Hence for example we do have laws about unsolicited pornographic materials sent to people in the
males and consider in terms of pornography or adult movie theaters or whatever and so
on in small towns versus big cities.
Ask yourself this question why in small towns might it be quite easy to restrict them not
so in large cities.
Again it's a matter of reasonable avoidability.
You can ride through any old small Texas town and you probably got on the main street
three buildings, a gas station, a 7-11 maybe and a few other buildings and if we added
a porn shop there or whatever no reasonable avoidability one main street.
But if we're talking cities there's more ambience and so on and so forth and more reasonable
avoidability so the rules are a little different.
I think you can see how these things work if you think in terms of offense and respecting
other people.
So we need we can have an offense principle that we add to the harm principle.
For the harm principle says that the liberty of individuals can be restricted if they do
harm to others.
Offense alone isn't going to be quite good enough but we want to ask the question when
will offense allow us alone to restrict liberty.
Well we could add then an offense principle which says that the liberty of individuals
can be restricted by law or government when it gives offense to others if the offending
behavior is not reasonably avoidable by those offended.
Okay so far so good but is even this restriction enough?
It may have occurred to you that reasonable avoidability will not handle cases where prejudice
is widespread in a community.
Suppose the majority in a community is offended by the presence of a black family in their
neighborhood or blacks eating at a local lunch counter to take a famous example in American
history or a Jewish synagogue in their neighborhood.
The requirement of reasonable avoidability won't handle such cases because the offended
parties claim that what offends them is not reasonably avoidable.
After all it's right in their neighborhood or in their local cafeteria.
Clearly some sort of a further restriction to the offense principle is needed here.
And I would think that the following suggests itself in the light of our account of public
morality.
If the attitude which gives rise to the offense is itself in violation of the principle of
equal respect for all individuals and groups then it shouldn't count in the first place.
If the attitude that gives rise to the offense is based on the idea that some persons are
less worthy of respect than others simply because of what they are because they are
black or Jewish or female or whatever then the attitude should not even get into the
liberty-limiting equation in the first place.
It is already a violation of public morality.
So we should if you will restate the offense principle so that it says that the behavior
of individuals can be limited, their liberty-limiting, if what they do gives rise to offense in others,
if it's not reasonably avoidable and if the offending attitude itself is not in violation
of the principle of equal respect for everyone.
And in such cases I think we can't limit liberty in this way for offense.
Think for example that it's one thing to put the pawn shop down on Pecan Street or in a
commercial district and quite another to put it next to the Baptist Church.
Here we're talking now about respect for the offended parties where children can go and
so on and so forth.
Zoning laws in cities are actually an expression of this kind of respect that we have for different
people and the fact that they may or may not be offended by this or that.
This is a kind of a two-sided game on the one hand with nudist colonies and so on.
We have freedom to respect the particularly unusual ways of certain peoples if they don't
get in the way of others.
But on the other hand if you kind of thrust it in their face we have to start respecting
those people who are offended.
It's a balancing act if you will but I think you can see how it works in public morality.
Okay, but some legal experts and social ethicists argue that even these principles, harm and
offense, are not enough for public morality and they suggest further liberty limiting
principles which are still even more controversial.
One such ethicist is Sir Patrick Devlin, a respected British judge and legal theorist
who presented his case for the legal enforcement of morals while arguing against relaxing
England's laws on homosexuality.
Devlin first noted that societies are based on a community of ideas, part of which must
be a moral foundation, and society has a right to protect that moral foundation for its own
survival.
He says, and I quote here, is held together by invisible bonds of common thought.
If the bonds are too far relaxed the members will drift apart.
Devlin's second point concerns the standards by which societal morals should be judged.
They should be, he says, the community standards as determined by the reasonable person or
average citizen in the jury box.
In matters of pornography, by the way, in our country that is in fact the way we do it.
Questions of obscenity and such like, frequently the police may round up some materials or
whatever and bring them before a grand jury which then has to make some kind of judgment
as a representative sampling of the community.
The Supreme Court has allowed this sort of thing and we do it sometime in our cities
and towns and so on.
Now Devlin grants that the community reaction through such representatives must be a strong
one and justify legal sanctions.
But when there is such a reaction, he holds, liberties can be restricted on moral grounds.
Now the principle which states this is sometimes called the principle of legal moralism.
It's a very controversial principle, but it deserves a name.
It says that behavior can be restricted by law if it offends community moral standards
in something like the way described by Devlin.
Now clearly this is a very controversial principle and critics have made some of the points that
you may be thinking about in trying to apply the principle of legal moralism, assuming
that it is an acceptable principle and that's certainly up in the air here.
I want to make that very clear.
Critics have said that Devlin's appeal to community standards is vague and potentially
dangerous.
Community moral standards may be based on ignorance or prejudice.
Should they be given the status of law simply because they are widespread, so say the critics.
And how widespread must they be?
Will a majority suffice?
And if so, do we have, if you will, a tyranny of the majority as regards moral standards?
One critic of Devlin is Ronald Dworkin, who is Professor of Law at New York University
and also at times at Oxford University.
Dworkin sums up these concerns with Devlin's principle of legal moralism when he says that
the problem is not with Devlin's idea, and I quote now, it's not with Devlin's idea
that the community's morality counts.
It surely does count, but rather the problem says Dworkin is with Devlin's idea of what
is to count as the community's morality.
Problems on liberty to prevent immoral behavior as the legal moralism principle requires fail
to resolve the central question of pluralist societies whose idea of immoral behavior will
be enforced.
In the U.S., as I said, the Supreme Court has in fact left matters of restricting pornography
to individual communities with only a few vague guidelines for them to go by.
For example, that the material must appeal merely to prairie interests and have no redeeming
social, scientific, and literary value.
This requirement has been a real difficult one ever since they put it forward.
It was amazing how pornographic movies used to try so hard to give themselves redeeming
social value by making some important point or other in some ridiculous way.
Some communities, for example, the city of Cincinnati is a very notable example here,
have taken a very strong stand against the sale of pornographic materials within the
city limits, but we know full well that other cities have highly done anything at all on
the topic.
Well, that's allowable by the court, by the way.
It's community standards along Devlin's lines to a way, and that's fine if Cincinnati
wants to do that, if you will.
But most other communities, as we know, are less restrictive.
But on the other hand, you see these kinds of restrictions in a city, if you want them,
are justifiable on grounds of offense.
The legal moralism principle here may not be required.
And as I said, meanwhile, producers of pornographic material continue to try to justify their
work as having redeeming social and literary value.
I'll never forget, by the way, when I was in Philadelphia.
This is unbelievable, but I saw in the Philadelphia newspaper an ad for an X-rated film, and this
is what the ad said.
This is an adult movie, but it is also mature.
One gets the impression that this is not the normal thing in this genre, right?
Like when a person says to you, I'll level with you, you'll get the impression that that's
not his normal way of communicating.
Complicated today, I think, are questions of sex and violence on TV, and such things
as pornography on the Internet.
These are different, because first of all, they involve children.
And second, because TV and computers have now become such a staple in nearly every American
home that the question of their reasonable avoidability is really up there in the air,
you see.
When we have suddenly got these things that are thrust right into our home, there's no
reasonable avoidability anymore.
You might try these V-chips and things and so on.
That's what that's all about, of course.
It's the reasonable avoidability.
How well it works is very, very unclear and up in the air right now.
But these questions are further problems that are not solved by either the harm principle
or the offense principle, and we would need further liberty-liberating principles to deal
with them.
And what we're going to do in the next lecture is consider what further possible principles
may be needed in addition to harm and offense to deal with these contentious issues.
As for Devlin's legal moralism principle, it has some problems.
But there's something to be said for his idea that society is held together by invisible
bonds of common thought, which must include a moral foundation and shared ethical beliefs.
We will have to continue to explore that particular issue in the next lecture.
Thank you.
