In this lecture, we continue the discussion begun in the last lecture of what principles
beyond harm and offense are needed to define public morality. If Devlin's legal moralism
principle presents difficulties about determining community moral standards, nonetheless, even
Devlin's critics agree with one of his underlying claims as I noted at the end of the last lecture.
He says society is held together by invisible bonds of common thought, which must include
shared ethical beliefs. Even Devlin's critics, like Dworkin, will agree with that. But if
Devlin's own legal moral principle comes too close to the idea of one group's imposing
its morals on everybody else, we perhaps still need another principle to try to handle this
need about common bonds and so on. One promising candidate that suggests itself would be a
public morality principle, which would say something like this. Society has a legitimate
interest in protecting and encouraging attitudes, institutions, and social conditions that tend
to sustain a sphere of mutual respect between persons, a moral sphere. Since this principle
focuses on respect for the rights of all, it seems like a better candidate for the shared
beliefs of public morality. But does it add anything substantial to the harm and offense
principles? Yes, I think this public morality principle does add something substantial,
and what it adds are things that accommodate the ideas of communitarians that we discussed
in lecture 11. The harm and offense principles are reactive. Liberty is to be restricted
if it would cause harm or offense to others under certain conditions. This public morality
principle goes further, insisting that society has a vested interest in sustaining communal
bonds and supporting those institutions such as families, extended families, neighborhoods,
churches, schools, which are involved in the moral education of the young. Recall that
communitarians think that liberal individualist societies tend to neglect these communal bonds
and supporting institutions, and I think they are onto something, and we have to accommodate
it seems to me, their ideas in this regard. It's customary to think of public morality
in free societies as merely a set of rules for adjudicating conflicts between individual
rights and ways of life, and we in America tend to think that way. What is missing in
such an approach, as communitarians remind us, is a realization that the rights of life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness are not self-sustaining. They require a moral sphere
in which to exist, and this moral sphere is in turn a very fragile thing that depends
for its preservation on the cultivation of institutions like families and schools and
neighborhoods that create what we might call a moral ecology in which rights can survive
and flourish. There's some truth in this communitarian claim, and it is accommodated, I think, by
this very nice term, moral ecology. We are aware of the ecological ideas with regard
to our physical environment. Perhaps we ought to add and think very seriously about the
idea of the moral ecology of our own society. One of our founders, James Madison, put it
this way, if there be no virtue among us, no form of government can render us secure.
To suppose that any form of government will secure liberty or happiness without any virtue
in the people is an illusion, unquote. So the public morality principle would guide
all social policy and private initiatives, having to do with the health of families of
education, including moral education, social programs dealing with teen pregnancy, drug
abuse, drunk driving, disaster relief, job training, gang violence, domestic abuse, crime
prevention, and numerous others that are crucial to the preservation of the moral sphere,
a concern, if you will, for the moral ecology of society. As I give these lectures, and
as you know this very week, we've had a terrible tragedy in Colorado in which two young men
went into the high school, and they shot at least 13 or more young people, killed them,
and so on, and everyone now is thinking very seriously about these matters of moral ecology.
And what kind of background we have here of our alienated youth, and what effects have
had on them of violent video games, for example, and movies, and violence, and other things
they see on TV, and all around them. These are questions that are rising in our mind
today, and they're foremost in our mind because they have indeed to do with this whole question
of moral ecology. And think clearly here that the harm and offense principles don't solve
this problem, because they just say, you know, if the moral sphere breaks down, if there's
harm, or if there's offense in some ways, then we do something at that particular point.
But the public morality principle is concerned with the preservation of a sphere of life,
if you like, where we, these kinds of things will not happen, and it is a much more difficult
thing indeed to institute. William Inge once said that societies of the past were inundated
from barbarians that came from outside. Modern societies, he said, breed their own from inside.
And unfortunately we have experiences of this kind. Now naturally there will be fierce
political debates about how these things will be dealt with, teaching the young, and bringing
up the young within a moral ecology in which we can preserve mutual respect for one another
without resorting to violence and other such things. There will be differences of opinion
here politically. Should this be done by the federal government or state governments
or local governments, or should it be done by private institutions or organizations?
These are political debates which I think are healthy, and they have to go on. But they
surely have to be done. There's no question about it. And nowadays I think we are learning,
and we certainly learned from this Colorado incident, but from many others as well, that
families alone, and even institutions like churches and so on, cannot handle this problem
by themselves. If we're going to deal with this problem, it seems to me we're learning
more and more that we have to deal with things like the general cultural environment. That
TV and that computer and that internet, which I said was now part of our home, right inside
it, not reasonable, avoidable anymore, are we going to get the idea that things have
changed, technology has changed, and so much has encroached on the family so that the family
can't handle this alone anymore, and to deal with it as part of society. And what I am
suggesting here, that even as a matter of public morality here, we are required to go
beyond harm and offense, to go beyond the idea that, hey, we have to stop somebody and they
don't have liberty when they actually do something wrong to harm somebody or offend somebody.
We have to be more aware of the moral ecology here, the background, the bringing up of children,
the kind of society we live in, and maybe we have to start looking at things like video
games and movies and violence on TV and a host of other things. I think this is the lesson
of the public morality principle, and it does in fact go beyond the other particular principles.
As I said, it will be a political matter to try to figure out and decide how we are going
to deal with these questions, because we know that there is a conflict here between restricting
things like video games and stuff and film and the whole question of free expression.
I think that conflict between creating a moral ecology for the young and freedom of expression,
freedom of speech is going to be one of the biggest and most difficult issues for modern
free societies to deal with. It will be one of the big issues of a new axial period, I
think, because it is absolutely crucial. Now, another thing of special importance to the
task of public morality and creating a moral ecology is the crucial issue of moral education
in the schools. How is it to be done in a pluralist society where there are different
private moralities and conceptions of the good? This is our contemporary version of
the central problem of moral education that concerns Mencius and Yume in Lecture 7. It
is a daunting problem for a pluralist age for sure that we are far from solving, and
another big issue, I think, for a new axial period. Contrary to Yume, teaching morals
is a lot harder than teaching music appreciation, although I have a niece who teaches music
to elementary students, and she disputes that. There are currently three methods of teaching
values in the public schools, each of which is controversial, but each of which is worth
considering. The first of these methods, which was popular in the 70s and 80s, is called
values clarification. It is based on the premise that in a democratic climate of value pluralism,
more of none of us has the right to pass our values on, our particular set of values
on, to other people's children, and that goes for teachers too. So teachers must avoid imposing
their values or any set of values on the students. Well, what to do then? Through group discussion,
according to the values clarification method, in which the teacher is supposed to remain
non-judgmental, young people are encouraged to discuss their differing values in order
to come to a better understanding of their values and maybe to understand the values
of others, which may differ. Now advocates of this values clarification method say it's
the only way the public schools in a pluralist society can go about teaching values, and
think about it a bit. You may see their point, because teachers can't impose their own personal
values on the students, but debates about values clarification has been fierce. Critics say
values clarification breeds relativism and subjectivism. It leads to the belief that no
view is any better than any other so long as it feels good to the one who advocates it.
Well, I think we can all see how it would lead in that direction. Critics also argue
that values clarification relies on the assumption that the proper attitude of society or government
in the person of the public school teacher is one of neutrality to different conceptions
of the good, since the students come from all different backgrounds naturally. But perfect
neutrality, the critics of values clarification argue, is not possible. If teachers do insist
on remaining entirely neutral, they will in effect be promoting the position that no
view is intrinsically any better than any other. It's a terrible dilemma. That would
be, of course, vulgar relativism. Well, a second method of teaching values in the schools,
and I'll come back to the assessment of all these eventually, a second method of teaching
values in the schools, is the so-called cognitive method inspired by the influential developmental
psychologist Lawrence Colberg, whose views have very much influenced the teaching of
values in this country. The cognitive method focuses on moral reasoning capacities by presenting
moral dilemmas to students and asking how they would resolve them. Critics argue that
since the dilemmas offered frequently do not have clear-cut right answers, they're often
rather difficult. And teachers are not supposed to impose a single right answer. The cognitive
method also, according to its critics, leads to relativism and subjectivism. You may recall
from lecture four, the existentialist philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre presented us with a dilemma
about the boy who had to choose between his mother and the resistance, and so on. Well,
this is like the dilemma is actually presented in some of these cognitive methods. There
isn't always a clear answer. And Sartre left the impression that all moral dilemmas are
like this, tough to call, and there are no rules that can help us. We must ultimately
trust our instincts. Well, the critics of cognitive methods suggest that that seems
to be the implication that they often leave as well, again, subjectivism or relativism.
Well the third method of teaching values in the schools is a response of sorts to the
perceived failings of these other two, which have been popular. This third method is the
teaching of basic values or character education in the schools starting in the younger grades.
This is an approach that has become popular in recent years with the revival of virtue
ethics, which we discussed in lecture 12. Here developments in philosophy have paralleled
those in society at large, an interest in virtue ethics here and going back to the ideas
of virtue. The idea in this case in the schools is to teach certain basic virtues or traits
of character as fundamental for living in a civilized society. It's an approach that
would have appealed to both hum and mensius, for sure, as you recall. Different tables
of virtues have been suggested and used in different state and local school systems,
but they are often overlapping. For instance, one standard commonly used set is the six
pillars of character proposed by the Josephson Institute's Aspen Declaration of 1992, now
used in a number of different school systems. They suggest six virtues. I have only five
fingers here, sorry. They suggest six virtues, trustworthy, respect, responsibility, fairness,
caring, and civic involvement or citizenship. Alternative state educational, pretty interesting
group, I think. Alternative state educational groups and local systems have come up with
four virtues, honesty, caring, respect, and responsibility, but they more or less overlap
with the six of the Josephson Institute if you align honesty with trustworthiness. Such
character education in basic virtues, I think, goes some way to responding to the charges
of lack of specific content, at least, those charges, leveled against values, clarification,
and cognitive methods. For here we have specific content in the form of character traits and
virtues. Let's take the six of the Josephson Institute. This is one reason, I think, for
the popularity of virtues education in recent years. Yet there have been criticisms of this
approach as well. For example, different state and local citizenship groups have come
up with different lists of virtues. So the old problem in relativism might rear its head
again here as it did in the case of Mencius and Eum. As always, there are laundry lists
of virtues when you approach ethics in this way through virtues. Yet in this case, the
virtues frequently overlap as we saw above. So the philosophical question that should
interest us is this. What's the rationale for the virtues chosen? Well, a Wisconsin
citizenship task force that looked into this matter for character education in the schools
suggested a rationale. They said the virtues chosen should represent a core set of citizenship
values essential to our democratic society. Well, this is a very interesting idea which
is precisely in line with our public morality principle. And it seems to track the notion
of public morality. Those virtues essential for a democratic society. I would put it this
way. The values of virtues chosen for public morality to be taught in the schools are not
meant to tell us in full detail how to live or what is the best form of life. That's for
each of us to work out in the business of living. The values of virtues chosen for the
schools should rather be dedicated to answering a different kind of question altogether. Not
how do we live in full detail? We have to work that out ourselves. But how do we live
together given that we have different views about how to live? Consider by way of example
then the six virtues of the Josephson Institute. Trustworthiness, respect, responsibility, fairness,
caring and civic involvement. They all point in this direction. How to live together given
that we may have different views about how to live. Indeed, as far as I can see, they
all are implied in one way or another by the idea of treating other person's ends in themselves
and not mere means to one's own ends. Trustworthiness, respect, responsibility, fairness, caring,
civic involvement. Minor differences in the tables of virtues recommended should not confuse
us therefore with suggestions of relativism. If we understand the underlying rationale of
public morality, say the idea of treating everybody with respect or equally, then we
can see that there is a common set or core here that we could come up with. But again
I would add that even though this virtues approach seems to have something going for
it, there's still a place for values clarification and cognitive methods in moral education.
One thing it's important to understand the different values of others if we are going
to treat them with trust, respect, fairness and care. Where values clarification and the
cognitive methods go wrong I think is requiring that the teacher be non-judgmental. Now of
course the argument is that this is required to avoid the teacher imposing his or her own
views on other people's children. But this argument I think rests on a confusion that
was exposed in my earlier lectures. If we start with openness to other ways of life,
in other words being non-judgmental if you will, as the values clarification wishes to
do, we can't end up by asserting that every view is as good as every other. To the contrary
if we start by being open and non-judgmental, it turns out that some views if they're acted
upon would make themselves less worthy of respect by breaking the moral sphere and making it
impossible for others to treat them with respect and everyone else as well. Here is what I
think teachers and parents ought to say when children are continuously bombarded nowadays
through the media, TV and other places as they are today with different points of view
in the global village. Teachers and indeed parents, here's what I suggest. Be open if
you wish to other points of view. This may be the correct attitude to start with if you
want to find the truth. But just remember that this attitude of openness or tolerance
does not mean anything goes ethically speaking. Quite the contrary, trying to sustain an attitude
of openness under adverse conditions leads to the conclusion that some ways of living
and acting are really right and others wrong and some more worthy of respect and others
less worthy, those who break the moral sphere, making it impossible for us to respect them
and others too. So we can sit around trying to understand each other's values all right
as in the values clarification method, but don't think that means we have to take an
equal attitude to those whose ways of life involve killing, lying, stealing, cheating
or otherwise exploiting others, treating others as means and not as ends. We can't
treat these equally. The very principles of openness and tolerance with which we started
tell us we must be judgmental when it comes to such things. If you start off being open
and tolerant, you must in the end be judgmental. And this goes for the teachers as well as
the students. So the teachers need not sit back mutely without any judgment or passing
any judgment and similarly the students. In such manner the values clarification method
would converge with the teaching of virtues such as trustworthy respect, responsibility,
fairness and caring. Clarification of values without the confusions often attending it
would lead to these very virtues. To conclude this lecture I want to turn back to a general
theme of public morality. We have been trying to spell it out in terms of liberty-living
principles such as Mil's harm principle, the offense principle and now have tried to add
this public morality principle which would try through moral education and in other ways
to create a moral ecology in society, which in part one hopes would combat the kinds of
tragedies we have had this week. But there is one other controversial liberty-living
principle that has to be added to the mix for a full account of public morality. It's
sometimes called the paternalism principle. To what degree can the liberty of individuals
in a free society be limited by law or government to prevent persons not from doing harm or
offense to others but from doing harm to themselves? As John Stuart Mill argued, the presumption
of free societies is always for liberty, since that's the best way to respect others
even if persons use their liberty in ways that will harm themselves. That's true for
adults at least. Mill made some exceptions on paternalism for children and clearly we
need paternalistic legislation for children. For example, restrictions on underage drinking
or advertising to children and all the rest. Even Mill would have allowed that sort of thing.
But paternalism to adults seems like a much more complicated business in a free society
where we run into the justification for controversial laws restricting liberty to adults like gambling
or drug legislation or prostitution or anti-sotomy laws or even mandating things like motorcycle
helmets or seat belts so on. To initially test one's intuitions on this matter of paternalism
because there are people like who follow Mill or even go further than Mill and say gee
we shouldn't have any legislation whatever restricting liberty when it comes to an adult
doing harm to themselves. Well, we need to test our intuitions on this. And I suggest
we do so with a rather unusual example that's part of American history. And that's the
example of dueling. You'll recall that dueling is illegal but it wasn't always in American
history. It was illegal through a good slice of our history. I guess we know the story
of Alexander Hamilton was it and Aaron Burra and other challenges between senators and
congressmen in the Congress during the 19th century. Laws against dueling are now taken
for granted but they are clearly paternalistic. They protect proud and foolish men from letting
their pride and foolishness lead to putting their lives on the line. I suspect that if
dueling had been legal during the recent impeachment process in Washington, several
senators and congressmen would now be dead. Perhaps I'm here undercutting the argument
against it. I don't know but in any case, more relevant paternalistic legislation concerns
other things having to do with government regulation however. For instance, consider
the regulation of dangerous foods and prescription drugs and other consumer goods. The work of
the FDA, product safety commissions, this is often paternalistic legislation and it's
perennially controversial like much else in public morality. Some people say following
meal in a free society wherever possible we should first inform people of the dangers
of safe foods and drugs and let them make their own free decisions. Some people like
to say that about our anti-drug laws now. There's a movement across for the legalization
of drugs. Some of these respects. So the suggestion is we should inform rather than
ban when it comes to people harming themselves. Hence we get warning labels on cigarettes
and pharmacist lists of possible side effects of prescription drugs which are often very
hard to read as you know and things like that. What's the principle here? Well in the case
of paternalism, the idea would be since if people are only harming themselves and their
adults inform wherever you can letting persons make their own choices and ban only when necessary.
I think that's a very significant qualification we have to make to the paternalism principle
for adults. And it wouldn't mean by the way that we would never just have to ban something.
I think a very interesting case here is the case of Chloridane. Chloridane is that very
very powerful and dangerous nerve damaging chemical that was used for many years for
termites. You know you get your house termited and they come in and they spray around it.
Chloridane was the thing they used for years and years. Well it's now banned. They officially
tried to simply inform people that it was dangerous but the information wasn't getting
out there because for one thing to use Chloridane is a lot cheaper than the other substitutes
they have for it. And so all the companies that were doing your termiting were using
it otherwise they would have to charge four or five hundred dollars more per house. Well
you can see there's something going wrong here in the free marketplace because in order
to get the cheapest price they were all using the most dangerous chemical. Well the way to
go in here is just get rid of it and in fact Chloridane has been banned. So here's a case
where you have a qualification for paternalism which says in effect inform people first.
First labels on cigarettes etc etc but there are going to be cases where information just
isn't going to get across. I remember when I was first trying to find out about Chloridane
I tried to call the state agencies and they told me before it was banned that is and I
was going to get my house termited they told me no problem. These are bureaucrats for you.
Two weeks later it was banned nationally. I had to get my information by calling up the
disease control center in Atlanta and you can't usually do that. I had to pull something
like I was a big professor or something and I talked with the fellow there and he told
me about its dangers. So there's a very very interesting case I think where paternalism
comes into play and I think a case that I don't have time here to discuss at great length
but is also important these days to people is physician assisted suicide. Here is a very
interesting paternalistic issue in society I think today because again the normal idea
would be inform people make it clear to them about what their physical condition is how
much pain and suffering and let people make their own free decisions. That's one way of
looking at the physician assisted suicide issue is to put it up to the free decision
but the question arises whether people in a condition of sickness whether they're thinking
properly whether they're in a depressed mood or something whether information will get
across to them are they thinking clearly are they thinking straight and so on. In other
words the same old principle with paternalism here is information enough to handle the business.
That's very important so as we slowly work out the issue here of physician assisted suicide
in society it's going to be like that. How can we avoid or any kind of abuse of this situation
where a dying person is not so to speak bumped off by the relatives anxious to inherit or
otherwise not in a condition to make an informed decision about this and how much can be left
to the individuals. I think this is an extremely difficult case right now I think there are
good arguments you can give on each side people do want more control over their dying because
now we have the means of keeping them alive indefinitely in conditions which are sometimes
intolerable so I think we're going to have to work that out but it is a very clear example
of the paternalism principle here in morality. So public morality in general covers a lot
of things if you include both the harm principle the offense principle the public morality
principle and the paternalism principle but it doesn't cover all of the issues that are
controversial and bother us in society and other in some ways the most controversial and I will
conclude with one comment about this if public morality has broader scope than we might think
it still leaves certain contentious issues undecided and I think one of the primary examples
of these today is abortion. I don't think the principles of public morality we've come up with
as broad as they are in scope and I've tried to emphasize that are going to handle all of our
contentious present moral issues and I think abortion is a very good example of a case that
public morality simply can't handle why because public morality insists that we treat everybody
and every person with equal respect as an end and not a means and the problem with abortion is
that there is now bitter dispute and debate about the status of the fetus is the fetus a person
with those rights to be treated as an end and when does it come become so at the moment of
conception or later on biology doesn't quite answer this and religious views about it differ
and as long as that is the fact then abortion is going to be a continuing moral struggle for
pluralist societies which must continue to rely on second best strategies like majority vote I'm
afraid to deal with it that seems sad but nonetheless public morality can't handle anything we have
ongoing problems that we have to slowly work out and get answers to thank you
