Lecture 18, Play-Doh on the State, the Soul and Democracy.
At the end of the last lecture I pointed out that some important moral issues may be beyond
the scope of public morality to resolve at the present time.
They are just too difficult and contentious for us to deal with them.
And one of these, of course, was abortion.
And I suggested that it might have to be dealt with by second best political strategies
like majority vote.
Now I didn't mean that we would ever directly vote on the whole question of abortion.
But as a matter of fact, through electing our representatives, through electing presidents,
through appointments to the Supreme Court, we are in effect going to face up to this
issue one way or the other by political means.
It's not the best way to solve ethical problems, that's for sure.
But it can't be solved directly by public morality, so it has to be put to political
means.
And I call them second best strategies.
But that is what we face in the present case, because we can't find a solution, a direct
one right now, to public morality.
But it does lead this question naturally to questions about the relationship of ethics
to politics, which will be the subject matter of the next two lectures.
The theme of this lecture is that as ancient axial thinkers held, politics can't be isolated
from ethics, from the search or quest for the good.
And hence politics can't be isolated from the quest for wisdom and meaning in life,
which has been the main theme of this lecture series.
This theme has special relevance today to democracy, which has become the favored political
form of our pluralistic age.
With the demise of communism, nations are lurching toward democracy throughout the world, from
both left and right.
It's the politics of the new axial period, if there is going to be one.
The transition to democracy is not easy in many nations.
Russia, for example, or China, and many others in Asia and Latin America and Eastern Europe,
because democracy requires habits of mind and heart different from the totalitarian and
authoritarian ones to which they are accustomed.
There's a danger, a real danger today, that some of these countries will revert to authoritarianism,
or they will exchange one form of totalitarianism for another.
In Africa, in Asia, in the Middle East, and other spots around the world, there's the
added problems of tribalism and fundamentalism, which clash with the openness and pluralism
of democratic ways of thinking.
These clashes, I think, make clear that the present ferment over democracy is not simply,
and that's worldwide, is not simply a matter of practical politics.
It's about ways of thinking and ways of understanding values.
If we take a larger look at it, what I'd like to suggest to you is that democratic politics
is part of the largest struggle of the modern world to cope with the lost moral innocence
of pluralism and uncertainty, and democracy is related to the two contrasting ways of
searching or questing for absolute values discussed in Lectures 13 and 14 that are responses
to pluralism and uncertainty.
To see this, consider two different images.
In one image, values seep downward from the top, from rulers to rule.
This is obviously the image of totalitarian and authoritarian forms of government.
Some ruling groups or elites choose values for the rest of society, and these are imposed
from the top down.
Often in the past, the access of rulers to the true values was legitimized by claiming
the divine right of kings, or through ancestors who came from the gods, or sometimes as an
ancient Egypt claiming that the rulers were gods.
Democracy represents the exact opposite image.
Instead of values bubbling down from the top, values in democracy bubble up from the bottom
to the top.
They arise in the desires and the feelings and the aspirations of the people and flow
upward to the leaders who are supposed to be responsive to the rule of the people.
Democracy assumes no direct access to the God's eye point of view, what I called before
the fourth dimension of value.
It assumes no direct access by the leaders to any God's eye point of view.
So the leaders are fallible like everyone else, and their power has to be checked by
checks and balances.
Nor are the people even infallible, though they are sovereign.
That is why even the sovereignty of the people in the form of a tyranny of a majority must
be curbed in democracy by constitutional checks and balances.
Clearly, this second image of democracy with regard to values seeping up from the bottom
is more chaotic and pluralistic, uncertain.
In democracy, as John Stuart Mill pointed out, the search for the good is very much an experiment
in values that everybody is performing individually and with others.
Democracy therefore has its dangers and flaws.
Instead of finding the good, it may end up in moral chaos.
It's an experiment.
We see this danger today, of course.
But the dangers and flaws of democracy were even more presciently seen centuries ago
by one of the greatest thinkers of the first axial period, the Greek philosopher Plato.
And his criticisms of democracy will be the centerpiece of this lecture.
Plato, as you know, was Aristotle's teacher, the founder of the academy in Athens, to which
Aristotle and many other great thinkers of the ancient period studied.
And Plato and Aristotle are the two most influential figures in the history of Western
philosophy, both of them from the late axial period.
By discussing Plato's views on democracy and politics here, I hope to finally bring
together themes about the ancient quest for wisdom and meaning that were first introduced
in lecture two when we dealt with Aristotle.
In fact, we'll put these two ancient thinkers, Plato and Aristotle, together like bookends
in order to make sense of the ancient quest for wisdom.
Plato, in his major work, The Republic, which is surely one of the most influential works
in Western culture, argued for an authoritarian solution to the problems of politics, in contrast
to democracy.
But Plato's well-known twist, as you well know, was that the rulers be philosophers.
Philosopher Kings is the famous phrase.
Now this expression, this famous expression, is misleading.
What it means, literally, is that the rulers should be philosophoi.
That is, those who would love, fillane, wisdom, Sophia, rather than being lovers of power,
as most leaders and politicians are.
In other words, the crucial contrast of the republic is that leaders should be lovers
of wisdom rather than lovers of power.
Rulers who loved wisdom more than power, philosophic rulers, for that's the true meaning of philosopher
Kings, would have insight into the good and the correct ends to pursue the ideal forms
for Plato.
For that's what wisdom seeks, the reality, as we saw in lecture two.
These rulers would pass this wisdom down to the people in the manner of the authoritarian
image of values seeping downward from the top.
Now Plato criticized all other forms of government.
They were flawed for a reason that will seem very strange to us moderns who have lost the
true meaning of politics, in his view.
Bad governments were flawed, he thought, because they clouded and inhibited the search or quest
for the good.
We moderns fail to see this because we live after the modern fall, having sundered politics
from ethics along with other sunderings of modernity.
For Plato, the condition of the state, which in Greek is polis, and the condition of the
soul, which in Greek is psyche, the root words of our terms politics and psychology, the state
and the soul, are related.
Flawed states wrought the soul, and flawed souls wrought the state, such as the close
connection.
And democracy for Plato was especially flawed.
It was the worst form of government in his list, except for tyranny.
Democracy brought, in his view, discord, moral confusion, disagreement about values, a degeneration
of public discourse, a fetish for images and illusions, living in a kind of cave, as he
put it.
And in all this confusion in democracy, Plato argued, people lose their way in the search
for the good.
Plato's criticisms of democracy are still the most prescient ever written, and they
have great relevance to the political problems of the day and the quest for values in our
own time.
I aim to show that in this lecture, looking at modern problems of politics and democracy
through Plato's criticisms.
It is a further way of continuing our theme of the second half of this lecture series
of relating ancient and modern wisdom.
Now Plato's criticisms of democracy can be divided up into two parts, and I think this
helps us to organize them, if you will.
Some of them are political, and some of them are social.
Let's begin with the political criticisms.
Plato argues first that leaders in a democracy would tend to seek popularity above all rather
than try to be statesmen.
Why?
Well, obviously, popularity with the masses is what is required to get elected and stay
elected in a democracy.
The people would tend to vote for leaders more like them, who projected an attractive
image, not necessarily the best or most competent.
If democracies do end up getting competent leaders, according to Plato, that would be
a matter of chance or luck.
It can happen, but it would be a matter of chance, because people will vote for the popular
person.
In addition, that's the first criticism that popularity will go out over statesmanship
in the leaders.
His second criticism is that elected representatives in a democracy will tend to pander to the
wishes of the people rather than do what they think is right.
If not, they'll be thrown out of office, so he said.
Democratic leaders must pander this way, unlike the philosopher kings, who don't have to worry
about such matters.
As a consequence, and here is the third criticism Plato makes of democracy, leaders in a democracy
are also tempted to focus on short-term goals at the expense of long-term needs of society.
What happens in the distant future will not affect the next election.
The difficulty of getting leaders in a democracy to take the long view is no accident about
democracy, according to Plato, it's built into the system.
Democratic politicians can't afford to choose policies that have long-term benefits but
cause too much short-term pain.
It's been said that the breadth of a politician's vision is equal to the number of days remaining
in his or her current term.
And I think a good deal of truth there in this third criticism of Plato of democracy.
By contrast, taking the long view and the larger view is the essence of wisdom.
On Plato's view, it's what his philosophic rulers, his rulers that love wisdom rather
than power, will be interested in.
The long view and the common good, not special interests and not the short-term crisis attitude.
As a consequence, and here we come to a fourth political criticism of democracy by Plato,
it's always easier, he said, for democratic politicians to give things to the people rather
than to ask for sacrifices, which in our day amounts to an inbuilt tendency to spend more
than they take in.
As Plato puts it, democratic politicians find it hard to force sacrifice on a reluctant
public, which will throw them out of office.
And by contrast, they can get re-elected by giving out goodies of all kinds.
So naturally there's going to be an inbuilt tendency to spend more than you take in.
Now in addition to these four criticisms, which I think are pretty much on the mark
from our experience, Plato focuses on a further set of political criticisms of democracy.
These are on the nature of debate and discourse in democratic societies.
He argues, for example, and here is a fifth criticism, that debate in democratic politics
will become superficial and focus more on images, less on substantive issues.
Why?
Well, he said, the masses are impatient with complex reasoning and prefer the sensational
over the important.
How true this often rings in modern democracies hardly need saying.
In political campaigns, it's been said pure drivel tends to drive out ordinary drivel.
This by the way also happens on TV, where Jerry Springer drives out, what's her name,
that woman.
Oprah Winfrey, that's the one.
Okay, so there's another criticism.
Similarly, in electing leaders, Plato argued sixth, and here's a sixth criticism, images
would come to dominate in democracies over substantive debate in political elections.
More emphasis would be placed on superficial matters of how candidates looked or presented
themselves rather than on substantive issues.
All these tendencies were not accidental, Plato thought, but they are built into the
fabric of democracy.
We don't think of it that way usually.
We think these are accidents somehow.
He thinks they're part of democracy.
In fact, it's an interesting issue here that Richard Werthlen, who was the public and
media consultant for the Reagan campaign in 1980, was the first political consultant
to win Advertiser of the Year Award.
A very interesting factor, and of course, his methods have since been used by others
ever since, Democrats and Republicans through media consulting.
It's interesting, a form of advertising.
As criticisms of Plato, the democratic politics focuses on images and image politics.
They actually touch on deeper themes in Plato's own thought.
For the central distinction of the Republic is between appearance and reality, how things
seem to us and how they really are.
That's what the Republic is about when you look at its philosophical depth, even on the
surface, it's about politics.
Indeed, that distinction between appearance and reality is the central distinction of
wisdom or first philosophy, of all philosophy, as we've seen with Aristotle, the way things
really are as opposed to the way they appear to us.
The distinction is illustrated in the Republic by Plato's famous Allegory of the Cave, ordinary
experiences like living in a cave in which we only see the appearances of things, the
images, the illusions, not the reality behind them.
And for Plato, all imperfect political systems fail because they favor appearances over reality,
illusions, images, whether in political campaigns or otherwise, and so they lose their way in
the quest for wisdom.
For wisdom is seen through the appearances to the reality underneath, and the meaning
beyond them, it's climbing out of the cave of illusions.
And democracy is especially flawed in this regard according to Plato.
In a democracy, this is his seventh criticism, people are awash in images.
They wallow in appearances.
As a consequence, he adds, and here's an eighth point, more emphasis is placed on emotion
than on reason in public debate.
For example, I remember in the 60s and 70s when they were debating about nuclear power,
especially in California, wanting to put one of those power plants on the San Andreas
Forth.
Well, they had a referendum and they had a debate in the public airways, and the two
sides, what they tried to do with their ads is scare people as much.
Those who were for nuclear power tried to scare people that we wouldn't have enough energy
in the future if we didn't use it.
And those who were afraid of it tried to scare people with nuclear accidents and sabotage
and so on.
And the one who could scare the most wins, even though as Plato would see it, it's a
very complex debate.
Now we might be on one side or the other.
I know where I am on this one, being ecologically minded, but nonetheless, it's a complex debate
and it shouldn't be carried on merely at an emotional level.
That's Plato's point.
And to all this, Plato adds a ninth point, that societies which are focused on images
and appearances like this are easy prey to those interested in manipulating public
beliefs to their own advantage, rather than finding the truth.
If you live by illusions, that is, in a cave, you die by illusions.
These manipulators of images and appearances in our own time, we know what they're called.
They're called media consultants, advertising agents, lobbyists, spin doctors, public relations
experts, and other names.
In Plato today, they also had a name.
They were called Sophists, and they were his chief antagonists in the Republic.
The Sophists were itinerant teachers in ancient Greece who pretended to teach wisdom for a
fee, but their real concern was teaching good speaking and how to win an argument and present
a case, if you will, not find the truth.
As Plato would think of it, they were lovers of power, not lovers of wisdom.
Their principle was that you can fool all of the people some of the time and some of
the people all of the time, and that's usually good enough.
True love is a wisdom, by contrast.
The philosophers would prefer to lose the argument if they could find the truth.
And I can tell you, as a practicing philosopher, for a long time, that's very hard to do.
It may be the hardest thing to do in the world, especially for us.
And yet that's what wisdom is supposed to be all about.
For Plato, democracy opens the door to rule by manipulators and Sophists like this, because
the people are awash in images, and images are easy to manipulate.
And the manipulation of images, Plato adds, serves the purposes of special interests,
who are seeking to manipulate public opinion for their own private gain, rather than the
public good.
Now, as a final example here of Plato's political criticisms of democracy, it's rather interesting
to take a look at this one.
This one is really wild.
Plato suggests that in democratic societies, people will tend to eat poorly.
And you say, what?
But indeed, that's what he argues.
Why?
Because they will be more concerned with how food looks and tastes its appearances rather
than the real, nutritive value behind the appearances.
Same problem, appearance versus reality.
You can see, you go into a grocery store, you can see that an orange on the shelf is
brightly colored and unspotted.
What you can't see is how rich in vitamins and minerals it really is, nor how many synthetic
chemicals have been put into it to make it so brightly orange, right?
Now how many pesticides to make it spotless?
These things you can't see.
But for Plato, the reality is always hidden.
What appears is not what is.
And this is true in the marketplace, as well as in politics.
It takes wisdom to see through the appearances, including science to detect the vitamins and
the nutrients inside.
Illusions also undermine habits of rationality.
Consider.
Consider this.
This is really wild.
We put synthetic lemon juice in small plastic lemon shaped containers to spray on our salads.
You've seen these things in the market, right?
And inside, basically, it's synthetic stuff.
It's a chemical mixture, which is brew of chemicals inside there.
That's what we spray on our salads.
And then we put real lemon juice in floor wax.
No one seems to recognize how irrational that is.
As Plato would say, if you live by appearances long enough, they come to seem natural.
The reality itself.
Something has to remind us that we're living in a cave and we're not really thinking clearly
anymore.
Well these are the preceding political criticisms of democracy, which Plato makes.
We now turn to his second set of criticisms, the social criticisms.
And here, we raise a whole new set of rather interesting issues for us to consider.
Plato argues further, and then we can call this his 12th criticism of democracy, that
in a democracy, people will tend to gradually lose a sense of shared values.
Now this again is a bit of a social criticism.
The others are about the political system for the most part.
This one here is a social criticism about the society.
In other words, democracy, there will tend to be a loss of shared values.
Well why?
Well, he says the democratic character wants to go its own way, to pursue its own personal
values.
We call the image of values bubbling up from people.
Everybody wants to do their own thing in a democracy, he says.
But the desires and values of individual persons differ.
So naturally, disagreements increase and shared values are hard to find.
This is the pluralist theme, which Plato obviously foresaw.
Now he of course would have expected his philosopher, King, to keep all this in check.
But in a democracy, of course, you cannot exactly do that sort of thing.
So in addition, he argues, people will become in a democracy absorbed with their own personal
interests and will be less willing to sacrifice for the common good.
So he thinks democracy will also breed, if you will, other social problems.
For example, it will breed, if everyone's going their own way, less willing to sacrifice
for the common good, it will breed social disorder.
It will also breed, he thinks, rises in crime.
It will also breed, he thinks, distrust of authority and government.
Because again, people want to do their own thing, go their way.
It will also breed, he thinks, a greater gap between the generations.
Why?
Because young people want to do their own thing and not necessarily share the values of their
elders.
Lily Tomlin once said, there were many things my mother told me that weren't true.
And one of them was, whatever will please you will please me.
And I guess every mother must know that one.
Finally, and oddly, Plato argues that democratic societies will spawn successions of fads and
fashions that will capture public attention for a time and fade away.
Why?
Well, he thinks these fads and fashions fill a value vacuum that's created by the loss
of shared values, which democracy produces.
Citizens he thinks will wander from one thing to another, from Eastern religions to primal
scream therapy, I'm using obviously things he didn't know about, but we do, do yuppie
indulgence to the latest fad diets and attempt to fill this value vacuum.
Plato puts it this way in the Republic, and I'm quoting here now from the Republic.
For the democratic personality, one day it's wine, woman, and song.
The next water to drink and a strict diet.
One day it's hard physical training.
The next indolence and careless ease.
Often the democratic personality takes to politics and keeps jumping to his feet, saying
and doing whatever comes into his head.
There's no order and restraint in his life, but he reckons his way of living is free
and happy."
Putting together these social criticisms of democracy, all of them notice about values
in some ways.
With the political criticisms mentioned earlier, we have, I think you will agree, a very powerful
and remarkably prescient criticism of democratic politics.
The best, I think, that's ever been written.
Now you might want to ask here, where did Plato get all these ideas, and why was he
so much opposed to democracy?
Because we ourselves, lovers of democracy, it seems to me, should be wondering about
how we can make it better, but we should, I think, take his criticisms very, very seriously.
Well, how did he get his views about these matters?
It so happened that in Athens, in his lifetime, Athens had gone through a succession of governments,
oligarchies ruled by the rich, tyrannies, and there were some democracies thrown in
there too.
If you look around the ancient world, democracy was very, very rare, but it did occur in Greece
from time to time in the city-states, and it did occur in Athens, off and on, and at
least once during Plato's own lifetime.
So he had experience with it.
But interestingly enough, during the period of democracy in Athens, there was a considerable
amount of social chaos, which obviously you wouldn't get if you had a single ruler with
a lot of power, actually, because that's the way democracy is.
So he had a view of this.
He saw some of it in the flesh, so to speak, and he saw some of the chaos, but that wasn't
the only reason he was suspicious of democracy.
