You're a little taller, you want to sit over here?
No, I'm good.
Okay.
Cause I'm already set up.
Plus I'm supposed to be farther away so I don't get people sick.
Sick.
Yeah.
We're all going to come out if you're six.
That, hmm.
Now that would be a downgrade.
Wouldn't be the worst thing in the world.
I mean, I wouldn't die as soon.
That's true.
But I'd still have to go through the whole teenage years again.
A school would be a breeze this time.
God, school might be really boring on the other hand.
I could just ignore everything and work on my own projects.
That's right.
And you can be the, you can run the school with your advanced brain.
I'm not sure that's how schools work.
No, but you could probably run the bullies somehow.
I don't know.
I don't know if you could argue with kids or not if you're smart or it doesn't work with
adults.
But you might freak them the fuck out if you're talking at them like a 30 year old with a
six year old body.
You might be able to like corral the nerd group.
That's true.
Yeah.
I don't think you're about to talk any nerds into not beating you up.
So let's introduce ourselves.
Hey, welcome to the Bayesian conspiracy.
This is Katrina Stanton.
This is Steven Zuber.
And this is Zinniash Brodsky.
And today we are talking about the sanity waterline.
Specifically, should we raise it?
Can we raise it?
And before we start any of that, I should probably introduce what the sanity waterline
concept is.
Please do.
Okay.
The sanity waterline is coined by Ali Eiser, of course, is the idea that there is fundamental
problems in society itself that has let us get to this point in how we think.
The example he brings up, which I think might be slightly contentious, but not a bad example,
is that of religion, that even if you were to get rid of all religion and, you know,
to be less contentious, let's just go with creationism.
We can all agree that young earth creationism is really past the pale, and there's no reason
for anyone to believe that that's sane.
The young earth creationism being the belief that the earth was created 6,000 years ago.
Are you sure you're not marginalizing the less wrong young earth creationist overlap there?
You know what?
They can stop listening if they want, or they can continue either way.
So we'll take creationism, even if you were to wipe out entirely the concept of creationism,
which in America has an approval, a belief rating of something like 40 to 50 percent?
Yeah.
Young earth?
Yes.
Young earth creationists.
40 to 50 percent of people subscribe to it.
So yeah, totally.
The earth was created 6,000 years ago.
Even if you were to wipe out that belief completely, and everyone were to just have that erase
from their heads, and no one would think of it again, there is this problem in society
that that belief could arise in the first place, and it would be no more than a few months
before something equally crazy swept through the country, because there's a fundamental
problem in how people think if thoughts like that are that easily and that widely accepted.
So what's the origin of this problem?
I was just reading something that talked about our ancient brains.
Our ancient brains that evolved over hundreds of thousands of years, obviously longer than
that actually, and it evolved over 6,000 years.
Yes.
Are ill-equipped to handle our space age world.
They're very well-equipped to handle running around the savannah.
Yeah, if that's what you want to do.
Right, and making babies.
And they're only kind of okay with that.
I mean, I guess they're optimized for false positives, because you survive longer.
Okay.
Well, I wanted to bring in this quote at the top of that essay, because I liked that a
lot.
That great fine menesque strategy of sounding complicated, but then you dissect it and it
doesn't.
Uh-huh.
So, the post that we're kind of deriving this episode from is, unless wrong, called
Raising the Sanity Waterline.
It begins to paraphrase the Black Belt Bayesian, behind every exciting dramatic failure, there
is a more important story about a larger and less dramatic failure that made that first
failure possible.
Beautiful.
Beautiful sentiment right there.
I think it's, so, I read that the first time, and I'm like, what is okay?
What do you, what do you mean?
And then he goes on to say, if every trace of, and well, we'll amend it to work with
our own example.
If every trace of religion, but we're sub-increationism for our example here, was magically eliminated
from the world tomorrow, then, however much improved the lives of many people would be,
we would not even have come close to solving the larger failures of sanity that made religion
possible in the first place.
So, there's a larger and less dramatic example that made that first problem possible in the
first place.
And, in this case, sanity is, or the, the lack of sanity is the difference between what
reality and what our brains perceive, or?
Not, I don't think it's just what our brains perceive, because there's very little supernatural
to be perceived.
It's the lack of ability to think through things and correlate thoughts in your head.
I think the reason this is brought up as a lack of sanity in society in general, as opposed
to individual people, is because it is so widely accepted.
I'm reminded of the, I believe it was Neil deGrasse Tyson quote, where he was talking
about the correlates between education and religion, and the more educated you are, the
less religious you are as a populist.
I believe he said some with the high school dropout rate, it's around 70% belief.
Once you get a high school degree, it drops to 60.
Once you get a college degree, it drops like 40.
A graduate degree is down to 30.
He keeps going through the list.
He says the very top of educational attainment is the scientists who work in the elite academy.
I believe it was the National Academy of Sciences.
Yeah.
And he said, and in there, there's only a 7% belief rate.
And he goes, now some people bring this up to point out that the more educated you are,
the less you believe in religion.
But what I really want to know is, what's up with that 7%?
I'm really glad you brought that up, because I hate that he focuses on that.
You think they hate that?
Why?
Because he makes, I guess looking at it through this lens makes it sound much more reasonable.
I kind of took it to mean, because he doesn't like the confrontational about religion.
Yeah.
And so I took it to mean where he's like, look, 7% of scientists are religious, but they're
still doing science.
So let's just, you know, whatever.
I always took it the opposite way that, you know, what is going on that even the most
educated and intelligent people in society still have a 7% belief rate.
So they're referring to theism or both of the poly or mono there are some people that
are just the vaguely spiritual, like I see patterns in the connections.
But there are some people that are just hardcore scripturalists, even in those levels.
And probably somewhere on the spectrum between, you know, like, oh, it must mean something
that my phone rang right when I plugged it in, or, you know, the people who draw significance
from coincidences all the way down to like, I believe in ghosts.
And then I guess, yeah, somewhere near the bottom is sets, thousand year old earths.
Right.
I don't think any of those, you know, I don't think the, my phone rang, it's a coincidence
exists in the NAS people, but the fact that you can have this knowledge of how the world
works and how you're supposed to gather evidence and correlate evidence in your head, but still
have the special place in your head where all the tools that you have learned just don't
get applied because it's special is a unique failure.
I thought that's what Neil deGrasse Tyson was saying.
Maybe that is just my interpretation of his words.
What's, um, isn't that the Steven J. Gould separate magisteria?
It is.
Can I just, I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
No, please.
I just wanted to dismantle Gould's magisteria in one example.
One example?
Yeah.
Do it.
So it's a, it's a great way to like say, Hey, look, we can stop arguing.
Let's just, you know, play in our own sandboxes.
But the thing is no one would be content with that.
So like, say the Shroud of Turin contains DNA that was proven to only have mitochondrial
DNA and no like familial or no paternal lineage.
There's no religious person on earth who wouldn't freak out and be like, see that proves it.
That was Jesus.
And he didn't have a father.
See.
So like they, they're, they're fine.
Jesus did have a father and that father was God.
Oh yeah.
But does he have 23 chromosomes that he submitted to Mary when he knocked her up without asking?
Why not?
We don't know the details.
So were you there?
When I'm getting at those, I would, I would imagine that that, that finding would be relished
in a religious community as a strong evidence of the divinity of whoever was wearing that,
the Shroud of Turin.
Right.
So, um, or at least I think they would find a way to shoehorn it into look proof of Jesus
being magic.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Only positive evidence.
Well, that's my point, right?
So they, they're, they're fine to say separate magisteria whenever we point out something
that doesn't make sense.
Like you can't, uh, come back three days after being killed or you can't be born without
a father.
So.
Unless you're a non mammalian.
Right.
Well.
That's my, that's my biologist.
Um, are we bringing in the lizard people, as far as Ethiopian?
So reptilians, any bird people out there and definitely insect people, um, there's, uh,
there's definitely a probability that they could be born pathogenically without a father.
Okay.
Back to your regular programming.
I liked your, your interpretation of, of Tyson's query there.
Nice.
Maybe cause the only time I've seen him talk about it, he sort of stopped the, he's like
kind of stopped the conversation at that point.
But if he, if he had said what you, what the next thing that came out of your mouth afterwards,
which is what's going on there, that's really weird.
Let's figure out what's going on there.
Um, I think I might have come to that way.
I don't know why I took it the other way, but I think your interpretation is probably
more, more likely.
Well, I think.
Any beat cop like knows how probability of evidence works, you know, that's, that's
what I don't know, maybe not a beat cop, but a detective at any rate, uh, knows how
to weigh.
Well, this means that this likely happened and this is just beyond the pale.
If they see a bullet casing on the ground and they see a guy with a bullet hole in his
chest, they assume that the casing probably came from the bullet that shot the dude.
Well, it's not like it's, um, it's not like they have to work to compartmentalize.
No, that is the natural, natural order of things is what you learn in one field sticks
to that field and it's difficult for people to generalize, generalize knowledge and learning.
And I believe that actually is Eleizer's point that the sanity waterline, that the
general level of people applying their skills to everything in life is so low that these
ridiculous beliefs pop up even among people who shouldn't have these beliefs.
And so it should be in theory fairly easy to raise the general sanity level in the population
if we can just get people to, to, you know, apply these tools to all their thinking.
It'll be so easy if we can just do this incredibly difficult thing.
I think that that's, that's what I was going to say too.
So that does sound like it would solve or go a long way towards solving some of those,
the society wide rationality issues.
But that's a rather hard task.
There was a great anecdote.
There was a talk at the 2014 amazing meeting.
It was a panel discussion with Julia Galef, Dan Dennett and two other people who I'm not
familiar with, but we'll link to the talk in the description for this episode and on
the website.
And they discussed this very issue, can you teach rationality and like most 45 minute
panel discussions, they don't come to a consensus.
But one of the panelists, I forget her last name, first name was Barbara.
She talked about how she taught probability theory to a lot of her students and they could,
they nailed it, you know, you talking about drawing marbles out of urns and that they
had it just fine.
And I'm not sure she didn't sound like she was making up the, she didn't sound like
she was making this a hyperbole, but she said the second that she switched the examples
to M&Ms, all their skills fell apart.
Oh no.
And so if it's that hard to generalize colored balls from M&Ms, I think generalizing standard
rational practices to everyday life might be a very arduous task indeed.
I think that's kind of what this episode is about because you guys are saying like it's
the most impossible thing, but how did we come to this, you know, realization and get
these skills?
I read a series of blog posts on the internet.
It's a good thing we're perfectly sane.
No, I'm saying if all I had to do was read some blogs by a guy who could write entertainingly,
it shouldn't be that hard to impart, right?
Did that cause you to lose your religion?
No, I'd lost my religion long before that.
What happened?
So what happened when you read those blog posts?
What did you generalize that to?
That's what I want to know, Imyash.
What do you mean?
What did I generalize it to?
So we're talking about, you read those blog posts, you're like, sounds good to me.
Right.
Now, how did it impact your life and those other compartments that we're talking about?
How do you use it in work?
How do you use it, yeah, just on the day to day, how do you use it when you're doing
physics?
You know, I don't actually use it at work because my work is fairly simple.
I'm an accountant.
It's all, you know, basic math stuff.
So I don't use it at work at all.
I use it more in my day to day life and in how I think about things and assign probabilities
to beliefs.
Like I think one of the major things before was I grew up in a very fundamentalist religion
and things were generally very black and white.
This is good.
This is bad.
There's no in between.
This is true.
This is false.
You know, God created the earth.
But here's the funny thing about Jehovah's Witnesses.
They're creationists, but they're not young earth, right?
So God created everything exactly how it is, but he did it billions of years in the past.
So what's their version of history?
Well, you know, when creatures enter the evolutionary record, that's not when they evolved into
that form.
That's when God decided it's about time to make some lizards.
And so he made some lizards then.
I can totally see that.
That sounds...
And after all, he's like, this planet's kind of born without humans.
Let's make humans now.
And that's when humans showed up in the fossil record.
I'm going to say that sounds distinctly less probable than just standard young earth creationism.
Really?
Because saying...
They don't have to fight against the carbon dating people.
Exactly.
They don't have to fight against the fossil record.
Right.
They have to specifically fight against the fossil record because you get transitionary
species and you get species and different species.
There are no transitionary species that allow me to correct you before you go any further.
Oh, that's right.
Whenever you find...
Whenever you fill a gap, you just make two more smaller gaps.
Right.
Yeah.
No, so the interesting religion has, I guess, not that much to do with what I was saying.
But before, I was thinking very much black and white, truth or false.
And once I lost my religion and started thinking more empirically, and I guess more just general
liberally, I guess would be the term, because you associate liberal-liberalness with this
sort of wishy-washy gray area, and I think it's quite certain.
And I didn't know how to handle that.
So I was just like, I guess anything is possible, and I guess everything is equally valid.
And so it was just basically everything, just this one shade of gray, and you can't really
make any judgments or decisions.
And then stumbling across this, the Bayesian thinking, where you can actually put different
probabilities on different things and adjust your probabilities as you encounter more evidence,
I was like, oh, so I can say with very high certainty that God doesn't exist without having
to say things like there's absolutely no life in the universe or whatever.
I guess that has nothing to do with God.
I don't have to say there's absolutely no chance Jesus as a historical figure didn't
exist in Judea around 30 BC.
So and a lot of people have to seem to be like either I have to fight for there was a historical
Jesus or have to fight against there was a historical Jesus.
I can be like, you know, there's a decent chance that there was some rabbi that went
by not the name Jesus, but was it Yeshua or something that went by that name and eventually
his legend was transfigured and there were a lot of messiahs around that time and I'm
sure they all so you can have these probabilities in your head and you don't have to be yes
or no for one or the other and it really makes life a lot easier to approach when you you
admit that your view is uncertain, but you get it as certain as you can.
What you what you just we're talking about makes me think of two points.
One is that we do all have examples in our lives of times that we transfer knowledge
or what we've learned about rationality or even another subject, maybe statistics, maybe
something else where we transfer that to something else in our lives to our benefit,
I guess, but I think that what we're lacking is general transference, general and measurable
transference that's not, you know, largely anecdotal, but that's a skill that can be
taught if you keep trying or can be improved anyway, if you keep trying at it, right?
I want to say too that that's what's evidence is a really good question because it's I think
it's really hard to tell how good someone is, how good they're getting slash how much
better they are than they were when it comes to that sort of skill like it for myself.
I think I said last episode was I try to say I tried to not because I want to say it as
often as it's needed, but I want to not need to say, man, I was stupid, you know, every
other day. So but I wanted to say about what you said in Yash, the switch from binary to
Bayesian thinking and that was what was really interesting. I'm not sure when that came to
me before or after last wrong or before, I guess, or during, but I'm not sure maybe we're all
told everything's binary or we're kind of preprogrammed that way, that things, you know,
that's either true or it's not makes it easier. It does. But yeah, but I guess it makes it much
easier to form into coalitions. If you can say, you know, these people are for us, these people
are against us, or these people are for this idea or against this idea. And since so much of our
history is about forming coalitions, I think that that's probably at least part of the right
explanation. You know, when I went into college and I took a chemistry course, and everything I
learned was different from high school chemistry, which before I thought was the absolute real
thing. I guess that really threw me for a loop. And everything turned into more shades of gray at
that point. But when I learned about lesser wrong and rationality, it was mostly pretty much what
I already knew intuitively. And I credited that with growing up always wanting to be a scientist.
And, you know, learning science and being immersed in biology, and kind of learning what we don't
know and what the holes are about our world and what we assume. We assume so much that we just
take as knowledge, but nobody's ever actually looked into it. So everything just fell in together
really easily for me. And the example that I told you guys before we started recording was my husband
Tim, he grew up as a young earth creationist. And the rest of his family is still young earth, 8,000
years old, you know, creationist. It's six to eight.
Oh, okay.
It's something they have some room in there.
It's like October 24.
Well, there's no there's no you asked, but there was a guy, yeah,
well, there's an established year for a lot of these people, some 6700 years,
I don't believe they had an established year. But he said that, you know, he got away from
young earth when he took a geology course. And he's like, Oh, well, guess that those two things
don't square up. And he dropped God, he dropped theism after he took some statistics.
Why statistics?
Because he started to think in terms of probability, I think. We'd have to ask him directly.
I can imagine one avenue would be, how do I know which, you know, there are so many gods, what
would make me think this one's the right one? You know, my odds are like one in a thousand.
That's, I mean, I find that convincing. I don't, I don't know if that's the way that he went.
I wanted to say really quick, that it's interesting, when you mentioned that Tim took a geology
class and said, wow, my religion's false, maybe not, you know, after day one or all at once.
But he started to question and it fell apart for him. I'm wondering what discerns people like Tim
from people like I met in college, and I met people like Tim as well, but I met people who
go to college. That's probably some of their first time coming into some of these ideas,
because they're you know, homeschooled or private schooled. And evolution loses out, geology loses
out. It's doubled down. Well, so yeah, but that's, so that's the thing is that it doesn't seem like
enough just to give them the information. Tim had some sort of a disposition that allowed him to
to update the direction. He's a very intelligent person on his, he wrote a little blog about
the transfer of learning. And I'm just trying, I'm trying a couple of the things that he suggested,
which I don't know that I completely agree with this, but he suggested that intelligent people
make connections better. Right. I know so that and it's possible that when we as relatively
intelligent people think about all the connections that we've made and all of the major changes in
opinion that we've come to in our lives, then based on, you know, our education and rationality
or science or whatever, then maybe we're kind of able to do that and not everyone is. I don't
think I agree with him on that necessarily. I think, again, that people are are able to update
all the time and that it's how strong being in a it's being in a I think it's probably being in
a situation where you have the motivation to update that makes the difference rather than the
intellect to update or the intellect to to do that knowledge transfer draw. So I am saying that
based on not much. Although I believe that they're probably, I mean, I'm sure there is research on
knowledge transference and learning transference and motivation. It's just, I don't know of it.
Everything is incentive gradients, right? You need some incentive to do this.
And I was nodding when you were illustrating that example about needing an incentive to change
and or a motivation. And I had a couple thoughts. Well, you can be highly intelligent and still be
a devout fundamentalist. You know, like Alvin Plantigna writes papers and books. And he's he's
a philosopher who writes for religious apology, apologists. And he seems like a smart enough guy.
But then then you really struck a chord when you said that you need the motivation to change one
of our friends and we should have autumn on if we ever want to talk about losing a religion.
So we just our curiosity, how many here used to be like, you know, very strongly religious and got
rid of that? No, I was never very strongly religious. I was always an atheist, or at least
non religious. I started out extra like I was the opposite of Tim, where you said that, you know,
he took geology and he's like, Oh, well, that's false. Like I fought with people for years about,
you know, evolution and these things. It was eventually just a ponderance of all the evidence
in the world. And it broke me down. I want to meet Betty and Yash. Oh, my God, I got to give
so many props to this guy. I don't even know his real name. But he was this admin on a BBS that
would just chat with me for hours into the night. That's awesome. I was like, how can you not see
evolution is such a crock? And yeah, no, I never I never admitted it to him. Because I don't think
I changed while you know, I was still talking with him. But he planted the seed and over over
couple years it grew. I think that's how it works for a lot of people for myself. I don't know how
interesting this isn't solve the time to be brief. But I never was very religious, religious in my
family. My parents are both kind of like, believe in belief kind of people. Although I don't think
they know what believe in belief is. But that's sort of how I interpret their behavior. But we
never went to church. But it was mainly when I was 131415, I guess, starting to like actually
wake up as an actual human and not being just kind of like an like a well, I mean, like kids
unfair to children. No, children. I'll argue a bit that children have strong incentives to
stick to the beliefs of their parents. That's true. The scientists, at least until the what the
scientists children die quickly. Don't go over there. There's an alligator in that point.
Allow me to test. I want to test that. Yeah. Well, not just that, you know,
parents support you financially. They you have really strong incentives to stay on their good
side. Well, I meant I meant specifically in that I don't my memory of my childhood is very poor,
but I don't remember being reflective at all before the age of 131415. That's about memory is
somewhere within give or take two years there. Despite your lack of memory. I think that you
probably were I know I was. And I remember when I was a little girl, and I went to my parents and I
said, Mommy, Daddy is God. And they said, We don't know. See, my parents would say yes. My parents
said, We don't know. And I went off and became an atheist. So for myself, like I said, it was it was
and I don't know, I remember being a kid just to content to comment on my reflectiveness as a child.
I remember doing a lot of things and not really understanding why or not not reflecting hard
enough to actually do anything about it. Like remember like listening to the crappy music that
my classmates listened to, even though I didn't like it. And I remember thinking, I don't like this,
but listen to it because they like it, but never occurred to me to think one path one step past
that for maybe that's how a lot of people are. I don't know. I think I was constantly frustrated
as a child. And I actually wrote myself in when I was in first grade, I wrote myself a letter
to myself at age 18, saying, you need to treat little kids with respect. You need to listen.
So you kept that letter. I read it. I read it when I was in my late teens and laughed because
I was also really concerned that I was going to smoke or do drugs. That was the other part of
the letter to myself was like, by the way, apparently all teens do this. So according to the teacher,
so don't do that. I was really upset when I realized that I was going to be 20 when the year 2000
came along. And so I would be too mature to go out and enjoy myself. Oh, yeah. How old were you
when you had that thought? I must have been like nine or 10. I was like, Oh man, I'm going to be
adult then. I won't know how to party anymore. Luckily, you overestimated the maturity of adults.
But and to be clear, I don't I don't dehumanize children at nine was, you know, having a sleep
over in my pajamas. Hey, sounds like fun. Yeah. I don't I don't dehumanize children in the fact
that I don't treat them like people. That's that's sort of the opposite. I treat all all children
like they're basically full fledged adults. But so they like you a lot more. But importantly,
depends on the kid. So our society as a whole doesn't treat children like people. Otherwise,
you know, a kid who picked up his dad's gun and shot his neighbor would be sentenced to life in
prison. Right. So like, and they're they're very often not because they're they're not deemed
responsible for their actions. But what I wanted to say was, and it's a really quick thing,
since religion, like I said, is kind of passive in my house. When I first started questioning
about it, and I would ask my parents all the and as like I said, a young teenager pre driving age,
you could get two questions in and they'd be like, Well, that's that's just where faith comes in.
And like, Well, what's faith then? Like, Well, that's just you know, and I can't remember what their
answer was. But Richard Dawkins had the answer, faith is the license people give themselves to
believe something after reason fails. And that was their answer like to everything, like, Oh,
that's just faith. And then I realized that no one had any good answers. It's like, Okay, so all the
answers suck. So either you know, anyway, so a little bit after that, that I dropped it completely.
Speaking of Richard Dawkins, I wanted to mention he had a stroke on Saturday. Oh, no. Yeah, I didn't
know this until last night. But he's doing pretty well. He's expected to make a full recovery. But
that's kind of a bummer. It's always a bummer when someone has a stroke.
Agreed. Even if even if some people aren't fans, even even if some people are not fans of Richard
Dawkins, let me especially right now, let me only iterate to the audience that if you've only read
Richard Dawkins in tweet form, you're not doing him justice. He doesn't do himself justice for
why does he still get on Twitter? Daniel has even has even written to him saying, Look, I feel like
you're ruining your reputation. But read one of his books. I read the God Delusion when I was a
teenager after when I was going through all this. And actually, the last chapter basically got me
into feminism. I don't know if you read the God Delusion or not, but the whole last chapter is
on feminism. And I was as a kid, you know, I was like, Oh, well, things are fine. There's no,
there's no problems here. I was a kid. No one, no one I saw had any problems. That's that's what
I'm kind of kidding. Right? Yeah, he raised my consciousness to that issue. That's great intensely.
So I want to say that I don't know nearly enough about what's going on with Richard Dawkins now.
And I don't think I've read any of his works. I just cannot comment on it. And I have no
well formed opinion. Fair enough. But I will lend you Unweaving the Rainbow, which was one of my
favorite books. Okay. And he wrote it, it basically is a counterargument to the idea that science
makes the world less interesting. And maybe to bring it back to the podcast, you know, looking
at the world rationally makes things less interesting. Because you know, where's the magic
miracle? Exactly. Well, did Newton or did, um, yeah, did Newton ruin the rainbow by reducing
it to prismatic colors and figuring out how they're generated? Or did he add to it by saying,
this is this is how nature generates these things. And they're really cool, right? So it's a short
book link fonts to that, that challenge. So it was very fun. And, you know, regardless of his
whatever political problems he's been in, his things are still very he contributed a lot. And
they're very interesting to read. And you know, you shouldn't shun him entirely just because
he's kind of an ass hat. I tried to have an argument once on Twitter. And I'm on Twitter,
maybe five minutes a year now, but when I first got into it, and I was it was somebody was arguing
that male circumcision was as big a problem worldwide as female circumcision or female
genital mutilation. And I challenged, but you can't have an argument 140 characters. And after,
I don't know, half a dozen of these back and forth, I said, I don't think we're going to be able
to communicate effectively. Let's let's just stop. And I felt I quit responding to him Twitter is
probably the worst thing ever invented. And I don't I wouldn't go on there because you just
cannot say anything meaningful and 140 characters. I don't know if it's meant you can give you
Yeah, you can give sound bites and applause lights. And people can be like, yay, or boo,
but that's really all you can do. I got into it because I was attending a conference. And it was
a main thing where people could kind of live talk about other things that were going on and stuff.
It was kind of fun. You have to learn how to use Twitter. If you want to use it correctly. And I
never took the time to do that. But I follow comedians on there. And I got to say that they're
pretty good at it sometimes. They sure are. Yeah. And Anthony just on Nick, whenever a tragedy happens
worldwide, he says he gets text messages from from family members and friends saying don't
he'll he'll find some way to make it terrible. This is this is tangential. But how do you guys
feel about the whole not judging a work by its author? Because I remember when when
Ender's game, the movie came out, and everyone freaked out because Orson Scott Card is I'm not
sure if he's actually homophobic, because I didn't look that much into his you know, personal
He totally is. He is. Okay, I know he's a hardcore Mormon and Mormons are very structurally
homophobic or institutionally homophobic. So I you know, figure if he follows that religion,
he might be as well. But he is personally said. Yes, personally. But you know,
it doesn't change the fact that Ender's game itself is a fucking brilliant book.
That was like an awakening book. I loved that I read it in sixth grade. My piano teacher gave
it to me. Right. I read it last year. I know. But it was a lot of fun. And I liked it. It was
great. Everyone I knew who said they were boycotting the movie, like weren't losing anything because
they'd already read the book. And I was like, you're not giving anything up. And they weren't
giving anything up because the movie was terrible. Oh, was it? Oh, you saw it. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Well,
if it makes anyone feel better, I didn't pay for it. So it makes me feel worse, actually. Well,
I did buy a copy of Ender's game to read that. So whatever. Well, so I think there's two points.
One, you might say, well, his books could be fine, but I refuse to give him money because I
disagree with him and how he's spending it or something. But ultimately, I think that people
that believe weird or bad things can still be great authors. Apparently, I've never read them.
But the Chronicles of Narnia are a great book series for children. And they're written by
C.S. Lewis, the Christian Apologist. But he was such a nice person. Oh, maybe he was.
You can be a Christian Apologist, it turns out, and still be a great person.
Well, I meant like so, I guess, great person, insane person, bad person. So like, you know,
whatever the author's just position is that that you don't like about it or that or that you,
you know, want to identify with her support or something, right? Did you intentionally just
reference Lord Lyre or Lunatic? No. Oh, okay. But I like that, actually. All right.
Um, what they're talking about. It's God, was it C.S. Lewis that put forward the Lord Lyre or
Lunatic? Yes. Okay. Because I only remember that because Christopher Hitchens brought it up once.
Okay. And it's, it's an old argument that Jesus either, you know, but when you look at his thing,
yeah, he either was the Lord or he was a liar or he was a lunatic. And we can rule out Lunatic or
Lyre. So obviously, he was the Lord. He was a lunatic like everyone else. It's, it's a wonderful
argument if you already believe it leaves out the, it leaves out the hidden alternative of
honestly mistaken or legend. Yeah. Anything starting with an L. Right. Or just, you know,
some good ideas, some bad ideas, all kind of like humans generally do mixed up together.
Yes. Where were we? We were talking about authors. Yes. So I think that like, is there a limit?
Because if Hitler, you know, was still alive and in a prison somewhere, would it be okay to buy
mineconf to see what he said? Apparently, the book is terrible. And it's like the ravings of a child.
But it's, it has a great deal of historic value. Right. I was actually thinking about this recently
because I was reading a modern, a modern anthology, and you know, all female writers, lots of minority
authors. And one of the authors was somebody who had been called out by the writing community for
some really nasty behavior. Right. And she is alive and still writing. And I got to,
I got to her piece in the anthology. And I saw the name and I stopped for a moment.
And I'm like, how do I, if I do read this, how do I read it? Do I read it, you know,
completely separate from, from a knowledge of who this author is? Or how does that figure in? And
it's kind of confusing. Yeah. It's kind of confusing. I think that with creative people,
we give them a lot of license to be quirky. And, and, and we, we let ourselves consume what they
create, you know, if they're topically Kanye West, or who I've heard is an amazing artist.
You haven't, you haven't heard his stuff. Now, I've heard a lot of people that listen to a
rap that he's really freaking good at what he does. And they're sad that he sucks so much as a
person. So they should enjoy it. Just like, you know, when I was kind of sad that Christian Bale
said some mean things, because I like his acting. Oh, that's actually a great example. So Mel Gibson,
when he made an ass of himself, right, I can still enjoy Braveheart. I think you should still
enjoy Braveheart. I mean, this is not because I don't really know that many authors that are
bad people that I've read their books. But I'm trying to think, you know, it's like, I enjoy
some of the movies that, that spy guy, even Mission Impossible, why can't they Tom Cruise,
I enjoy some of his movies. But I remember specifically thinking when Mel Gibson went off
the rails, that I was like, you know what, I'm not, I'm not a fan of Mel Gibson, but I'm a fan of
William Wallace. You know, so like, they're, because, you know, he, whatever he, if he makes
money off the movie, he's going to make, I think they make money enough anyway. You know, it's
kind of like, I get the idea of not supporting it, but whatever. I don't know if I ever bought
that movie either. So for what that's worth. But, but, and, and this is a real life example,
what if you really enjoy ice cream? And your local ice cream shop is, is owned by a confirmed racist
person. You wouldn't want to support them by going and buying ice cream there and enjoying that product
of their labor. Are they actively racist or just like their racist on the inside and whatever,
but like, like, do they not serve minorities in their store? They don't hire minorities.
So there's so actively racist. Fair enough. Well, sometimes I think of like,
there was that nationwide example of Chick-fil-A, where the major owners donated tons and anti-gay
charities. And I actually, I did boycott Chick-fil-A for that reason. Although I have eaten there.
I boycott at Chick-fil-A because they serve chicken. Right. And I, I, I agree with you.
We need to talk. I have taken too hard to the argument that if we start patronizing businesses
based on the politics of the people who own them, then we will really just kind of have all the
businesses we can go to and divide the nation more into red and blue. And there's no real good reason
for it. I didn't mean specifically their politics. I meant specifically that apparently some fraction
of my spending money there would go towards anti-gay charity. Right. But does this say it's the same
situation that Inuyasha is talking about? Some fraction of money that I make was going to go
to causes that other people probably don't like. And yet, you know, do I want them to never buy
anything that I make or not hire me? Also, we all pay taxes. Right. What if, what if my employer is a
right-leaning Republican, but technically my employer is a right-leaning Republican? And he
would be like, oh, I'm sorry, you're too liberal. You can't have a job as an account. I'd be like,
what the hell does my liberalism have to do with my accounting work? It's like, I don't know. This
is just the way things run now. We only patronize people with the same politics as us. But that's,
that's a different basically goalpost to pick as they're talking about hiring people as opposed to
people shopping at your company. Yeah, but they're paying him. Yeah, they're paying me for my labor
as opposed to me paying them for their chicken. Well, then them saying they won't serve you
or that your, your, your, your employers hypothetically saying we won't hire you is
different than you saying I won't work for you, which is the, which is the choice you make as a
consumer. I won't buy from you. Not Chick-fil-A saying we won't serve gays. I got to say when they
never said that. And then that's what I'm saying. That's what I'm saying. They're two completely different
points. Yeah. Um, I'm inclined. I'm convinced after our little discussion here that we should
enjoy what we enjoy. I'm still sort of on the fence. I mean, unless, unless Chick-fil-A was
saying we don't serve gays, then you should definitely not go there. How intense they are,
which they didn't say. So like, but I didn't want to say, I have eaten a Chick-fil-A in the last
year because they lost the gay war thing or the gay rights war. And I'm not sure what their next
thing is, but I'm like, well, you know, well, you guys want to keep donating to that, whatever,
but you already lost. It's the weirdest thing. I don't have anything against Chick-fil-A on a
philosophical level, but I, you know, I don't go out to eat when I'm alone. If I'm alone, I'll grab
whatever I have in the fridge. And whenever I'm out and about, I'm with someone else. I'm like,
oh, I don't want to go into Chick-fil-A with this person right next to me. They'll judge me.
And that's maybe why we do that. So yeah, it's the social pressure that keeps me out.
I've done so much solo driving lately that I think maybe that's why I've finally succumbed,
because other drive-through places are getting old. But they really do make a good check.
It occurs to me that we're getting really far off. Yeah, actually, I was, I was thinking about,
about the original topic and something that Ines said earlier about,
you know, assigning probabilities and after, you know, reading a series of blogs that he found
entertaining. So, so there was a survey of people who use less wrong. And I think that
the results of that were that there was no difference in calibration ability between people
who use less wrong and people who didn't, who are not members of less wrong. That's discouraging.
Is that so or encouraging? We're all we are all bad at calibration at these calibration exercises.
Although calibration exercises, I think are not quite the same thing as what we're discussing in
terms of, of raising the sanity water line. Because I think calibration is a slightly higher level
skill. Whereas we're talking about really, really basic things, like make everyone in the world
every now and then think, just as in the back of their mind, what do I know? And why do I think I
know it? So, I mean, the basic question of rationalism, right? Is why do I believe what I believe?
There's a great analogy to be made here between rationality as a skill and martial arts. And so,
you know, so like if you're great at calibration, you know, that could be the equivalent of you
being able to punch through a board. But that's not the same thing as being good at martial arts.
And so you might, you might be a really good fighter, but you're all Krav Magan, you know,
Brazilian jujitsu, it's not about breaking boards. So, do you see what I'm saying? Does that make
any sense? Yes, we need more research is what you're saying. That too. But I do like the analogy in
that. Well, it sucks, because we can't just put everything on hold until we conduct more research.
You know, because I mean, the research is currently being done, but it's taking a while,
as it should, because it's being done, I think, properly. But in the meantime, we don't want to
just hold off on all discussion until the results come in, because they're doing results on these
kinds of things. Well, I mean, and I think you mentioned previous previously, not while we were
recording this episode, that there's a lot of the people feel like it's making a difference
in their lives. There's anecdotal reports that learning rationality makes a difference. And I
mean, I can again, and we can all report anecdotally that I could say I went to my job in marketing,
and got into a fight with my boss about whether a study was robust enough to quote or something
like that, you know, because I'm coming from a science background. So, we know that we can
transfer knowledge anecdotally. And we know that it makes people feel better too. If they, I guess,
and we have a feeling that if people have the motivation that they can transfer what they
learn about rationality to other parts of their lives, I think they could. Yeah, I think it does
need to be that kind of that push moment, where you finally start trying to use what you know.
And for a lot of people that just doesn't come because things are pretty relaxed and, you know,
you have enough of a community that you don't need to, you know, so like, I'm imagining that
in some circles, being young, young earth creationist is like awesome.
Oh, yeah. So, but if I were to come out as a young earth creationist, my friend group would look at me
like I just came out as a Holocaust denier, you know, so there's no pressure for some people whose
society or social circles anyway, or already cool with them being the way they are to
bother changing. Yeah, I'm thinking about Tim's family in Eastern Tennessee, where everybody
pretty much believes the same way that they believe, they're surrounded with messaging
that confirms their beliefs and confirms that their that their society believes the same way
they believe. And it would be incredibly difficult to take somebody who's so comfortable out of bed,
I guess, and put them somewhere else. I think you'd be hard pressed to coerce them to get
themselves out of bed and go somewhere else. I think if you just get people to care enough
about figuring out how things actually are and making sure that their map is as close to reality
as they can get it, then the rest will shake out naturally. That's an interesting point,
and there's a good counter example, but I wanted to raise one thing first is that a lot of people
just don't really care. Yeah, it's weird. I even people that I'm really close with, you know, they're
just like, that's just not really my thing. I'm happy and I'm right, you know, and I've never
really understood how to get past the motivation problem. If someone just doesn't care, what do
you do? I don't care. Yeah. But what if you want to share with them all the cool stuff you like?
Well, I mean, I recently met somebody like that. And I was like, I was talking about, you know,
this and that and this incorrect belief and this new thing. And he just said,
yeah, I don't care about that. I am a simple guy. And the result was I was like, I am probably not
going to go on another date with you. Maybe the difference between people like that is that simple
to him as a compliment and to others, it's not. I think that gets us to the second part of the
question being, should we try to raise the sanity waterline? Oh, I wanted to raise an example,
though, about having your counter example. Well, once you have a desire to, I guess, apply
Bayesian thinking and map territory distinctions to the real world, wasn't the the creator of
Amund's agreement theorem or Amund's RBC's last name? Wasn't he a, wasn't he some,
wasn't he a Jehovah's Witness or a fundamentalist or something? I don't know. Let me check.
I think he may have been a fundamentalist. I don't think that he was a Jehovah's Witness, though.
Although I could be wrong. I mean, I'm thinking if he was, then we would have told us.
Do you know every Jehovah's Witness? Well, I knew Michael Jackson was Jehovah's Witness,
I guess. I just learned that Michael Jackson was a Jehovah's Witness. I just, I just learned
that right the second. Oh, yeah. That's what I mean, yeah. Oh, okay. But on the other hand,
he's like a celebrity, so that would probably be brought up more often than someone no one's ever
heard of. Well, not no one, but someone that most people in my church wouldn't have heard of.
Everyone had heard of Michael Jackson. Yeah, it's true. So while you're looking,
while you're looking up whatever you're looking at, Stephen. Couldn't find it. Okay.
I was thinking the should we question, that hearkens back to that 7% of whatever kind of
scientist that Neil deGrasse Tyson was talking about. And if they're doing good work, you know,
bless their hearts, they can believe whatever the heck they want. That's how I feel.
I would feel that way if I thought that was possible. So like Francis Collins, the director of the
National Institute of Health appointed by Barack Obama as Young Earth Creationist.
And a lot of health people are. But it's weird because he's the director of the NIH. So like,
it would be fine if he was going to be a health now on his own little blog. Right. But he's actually
pretty good as the director of health. He doesn't let that interfere with his science. Well, in his
presentations, he comes right out and challenges evolution. You know, and so I would not a very
good role model. Well, so I just worry about the health decisions that someone like that might
make, you know, regarding a rapidly evolving pandemic spreading across the States, virus
epidemiology or something, right? So, oh, well, you know, once we vaccinate it, it'll be fine.
You know, in 100% of people all the time, because it can't possibly change. Well, he clearly doesn't
actually believe that. People who are anti evolution generally believe in micro evolution.
This applies to Tim's extended family. So Tim's, I guess, immediate family. So
they can still do things like fight pandemics. So I'll be generous to Collins then. And let's
pretend that he does that all of this. And I guess I'm not sure. So let's let's set as given then
that that his sciences sound as as often as the best atheist scientist. Then I wonder what is
going on in his head that makes him so confident in his religion, while at the same time being a
great scientist. In his book, he talks about seeing a he is on a on a retreat to find himself
spiritually. You saw frozen waterfall frozen into three separate paths. And was there a rainbow?
Probably double. But the thing is, is that the the frozen waterfall said that the triple stream
frozen waterfall spoke to him of the Trinity. And then he says he fell to his knees except
Jesus into his heart. Wow. And so but I'm wondering about that, because, and I think Sam Harris said
that a frozen waterfall can prove the divinity of or the truth of Christianity than anything can
prove anything. Right. Well, I mean, that obviously wasn't his true reason. But he had a spiritual
experience, I guess. But some a lot of us have those anyway. And a lot of us don't attribute
things that can't be attributed to them to them. Right. So I think that's actually one of the
good reasons to want to raise the sanity waterline, because we well, I don't know if we all have,
but I've had spiritual experiences before. Sure. Yeah. But you can you can interpret them in light
of Oh, okay, this is probably what's actually happening. As opposed to Oh, God, there's actually
aliens behind me, which was my case or there were actually aliens behind you. There were was amazing.
Oh, well, it was. Do you really want to know? Yeah. Okay. This was back when I was still smoking.
And I was out on the porch at a friend's house, you know, way after dark having a cigarette.
And I was the only one out there. And this light came on behind me. And it was just over the rooftop.
So I couldn't see the source. But it looked exactly like a UFO was about to come over.
I was like, Oh, my God. And I totally had this this flush, this absolute certainty that there
were aliens and UFOs. And I was going to get taken right now. Or if I wasn't, you know,
something else was going to happen with aliens. And and that didn't happen. But still the whole
time I was like, Okay, I know there's aliens right behind me watching me. But the entire time in my
head, I was like, but I know what's actually causing this is nothing to do with real aliens,
the probability of aliens showing up just now and, you know, various all the other things that
that go through your head, your priors of how extremely unlikely this is and what evidence
I'm actually seeing. Oh, just a bright light. And so forth, where I was able to dismiss that
this deep emotional reaction within me feels really cool. But it has nothing to do with what
is actually happening in the world behind me to bring children up again. We've all been children.
And I can neither confirm nor deny it. You're just talking, you don't remember your childhood
pre 12 years old. That's why he can't confirm or deny. But we've all been kids and we've all
I had a really realistic dream one night and I was convinced that there were ghost flamingos
living in our attic. But that's really then later, I realized that couldn't have happened
because I was way too much of a scaredy cat to go to the attic at night on my own. So I wouldn't
have gone there in the first place to see the ghost flamingos. Damn, that's how I just proved
that way. Use meta knowledge as a kid. That's fantastic. But we all we've all had those those
experiences that I think aren't as common for most people as we go into adulthood, as we get more,
as we develop more priors, right? As we have more evidence in our lives. But but we can still
remember how things used to be and and I think conceive that we might be going through something
similar. Right? I think I'm working with a different definition of spiritual experience
than the ones you guys described because I mean, I've had, you know, I was I was raised
a Unitarian Universalist, and I have had very spiritual experiences while sitting in the sanctuary
at midnight while somebody rang a gong. I've had incredibly meaningful deep moving experiences in
interior Del Fuego watching a glacier calf while while South American parakeets flying by.
You know, I I know what you're talking about. Yeah, that's in addition to I guess what I was
talking about, which was more of a supernatural experience. Okay, yes, that's the distinction
I was I was thinking of. Like a spiritual experience, I can imagine, or I can remember
times, you know, and I can kind of put myself in the right mindset and sort of generate them,
not whenever I want, but with a little effort, more or less whenever I want. And, you know,
I can go outside, look at the stars, think about, and I can just think of the path from
light like that to the atoms in our bodies to, you know, the long chain of evolution that led
to us being here. To me, that's that's deeply profound. And what I can only imagine is similar
to what people talk about when they talk about spiritual experiences. I'm trying to remember
any supernatural experiences I've ever had. I remember I went along with a lot of them when
I was a kid. My friends would pretend they would say they saw ghosts and pretend that I did too
to agree with them. I can't remember. Or you even imagine that you might have, if enough people said
that they saw it. I don't remember ever actually believing I knew I was lying to myself the whole
time. I knew I was lying to them the whole time. But I would play along without spoiling the fun.
Unless there's some time when I was younger that I can't remember. But yeah.
You know why I personally think we should raise the Sanity Waterline if possible?
Why? Yeah, why? Like as a selfish reason why? Because I mean, obviously all last episode we
were talking about how it makes your own life better if you can be rational because you have
a better grasp of the world and you know how you can change it and and alter your surroundings. But
as a selfish reason why I think it'd be a good reason to to raise the Sanity Waterline overall
in the world is because we are an incredibly interconnected species nowadays. I guess we
always have been. But it's just it's gotten ridiculous how much we all depend on each other
nowadays to survive or to do anything meaningful. And in that case, a lot of life comes down to
iterated prisoners, dilemma type situations or coordination problems with other people.
And the more rational the people that you're coordinating with, the better allies you have
just not even allies, co-workers, people you know that you have to rely on. If they're more
rational, things just work better in general. You can count on them more, you can, you know,
put more trust in what they're doing. They have to be rational in a certain way.
If you're doing a, you know, if there's a tragedy of the common's problem, right? If there's a
fisheries problem, the religion of the people involved is not really going to matter. But there
are, you know, other ways in which they need to be rational in order to work with you, right?
Yeah. That's the kind of rationality I mean, mainly. Like religion, people can be religious.
And that's fine with me as long as it doesn't adversely affect the world. But I would still
like them to be slightly more rational. And with the analogy, the waterline specifically
involves the fact that people can, like Francis Collins can exist shows that there's some deeper
problem there, right? Yeah. I think getting rid of the Francis Collins is, of the world,
is a different task than getting rid of the Ken hams, right? Hey, also, I don't like the term
getting rid of individual people. That's why I don't want to knock them off. Let me be perfectly
clear. That's why I used plural on both of them. And then I realized too that I was kind of stuck
with it after I already said it. So more like the method of thinking that least that sort of
absolutely. Yeah, no, no, I am absolutely not for in any way, quote, unquote, getting rid of
these people. So let me just put that on the record. Although I do think that hams a butt.
Yes, I think so too. I tried to watch the Hamon Nye debate. And I told myself going in,
I'm going to watch the whole thing. And I couldn't I started skipping and just watching Bill Nye's
segments. But I did give it an honest effort. But every every thing out of that guy's mouth was,
well, we have a book that has that in it didn't really matter who he was talking,
you get the feeling that no matter who he was talking against, it would have been the exact
same speech. Yeah, he just he ignored his opponent and comes out and just does his own spiel.
Wow. Yeah, we did not get what a debate is about. So well, that's what I mean, I think what he got
out of it, what he got out of it was actually quite a bit of funding and attention. So I think
that I'm getting to be on the same stage as Bill Nye. So he gets some, you know,
the rub off, get some cred. Yeah, man, he must people must be taken in pretty seriously. Bill
Nye himself is going to argue with this guy, right? Right. Yeah, I think that happened. That's
that was all the discussion leading up to it. That's why I like Richard Dawkins doesn't take
debates anymore, or at least with depending on the topic, but he doesn't argue religion anymore.
For that reason, you know, for everyone's hitch. Yes, it was so good. There was Oh,
I wanted to mention speaking of hitch that reminded me of just because watching him
it like in a debate was watching like a boxer, someone who really knows how to fight. And, you
know, even if he doesn't necessarily make the best points, just his delivery was so artistic.
You just loved watching him argue, be like, you know what, hitch, for this next argument,
I want you to argue the young earth creations position go and I would still come out rooting
for him because of the way he deliver things. Hey, listeners, if we have any funny, funny
backstory here, we were talking about how we didn't want this to be a skeptics or anti-religion
podcast. Well, we can bring it to more, more challenging issues, right? Yeah. Because like
that's sort of that's easy. Once again, fruit. Right. So skepticism again, like I said, it's
great rationality one point or like, you know, maybe 0.5, I don't know. But it's, I think it's
the easier version of rationality. You know, their one thing is what's a reasonable standard
for evidence if you had to narrow it down to one sentence. And the rationality thing is what do I
know and what do I think I know and how do I think or what do I think I know and why do I think I
know it. But speaking of hitch, there's a British writer named Douglas Murray who has a lot of the
same zeal and isn't afraid to say hard things like hitches. And he's worth checking out. Sam
Harris interviewed him on his podcast recently, or they had a dialogue rather, it's not really an
interview show. For me, there are selfish reasons, I guess, to, you know, be around saner people.
But I mean, that's sort of what I do anyway. And I already do that. So I satisfy that need
basically just by only going, you know, not not reading YouTube comments and setting up
less wrong meetups. But globally, it's, I guess it's the opposite of selfish, but it works for me
to everybody stands to benefit if if the waterline goes up. I also assume that we are going to at
some point in the not too terribly distant future reach, you know, greatly expanded lifespan, you
know, possibly functional immortality. And at that point, there's so many things it really annoys me
when people are like, Oh, well, that idea is fine. Just all its proponents will die off and the new
generation will take over racism, homophobia, things like that. And I'm like, that is not good
enough, because soon people will stop dying. And we need to have some way to update our beliefs.
Then that's what rationality gives us is the ability to change our minds when we find out we're
wrong. Right. And I think that's an incredibly important skill for everyone to have, especially
as we reach much longer lifespans. And the people that have the wrong ideas dying is one way for
the problem to kind of go away. But it's I think not the best way. What would be better, you know,
is almost as you know, a excuse to start killing people off that have the bad ideas, right? It's
one big step away, but it's on that path, right? So, but what would be better is if they change
their mind and live the rest of their lives, however long it was, you know, 10 years left or,
you know, 100 or 10 billion years left as saying or people, you know, but my thing is that there
is a good deal of Oh, shit. No, no, we're good. We're good. I stepped on the computer, but it's
fine. All right. Also, how long have we been recording? We should wrap it up, actually. Yeah.
That sucks. We didn't really talk that much. I wanted to get more into this. Well, maybe we'll
maybe we'll not get as tangentially off track. I enjoyed it. I did too. I had fun. I guess we
could come back to this topic at a later point. I think I think a good topic for next week might be
ways to actually do it because there are some fun ways that I wanted to bring up that I used to
to not next week, but next episode, right? Excuse me. Next episode, two weeks from now. Yeah.
That I use when I I don't really have any sacred cows and we can have maybe you two can have fun
trying to find one of mine. One of my beliefs that I just I hate talking about because I don't want
it to be wrong kind of thing. I like talking about those things. But there are there are strategies
to engage on those for things people don't like talking about. I think that's another great technique
of rationality that when you find out you're wrong about something, you don't view it as a
failure. You view it as you just got stronger. Like my map is now better. Or you should try to
view it that way. Yeah, it can be really hard. It can be tough to not just feel terrible about
being wrong. Right. Yeah. No. So I mean, and sometimes it's double-sided, right? You know,
you realize that, well, this PhD program that I've been into, you know, that I've been on the
trajectory for the last seven years, this isn't going to do it. I'm dropping out, you know. So
like that's that's going to be kind of a, you know, there are pros and cons ending a
relationship or whatever could be right. So let's do let's let's talk about that next time.
No, we should talk that about that in two episodes from now. Okay. Because next episode,
we are going to interview Elias Ryatowski. Are we there yet? I guess we're I guess we have to be.
Yeah. I'm going to talk with you guys about this right after that. But yeah. Well, all right.
Stay tuned next week, or excuse me, stay tuned for two weeks for our interview with Elias
Ryatowski. What? Oh, and a shout out on the very off chance that this person is listening.
If you were a CIS admin on the DS9 BBS in the 90s by the name of Pat Captain Picard,
I owe you so much and you rock. Katrina, any sign off? Bye. Goodbye, everybody. Thanks for listening.
