Everyone knows that McDonald's Sprite tastes way better than just ordinary Sprite. Why is it so good?
What is the secret to McDonald's soda fountains?
It's a great question that's been circulating around the internet for the last five years,
and that is what I aimed to answer today.
And let me tell you, the truth is in the place that you'd least suspect it.
Hello internet! Welcome to Food Theory, the channel that hits different.
For a while now, the internet's been obsessed with a fizzy mystery that is McDonald's Sprite.
In case you've never had it, it's like perfectly chilled liquid pop rocks bursting with lemon lime flavor.
The general consensus is that the Sprite being served out of McDonald's soda fountain is stronger,
giving it an electric, or even a spicy, taste.
Why is it spicy?
You need to order a Sprite?
Extra spicy.
Extra spicy?
Whoa, it's spicy!
Others have said that this stuff is so powerful it could probably fry fish.
I'm at the price of fish, you want some?
Yeah, but we don't have a place.
I got something stronger, man.
Ah!
My personal favorite flavor comparison, though, is that it tastes like what a Super Saiyan 2 looks like.
Crisp and full of lightning.
It's even gotten to the point where McDonald's and Sprite themselves have had to acknowledge this trend.
Hey everybody, Chris K here. I'm in the mood for some spice.
First, the spicy Sprite.
That's spicy.
But obviously, the next question that everyone has on their mind is,
what exactly makes the drink so explosive?
So good, so crisp.
Well, the internet has plenty of theories.
Food theories, trying to answer exactly that.
In general, the guesses circulating the internet boil down to four key factors.
The first is that the Sprite syrup getting shipped to the restaurants gets special treatment due to a
long-standing partnership between Coke and McDonald's.
Coke sends syrup in plastic bags to other restaurants and stores.
They send the syrup to McDonald's in stainless steel containers.
The second theory is that the carbonation levels are just higher at McDonald's.
So you get more carbonation, that's why it burns your nose.
Third is that the Sprite is extra sweet to better combat the saltiness of McDonald's fries.
McDonald's hired a sensory scientist and he found out that the salt that they use in their fries
enhances the flavor of the Sprite.
And finally, some have thrown all of that other stuff away and said that there's no difference,
but rather everything's the result of McDonald's having a larger straw.
Apparently, the straw is bigger, so you get more flavor in your mouth.
Okay, this one's definitely for who even rides this.
So today we're putting this debate to rest once and for all by digging into the facts
and then running our own battery of scientific tests.
Why is McDonald's Sprite so different?
Is it different?
Or is this just a self-fulfilling prophecy started by the internet hype machine
that now everyone just implicitly believes?
Get ready, theorists.
Today we obey our thirst, but follow the facts.
Now, before we get to my big taste experiment, putting all these theories to the test,
I think it makes sense to look at the possible explanations one at a time
to see if there's anything we can debunk right off the bat.
The first hypothesis that I've seen circulating around is that Coca-Cola
especially delivers the Sprite syrup to McDonald's restaurant in these large,
stainless steel tanks.
This is the result of a long-standing relationship between the two companies.
And right off the bat, this one does seem to be rooted in some amount of truth.
You see, the relationship between Coke and McDonald's started in the early days of the
restaurant's expansion, with the two companies partnering up and largely growing together.
Their relationship is so strong that Coke is contractually barred from selling syrup to
other restaurants for less than what McDonald's pays, even if it means costing them business.
There's even a division at Coca-Cola dedicated to specifically McDonald's business, aptly named
the McDonald's division.
Look, they're saving the creativity for the marketing and not the department naming.
Needless to say, Coke works closely with McDonald's to make sure that they have
everything they need to deliver their product in the best way possible.
And in turn, McDonald's spends a large amount of resources to ensure that they're
given their customers the best Coca-Cola experience they can.
But does any of this actually affect the way that syrup is being shipped?
Yes, it does.
You see, the concept of delivering the syrup in stainless steel vats makes a lot of sense.
The steel helps ensure that the syrup's flavor is the purist it can be.
And when you look at the reality of the situation, Coke is indeed sending
syrups to McDonald's and steel vats.
There's just one problem.
It's not Sprite syrup.
According to James McIntyre, a franchise owner from Pennsylvania,
not all Coke products get the same treatment.
Dessert for Coca-Cola?
That arrives in stainless steel tanks.
The Sprite, however, does not.
It instead comes in the standard plastic bags that everyone else is using.
That's right, it's just a box lined with a plastic bag.
We even went to our local McDonald's and asked to speak to the manager,
in the least caring way possible, to see if we could get confirmation of any of this.
And yep, only Coca-Cola gets the stainless steel vat treatment, not Sprite.
So that's one major theory debunked right off the bat.
Next up, the water quality and overall level of carbonation.
As hype around McDonald's soda is circulated across the internet for the past five years,
various sources have started to come clean about how clean McDonald's soda fountains really are.
And it's here that our friend James McIntyre,
that franchise owner from Pennsylvania I talked about in the last paragraph,
helps us out again, revealing that McDonald's has not one,
but four different water filtration systems that the water has to go through
before it ever makes it to the soda tower.
This process includes a state-of-the-art reverse osmosis filter
that works by applying pressure to the unfiltered water,
forcing it through a membrane and into a storage tank,
which in turn helps remove dissolved minerals, bacteria, and other solids.
This makes the water virtually tasteless before the syrup gets mixed in,
thereby ensuring a consistent flavor profile wherever you're going in the country.
Usually a restaurant or a gas station that has itself a soda fountain
is gonna connect the water line directly to the machine.
Rarely are they incorporating a filter, let alone four.
This makes the process simpler and cheaper,
but apparently McDonald's isn't afraid to spend a little bit more.
But it's not all about purity.
Once the water is squeaky, clean, and tasteless,
the next step in the process is for them to make it sub-zero.
Uh, alright, not exactly sub-zero, but just really, really cold.
See, the other big difference is the temperature that McDonald's keeps everything at.
Normally other soda fountains are set to flash-chill their sodas as they're being dispensed,
so that they come out cold, but not cold-cold.
The golden arches on the other hand are pre-chilling not only the filtered water,
but also the syrup to the perfect range between 33 and 38 degrees Fahrenheit,
just above freezing temperatures.
This range is important because it's the optimal temperatures for the carbonation of the water.
You see, CO2, or carbon dioxide, the chemical compound that makes fizzy drinks,
fizz, has a higher rate of absorption and dispersion in colder liquids.
In other words, the colder the liquid is, the more carbonation it's able to have.
This is why warm drinks tend to go flat quicker.
The gas is able to escape more easily.
So with the sprite's water and syrup both being pre-chilled,
it's preventing any unwanted fluctuations in temperature
when the water and syrup get mixed together in the soda fountain.
In other words, the claim that McDonald's sprite is more carbonated is technically true,
but not for the reasons that you would expect.
It appears like it has more to do with the colder temperatures of the water and syrup
rather than any sort of artificial increase in the amount of actual bubbles being shoved into the mix.
But then, what about the syrup-to-water ratio?
One of the biggest myths that you see circulating around the internet
is that the syrup-to-water ratio coming out of McDonald's fountains
is actually higher than what's being served up in a typical bottle or can of sprite,
thereby making their soda sweeter and thus more flavorful or stronger to the drinkers.
This is one, though, that McDonald's themselves have publicly shut down,
saying that there's no special formula they have.
That said, I'm not just gonna naturally trust a corporation.
Can we take their word for it?
The answer is actually somewhere between yes and no,
while McDonald's claims to strictly adhere to the Coca-Cola standard
of one-to-five water-sirrup ratio or one ounce of syrup to every five ounces of water,
they do take into consideration the ice that's being added into the drink,
meaning that they have a slightly higher syrup content,
but it's done so that once ice is added,
you're tasting the equivalent of the standard one-to-five ratio.
So, pro tip to all of you watching,
don't skip the ice the next time you drink at McDonald's.
You're gonna ruin the ratio, you'll ruin the art,
and it'll just be a tad bit too sweet.
So we've gotten our cup of sprite straight out of the fountain,
nice and cold with just the right amount of ice and flavor,
but there's still something else at work here, the fries.
Rumor number three states that McDonald's hired sensory scientists
to help optimize how the sweet sprite pairs with the salty fries,
all in order to make the perfect combination.
And anecdotally, there's evidence to back this one up.
According to some sources, McDonald's has developed a special ketchup recipe,
one that's sweeter and tangier than other brands
that is specifically designed to match the saltier flavor of their fries.
Now, according to my research, this has never been outright confirmed,
but it is known that the company uses extensive taste testing
to ensure that their products are as delicious as possible,
and if they're doing it with ketchup,
is it that much of a stretch to believe that they're doing it with the sodas as well?
But that's not all.
Back in the ancient days of the 1980s,
when cars were powered by feet like the Flintstones,
the French fries at McDonald's were fried using beef tallow
instead of the canola oil that they use today.
This made for an insanely rich, savory fry taste.
Unfortunately, beef tallow is also incredibly unhealthy.
So in the 90s, when the public grew more concerned
about the saturated fats in their foods,
they made the switch to plain old vegetable oil.
Customers obviously started to complain,
so McDonald's began adding natural beef flavorings to mimic the old beloved flavor.
Yep, that means that the fries at McDonald's are not vegan-friendly,
so uh, sorry any of you vegans out there
that have been happily munching down on the golden goodness.
But hey, at least they did have to pay $10 million as part of a lawsuit because of that very fact.
Anyway, today their French fries still contain that rich umami flavor
from the added beef flavoring and salt.
Couple that with the refreshing acidity and sweetness of the sprite,
and you have yourself the bliss point.
A term coined by market researcher Howard Moskowitz
when describing the perfect balance of sugar, salt, and fat.
These two complete each other like a fast food rom-com come to life,
but none of it is gonna matter if you're just guzzling the sprite like an animal.
And this, my friends, is where one of the smallest parts of this process
makes itself the biggest difference, the straw.
Hypothesis number four, the size of the straw.
Most people don't give the straw a second thought,
but McDonald's gave it a second, third, and fourth thought.
For example, did you know that McDonald's straws are actually wider than normal?
Yeah, the diameter of a standard drinking straw is 0.24 inches,
but a McDonald's straw has a diameter of 0.284 inches.
Now, that might not sound like that much,
but it's enough of a difference that a normal straw can actually fit inside of a McDonald's one.
And just how much of that is changing the drink experience?
Well, the advantage of drinking through a straw is that it delivers less liquid into your mouth,
allowing you to warm it up faster and get more aroma and flavor
through volatile organic compounds, or VOCs, for short.
VOCs help produce aromas of the food and drinks that we consume,
aromas that are intensified and become more complex when they warm up.
That's why if you were to just take a giant swig of freezing sprite,
you'd barely be able to taste much outside of the brain freeze that's ravaging your head.
But with a straw, it limits the amount of liquid that you can take into your mouth at a time,
which lets it warm up briefly and at the same time improves air circulation in the mouth when you drink.
The straw is also helping out with the carbonation because,
while a straw might seem smooth to us,
there are actually tons of tiny little bumps and indentations in there,
all places where carbon dioxide molecules can attach to,
thereby creating more bubbles, promoting more effervescence.
This is why paper straws, which have even more imperfections,
can cause carbonated drinks to go crazy.
Or at least that's how the science should play out.
But does any of this actually make that substantial of a difference?
It's finally time to put all these variables to the test.
Take it away, live-action MatPat.
Alright, so with all our variables set and ready to go,
it's time to actually put our money where our mouth is.
Or put our sprite where our mouth is.
I am joined on the couch by HR representative Rachel.
Hello, happy to be here.
Is that the lore that I should build for you at this point?
That's sure. That sounds fancier than I am.
So before you, we have a bunch of different varieties of sprite,
so we can actually get a side-by-side taste test
on what truly is the best version of sprite.
We also have variables of different straw sizes,
so we can see if straw size is playing a factor in all of this.
And then lastly, we have the fries.
Right over here, it's lunchtime, which is great.
We have some fries, so we can test out whether this sprite
is specifically engineered to complement the saltiness
of the McDonald's fry, or if that's just a myth
and they're all equally the same.
So, how do you feel about sprite?
I love sprite, and I expect them all to taste the same,
but I'm going to enjoy them all.
Yeah, you think they're all going to taste the same?
Well, I think with the fries, I think we're going to like that one.
For the vibes.
Really, for the vibes.
Purely vibes. Purely off of vibes.
But I don't think they're going to be that different.
I firmly disagree.
Really?
100%.
Long, long-term viewers of our channels will know
that I can taste-test the difference between Diet Coke
from can to bottle to fountain to glass.
Like, it's very easy for me to...
Even from different restaurant franchises,
I can tell you different Diet Cokes.
I'm an addict.
I wouldn't be surprised if this taste is vastly different.
So, without any further ado, let's crack these guys open, shall we?
You want me to...
This isn't a twist-off.
Do we have a can up here?
Do we have a can up here?
Here, let's go for it.
A bottle opener or something?
You just did it with your teeth.
Sure.
Just a talent.
Okay. Pleasant.
Sprite.
Tastes like Sprite.
It tastes like Sprite.
It's not as carbonated,
but this is a good baseline of Sprite,
not as carbonated as I expected,
but also doesn't have that spiciness that you associate with Sprite.
It's well-balanced.
Yeah, it's actually very smooth.
It is.
It's a smooth Sprite.
All right, here's the big boy.
Huh.
I don't know what to do with that.
I don't either.
This feels flatter.
It feels fizzier, this one does.
Right, that one feels fizzier.
I don't know if the fizz has a flavor,
but it does change.
The fizz is what really feels like it gives you that crispiness,
or the little bit of the Sprite burn.
And it does feel like when this one goes through this straw,
this one feels bubblier.
It does.
Whereas this guy does not.
No trouble with that one.
Right, thanks.
Thank you, but should I enlist your teeth for this one?
Huh.
Okay, that one has less flavor to me.
I agree with that.
It doesn't have much to do with the carbonation,
but it does feel less sweet.
You're trying this one again?
Well, maybe they're not as different as I thought.
So Sprite all really tastes the same.
Yeah.
It's very similar.
There's differences in carbonation,
but I feel like the taste is consistent.
It does feel like the taste is consistent across the board.
It is purely based off of carbonation,
and less to do with the flavor mix.
The more carbonation it feels like the less sweet it is,
whereas like this is more carb,
that's the flattest one so far.
The other ones have like an airy feel.
We did an episode a long time ago about champagne,
and about how the glass bottles of the champagne
and why you pour it into glass,
because it's able to retain the smaller bubbles better.
Oh.
And so I'm wondering if the glass bottle of the Sprite
is actually playing into that in some way,
and it's functioning in some way.
That was nice.
I was able to do that one too, sorry.
I should have offered it to your teeth first, my bad.
This is so vastly different.
There's a lot of bubbles happening.
Those are close with the bubbles.
In terms of the teeny bubbles?
Tiny bubbles.
But it almost feels like this one has the most flavor.
This is so bubbly.
It because the other ones are just so carbonated.
I feel like it's distracting.
So what have we learned here?
What is the most different Sprite?
They all, to me, taste the same.
Yes.
This one, I get a little bit of a sense of the can.
This one tastes a bit watery because of the ice.
This one is very bubbly through a straw
relative to the other ones.
But as far as the flavor difference?
Not a ton.
And I'm surprised.
My hypothesis, like I said at the beginning of the thing,
my hypothesis was that it would be very easy
to tell a flavor difference between all four of these
in much the same way that you do with Diet Coke.
I sit here and I think I'm completely wrong about that.
All right.
So with round one of the tests complete,
I think let's move on to the big boy straws.
So this is what McDonald's is primed to give you, right?
You already do that?
Yours is better than mine.
I have a four-year-old.
I do it slightly more frequently.
That's valid.
I blew, speaking of my four-year-old,
I blew Ollie's mind one time
by showing him the Giga straw.
There it is.
Why do you call it that?
The Giga straw?
To this more?
Yes.
Because it's more.
Obviously we have a bigger boy straw.
So now it's time to compare the flavor of the two, right?
Does the higher volume of stuff
that you're getting in your mouth through this one
complement this type of sprite?
Does it change things at all?
Does it affect the amount of carbonation
and bubbles that you're tasting?
So without any further ado, back to the rounds.
I might need a Giga straw for this soon.
It's good down there.
It's easier to drink.
It tastes the same.
It still tastes like sprite.
It tastes the same.
Spoiler alert, drinking it through a big straw
has not changed the fact that it is still sprite.
There you go, Matt.
You can open this one.
Oh, thanks.
Please don't.
That old plan.
He should need to break it.
He gave you a can opener.
He did?
It's on the air.
It's a can opener of defeat.
So wait, let's do the side by side real quick.
So we got thin straw.
Okay, thin straw versus thick boy.
Interesting.
We do it side by side.
The bubbles don't come through quite as much.
Right.
It's a little bit easier.
Yeah, it's interesting.
Because the straw has texture on the inside,
the soda's coming through it,
so it's activating a lot of those bubbles, right?
Here, because you're getting more fluid
and less surface area,
you're going to get less bubbles overall.
And that's exactly what I'm tasting here.
This one, the smaller straw,
is giving me stuff that is decidedly more bubbly
and concentrated in the bubbles.
This is a much more balanced flavor for this guy.
This is a moment of truth.
Huh.
Interesting.
What is that?
I'm curious to get your opinion.
I don't want to color any judgment.
To me, it's the same.
Really?
Yeah.
Interesting.
Here.
Stir it again.
I think for some reason,
you almost lose the carbonation with the small straw
and it comes back more with the big one.
I don't think it's there quite as much
as the other ones still,
but it is more balanced, for sure.
Maybe I'm just consuming my drinks like a maniac.
It's sicko mode.
Like, oh, I'm drinking the whole thing.
And it's not giving me much of a flavor difference,
but it's giving me like...
To mouth feel.
Yeah, it's a weird mouth feel thing, right?
Where having more fluid hitting my mouth faster
is more satisfying in some way.
When I'm drinking this,
I find it much more enjoyable
going through this straw than this straw.
I think it's just a whole experience.
Not 100% sure what it is,
but with both of the two,
I would opt for the bigger straw.
Even though I couldn't necessarily tell you
why I'm opting for the bigger straw,
I like it better.
For the vibes.
For the vibes.
Yeah.
For the vibes.
Same thing.
These straws are just too small.
They create too much carbonation.
And as a result,
I don't get the flavor of the soda
as much as just a bunch of bubbles
and I don't like that much carbonation.
That's significantly different.
Carbonation.
Yeah, between the two.
Yeah, the flavor stays the same.
Through all of them, I think.
But the carbonation affects the flavor.
It does.
100% cross the board in every single one of these.
Big straw is the better option.
The flavor is better with less carbonation.
So maybe McDonald's' secret sauce here
isn't so much about like
the flavor or anything like that.
It really boils down to the straw.
But what's interesting, right,
is as we continue to drink this,
as I get overwhelmed with the flavor of Sprite,
I appreciate the watered-down,
icy, you know, this is the guy
that has the watered-down Sprite flavor.
Whereas the other ones are just pure and unconcentrated.
And so, like you said,
this one tastes slightly different
as a result of that.
It tastes more mild.
It's more soothing.
And so, like, I feel like I can drink more of this.
And this one at this point
is like my favorite of these.
Yeah.
Because it's not just cloying the entire time.
Yeah, it does feel more refreshing.
I feel like that's...
If I had to drink all of one of these,
that one's bigger.
So I don't know if that's fair.
But I would drink more of that one.
Yeah, it's mellower now at this point.
Again, because of the ice.
But as a result, I actually like it better.
So maybe what the conclusion here
is that normal Sprite is just too strong of a soda.
And they just need to chill it out a little bit.
Maybe.
I mean, there's just a lot going on
with flavor and carbonation in all of these.
And that takes a little bit of it away, which is nice.
Which brings us to the final variable,
which is the fries.
The French fries.
Right?
So now the question is,
will the Sprite from McDonald's
be specifically engineered
to complement the flavor
and the saltiness of the McDonald's, right?
Because we've ultimately decided that the syrup
tastes largely the same,
I don't think that's going to be the case.
I'm not super hopeful on this one, to be honest with you.
This is better with fries than the bottle.
I agree.
Maybe just the sweetness of it.
Oh, I don't like the fries with the bottle.
This just feels right.
Right?
What is it?
It's sweeter.
I almost think the opposite.
Really?
Where I think these two that I just tried
are so sweet and so flavored.
Whereas this one, again,
has a little bit of that wateriness to it,
which balances, like, it's mellower
and a little bit waterier,
which balances out against the, like,
salty greasiness of the fry.
If you were to ask me which one I would want,
just, like, by natural impulse,
which one are you drinking with these fries?
Hands down.
Hands down.
Hands down.
Hands down.
Right?
And again, is it a flavor difference?
No.
It is more refreshing.
It is.
And it's got to be a mix of, like,
water and carbonation,
and it's refreshing.
I feel like it's probably a combination
of everything that we've talked about today, right?
There is an element of the ice
that's mixed into this,
which makes it slightly more refreshing.
There is an element of the straw,
which makes it more consumable.
And then, yeah, as I keep going back
to the other sprites,
all the other sprites have just that,
again, like, such a strong flavor
as opposed to this guy,
which is different in a good way.
Yeah.
Top tier.
Top tier.
Why?
I don't know.
Yeah, yeah.
It's top tier and not in a way
that you can clearly articulate,
but is better.
Yeah.
So there you have it.
After rigorous testing
and absolutely attacking our stomachs
with sugar,
we found that McDonald's sprite
does indeed hit different,
but not for the reasons you might expect.
To start, the carbonation was actually
less in the McDonald's sprite than the others.
We didn't really feel that snap,
crackle, or pop,
but you know what?
It worked.
And we're not the only ones to think so.
This one kind of tasted too fizzy for me.
I actually kind of like these better than that one.
The lack of carbonation there
was a real surprise considering the science
behind the McDonald's process.
The cold filtered water
should have allowed for more carbonation,
but the ice and the rate at which
the plastic cup heated up
might have affected the fizziness.
We also found that the flavor was milder
and a little bit sweeter.
Ultimately, it amounted to an overall
more pleasant experience,
and was the drink that we agreed
would be the one that we'd keep coming back to.
But in the end,
the one variable that made the biggest difference
across all the taste tests
is the bigger straw.
The fact that, I gotta be honest,
was absolutely shocking to me.
The wider straw made the perfect balance
so you got enough fluid
so you could taste the flavors,
but also adding in just the right amount of bubbles.
And even though Rachel and I
didn't quite see eye to eye
on what made the fountain sprite
our favorite to partner with the fries,
it was in a different league
than any of the others
in terms of how refreshing it was to drink
and how well it worked
with all that salty greasiness.
In the end,
the secret to McDonald's sprite
wasn't a matter of taste,
which makes sense considering
there's nothing special about the syrup
that McDonald's is using
nor the container they keep it in.
Instead,
it was a matter of how pleasant
the entire drink experience ended up being.
It's a finely tuned process
that takes into account everything
from temperature,
the amount of ice,
to straw your sipping through,
the dishes that you're enjoying
alongside the drink,
all of those things combined
to make McDonald's sprite truly special.
And sure,
it didn't quite make me feel like static,
a lightning or the meteor
that killed the dinosaurs,
but we obeyed our thirst,
and I was quenched.
It'll quench ya.
Nothing's quenched here.
It's the quenched here.
But hey,
that's just a theory.
A food theory.
Bottoms up.
