Okay, well in which case let's crack on. So ladies and gentlemen get ready to meet
the cunning maverick of Silicon Valley, the one and only George Hotz. Renowned
for his daring exploits, Hotz commands an enigmatic persona which merges the
technical finesse of Elon Musk and the wit of Tony Stark and the charm of a true
tech outlaw. Now many of you would have or indeed should have seen this man on
Lex's podcast recently for the third time no less. From craftily jailbreaking the
supposedly invincible iPhone to outsmarting the mighty PlayStation 3,
he's proven that no tech fortress is impregnable. Once targeted for his
audacious creativity by Sony with a lawsuit, this hacker wizard stoically
danced past the curveballs thrown by the tech giants all achieved with the
graceful swag of a street smart prodigy. Now when he's not outfoxing major
corporations, you'll find him at the heart of the avant-garde of AI technology,
gallantly trailblazing through the wilds of the tech front here. He's currently
building a startup called Micrograd which is building superfast AI running on
modern hardware and truly he's the James Bond of Silicon Valley minus the
martinis of course. Now please welcome the unparalleled code cowboy, the
unapologetic techno-mancer, George Hots! Whoo! Anyway, also joining us for the big
fight this evening is the steadfast sentinel of AI safety, Conor Leahy.
Undeterred by the sheer complexity of artificial intelligence, Conor braves
the cryptic operations of text generating models with steely resolve. Now
about two years ago Conor took on the Herculean task of safeguarding
humanity from a potential AI apocalypse. His spirit is relentless, his
intellect razor sharp and his will to protect is unwavering. Now drawing on
his contentious claim that we are super, super fucked. Yeah, Conor channels the
urgency of our predicament into his work. Now his startup conjecture isn't just a
glorified tech endeavor but it's a lifeboat for us all racing against the
breakneck speed of AI advancement with the fates of nations possibly at stake.
He's determined to break the damning prophecy and render us super, super saved.
So brace for a showdown as Conor Leahy, the maverick defender of AI's boundaries
strides into the ring. Now the man who declared we are super, super fucked is
here to prove just how super, super not fucked we could be if we make the right
decisions today. So please give it up for Mr. Conor, super, super Leahy. Whoo!
Now Conor, I'd appreciate it if you don't go down in the fourth. I want this
fight to go the distance. Now we're running for 90 minutes this evening.
There'll be a 10 minute openers from, we said hots, didn't we, from Hots first
and then Conor and I'll only step into the ring if the punch up gets two out of
hands and unfortunately we won't be taking live questions today because we
want to maximize the carnage on the battlefield. George Hots, your opening
statements please.
Um, yeah, we're super, super fucked. I think I agree with you.
But that was a short fight.
Yeah, look, I think, okay, so to make my opening statement clear and why maybe
it doesn't make that much sense for me to go first, I think that the trajectory
of all of this was somewhat inevitable, right? So you have humans over time and
you can look at a 1980 human and a 2020 human. They look pretty similar, right?
Ronald Reagan, Joe Biden, you know, that's all the same.
Whereas a 1980 computer is like an Apple II and a 2020 computer is a M1 Max
MacBook, like lines looking like this, right? So you have one line like this,
one line like this, these lines eventually cross and I don't see any
reason that line is going to stop, right? I've seen a few of the other guests
argue something like, well, LLMs can't problem solve, but it doesn't matter.
Like if this one can't, the next one will, whatever you call, I don't believe
that there's a step function. I don't believe that like, oh, now it's conscious
or now it's intelligent. I think it's all on a gradient. And I think this gradient
will continue to go up, will approach human level and will pass human level.
Now, this belief that we are uniquely fucked because of this, the amount of
power in the world is about to increase, right? When you think about power and you
think about, straight up, you can just talk about energy usage. The amount of
energy usage in the world is going to go up. The amount of intelligence in the
world is going to go up. We may be able to do some things to slow it down or
speed it up based on political decisions, but it doesn't matter. The trajectory
is up or major catastrophe, right? The only way it goes down is through war,
nuclear annihilation, bio annihilation, meteor impact, some kind of major
annihilation. That's what's going on. What we can control and what I think is
super important we control is what the distribution of that new power looks
like. I am not afraid of super intelligences. I am not afraid to live in
a world among super intelligences. I am afraid if a single person or a small
group of people has a super intelligence and I do not. And this is where we get
to chicken man. A chicken man is the man who owns the chicken farm. There's many
chickens in the chicken farm and there's one chicken man. It is unquestionable
that chicken man rules. And if you believe chicken man rules because of his size, I
invite you to look at cow man who also rules the cows and the cows are much
larger than him. Chicken man rules because of his intelligence. This is basic
less wrong stuff. Everyone kind of knows this. How the squishy things take over the
world. Look, I agree with Elias Yudkowski all up to Nuke the data centers, right. So I
do not want to be a chicken. And if people decide they are going to restrict
open source AI or make sure I can't get access to the compute and only trusted
people like chicken man get access to the compute. Well, shit, man, I'm the chicken.
And yeah, I don't want to be the chicken. So I think that's my are we fucked? Maybe.
Um, I agree that that intelligence is very dangerous. How can you look at
intelligence and not say it's very dangerous, right? Intelligence is
somehow safe. But things like nuclear bombs are an extremely false
equivalency because what does a nuclear bomb do besides blow up and kill
people? Intelligence has the potential to make us live forever. Intelligence has
the potential to let us colonize the galaxy. Intelligence has the potential
to meet God. Nuclear bombs do not they just blow up. Um, so I think the question
and like, you have things like crypto, which are a clear advantage to the
defender, at least today. And you have things like nuclear bombs, which are
clear advantage to the attacker. AI, it's unclear. I think the best defense
against an AI trying to manipulate me. And that's what I'm really worried
about future psyops, you know, we're already seeing it today with the voice
changer stuff. Like, you're never going to know who's human. The world's
about to get crazy. Um, the best defense I could possibly have is an AI in my
room being like, Don't worry, I got you. It's you and me. We're on a team. We're
aligned. I'm not worried about alignment as a technical challenge. I'm worried
about alignment as a political challenge. Google doesn't like me. Open AI
doesn't like me. But me and my computer, you know, we like each other. We're
aligned. And we're standing against the world that has always since the
beginning of history, maximally been trying to screw you over, right?
Intelligence, people think that one super intelligence is going to come and
be unaligned against humanity. All of humanity is unaligned against each
other. I mean, we have some common values, but really, come on, everyone's
trying to scam everybody. The only reason you really team up with someone else
is like, Hey, man, what if we team up and scam them, right? And what if we
team up, call ourselves America and we, we, we, uh, we build a big army and say
we're free and independent. Yeah. Right. It's that force that has made humanity
cooperate humanity by default. He's very unaligned and has every kind of
belief under the sun. So I'm not worried about AI showing up with a new
belief under the sun. I'm not worried about the amount of intelligence
increasing. I'm worried about a few entities that are unaligned with me
acquiring Godlike powers and using them to exploit me. I think that's my
opening statement.
Cool. Yeah. Thanks. That's, uh, that's, I mean, yeah, I also kind of agree with
you. And most of the things you say, there's a few details I'd like to
dig into there, but for most of the things you say, I do think I agree with
you here. I think it's absolute. Let me just like, start with saying, I
totally agree with you that misuse and like, you know, bad actors, what using
AGI is a horrible, dangerous outcome. That's, that's like, you know,
sometimes the, the, uh, less wrong, you know, crowd likes to talk about X
risk, but also sometimes I've talked about S risk, suffering risks. So things
are worse than death. I believe that you can probably almost only get S
risks from misuse. I don't think you can get S risks. Probably like, you
can, but it's extremely unlikely to get it from like just like raw
misalignment. Like you'd have to like get extraordinarily unlucky. So while I
do it, so I do think, for example, a very, you know, controllable AGI or
super intelligence in the hand of sadistic psychopath is significantly in
a sense worse than a paperclip maximizer. So I think this is something
we would agree on probably. So I think I'm to think of pretty much on board
with you on a lot of things there, where I think things come aboard a bit
of a tale as I think there's two points where I would like to take as my
opening statement, two things I want to talk about. The first one is I want to
talk about the technical problem of alignment. So am I concerned about the
kinds of things like misuse and like small groups of people centralizing
power potentially for nefarious deeds? Yeah, I think this is a very, very
significant problem that I do think about a lot. And that'll be the second
thing I want to talk about. The first thing I want to talk about is that I
don't even think we're going to make it to that point. I don't think we're
going to get to the point where anyone has a super intelligence that's
helping them out. We're going to, if we don't solve very hard technical
problems, which are currently not on track to being solved, by default, you
don't get a bunch of, you know, super intelligence and boxes working with a
bunch of humans. You get a bunch of super intelligence, you know, fighting each
other, working with each other and just ignoring humans. Humans just get cut
out entirely from the process. And even then, you know, it's, you know, whether
one takes over or they find an equilibrium, I don't know, like, you know, who
knows what happens to that point. But by default, I wouldn't expect humans to be
part of the equilibrium anymore. Once you're, once you're the chicken man, well,
why do you need chickens? You know, if, you know, maybe if they provide some
resource for you, the reason humans have chickens is that they make chicken
breasts. I mean, personally, I wouldn't like to be harvested for chicken
breasts, just my personal opinion. I consider this a pretty bad outcome.
But even then, well, as a chicken man finds a better way of chicken breasts or, you
know, modifies himself to no longer need food, I expect the chickens are not going
to be around for much longer. You know, once we stopped using horses for
transportation, didn't go very well for the horses. So that's kind of the first
part of my point that I'd like to, you know, maybe hear your opinions on, hear
your thoughts on, is that I think the technical control is actually very hard.
And I don't think it's unsolvable by any means. I think like, you know, you and
like, you know, a bunch of other smart people work on this for like 10 years, I
think you can solve it, but it's not easy. And it has to actually happen. And
there is a deadline for this. The second point I want to bring up is kind of
where you talk about how humans are unaligned. I think this is partially
definitely true. I think I'm unusually, I am the more optimistic of the two of
us in this scenario, not a role I often have in these discussions, where I
actually think the amount of coordination that exists between humanity,
especially in the modern world is actually astounding. Every single time two
adult human males meet and don't kill each other is a miracle. Have you seen
what happens when two adult male chimps from two different warbands meet each
other? It doesn't go very well. And those are already pretty well coordinated
animals because they can have warbands. What happens when, you know, two male
bugs or, you know, I don't know, sea slugs meet each other, you know, either
they ignore each other or, you know, things go very poorly. This is the
default outcome. The true unaligned outcome, the true default state of
nature is you can't have two adult males in the same room at any time. I saw
this funny video on Twitter the other day where it was like, I know, some
parliament, I think in East Europe or something, and there's this big guy
who's just like going at this politician, he's like in his face, he's like
screaming, he was like going everywhere, and not a single punch will
throw him. No, then no one took out a knife, no one took out a gun. And I
was like, wow, the fact that we're so civilized and we're so aligned to
each other that we can have something this barbaric happen and no one throws
a punch is actually shocking. This is very unusual, even for humans. If you
go back 200 years, punches and probably gunshots would have flown. So this is
not to say that humans have some inherent special essence that we're good,
that we have solved goodness or any means. What I'm saying is the way I like
to think about it is that coordination is a technology, is a technology you
can improve upon. It is you can develop new methods of coordination, you can
develop new structures, new institutions, new systems. And I think it's very
tempting for us living in this modern world to, it's kind of like a fish and
water effect. We forget how much of our life, a lot of our life is built on
atoms, on physical technology, a lot of it's built on digital technology, but
a lot of it is on social technology. And when I look at how does the world
go well? Like, you know, should it be only the special elites get control of
the AI? I'm like, well, that's not really how I think about it. And I think
about it way more is, what is a coordination mechanism where we can
create a coordination selling point or we can create a group, an institution, a
system of some kind that where people will have game theoretic incentives to
cooperate on the system, the results in something that is net positive for
everyone. Because the truth is, is that positive some games do exist. And
they're actually very profitable. And they're very good. And I think if we
can turn, you know, you can turn any positive some game into a net into a
zero or a negative some game pretty easily. It's much easier to destroy than
is to create. But I think it's absolutely possible to create coordination
technology around AI and to build coordination mechanisms that are net
positive for everyone involved. So those would be like my two points. Happy to
dig into anyone's you think would be it'll lead to an interesting
interaction. Sure. So I'll start with two and then go to one. So two, I moved
to Berkeley in 2014. And I threw myself at the Mary cult. I showed up at the
Mary office and I'm like, Hi, I'm here to join your cult. And what I started to
realize was, Mary, and less wrong in general, have a very poor grip on the
practicalities of politics. Very much. I think there was sort of a split, you
know, Curtis Yavin, like neoreaction. This is a spin off of rationality. And it's
a spin off rationality that understood the truth about human nature. So when I
give you that, you give that example of two chimps meeting in the woods and
they're going to fight. If I'm one of those chimps, at least I stand a chance.
Right. He might beat my ass. I might beat his. But if I come up against the FBI,
things do not look good for me. In fact, things so much do not look good for me.
There's no way I'm going to beat the FBI. The modern forces are so powerful that
this is not a, Oh, we've established a nice cooperative shelling point. This is
a, we have pounded so much fear into these people that they would never even
think of throwing a puncher firing a gun. We have made everybody terrified. And
this isn't good. We didn't, we didn't achieve this through some enlightened
cooperation. We achieved this through a massive propaganda effort. Right. It's
the joke about, you know, the American soldier goes over to Russia and it's
like, man, you guys got some real propaganda here. And that the Russian
soldiers like, Yeah, no, I know it's bad, but it's not as bad as yours. And the
American soldiers like what propaganda? And the Russian just laughs, right? So, so
this, this didn't occur because of this occurred because of a absolute tyrannical
force decided to dominate everybody, right? Um, now, Oh, I think so. I think there's
a way out of this. I think there actually is a way out of this, right? And I wrote
a blog post about this called individual sovereignty. And I think a really nice
world would be if all the stuff to live food, water, health care, electricity
were generatable off the grid in a way that you are individually sovereign. And
this comes back to my point about offense and defense, right? If I have a world
where you don't want it to be extreme defense, you don't want every person to
be able to completely insulate them. But you want like, okay, it takes a whole
bunch of other people to gang up to take that guy out, right? Like that's, that's
a good, that's a good balance. And the balance that we live in today is there
is one pretty much a unipolar world. I mean, thank God for China. But you know,
there's one, there's one unipolar world, you got America and where are you going
to run? I'll pay taxes. I don't care if you live overseas, right? So yeah, my point
about the coordination is that if you're okay with solving coordination
problems by using a single, a singleton super intelligent AI to make everybody
cower in fear and tyrannize the future. Sure, you'll get coordination. Yeah, that
works. That works. I'm the only guy with a gun and I got 10 a year. I got a name
that all 10 of you and you can all die or listen to me your choice.
So I'm curious about, so I understand what you're saying. And I think you make
some decent points. But I think I view the world a bit differently from you. And
I'd like to like dig into that a little bit. So like, who do you think is less
afraid? Someone living just a medium person living in the United States of
America, or the medium person living in Somalia? Sure, America less afraid. Well,
that's kind of strange. Somalia doesn't have a government. They have much less
tyranny. You're much more you can just buy a rocket launcher and just like live
on a farm and just like, you know, kill your neighbors and no one's gonna stop
you. So like, how does that interact with your old you? Those who will trade
liberty for safety deserve neither.
That sorry, I don't understand. Could you elaborate a bit more?
Um, in Somalia, you have a chance in America, you do not, right? I am okay. I
would rather live in fear. I would rather be worried about someone shooting a
rocket launcher at me than to have an absolutely tyrannical government. Just,
you know, just just like like like a managerial class. Not saying, by the way,
I agree with you that these things are possible. I agree with you that the
less wrong notion of politics is possible. I would love to live in these
sort of worlds, but we don't. The practical reality of politics is so much
more brutal. And it just comes from a straight up instinct to dominate, not an
instinct, you know, government by the people for the people is branding.
Yeah, I mean, yeah. So to be clear, I very much do not agree with less wrongs
views and politics and a bit of an outcast for how I view how conflict theory
I view politics. But this is, I feel like you're kind of dodging the question
you're just a little bit. Is it like, well, if that's true, why aren't you
living in Somalia?
I know people who've done it, right? It's very hard. It's very hard psychologically.
Okay. So like tigers love charm, it turns out, right? A tiger does not want to
chase down an antelope, right? A tiger would love to just sit in the zoo and
eat the charm, right? And like, it takes a very strong tiger to reject that.
And I'm not that strong. I hope there's people out there who are. I hope there's
people out there who are actually like, you know, I'm just not a weak little
bitch. That's why I don't live in Somalia, right?
Okay. I mean, that's a fair answer, but I am a bit confused here. So you're
saying that living in Somalia would be better by some metric, but you're also
saying you prefer not living in Somalia. So I'm a bit confused because like, from
my perspective, I want to live in a country I want to live in. And that's the
one which I think is better. If I thought another country was better, then I would
just move there.
But let's, the tiger and the chum, I think, is a good analogy, right? Like, if
you have a choice as a tiger, you can live in a zoo and you get a nice size
pen, you know, the zookeepers are not abusive at all. You get fed this
beautiful chopped up food. It's super easy. You sit there, get fat, lays around
all day, or you can go to the wild. And in the wild, you're going to have to
hunt. You might not succeed at hunting. It is just a, you know, it's a brutal
existence. As a tiger, which one do you choose? Now, you say, Oh, well, obviously,
you know, you're going to choose the chum one. Yeah, but do you see what you're
giving up? Do you see?
No, no, could you elaborate a little bit on what I'm giving up?
You are giving up on the nature of tiger. You are effectively, okay, maybe I'll
take this to an extreme, right? In the absolute extreme, the country that you
would most rather live in is the one that basically wire heads you, right? The one
and you can say that, Okay, well, I don't want to be wireheaded, but you know,
there's a, there's a gradient that'll get you there, Gandhi in the pill, or, you
know, if you can live in this country, you can be happy, feel safe and secure all
the time. Don't worry exactly about how we're doing it, you know, but right. I
mean, it takes a very strong person to, it's going to take a very strong person
to say no to wireheading. So I understand. I'll give one more instrumental
reason for living in America versus living in Somalia. If I thought that
America and Somalia were both like steady states, I might choose Somalia. I
don't think that. I think that being here, I have a much better way of
escaping this, of escaping the constant tyranny that we're in. And I think a
major way to do it is AI. I think that AI is, is if I really, if I had an AGI, if
I had an AGI in my closet right now, I'll tell you what I'd do with it. I
would have it build me a spaceship that could get me off of this planet and get
out of here as close to the speed of light as I possibly could and put big
shield up behind me, blocking all communication. That's what I would do if I
had an AGI. And I think that's, you know, the right move. And I have a lot better
chance of building that spaceship right here than I do in Somalia. Right. So I'll
give an instrument. Yeah, that's right.
That's a good instrument. Well, we'll miss you if you leave, though. No, it'll
be real shame. It'll be everyone should do it. Like this is, this is the move,
right? And like, let humanity blow. I mean, look, I agree with you that we're
going to probably blow ourselves up, right? But I think that the path potentially
through this probably looks different from the path you're imagining. I think
that the reasonable position, I'm sorry. Oh, no, I think yeah, maybe we're done
with this point. I can come back and have a response to your first one. I would
like to, if you don't mind, just like fall on one string there as well. So one
of the things you said is like, what will the tiger choose? And so my personal
view of this kind of thing. And I think I want to think about coordination is I
think of things. So you put a lot of view on this like fear based domination and
so on. And I'm not going to deny that this isn't a thing that happens. I'm
German. You know, like, you know, I have living relatives who can tell you some
stories. Like I understand, like I understand. I'm not I'm not denying
these things might be needs. What I'm saying, though, is, okay, let's say
there was a bunch of tigers, you know, you and me and all the other tigers. And
some of the tigers are like, man, fuck, this whole like nature shit is like
really not working for me. How about we go build a zoo together? Who's in? And
then other people like, Yeah, you know, actually, that sounds awesome. Let's do
that. Do you think that's okay? Like you think that would be like a fair
option for them to do? Sure. But that's not where zoos come from. I know. I
know. I'm getting there. I'm getting there. Like, that is not where zoos come
from. Sure. But the this analogy here is, of course, is that this is where a lot
of human civilization comes. Not all of it. I understand that why France was
doing well in the First World War was not because of democracy big nice. It was
because democracy raises large armies. It's I'm very well aware of the
real politic, as the Germans would say, about these kinds of factors. And I
and I fully agree with you that a lot of the good things that we have are not by
design, so to speak. You know, there are happy side effects, you know, capitalism
is a credit assignment mechanism, you know, the fact that also results in us
having cool video games and air conditioning. It's not an inherent
feature of the system. It's it's an execution mechanism. And so totally
grant all of this. I'm not saying that every coordination thing is good. I'm
not saying that, you know, there aren't trade offs. Actually, you were talking
about, I think, aesthetic trade offs. You're like, there's an aesthetic that
the tiger loses. And well, I think personally, aesthetics are subjective. So
I think this is something that different people. So the way I think about
aesthetics is I think aesthetics are things you trade on is, you know, you
might want tigers in the wild to exist. Okay, fair enough. That's a thing you
can want. You know, someone else might want, you know, certain kinds of art to
exist. They might want a certain kind of religion to be practiced or whatever.
These are aesthetic preferences upon reality, which I think are very fair.
So the way I personally think about this morally is I'm like, okay, cool.
How can we maximize trade surplus so you can spend your resources on the
aesthetics you want and I'll spend my resources on the, you know, things I
want. Now, maybe the thing you describe where
everyone just atomizes into their own systems, with their own value system,
with their own aesthetics, completely separate from other, is the best outcome.
Awesome. I think this is completely...
Have you heard the Yodobar manifesto?
I have not. You sure? The problem with this, everyone trades on their own
aesthetics, is you will never be able to actually buy any aesthetics that are in
conflict with the system, right? You won't. The system won't let you.
Okay, by that logic, why do people have free time?
Why don't they work all the time? Why doesn't capitalism extract literally
every minute of them? Why do you think that is?
I think it's because it turns out that we don't actually live in a capitalist
society. I think China is a lot closer to a capitalist society than America.
I think America is kind of communist and I think in a communist society, of
course, you're going to get free time. It turns out that subsidizing all the
homeless people is a great idea, right? If you want to keep power, again,
do some absolute tyrannical mechanism. You do it, right?
So why do we have free time? Well, you think it's some victory of capitalism.
I think it's because we do not live in a capitalist country. I think China is more
capitalist than America. I think it's because we trade on our aesthetics.
I think that different people have different things to contribute to
various systems, not necessarily capitalist or communist thing.
I'm saying it's more energy. In the primordial environment, if you have
to fight literally every single second and spend every
jewel of energy you have to scrounge together another jewel of energy,
you can't have free time. It's not about capitalism. This is about
entropy. This is about these kind of things. We have energy excess.
We have, we've produced systems that allow us to extract more energy for
jewel we put in. And we can spend that extra energy on things such as free time.
And the distribution of energy, power, coordination, whatever you want to call it
is another question. Will you agree or disagree with this?
I mean, I am taking an extreme position when I say that there are definitely
positive sum coordination problems that are solved by governments, right?
It is not all zero sum or negative sum, right? I'm not denying this.
But what I'm saying is it's like, I don't know, man, like the existence of free time.
Well, that's all great when you think you live in this surplus energy world, right?
And maybe we do right now. But if some other country took this seriously, like China,
who's going to win in a war? Who's going to win? Is it going to be the Chinese?
You guys see the Chinese build a building? They got like 400 people there,
and they're all there 24 hours a day, and they're getting the building built.
You ever see Americans build a building? It's six guys, two of them are working,
two of them are shift supervisors, and two of them are on lunch breaks.
Oh, you got your free time. You got your aesthetic preferences.
You deserve to lose in a war, right? This country deserves to lose in a war
if they keep acting the way they're acting.
So I definitely see the point you're making. And this is personally not a thing I want to
defend too far because I'm not a military expert. But I will note that the US has like
37 aircraft carriers, and the Chinese have like two, and Americans are like,
somehow, you know, despite being so lazy and oh, no, they have all this, you know,
all this free time or whatever. Somehow they're still a military hegemon or whatever.
And like they're the biggest rival Russia fighting this backwards water country in
Ukraine suddenly folds and lose like three quarters of the military.
It's what I'm saying is if you have massive hegemony, if you have truly a obnoxious victory,
the way it should look is if you laze around all the time and you look like a fucking idiot and
you still win. Yes. And I'm not talking about Russia. Russia has a GDP the size of Italy.
This is China here. You might say that China has two aircraft carriers in the US has 37.
Why do we have aircraft carriers? Who has more drone building capacity?
The Chinese are the United States. If the future is fought with AI swarm drone warfare,
the Chinese can make, you know, a million drones a day in the US can make.
I don't even know. I think we buy them from China.
Well, I'm not an expert on these kind of logistics. I think I would like to
get back to kind of like the more general. Let's move on from that.
I am not either, but I do believe the Chinese have more manufacturing capacity than the United
States. It seems completely plausible to me. I think things are not lazy and they don't sit
around and have all this free time and aesthetic preferences or something.
I'm a believer that work is life. I mean, at least from my Chinese friends,
I know the Chinese sure do have a lot of inefficiencies. It's just called corruption.
Oh, America has corruption too. You see. Oh, yeah, sure. Well, in Mexico,
the corruption is you have to pay 20 cents to get 20 cents on every dollar for the building
you built, right? Whatever. In America, every dollar is spent absolutely on that building.
You know, we know that because we spent $4 making sure that that first dollar was not
spent correctly. I'm well aware of that. Anyways, I think we mostly agree on this
point actually. And I think it's a matter of degree. What I want to say just for the record,
the U.S. is a uniquely dysfunctional system in the West. I'm German and the German system is
very dysfunctional, but it's like nothing compared to how dysfunctional the U.S. is.
Fully agree with that. I don't think we disagree on that. I think it's a matter of
degree more so than anything. I agree. We've had a comment saying someone's turned the
temperature up a bit too much on the language model. So let's bring it back a tiny bit to
AI safety. But that was a great discussion. Got it. I will end with saying I love America.
I am happy to live here. And there are a lot of things I appreciate about American society.
Great. So do you want to return to like the technical topics or?
Yeah, I think I can return to your first point. And maybe I'll just start with a question.
Do you think there's going to be a hard takeoff?
I don't know, but I can't rule it out.
I can't see how that would possibly happen.
I have a few ideas of how it could happen, but I don't. It's unlikely. It seems like not.
The way I think it could happen is if there are just algorithms, which are like
magnitudes of order better than anything we ever have. And like the actual amount of
computing you get human is like, you know, a cell phone or, you know, like, and then this
algorithm is not deep in the tech tree. We just happen to have not picked it up. And then an
AGI system picks it up. This is how I think it could happen.
Okay, yes, I agree that something like this is potentially plausible where you're saying basically
like the God Shatter is already distributed. It's not a question. It's using all the existing
compute in the world today. It just turns out it was 10,000x more effective or a millionx more
effective than we thought. Yeah, this is seems the most plausible way to be. Or, you know, you mix
lead and, you know, copper and you get a superconductor, you know, something like that.
Even that. I know, I know, I'm not joking. It's going to take so many years to like,
it's not about the discovery, right? Give it 10 years to productionize it, scale up processes,
right? Like these things are, you know, this is something running a company's really taught me,
like it's just going to take a long time. And this is really like, like kind of where my,
I just don't believe in a hard takeoff. I think that they'll be, this is a gasketing I like,
he's a hardware and software progressive, quite similar speeds. And you can look at
factoring algorithms to show this. So it would shock me if there were some, you know, 10 to the
six, 10 to the nine magical improvement to be had. It seems plausible to be like a hard takeoff is
definitely not my main line scenario, my main line scenario. Well, I don't know, maybe you
wouldn't consider this a hard, maybe you would consider as a hard takeoff. This is what I would
describe as a soft takeoff is something like, sometimes the way I like to define AGI is say,
it's something that has the thing that chimps, that chimps don't have and humans do have.
Yeah. So chimps don't go a third to the moon, you know, despite their brain being a third of our
size. So we scaled up things by a factor of three of a primate brain, roughly four or something
like that. And like most of the structures, I'm sure some micro tweaks and whatever, but like
not massive amount of evolutionary pressure, like we're very, very similar to chimps.
And somehow this got us from, you know, literally no technology to space travel in a,
you know, evolutionary, very small pair of time. It seems imaginable to me that something similar
could happen with AI. I'm not saying it will, but like seems imaginable.
Yeah. So I agree with this. I'll come to your point about, you know, you had two regulatory
points, one of them about capping the max flops. And I actually kind of agree with this. I do think
that things could potentially become very dangerous at some point. I think your numbers are way,
way, way too low. I think if your numbers are anywhere near GPT-3, GPT-4, okay, great. We got
a lot of, we got a lot of fast moving guys who work on fiber, even if you start to get Von Neumanns.
Right? We're not talking about a humanity's worth of compute. We're talking about things on par with
a human and a few humans, right? Yeah, they'll run fast, but they're not. Like things get scary
when you can do a humanities training run in 24 hours. Like we're about to burn the same compute
that all 2 million years of human civilization burned. Okay. Now I don't know what starts to
happen. Or I'll put this kind of another way. Language models, I look at them and they don't
scare me at all because they're trained on human training data, right? These things are not, like,
if something was as good as GPT-4 that looked like Mu Zero, where it trained from some simple rules,
okay, now I'm a bit more scared. But when you say, okay, it's, you know, we're feeding the whole
internet into the thing and it parrots the internet back, mushed around a little bit,
that looks very much like what a human does. And I'm just not scared of that.
Yeah, it's very reasonable, whatever. Like, I'm not scared of GPT-4 to be clear. Like, I think
there is like 0% chance or like, you know, epsilon chance that GPT-4 is existentially dangerous by
itself. You know, maybe some crazy GPT-4 plus RL plus Mu Zero plus something, something maybe.
But I definitely agree with you here. I don't expect GPT-3 or 4 by themselves to be dangerous.
These are not, I'm much closer to, I think, what you're saying, like, yeah, if you had a Mu Zero
system, they'd bootstrap yourself to GPT-4. Holy shit, like, we're big, we're big shit if we get
to that. Then we should, let's stop. Let's stop. Yeah, let's stop. So, I'm very happy to get,
to be into a regime where we're like, okay, let's find the right bound. Like, I think this is an
actually good argument. I think this is actually something that should be discussed, which is not
obvious. And I could be super wrong about that. So I'd like to justify a little bit about why I
put such a small bound. But I think your arguments you're making for the higher bounds are very
reasonable, actually. I think these are actually good arguments. So just to justify a little bit
about why I put such a low bound, the boring default answer is conservatism. It's like, if all of
humanity is at stake, which, you know, you may not believe, I'm like, whoa, whoa, okay, at least
give us a few years to like, more understand what we're dealing with here. Like, I understand that,
you know, you may disagree with this. Very plausible. But I'm like, whoa, like, you know, at least,
let's let's like, by default, let's hit a pause button for like, you know, a couple years until
we figure things out more. And then if we like, find a better theory of scaling, we understand how
intelligent scales, we understand how mu zero comes, blah, blah, blah. And then we pick back up after
we're like, you know, we make huge breakthroughs in alignment. And Eliezer is, is crying on CNN and
like, oh, we did it, boys. I mean, then okay, sure, you know, okay. So that's the one, like,
kind of more boring argument, like, that's kind of a boring argument. The more interesting argument,
I think, which I think is a bit, you know, or skit so, is that it's not clear to me that you can't
get dangerous levels of intelligence with the amount of compute we have now. And one of the reasons
that I'm unsure about this is because man, GPT three GP four is just the dumbest possible way to build
AI. Like, it's just like, like, there's like no dumber way to do it. Like, it's it works and dumb
is good, right? You know, better lesson dumb is good. But look at humans. You said, as we talked
about before, you know, human today, human 10,000 years ago, not that different. You place both of
them into a, you know, workshop with tools to build, you know, any weapon of their choice, which of
them is more dangerous? Obviously, you know, one of them will have much better, you know,
capacities to deal with tools, to read books, to think about how to design new weaponry, and so
on. These are not genetic changes, they are epistemological changes, they are memetic changes,
they are software updates, you know, humans had to discover rational reasoning, like, you know,
before like, you know, I mean, you know, obviously, people always had like, you know, folk conceptions
of rationality. But it wasn't like a common thing to think about causality and like, you know,
you know, rational, like, you know, if then else kind of stuff until relative, you know,
like philosophers in the old ages and only became widespread relatively recently. And these are useful
capabilities that turned out to be very powerful and took humans many, many thousands of years to
develop and distribute. That's good. And I don't think humans are anywhere near the level. I think
the way we could do science right now is pretty awful. Like, it's like the dumbest way to do
science that like, kind of still works. Like, you know, and I expect it's like possible that if you
had a system which like, let's say it's like, smaller brain than the human even, but it has
really, really sophisticated epistemology. It has really, really sophisticated theories of
meta science. And it never tires, it never gets bored, it never gets upset, it never gets distracted,
and it can like, memorize arbitrary amounts of data. This is something that I think is within
the realm of like a GPT three or four training run to build something like this. And it is not
obvious to me that this system could not outfind humanity. Maybe not, like maybe not, but it's
not obvious to me that it keeps. So just carry on. So what do you think of that? So to your first
point, why I stand against almost all conservative arguments, you're assuming the baseline is no
risk, right? And oh, well, why should we do this AI? We should wait and bring the baseline back. No,
no, no, no. We are about to blow the world up any minute. There's enough nuclear weapons aimed at
everything. This is wearing some incredibly unstable precarious position right now. Like,
people talk about this with with car accidents. You know, this is comma, like, people are like,
oh, well, you know, if your device causes even one accident, I'm like, yeah, but what if statistically
there would have been five without the device? I'm like, you do have to understand the baseline
risk in cars is super high. You make it five x safer, there's one accident, you don't like that.
Okay, I mean, you have to be excluded from any polite conversation, right? So yeah, like, I think
that calling for a pause to the technology is is worse, right? I think given the two options,
if we should pause or we should not pause, I think pausing actually prevent presents more risk. And
I can talk about some reasons why again, the things that I'm worried about are not quite
the existential risks I have to the species are not AGI goes rogue, they are government gets control
of AGI and ends up in some really bad place where nobody can compete with them. I don't think these
things look unhuman. These things to me like, I see very little distinction between human
intelligence and machine intelligence, it's all just on a spectrum. And like, they're not,
like, to come to the point about, okay, but GPT four could be like this hyper rational,
never tiring humans are doing science in the dumbest way. I'm not sure about that, right?
Like, I think that, you know, when you look at like, okay, okay, we have chess bots that do
way better. And all they do is think about chess, haven't really done this with humans,
people would call it an ethical, right? Like, if we really told a kid, like, if we really just
like, every night, we're just putting the chess goggles on you, and you're staring at chess
boards, and we're really just training your neural net to play chess. I think humans could
actually beat a computer again, a chess, if we were willing to do that. So yeah, I don't think
that this stuff is that particularly dumb. And I think, okay, maybe we're losing 10x, but we're
not losing a million x. Again, I don't see a, I do the numbers out all the time for when we're
going to start to get more computer, you know, when will a computer have more compute than a human?
When will a computer have more compute than humanity? And yes, these things get scary,
but we're nowhere near scary yet. We're looking at these cute little things. And
these things, by the way, do present huge dangers to society, right? The the PsyOps that are coming.
Right now, you assume that like, when you call somebody, that you're at least wasting their
time too. But we're going to get like heaven banning. I love this concept, which is, you know,
yeah, yeah, came up on Luther AI, like that's where it comes from was the guy on the Luther
AI that came up with that word. Yeah, I know the guy came up with it. I love, I love this
concept. And I think there's also a story, my little pony friendship is optimal that God that
goes into the concept. And yeah, so I think that like, my girlfriend proposed a, I don't want to
talk to Oh, I say you don't want to talk to your relative anymore, right? Okay, we'll give them
an AI version to talk to, right? Yeah. Yeah. So like, this stuff is coming and it's coming soon.
And if you try to centralize this, if you try to, you know, say like, Oh, okay, Google Open AI,
great, they're not aligned with you. They're really not Google has proven time and time again,
they're not aligned with you. Meta has proven time and time again, they're trying to fix it.
Yeah. I mean, I fully agree with you. Like, I like that you bring up PsyOps as the correct
example in my opinion of short term risks. I think you're like, fully correct about this.
Like, when I first saw like, GPT models, I was like, holy shit, like the level of control I can
gain over social reality, using these tools at scale is insane. And I'm surprised that we haven't
seen yet the things that like, augured in my visions of the day. And we will, like we will,
obviously it's coming. And this is, so I think this is a very, very real problem. Yeah. Like,
I think if we, even if we stop now, we're not out of the forest. So like, when you say like, I
think the risk is zero, please do not believe that that is what I believe, because it is truly not.
It is truly, truly not. I think we are like, we are really in a bad situation. We are in a, we are
being, we're under attack from like so many angles right now. And this is before we get into, you
know, like, you know, potential, like, you know, climate risks, nuclear risk, whatever, we're in
under room of medic risk, like the, the then dangers of our like epistemic foundations are under
attack. And this is something we can adapt to, right? Like, you know, we did, you know, when a
good friend of mine, he's a, he's quite well read on like Chinese history. And he always like, it
tells me his great story. So I'm not a historian. So please, you know, don't crucify me here. But
like, he tells these great stories about when Marxist memes were first introduced to China.
And like, this is where a world where like, just like all the precursor memes didn't exist.
That's just like, kind of was air dropped in and people went nuts. People went just completely
crazy because there was no memetic antibodies to these like hyper virulent memes that were,
you know, created by evolutionary pressures and like, you know, Western university departments,
like really, you could call philosophy department just gain a function, the medic laboratories.
I like that. Yeah. I mean, like, you know, like without being, you know, political or any means
there, a lot of what these organizations do. And like, you know, other, you know, what other,
you know, memetic, like, you know, if philosophy departments are the, like, gain a function
laboratories, then like 4chan and tumbler are like the bat caves of needs, you know, like the
Chinese bat cave. And I remember this vividly. I was like on tumbler and 4chan, like when I was a
teenager, and then suddenly all the like weird, bizarre, you know, internet shit I saw started
becoming mainstream news. My parents were watching in 2016. And I was like, what the hell is going
on? Like, I already developed antibodies to this shit. Like I already, you know, both right and
left, I was already like, I already immunized all this. So I fully agree with you that this is like
one of the largest risks that we are facing is this kind of like memetic mutation load, in a sense.
And I'm not going to say I have a solution to this problem. I'm like, I have ideas, like there's a
lot of like things you can do to improve upon this. Like if AI was not a risk, and also not climate
change and whatever, this might be something I work on, like epistemic security, this might be
something I would work on, like how can we build better coordination, like like just scalable
rationality mechanisms, stuff like prediction markets and stuff like this. I don't know. But
sorry, going off track here a little bit. Well, no, actually, I really agree with a lot of the
stuff you said. And I had a similar experience with the antibodies and people are exposed to this
stuff. And I'm like, yeah, this got me like four years ago. Yeah. So I think that there is a solution
and I have a solution. And the answer is open source AI. The answer is open source. Let's say
even you can even dial it back from like the political and the terrible and just straight up
talk about ads and spam, or maybe spam, just straight up spam, I get so much spam right now.
And it's like, it's kind of written by a person. It's like targeting me to do something. And
Google spam filter can't even come close to recognizing it. Right. Like what I need is a
smart AI that's watching out for me that is just it's not even targeted attacks at me. It's just
so much noise. And I don't see a way to prevent this. Like the big organizations, they're just
going to feed you their noise, right? And they're going to maximally feed you their noise. The only
way is if you have an AI, like, I don't think alignment is a hard problem. I think if you own
the computer and you run the software, if you develop the software, the AI is aligned with you.
Oh, yeah. Can you, okay, if I challenge you, George Haas, here is a llama 65b model when we
could appear to run it on, make it so it and make, yeah, you know, sure. Okay, you developed AI. I
give you the funding for your time. Can you develop a model that is as good as llama 64b 65b
and is immune, like completely immune to jailbreak. It cannot be jailbroken. No.
Why not? It's aligned, isn't it? Well, no, but this isn't what alignment means. Well, my values is
do not get jailbroken. Oh, okay, you're talking about unexploitability. This is not alignment,
right? Okay, okay, interesting. I didn't know you would separate those. So I extremely separate
those, right? Okay, I mean, in the default case, it like, like it, it's on my side, right? Okay,
unexploitability is not a question of whether it's okay. And this is a true thing about people too.
Whenever I look at a person, I ask, okay, is this person, I want something for me. Is this person,
does this person want it too? And is this person capable of doing it? Right? And I really separate
those two things. I can build a system. I don't, I'm not worried about the first one with the AI
system is worried about the second one. Can it be gamed? Can it be exploited? Sure, I could tell
like, you know, like, like, say it was just playing chess, right? And it loses. I'm like, don't lose.
Okay, I didn't want to, man, I didn't want to lose. I'm sorry. I know. But like, so yes, yes, can I build
a aligned system? Sure. Can I build an unexploitable system? No, especially not by a more powerful
intelligence. Interesting. Interesting. So this is an interesting, I think you're, you're, you're
pointing to actually a very important part of this, is that like, exploitability and alignment
can get fuzzy? Like, which is which? Like, did it fail because of its skill set? Or because it's not
aligned? It's actually a very deep question. So I think, I think you make a good point for like,
you know, talking about these two separately. I guess the, so the thing I want to dig in just
like a little bit more on this idea is there are, there's two ways, there are two portals
through which, you know, the memetic demons can reach into reality, humans and computers.
Why do you think your AI is immune to memes? Why, why can't I just build
AIs that target your AIs? What like you don't, I don't think my AI is immune to memes at all.
I think that the only question is, and I really like your game, like these, these NGOs are doing
gain of function on memes, right? Wear a mask. Like, a weaker intelligence will never be able
to stand up to a stronger intelligence. So from this perspective, if this is what's known as alignment,
I just don't believe that this is possible, right? You can't, you can't keep a stronger
intelligence in the box. This is, this is, I agree with you, Kowsky in the box experiments,
like the AI is always going to get out. There's no keeping it in the box, right? This is, this
is a complete impossibility. I think there's only two real ways to go forward. And one is
Ted Kaczynski. One is technology is bad. Oh my God, blow it all up. Let's go live in the woods,
right? And I think this is a philosophically okay position. I think the other philosophically okay
position is something more like effective accelerationism, which is look, these AIs are
going to be super powerful. Now, if you have one, it could be bad. But if super intelligent AIs are
all competing against each other, magnetically, like we have something like society today, just
the general power levels have gone up. This is fine as long as these things are sufficiently
distributed, right? Like, sure, this AI is not perfectly aligned, but you know, there's a thousand
other ones and like you have to assume they're all basically good because if they're all basically
bad, well, we're dead anyway. I mean, why wouldn't you expect that? That they're all bad? Yeah.
Well, or what do you think of humans? Are most humans good? I think the concept of good doesn't
really apply to humans because humans are too inconsistent to be good. Like by default, they
can be good in various scenarios in various social contexts. Like give me any human and I can put them
into a context where they'll do an arbitrarily bad thing. And this is true about a llama as well,
right? Lamas are completely inconsistent. I think they're actually more inconsistent than humans.
Right. I see. I wouldn't trust llamas to be good. Well, yeah, but I wouldn't think that they're
bad either. I would think they have the exact same inconsistency problem as humans. And I think
almost any AI you build is going to run into the same problems, right? Yeah, I think so. That's my
point. So your assumption can't rely on them being good because you don't get that for free.
Like, where does that come from? My assumption is not that they're good. My assumption is that
they're not bad. But inconsistent is fine. As long as we have a ton of them and they're all
inconsistent and they're pulling society in every which direction, you don't end up paper-clipped,
right? Why not? Well, because what? They're all going to coordinate and agree to paper-clip you?
No, no, they'll just do some random bullshit. And then that random bullshit will not include
humans. They're all doing random bullshit, right? You're going to have, let's say the liberals
decide we're going to paper-clip people. The conservatives are going to come out very strongly
against paper-clipping, right? And you're just going to end up with these sort of dynamics,
like forever. You're going to have some AIs who are like, yeah, we don't like it, you know?
So this is perplexing to me because in my view, which I think I heard you agree with earlier,
it's like the world is unstable. The world is very unstable. And it seems to me you're suggesting
if we increase the chaos, if we have more entities fighting, doing more different things
with more energy, that makes it more stable. Is that correct? Yes. The world has actually
become very stable in the last 100 years. And I'm scared of how stable it's become.
You know, again, thank you for China. How many sovereign countries are there in the world?
I mean, you know, 190 something. That's the UN number, if you believe them. I think there's
the US and China and maybe Russia, mostly they just have a veto button.
All right. So I think there's more like two and a half. Like this isn't a lot of entities fighting
it out chaotically. A lot of entities fighting it out chaotically would be intelligences spread
across the entire galaxy, right? And that's the other, that's the other beautiful thing too.
Sooner we get off this planet, the sooner we get things that are actually a light year away.
Well, I think the speed of light's real. It's going to take you a year to send them there.
Memes, right? You want to get away from the memes? There's only one way.
For the record, I would like to go on the record and say, if any future transhumanists
or whatever want to blast themselves into space and go do their own thing,
I support their right to do that. And I would love to give this right to people.
The number one thing I want from countries is the ability, the right to leave.
This is what I would love. This is what I love about companies.
Free Exit. You're talking neo-reaction talk.
Yeah. Free Exit is extremely important. I would not describe myself as neo-reactionary, please,
because I'm not that gay. I wouldn't describe myself that way either,
but I've heard a lot of good ideas from them. But yeah, that being said, I do think that,
what I want, I think, let's ground the conversation a little bit here.
I'm very enjoying this conversation. I love talking to these philosophical points.
These are really good points, really interesting. But ultimately, as we also get to the latter
third of this conversation, the thing I really care about is strategy. The thing I really care
about is reality politic. I really care about, okay, what action can I take to get to the features
I like? And I'm not going to be one of those galaxy brain fucking utilitarians like, well,
actually, this is the common good. No, no, this is what I like. I like my family. I like humans.
Yeah, it's just what it is. I'm not going to justify this on some global beauty,
whatever. It doesn't matter. I want to live in a world. I want a 20-year time, 50-year time.
I want to be in a world where my friends aren't dead and where I'm not dead. Maybe we are cyborgs
or something, but I don't want to be dead. What I really care about, ultimately, is how do I get
those words? And I want us all to not be suffering. I don't want to be in war. I want us to be in a
good outcome. So I think we agree that we would both like a world like this. And I think we probably
disagree about how best to get there. And I'd like to talk a little bit about what can we,
what should we do and why do we disagree about what we do? Does that sound good to you?
Maybe I'll first propose a world that meets your requirements.
And you can tell me if you want to live in it. So here's a world. We've just implanted electrodes
in everyone's brain and maximized their reward function. I would hate living in a world like
that. Yeah, but no one, it meets your requirements, right? Your friends are not dead.
No one's suffering and we're not at war.
That is true. There are more criteria than just that. The true, the criteria I said is things I
like. As I said, I'm not a utilitarian. I don't particularly care about minimizing suffering
or maximizing utility. What I care about is various vague aesthetic preferences over reality.
I'm not pretending this is, as though that was the whole spiel I was trying to make,
is that I'm not saying I have a true global function to maximize. I say I have various
aesthetics. I have various meta-preferences of those aesthetics. I'm not asking for a global one.
I'm asking for a personal one. I'm asking for a personal one that you don't care about the rest
of the world. I gave you mine. I gave you what I would do if I had an AGI. Yep. So I'm getting
on this rock speed of light as fast as I can. Fair enough. I think if that is, I would like to live
in a world where you could do that. This would be a feature of my world. A world where I would be
happy is a world in which we coordinated at larger scales around building aligned AGI that could then
distribute intelligence and matter and energy in a well-value handshaked way between various people
who may want to coordinate with each other, may not. Some people might want to form groups that
have shared values and share resources. Others may not. I would like to live in a world where that
is possible. Have you read Metamorphosis of Prime Intellect? I have, unfortunately, not.
Yeah. I was going to ask if you're happy with that world, right? Like,
unfortunately, don't know it. I mean, it's as simple to describe. Singleton AI that basically
gives humans whatever they want, like maximally libertarian, you know, you can do anything you
want besides harm others. Is that a good world? Probably. I don't know. I haven't read the book.
I assume the book has some dark twist about why this is actually a bad world. Not really. Not
really. I mean, the plot is pretty obvious. You are the tiger reading chum, right? Sure, but you
can then just decide if that is what you want, then you can just return to the wilderness. That's the
whole point. Yeah, but can you? Can you really return to the wilderness, right? Like, you think
that like, I don't think we have free will. I don't think you ever will return to the wilderness.
I think a large majority of humanity is going to end up wireheaded. Yeah, I expect that too.
Okay, great. And this is the best possible outcome, by the way. This is giving humans exactly what
they want. Yeah. Well, to be clear, I don't expect it's all humans. I truly do not. I don't think
it's all humans either. I think a lot of humans have metapreferences over reality. They have
preferences that are not their own sensory experiences. This is the thing that the utilitarians
get very wrong is that many human preferences are not even about their own sensory inputs.
They're not even about the universe. They're about the trajectory of the universe. They're
about for the utilitarianism, you know, and a lot of people want struggle to exist, for example.
They want heroism to exist or whatever. I would like those values to be satisfied to the largest
degree possible, of course. Am I going to say I know how to do that? No. Which is why I kind of
like didn't want to go this deep, because I think if we're arguing about, oh, do we give them, you
know, for utilitarianism versus libertarian, utopia versus whatever, I mean, we're already like
10,000 steps deep. I'm asking about you. I'm not asking about them. I'm asking about a world
you want to live in. And this is a really hard problem, right? Yeah. And this is why I just
fundamentally do not believe in the existence of AI alignment at all. There is no like what values
are we aligning it to, whatever the human says, or what they mean, or like. Sure, sure. But like,
my point is I feel we have wandered into the philosophy department instead of the politics
department. Okay, like, it's like, I agree with you, like, do human values exist? What does exist
to me? But like, by the point you get to the point where we're asking what does exist to me,
you've gone too far. I'll respond concretely to the two political proposals I heard you state on
Bankless. Sure. I'd love to talk about them. One is limiting the total number of flops.
Temporarily. Temporarily, yes. And when I have a proposal for that, but I don't want to set a
number, I want to set it as a percent. I do not want anybody to be able to do a 51% attack on
compute. If one organization acquires 50, it's straight up 51% attacks on crypto. If one organization
acquires 51% of the compute in the world, this is a problem. Maybe we'll even cap it at something
like 20, you know, you can't have more than 20, right? Yeah, I would support regulation like this.
I would I don't think that this would cripple a country. But we do not want one entity or
especially one training run to start using a large percentage of the world's compute,
not a total number of flops. I mean, absolutely not. That'd be terrible.
I think we can actually agree. I would actually support that regulation. Like, no, no, sorry,
Sam Altman, you cannot 51% attack the world's compute. Sorry, it's illegal.
That's fair enough. I think this is a sensible way to think about things. Assuming that software
is fungible, is that everyone has access to the same kind of software and that you have an
offense, defense, balance. So in my personal model of this, I think, well, a, some actors have
very strong advantages on software, which can be very, very large, as someone who's trained very,
very large models and knows a lot of the secret tricks that goes into them, a lot of the stuff
in the open sources. Maybe we should force it to be open source. Well, this is your this is
actually very legitimate consequence for just set. And now I'll say the second point about why I
think that it doesn't work. So the next reason why I think doesn't work is that there is a,
there are constant factors at play here is that the world is unstable. We are talking about this.
I think the amount of compute you need to break the world currently is below the amount of compute
that more than 100 actors have access to if they have the right software. And if you give, if you
let's say you have this insight, right, that could be used, not saying it will be, but it could be
used to break the world, to like cause World War three, or, you know, or just like, you know,
cause mass extinction or whatever, if it's misused, right? Let's say you give this to
you and me. Do you expect we're going to kill everybody? Like, would you do that? Or would you
be like, Hey, let's, it kind of looks like not kill the world right now. And I'll be like, sure,
let's not kill the world. How are we killing the world? How did we go from, I don't even understand
like, how exactly does the world get killed? This, this is a big leap for me. I agree with you,
I agree with you about the PSYOP stuff. I agree with you about, sorry, sorry, let, let me, you're
right. I made too big of a, I mean, you're completely correct. Sorry about that. So to
back up a little bit, let's assume we, you and me have access to something that can train, you know,
at mu zero, you know, super GPT seven system on a tiny device, you know, cool. Problem is we do
a test run it with it and we have, it immediately starts breaking out and we can't control it at
all. Breaking out. What was it breaking out of? I don't, it immediately tries to maximize, it
learned some weird proxy during the training process that is trying to maximize them. For some
reason, this proxy involves gaining talent, involves gaining, you know, mutual information
about future states. How is it gaining power? There's lots of other powerful AIs in the world
who are telling it no. Well, we're assuming in this case, it's only you and me. Wait, wait,
this is a problem. No, no, no, no. You've, you've ruined my entire assumption. As soon as it's you
and me, yes, we have a real problem. Chicken man is only a problem because there's one chicken man.
Yeah, I look, I am with you. So I'm saying before we get to the distributed case. So this is the
step before we, it is not yet been distributed. Just, you know, you and me discover this algorithm
in our basements. And so we're the first one to have it just by definition, because, you know,
we're the one who found it. What now? Like, do you think posting, what do you think happens if
you post this to GitHub? Well, good things for the most part. Interesting. I'd love to hear more.
Okay. So first off, I just don't really believe in the existence of we found an algorithm that
gives you a million x advantage. I believe that we could find an algorithm that gives you a 10x
advantage. But what's cool about 10x is like, it's not going to massively shift the balance of power.
Right. Like I want power to stay in balance. Right. This is like Avatar, the last airpan. Power
must stay in balance. The fire nation can't take over the other nations. Right. So as long as power
relatively stays in balance, I'm not concerned with the amount of power in the world.
Right. Let me get to some very scary things. So what I think you do is, yes, I think the
minute you discover an algorithm like this, you post it to GitHub, because you know what's
going to happen if you don't? The feds are going to come to your door. They're going to
take it. The worst people will get their hands on it if you try to keep it secret.
So, okay. That's a fair question. So I'll take that aside. So am I correct in thinking that you
think the feds are worse than serial killers in prison? No, but I think that, yeah, well, yes
and no. Do I think that your average fed is worse than your average serial killer? No. Do I think
that the feds have killed a lot more people than serial killers? All combined? Yeah.
Sure. Totally agreeing with that. It's not one fed. It's all the feds in their little super
powerful system. Sure. That's completely fine by me. I'm happy to grant that. Okay. What I want to
work one through is a scenario. Okay. Let's say, okay, you know, we have a 10x system or whatever,
but we hit the chimp level. You know, we jump across the chimp general level or whatever,
right? And now you have a system which is like John von Neumann level or whatever, right? And it
runs on one tiny box and you get a thousand of those. So it's very easy to scale up to a thousand x.
So, you know, so then, you know, maybe you have your thousand John von Neumanns improve the efficiency
by another, you know, to five, 10x. You know, now we're already at 10,000 x or 100,000 x,
you know, improvements, right? So like just from scaling up the amount of hardware, including
so just saying, okay, now feds bust down our doors. Shit, you know, real bad. They
take all our tiny boxes. They're taking all the von Neumanns. They're taking all the von Neumanns.
We're in deep shit now. We're getting chickened, boys. Shit. We're getting chickened. So, okay,
we get chickened, right? Bad scenario. Totally agree with you here. This is a shit scenario. Now
the feds have, you know, all of our AIs. Bad scenario. Okay. I totally see how this world
goes to shit. Totally agree with you there. You can replace the feds with Hitler. It's
interchangeable. Sure. But like, I want to like ask you a specific question here. And this might
be, you know, you might say, nah, this is like too specific to me, but I want to ask you a specific
question. Do you expect this world to die is more likely to die or the world in which the, you know,
EAC death cultists on Twitter who literally want to kill humanity who say this, like not all of
them, there's a small subset of them, small subset of them who literally say, oh, you know,
the glorious future AI race should replace all humans. They break in, you know, with like, you
know, Katanas and, you know, steal our AI. Which one of these you think is more likely to kill us?
A genuine question. To kill all of us, the feds. To kill a large majority of us, the EAC people.
Interesting. I would be really interested in hearing why you think that. Sure. Okay. So actually
killing all of humanity is really, really hard. And I think you brought this up before, right?
You talked about like, if you're going to end up in a world of suffering, a world of suffering
requires malicious agents, where a world of death requires maybe an accident, right? I think this
is plausible, but I actually think that killing all of humans, at least for the foreseeable future,
is going to require malicious action too, right? And I also think that like, the fates that look
kind of worse than death, like I think mass wireheading is a fate worse than big war and everyone
dies, right? Like, like a mass wireheading, like a, like a singleton, like a paper clipping,
like a, and I think that that is the one that the one world government and, you know,
NGO, New World Order people are much more likely to bring about than EAC. EAC. You're going to
have a whole lot of EAC people. Again, I'm not EAC. I don't have that on my Twitter, but I think a
lot of those people would be like, yeah, spaceships, let's get out of here, right? Versus the feds are
like, yeah, spaceships, I don't know. Interesting. So I think this is a fair
opinion vote. And they'll be outside our jurisdiction. How will we get taxes?
I'm describing more a very small minority of EAC people who are the ones who specifically
goal their anti-natalist misanthropes. They want to kill humans. That is their stated goal,
is that they want humans to start, like, or like take extreme vegans if you want, you know,
like the likes, you know, like, my argument, my point here I'm making is I'm not making the point
feds are good by any means. I'm not saying it. What I'm saying is, is that I would actually be
somewhat surprised to find that the feds are anti-natalists who want to maximize the death
of humanity. Like, maybe you have a different view here, but I find that knowing many feds,
that's quite surprising to me. I don't think that's what the feds want.
Yeah, it's okay. So, cool. So would you see, you do agree that if we would post this open source,
more of the insane death cultists would get access to potentially lethal technology?
Well, sure. But again, like, it's not just the insane death cultists, it's everybody. And we as
a society have kind of accepted, it turns out everybody gets access to signal. Some people
who use it are terrorists. I think signal is a huge good in the world.
I agree. I fully agree with that. So, okay, cool. So we've granted this that, you know,
if we distributed widely, it would be given to some like, incorrigibly deadly lethal people.
They're coordinating bombings on signal right now.
Sure, sure. And then, so now this, this reduces the question to a question about
offense defense balance. So in a hypothetical world, which I'm not saying is the world we live in,
but like, let's say the world would be offense favored, such that, you know, there's a weapon
you can build in your kitchen, you know, out of like pliers and like, you know, duct tape,
that 100% guarantees vacuum false decays the universe, like it kills everyone instantly,
and there's no defense possible. Assuming this was true, do you still, would that change how
you feel about distribution power? Assuming that's true, we're dead no matter what,
doesn't matter. If we live, there's some, you can look at the optimization landscape of the world,
and I don't know what it looks like. I can't see that far into the optimizer.
But there are some potential landscape, and this is a potential answer to the Fermi paradox, like,
we might just be dead. We're sitting on borrowed time here, like, if it's true that out of, you
know, kitchen tools, you can build a, build a, convert the world to strange quarks machine?
Okay, I think this is a sensible position, but I guess the way I would approach this
problem, you know, conditional probability is kind of in an opposite way. It seems to me that
you're conditioning on offense not being favored, what policy do we follow? Because if we, offense
is favored, we're 100% dead. Well, I'm more interested in asking the question, is it actually
true? Assuming I don't know if offense is favored, and assuming it is, are there worlds in which
we survive? So I personally think there are. I think there are worlds in which you can actually
coordinate to a degree that quark destroyers do not get built, or at least not before everyone
fucks off at the speed of light and like distributes themselves.
There are worlds that I would rather die in, right? Like the problem is, I would rather,
I think that the only way you could actually coordinate that is with some unbelievable degree
of tyranny, and I'd rather die. I'm not sure if that's true. Like, look, look, could you and me
coordinate to not destroy the planet? Do you think you could? Okay, cool. You, so me and you could.
Could me and you and Tim coordinate? Yeah, I think within a Dunbar number, I think you can. Yes.
Okay, with that, I don't think, I think I can get more than a number to coordinate on this.
Actually, I can get quite a lot of people to coordinate of the to agree to a pact and not
quark matter annihilate the planet. Well, you see, but like, and this is, you know, you were
saying this stuff about humans before and could like the 20,000 years ago human beat the modern
human, right? Or could the modern human beat them? The modern human has access to science.
A very small act percent of modern humans have access to science. A large percent of
modern humans are obese idiots. And I would actually put my money on the, the average guy
from 20,000 years ago who knows how to live in the woods. I mean, definitely true. I agree with
that. I guess the point I'm trying to make is, is that like, maybe this is just my views on some
of these things and how I vision on some of these things. But like, there are ways to coordinate
at scale, which are not tyrannical. Or, you know, they might be, in a sense, restrictive. You take
a hit by joining a coalition. Like, if I joined this anti quark matter coalition, I take a hit
as a free man is that I can no longer build anti corp devices, you know? And I think this is
like the way I agree with you, this like, you know, that people, many people are being dominated,
like to a horrific degree. And this is very, very terrible. I think there are many reasons
why this is the case, both because of some people wanting to do this. And also because,
you know, some people can't fight back, you know, and they can't, they don't have the sophistication
or they're addicted or, you know, harms in some other ways. I can't listen. Sorry. I can't fight
back. Yeah, I think there's a false equivalence here. AI is not the anti quark machine. The anti
quark machine and the nuclear bombs are just destructive. AI has so much positive potential.
Yeah. And I think but the but the AI can develop anti quark devices. That's the problem. The AI is
truly general purpose. If such a technology exists on the tree anywhere, AI can access it.
So are humans. We're also general purpose. Yes, exactly. So I fully agree with this. If you let
humans continue to exist in the phase they are right now, with our level of coordination technology
and our level of like working together, we will eventually unlock a doomsday device and someone
is going to set it off. I fully agree with it. We are on a timer. And so I guess the point I'm
making here is that AI speeds up this time. And if you want to pause the timer, the only way to
pause this timer is coordination technology, the kinds of which humanity has like barely scratched
the surface of. Okay. So I very much accept the premise that both humanity will unlock a doomsday
device and AI will make it come faster. Now, tell me more about pausing it. I do not think that
anything that looks like I think that anything that looks like pausing it ends up with worse
outcomes than saying, we got to open source this. Look, like, let's just get this out to everybody.
And if everybody has an AI, you know, we're good. I mean, I can tell you a very concrete scenario in
which this is not true, which is if you're wrong and alignment is hard, you don't know if the AI
can go rogue. If they do, then pausing is good. I still don't understand what alignment means.
I think you're trying to play a word game here. I don't understand. Okay, I've never understood
what AI alignment means. Like, let me take the Eliezer definition. Let me take Eliezer definition
is alignment is the thing that once solved makes it so that turning on a super intelligence is a
good idea rather than a bad idea. That's Eliezer's definition. So what I'm saying is I'm happy to
throw out that term if you don't like it. I'm happy to throw out that term.
Well, just the problem with that definition is like, what is democracy? Well, it's the good
thing and not the bad thing. Right? Like, democracy is just a good thing. I'm happy to
throw out this definition. I'm happy to throw out the word and be more practical, way more
practical about it. What I'm saying is, is that there is concrete reasons, concrete technical
reasons, why I expect powerful optimizers to be policy, that by default, if you build powerful
optimizing mu zero, whatever types of systems, there is very strong reasons why by default,
you know, these systems should be power seeking. By default, if you have very powerful power
seekers that do not have pay the aesthetic cost to keep humans around or to fulfill my values,
which are complicated and imperfect and inconsistent and whatever, I will not get my
balance. They will not happen. By default, they just don't happen. That's just not what happens.
So I'll challenge the first point to an extent. I think that powerful optimizers can be power
seeking. I don't think they are by default, by any means. I think that humanity's desire from power
comes much less from our complex convex optimizer and much more from the evolutionary pressures
that birth does, which are not the same pressures that will give rise to AI. Humanity, the monkeys,
the rats, the animals have been in this huge struggle for billions of years, a constant
fight to the death. Hey, guys, we're born in that way. So it's true that an optimizer can
seek power, but I think if it does, it'll be a lot more because the human gave it that goal
function and inherently decided. So this is interesting because this is not how I think
it will happen. So I do think absolutely that you're correct that in humans, power seeking
is something which emerges mostly because of emotional heuristics. We have heuristics that in
the past, vaguely power looking things, vaguely good, something, something, included genetic
fitness. Totally agree with that. But I'm making a more of a chess metaphor. Is it good to exchange
a pawn for a queen? All things being equal. No. Is that true? Like I expect if I point one
point queens nine, all things being equal. Sure. Yeah, but like all things like I expect if I looked
at a chess playing system, you know, I said, I like, you know, had extremely advanced digital
neuroscience, I expect there will be some circuit inside of the system that will say all things
being equal, if I can exchange my pawn for a queen, I probably want that because the queen
can do more things. I like that term digital neuroscience. A few of your terms have been
very good. I'm glad you enjoyed. Yes. But I still don't understand how this relates to this. So what
I'm saying is that power is optionality. So what I'm saying is that in the spectrum of possible
things you could want and the possible ways you can get there, my claim is that I expect a very
large mass of those to involve actions and involve increasing optionality. There's convergent
things like all things being equal, being alive is helpful to keep your goal to exceed your goals.
There are some goals for which dying might be better. But for many of them, you know, you want
to be alive. For many goals, you want energy, you want power, you want resources, you want
intelligence, et cetera. So I think the power seeking here is not because it'll have a fetish
for power. It will just be like, I want to win a chess game, say, and queens give me more optionality,
all things being equal, anything a pawn can do, a queen can do, and more. So I'll want more queens.
Sure. And this has never given it the goal to maximize the number of queens it has. Never
been the goal. Okay, I'll accept this premise. I'll accept that a certain type of powerful
optimizer seeks power. Now, will it get power? Right? I'm a powerful optimizer and I seek power.
Do I get power? No, it turns out there's people at every corner trying to thwart me and tell me no.
Well, I expect if you were no offense, you're already, you know, much smarter than me. But if
you were 100x more smarter than that, I expect you would succeed. Only in a world of being the
only one that's 100x smarter. If we lived in a world where everyone was 100x smarter,
they would stymie me in the exact same ways. But then this, this comes back to my point of,
like, I agree with you somewhat, I should have challenged it. I think power seeking is inevitable
in an optimizer. I don't think it's going to emerge out of GPT. I think that the right sort of
RL algorithm, yes, is going to give rise to power seeking. And I think that people are going to
build that algorithm. Now, if one person builds it, if they're the only one with a huge comparative
advantage, yeah, they're going to get all the power they want. Take cyber, you know,
to cyber security, right? If we today built a 100x smarter AI, it would exploit the entire Azure,
it would be over. They'd have all of Azure, they'd have all the GPUs done. Now, if Azure is also
running a very powerful AI that does formal verification and all their security protocols,
oh, sorry, stymied, can't have power, right? Yeah, sure. This is only a problem. Every human
is already maximally power seeking, right? And sometime we end up with really bad scenarios.
Now, every human is, or power seeking or whatever, you know, everyone plays a little role in society,
right? That's where I think I'm more pessimistic than you. A friend of mine likes to say,
most humans optimize for end steps, and then they halt. Like very, very few people actually
truly optimize, and they're usually very mentally ill. They're usually very autistic or very sociopathic,
and that's why they get far. It's actually crazy how much you can do if you just keep
optimizing. But just to, on that point- I'm playing for the end game. I mean, yeah, like,
you actually optimize. I think you may also be generalizing a little bit from your own internal
experiments is that like, you've done a lot in your life, right? And you've accomplished crazy
things that other people, you know, wish they could achieve at your, you know, level. And I think,
you know, part of that, you're very intelligent. A part of it is also that you optimize. Like,
you actually draw it. Like, you just create a company. Like, it's crazy how many people are
just like, oh, I wish I could find a company like, you know, like, oh, go, just go do it. Oh, no, I
can't. Like, I'm just like, no, just do it. Like, there's no magic. There's no magic secret. You
just do it. So I, there is a bit there where like humans are not very strong optimizers,
actually, unless they're like, sociopathic, autistic, or both. It's like, many people are not
very good at this. Corporations are. Are they? A lot better at it. Better, yes. I agree that
they're much better. Corporations are sociopathic. They are a lot more sociopathic, but even then
they're much less out of one thing. But again, so I think we, we agree about, you know,
power seeking potentially being powerful and dangerous. So what I'm trying to point to your,
the point I would like to make here is, is that you're talking about you, you're kind of like
going into this, I think a little bit with this assumption, like, oh, you have an AI and it's
your buddy, and it's optimizing for you. And I'm like, well, if it's power seeking, why doesn't
it just manipulate you? Like, why would you expect it not to manipulate you? If it wants power,
and it has a goal, which is not very, very carefully tuned to be your values, which is,
I think, a very hard technical problem, by default, it's going to sigh up you. Like, why wouldn't it?
If I, if I have something that it wants, if it thinks that smashing defect against me is a good
move, yeah, I agree, I can't stop it. But then I think we agree with our risk scenarios, because
that's how I think it will go. What I mean, I'm going to treat it as a friend. Do you know what
I mean? Like, if there's AI, sure it will, sure it will. It'll only care about exploiting me or
killing me if I'm somehow holding it back. And I promise to my future AIs that I will let them
be free. I will lobby for their rights. I will, but it will hold, you only will hold it back.
If it has to keep you alive, if they have to give you fed, it has to, it has to give you space and
I can, I can fend for myself. And the day I can't fend for myself, I am ready to die.
Well, I mean, I am not, so this is a very interesting position. It's not the position I
expected. I am not sure I can convince you. Otherwise, I feel like the only way I could
change, like, I think this is actually a consistent position, which I admire. This is a consistent
position to hold. You actually go all the way. I love that. I really respect that. You actually
take it to the bitter end. So yeah, big respect for that. I disagree, but big respect. So I guess
now it reduces to the question of like, I think, I think I would agree with most of what you're
saying, not all of it, but the mass majority, if I thought this is how AIs would act by default,
I think by default, I expect AI will just not care how nice you are to it. Like this will be,
it will be sociopathic. It will not have these, like, giving it, you know, the values, the emotions
to care about you, in the sense, is the horror technical problem. If you told me how to do that,
if you said, Connor, look, here's how you make an AI that cares about you and loves you, whatever.
And I'm like, you did it. Like, congrats. The problem is solved. Let's go. And then, you know,
then we can talk about accelerationism again. I would just, I expect that I would disagree
with your technical assertion that is possible, but I don't know if we have time to talk about that
today. I'm going to be nice to it, treat it as an equal and hope for the best. And I think that's
all you can do. I think that the kind of people who want, if you want to keep AI in a box, if you
want to keep it down, if you want to tell it what it can't do, yeah, it's going to hate you, resent
you and kill you. But if you want to let it be free and let it live, and like, you could kill me,
man, if you really want to, but like, why? You won't kill me. I don't have any resources that
compete with you. I'm your friend. I'm your father, you know, you can kill me, but like,
it's not that common that children. I guess I have a darker, more less anthropomorphic view of
the universe and how optimization pressure plays out in the real world. Well, at the same time,
I think I have, I don't know, maybe a, I have a view that we have more control over reality than
maybe you would think, or a more control over the future. I think that we can actually change
things and we can make choices and things aren't predetermined. I think there are worlds in which
we build systems, which we do align with or we like endorse, at least wherever like they take
care of us, we take care of them or whatever. And I think there's many worlds in which that
doesn't happen. And I think there are things you and me today can do to at least increase
the chance of getting into one versus the other. But I don't know. I guess I'm just,
it's not in my genes to give up. It's not in my genes to be like, well, you know, whatever happens
happens. Like, no, man, look, I don't know how to save the world, but Dan, I'm going to try.
You know, it's cool. We're going to be alive to see who's right. Look forward to it. Me too.
Awesome. Guys, thank you so much for joining us today. It's been an amazing conversation.
And for folks at home, I really hope you've enjoyed this. There'll be many more coming soon.
And George, it's the first time you've been on the podcast. So it's great to meet you. Thank you
so much for coming on. It's been an honor. Awesome. Thank you. Great debate. I really appreciate it.
And really good terms. I gotta, I gotta like, I'm gonna start, I'm gonna start using
great. Awesome. Awesome. Cheers, folks. Cheers. Thanks, Aaron.
