PREFACE
When Problems Get Real
Metropolitan Boston, where I happen to live and work, consist-
ently ranks among the worst areas in the US for trafﬁc congestion. In its
2015
report,
"Unclogging
America's
Arteries:
Prescriptions
for
America's Highways," the American Highway Users Alliance estimated
that on one infamous two-mile stretch of Boston's Central Artery,
drivers expended nearly two million extra gallons of gasoline, wasted
more than two million hours, and cost the economy roughly $58 million
in lost productivity during a 12-month period. Why? Because the
Central Artery features one of the worst highway bottlenecks in the
country.
Boston is far from alone in experiencing such dismal trafﬁc
consequences. The "2019 Urban Mobility Report" published by the
Texas
A&M
Transportation
Institute
found
that
our
nation's
congestion problems caused 8.8 billion hours of travel delays, wasted
3.3 billion gallons of fuel, and tallied $179 billion of total congestion
costs in 2017. Highway and arterial designs, mass transit options, trafﬁc
advisories, toll incentives, and the location and availability of affordable
housing all contribute to the problem. Most experts agree, however,
that any combination of remedies in these areas is likely to bring only
modest reductions in congestion-related losses.

What Congestion Has to Do with Data Science
I bring up rush-hour trafﬁc because complicated practical prob-
lems of this kind changed my career arc. I started in academia as an
electrical engineer and applied mathematician obsessed with the ﬁeld of
learning and decision theory. After joining the MIT faculty in 1987,
however, I began to interact more with domain experts - in aerospace
and automotive design, for example - and to work on some real-world
applications related to my research. Unsurprisingly, space applications,
autonomy, and hybrid cars are jam-packed with compelling control
problems. My research group, which convenes under the banner
"Decisions Under Uncertainty," was a great ﬁt for collaborations in
these and other engineering-related domains.
Mitigating vehicular congestion is fascinating to people like us
because, increasingly, it is less a physical infrastructure challenge and
more a data and networked decisions conundrum. Constructing more
or wider roads - which does not solve congestion problems - will be less
efﬁcacious going forward than assembling a robust database of real-
time information about behaviors and consequences that occur when
you and your fellow commuters take to the road. How do you decide
when to leave the house or whether to change lanes as trafﬁc clogs?
Could you make everyone's drive time shorter if you traveled at an
agreed-upon optimal average speed? What are the individual and col-
lective effects of your decisions? How effectively can private and public
information mitigate congestion if given to every driver? Such variables
can be quantiﬁed and the consequences mapped using the analytical
methods of contemporary information and decision systems, statistics,
and data science.
My growing interest in distributed and networked decisions -
think power grids, transportation systems, and ﬁnancial and social
networks - and the interconnections between those systems and human
behavior caused me to reassess the relevance of my research. Addressing
problems with real and widespread consequences for individuals, com-
munities, businesses, and entire societies drew me out of my disciplinary
silo and into transdisciplinary collaborations with domain experts
across academia and industry. Along the way, my colleagues and
I were offered the opportunity to organize the immense scientiﬁc, engin-
eering, humanities, and social science resources of MIT to tackle prob-
lems of high societal value using innovative, holistic, data-driven
x
/
Preface

methodologies. The story of our collective journey is the story of the
MIT Institute for Data, Systems, and Society (IDSS). As of 2023, we'd
been at this for nearly a decade, and I'm happy to say that colleagues at
other institutions have developed similar initiatives during that time.
A global community of researchers, scholars, and practitioners is
taking shape.
Pronouns: An Expression of Community
Before I launch into the main narrative of this book, I'd like to
say a word about pronouns. During the writing process, I found myself
instinctively defaulting to the ﬁrst-person plural pronoun "we."
My astute editor asked the obvious question, "Who are 'we?'"
For the most part, the ideas and examples in this book are not
mine alone. Rather, they arise from years - even decades - of rumin-
ations, conversations, explorations, and innovations among a world-
wide community of scholars, researchers, and practitioners across every
discipline and endeavor working to improve the lot of humankind.
I wanted to express that sense of common cause. The more of us who
believe that we all are in this together, the greater chance we have of
developing solutions to urgent challenges that will beneﬁt diverse com-
munities, societies, and the planet. This is the outcome we are seeking in
our collective journey toward transdisciplinary thinking and practice.
xi
/
Preface


