4
A TRANSDISCIPLINE IS BORN
When we launched the MIT IDSS in the summer of 2015, none
of us imagined that it would be coming of age as an academic
transdiscipline when a global pandemic struck. Crafting responses and
measuring the impact of COVID-19 on our communities reminded us
all that some phenomena are impossible to quantify. And yet, we
recognized that we were confronting a profound proof-of-concept
moment for our discipline - a discipline that prominently features
actionable quantitative analysis in its value proposition.
At that time, my colleagues and I were aware of other research-
ers and academicians at institutions around the world seeking to dem-
onstrate greater utility and relevance of emerging data-science tools and
methods. While those initiatives were instructive and inspiring, we all
felt we were on to something game-changing and special because
our work had direct impacts on decisions that needed to be made
right away.
We created IDSS speciﬁcally to address great societal challenges
and to use scientiﬁc information to support sound policymaking.
Probability and statistics are effective tools for addressing problems
with uncertainty, and if ever there was a time to marshal our collective,
transdisciplinary expertise and help decision-makers confront a crisis
with timely, ethical, and equitable initiatives, this was it. It was also
clear, however, that we would have to operate outside our comfort
zones of conventional academic research, peer review, and publication
cycles if we were to provide relevant, real-time guidance. Add to these
challenges the fact that none of us had speciﬁc expertise in pandemics.

In April 2020, just weeks into the COVID-related shutdowns
across the US, we created a new volunteer collaboration within IDSS
called ISOLAT. The group held daily virtual meetings for months to
discuss the ﬁndings of topic-driven subgroups. We committed ourselves
to address three broad areas of data analysis related to the crisis:
creating a data structure of heterogeneous data sets (e.g., the spread of
virus, mobility, interventions); performing predictions of various critical
time-dependent variables; and understanding the effects of intervention
and policies on the spread of this virus. From the outset, our work
addressed core issues of equity, economic and health tradeoffs, and the
design of policies to mitigate the risks of infections.
I'll explain more about the speciﬁc research ﬁndings and
response strategies ISOLAT produced later on. In this chapter, I set a
broader context for understanding how dynamic initiatives such as
ISOLAT, as well as other initiatives within IDSS broadly, came into
being and how they differ from the way we've typically performed
research in science and technology. To understand why things are
changing in institutions around the world, we must zoom out a bit
and talk more generally about disciplines - what they are, why they
matter, and what they do well.
Why Disciplines Matter
Disciplines loom large as an organizing principle in global
higher education. Almost every university in the world shares a substan-
tially analogous set of degrees that students can pursue and use as
launchpads to professional careers or further study - and for good
reason. Disciplinary training creates enormous efﬁciencies in providing
a reliable stream of capable young people to ﬁll roles that we, as a
developed society, have found useful and necessary. But how do we
know a discipline when we see one, and why is it useful for scholars,
researchers, and practitioners to align themselves with a discipline?
In my experience, an academic discipline comprises ﬁve key attributes:
community (e.g., conferences, symposia, academic departments); jour-
nals; educational track reduced to a core set of topics designed to instill
a distinct way of thinking about the problems it attempts to solve;
shared understanding of outstanding challenges, open problems, and
common knowledge; and deﬁned criteria for evaluating suitability for
hiring, promotion, and tenure.
58
/
A Transdiscipline Is Born

Disciplines are productive, stable, and subject to administra-
tion. Those qualities help disciplines retain institutional backing, secure
space and equipment, and garner ﬁnancial support. On the teaching
side, a discipline provides a systematic path to reaching a deﬁned set of
educational objectives. Knowledge is passed on and expanded in a
reliable progression. We can measure outcomes by students' attainment
of disciplinary language, insights, and methodologies. And graduates
can use the toolkits they acquire to become successful and productive
members of society. They also ﬁnd it relatively straightforward to land
teaching roles in their disciplines at other universities when they choose
that career path.
For researchers, disciplines provide stable, well-deﬁned environ-
ments in which to question the known and the unknown, conduct
experiments and gather data, advance hypotheses, and prove theories.
Signiﬁcantly, this research isn't required to have obvious and immediate
relevance or application to our everyday lives - and that's a very good
thing. Although problem-driven research is responsible for many game-
changing advances, some of the most important breakthroughs in
modern human history originated in the pursuit of knowledge for
knowledge's sake within the framework of an academic discipline.
The study of bacteria, for example, resulted in the discovery of penicil-
lin. Early inquiries in physics, gravity, and astrophysics laid the founda-
tion for countless modern technologies. Nuclear physics gave us an
astonishing means of generating electricity and fundamental research
in genomics resulting in mRNA vaccines. And the list goes on.
Challenges of the Disciplinary Model
Disciplines, as traditionally administered, do have limitations.
The passionate focus on a prescribed set of tools, methods, and phenom-
ena essential to the formation of a discipline necessarily screens out a
wide swath of interesting and urgent questions - many of which are
examined by other disciplines. On the whole, members of a particular
discipline value the good work being done in other disciplines. Turf wars
are infrequent, though not unheard of. In all honesty, I'm surprised such
conﬂicts are as rare as they are given the high-stakes competition for
status, space, and funding within most university environments.
In truth, no one ﬁeld - be it sociology, computer science,
economics, political science, or any other traditional discipline - is fully
59
/
Challenges of the Disciplinary Model

equipped to tackle all facets of extremely complex and rapidly evolving
conundrums such as unanticipated consequences related to digital
media in general and social media. When we try to work together on
something that lends itself to collaboration, however, we sometimes
struggle to understand one another's languages and methodologies.
This was particularly evident in the early days of what may come to
be known as the era of big data.
Happily, myriad societal challenges spanning various disciplines
have spurred a new form of research - multidisciplinary and interdiscip-
linary projects. In a precise sense, these collaborations involve the
merging of multiple disciplines and often entail the transfer of knowledge
from one domain to another. Within IDSS, however, we assert that it is
essential to surpass this approach such that the intersection of disciplines
involving Data, Systems, and Society (DSS) gives rise to novel habits of
mind and problem formulation. We designate this evolving realm as
transdiscipline. This distinction, although not very tight, has been made
to some extent by various researchers. I recommend the 2009 work of
Romanian physicist Basarab Nicolescu for more background, including
"Transdisciplinarity - Past, Present and Future."
Disciplinarity: Multi, Inter, and Trans
Here are three examples that highlight the key distinctions
among
multidisciplinary,
interdisciplinary,
and
transdisciplinary
approaches. Consider, in the ﬁrst instance, research into bullying behav-
ior on the internet. That line of inquiry comprises components from
social interactions, psychology, and digital networks. Analyzing and
potentially addressing this complex problem requires individuals from
these diverse areas to interact and collaborate, making it an interaction
among multiple disciplines (i.e., multidisciplinary).
Contemplate next the evolution of molecular biology, a ﬁeld
that focuses on the biochemical processes within a cell such as DNA
replication. The convergence of contributions from genetics, physics,
and chemistry required knowledge transfers among all three disciplines.
The resulting interdisciplinary research led to breakthroughs that none
of the three disciplines could have achieved in isolation. As a relatively
new and distinct discipline, molecular biology continues to draw on its
origins even as it signiﬁcantly inﬂuences new work in biology and
genetics.
60
/
A Transdiscipline Is Born

In contrast to those ﬁrst two examples, mathematics is a
prime example of a transdisciplinary ﬁeld. It empowers other discip-
lines to transcend conventional boundaries and facilitates journeys
into new frontiers. As with other transdisciplines, mathematics
embeds itself in existing ﬁelds (e.g., economics, computer science,
management, etc.) and fosters a seamless transfer of knowledge
across traditional boundaries. Its integration into numerous discip-
lines enhances the penetrability of disciplinary siloes and allows
problems to be approached from new and invigorating angles.
As you'll see later in this chapter, the transdisciplinarity of mathemat-
ics provided an important frame of reference when we launched the
new transdiscipline of DSS.
Early Culture Clashes over Data
One difﬁculty my MIT colleagues and I encountered in the late
1990s was a cultural mismatch among disciplines in the collecting and
processing of data. To a considerable extent, computer scientists were
deﬁning the discourse and leading the implementation of data analytics.
Many other disciplines found themselves playing catch up, unfamiliar
with lingo related to algorithmic processing and underexposed to
advanced methods of software programming.
Historical practices of data collection and analysis common in
social sciences and the humanities, for example, were outshone by
powerful new computing tools - and by the practitioners who wielded
them. An "interdisciplinary" encounter about data analytics during that
period might have sounded something like this:
Computer Scientist:
I've crunched the data and I've come up with a
model that predicts consumer behavior.
Social Scientist:
What do you mean by "crunched?"
CS:
Well, I created an algorithm to process informa-
tion from social media data sets about buying
trends and developed a model of purchasing
probability.
SS:
And how does the algorithm work?
CS:
Basically, it breaks the data down into computable
elements and executes a ﬁnite sequence of unam-
biguous, digitally implementable instructions.
61
/
Early Culture Clashes over Data

SS:
But people are complex, surveying is compli-
cated, and sociological data is often ambiguous
and contradictory.
CS:
The logic of the algorithm simpliﬁes the problem
and removes the ambiguities.
SS:
That's what worries me.
This is a caricature, of course, but such misalignments of vocabulary
and objectives were features of the interdisciplinary landscape at that
time. Computer scientists weren't giving enough consideration to the
inherent complexities and limitations of certain types of data they
received from non-scientiﬁc contexts such as Facebook. Social scientists,
on the other hand, were uncertain about how to process such data and
how to analyze the environments from which it was collected. Although
sociologists were reluctant to formulate conclusions based on that data,
computer scientists proceeded with computational analyses, often
failing to account for the concerns of their social scientist colleagues.
Such culture clashes among disciplines certainly occurred before
the era of big data, but the speed at which the ﬁeld of data analytics was
developing far outpaced the growth of interdisciplinary understanding
and collaboration. Not surprisingly, many scholars in social-science
disciplines were wary of some of the conclusions being reached by their
colleagues in computer science and data analytics.
Cultural mismatches notwithstanding, the urgency of real-
world challenges continued to draw many of us into interdisciplinary/
multidisciplinary efforts. The more we tried to work together, the more
clearly we understood that systematic analyses of data from a variety of
realms would be essential to crafting equitable and sustainable solu-
tions. We all agreed that the big problems of our age didn't belong to
any single discipline, and neither did the data.
Facing Existing Disciplinary Headwinds
Despite everyone's best intentions, sustaining meaningful multi-
disciplinary research, teaching, and problem-solving often felt like
sailing into a stiff headwind. As discussed earlier, the vast majority of
incentives within academia - including jobs, space, equipment, research
funding, student recruitment, publishing opportunities, and societal
recognition
-
are
organized
and
dispensed
through
established
62
/
A Transdiscipline Is Born

disciplines. Interesting, relevant, and urgent problems that fall within
the bounds of discrete domains are numerous, if not inﬁnite. Inevitably,
departmental forces pulled people back to their home ports after tem-
porary forays into collaborative waters.
Fortunately, for those of us whose work increasingly pointed
toward multidisciplinary engagement, MIT extended an opportunity to
build a new kind of transdisciplinary vehicle that could more reliably
navigate the changeable winds and uncharted oceans of multidimen-
sional, real-world problems. What emerged, after lengthy consultations
across MIT's administration, its ﬁve schools, and with kindred spirits at
other leading universities and scientiﬁc entities around the world, was a
pioneering research and teaching ecosystem designed to tackle the
unprecedented challenges posed by large-scale, heterogeneous, intercon-
nected data and systems.
Such systems - energy, transportation, ﬁnance, healthcare,
manufacturing, social networks, voting misinformation, and religious
fundamentalism, to name a few - grew out of and were reshaped by late
twentieth and early twenty-ﬁrst advances in smart and embedded
sensors, high-speed communications, social networking, and social plat-
forms enabling real-time decision capabilities. Unfortunately, the rapid
evolution of those systems in the developed world far outpaced our
societies' abilities to comprehend, much less countermand, the unin-
tended negative consequences of those advances.
We also perceived that academia, industry, and government
were failing to intentionally deploy the immense power of new and
rapidly evolving complex systems in ways that promoted the fulﬁllment
of enduring universal human values. Our conviction was and still is that
those failures resulted more from a lack of attention and comprehension
than from malintent and market-skewing shareholder capitalism. As a
result, the advisors, supporters, and founders of the new IDSS discipline
coalesced around the ambition of holistically, systematically, and scien-
tiﬁcally addressing the promises and pitfalls associated with techno-
logically enabled complex systems.
A Better Framework for Data-to-Decision Collaborations:
The IDSS Triangle
The model my IDSS colleagues and I began to formulate
at MIT in 2014 grew out of the convergence of three rising pools of
63
/
A Better Framework for Data-to-Decision Collaborations: The IDSS Triangle

data - scientiﬁc, economic, and systems engineering data (common in
physical systems and well documented in academia and industry); insti-
tutional data (global in scope, aggregated from the outcomes of various
organizational interventions, and reliant on existing mechanisms); and
data on social interactions (individual in scale but newly available via
social media in mass quantities). The societal challenges that interested
us in areas such as ﬁnance, energy, urbanization, social networks, and
personal and public health, typically hinge on the interactions among
these three nodes of the IDSS Triangle (Figure 4.1). When tackling
challenges related to biases on a digital platform such as Facebook,
the Triangle compels us to investigate the systemic operations of the
platform, how people interact with the platform and each other, and the
various policies and regulations is paramount to understand how such
platforms can impact various communities. Later in this chapter, you'll
ﬁnd a more detailed description of how the Triangle inﬂuenced our
response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The question before us was how to establish a set of
transdisciplinary principles that would enable us to tackle the complex
task of deciphering interactions within our Triangle. We agreed that for
almost every problem of interest to us, we must be able to collect data
deliberately, make good and reliable predictions, and understand sys-
temic fragility, bias, resilience, and security. We also need to address
causality versus correlations, ensure sustainability, deﬁne the interaction
architecture of people and systems associated with the problem, and
propose ethical solutions that promote justice and privacy.
We recognized, as well, that we couldn't build an academic unit
around the solving of societal challenges, which are inﬁnite in number
Systems
Institutions
Social Behavior
Data
Figure 4.1 The IDSS Triangle
64
/
A Transdiscipline Is Born

and would comprise an amorphous, ceaselessly evolving set of discip-
lines for each particular problem. Instead, we committed ourselves to a
data-to-decisions framework that would incorporate the most effective
tools, methods, and technologies from engineering/computing and the
social sciences for solving real-world problems.
Our vision for better person-machine collaborations centers on
conducting research and training students in human-centered and
socially centered (i.e., collective human behavior) data science. Rather
than designing and building machines to think for us, we want to
demonstrate how AI, ML, and similar technologies can help us think
deeper and more broadly about a wide range of complex, systemic
problems. Human judgment must remain an essential element of every
equation, but we must continually up our game with higher-quality
information and a clearer understanding of what the data signify.
Data for the People
Simply stated, we founded IDSS in 2014 to leverage data about
individuals and systems for the beneﬁt of people. Or - if you are partial
to a more academic characterization - we dedicated ourselves to the
modeling and prediction of systemic behavior, performance, and risk;
system design and architecture; and advocacy of social welfare, sustain-
ability, and resilience. We recognized that we needed to consider equity
and systemic bias by accounting for the humanity of individuals. Our
hope was that our students would drive the development of new solu-
tions while being cognizant of all those dimensions.
In our initial communication to the MIT administration
regarding the establishment of IDSS, we committed to rooting our
methodologies in the intersecting domains of statistics, information
and decision sciences, as well as human and institutional behaviors.
We also undertook to actively involve domain experts who would be
essential to comprehend the multifaceted aspects of the intricate systems
that gripped our attention.
Although professionals in these speciﬁc ﬁelds will grasp the
implications of our transdisciplinary approach, a typical layperson
may not. Earlier in the book, we discussed statistics, so here, we should
elucidate the notions behind information and decision sciences.
Traditionally,
information
and decision
sciences
revolve
around
deciphering the information inherent in data - a resource that can be
65
/
Data for the People

extracted to serve diverse objectives such as learning, decision-making,
and data compression. The ﬁeld is deeply entrenched in probabilistic
models, spanning both static and dynamic contexts, optimization
methodologies, and the theories of decision-making and control. Some
endeavors center on fundamental boundaries - that is, the constraints of
what's unattainable - while others concentrate on algorithms, the path-
ways to what is attainable. From my perspective, statistics, information,
and decision sciences synergistically facilitate the foundational prin-
ciples of the data-to-decisions paradigm - the essence of AI.
Human and institutional behaviors encompass dimensions within
social sciences, humanity, and economics that shed light on the interplay
between data, systems, and the broader populace. Central to this under-
standing is the recognition of theories that underpin social reasoning, the
foundational aspects of micro and macroeconomics, as well as the func-
tioning of ﬁnancial and governmental establishments. Given that our data
and systems inherently originate in human actions and are harnessed to
create solutions for societal needs, it's imperative to adopt a perspective
that extends beyond mere utility when addressing complex challenges.
Naturally, when formulating policies - an arena that serves as the testing
ground for insights from social sciences and the humanities - it becomes
essential to incorporate these broader viewpoints.
This mode of thinking will manifest uniquely across various
domains. Crafting an algorithmic diagnostic tool for cancer, for instance,
necessitates a distinct approach to aspects such as modeling, precision, and
data management, which differs markedly from the considerations required
for a tool catering to customer service in a digital realm. Likewise, the
approach diverges signiﬁcantly when tackling a reinforcement-learning
solution for the challenge of nuclear fusion. The intersection of multiple
specialized ﬁelds offers a signiﬁcant opening to cultivate a versatile student -
one who can be deeply rooted in a speciﬁc domain while embracing this
innovative perspective concerning data and systems.
We expressed our ambitions with a three-pronged diagram we
refer to as "The Triangle." It depicts the dynamic interactions among
physical and engineered systems, individual social behavior, and social
institutions. The multidirectional arrows of our diagram represent the
complex, multifaceted interactions of the three nodes. Data sit at the
connective tissue that bears the imprint of all three nodes.
Probabilistic thinking, statistics, and decisions under uncertainty
provide a framework for the abstractions used in modeling complex
66
/
A Transdiscipline Is Born

phenomena. These tools employ rigorous methods to assess the quality of
the data, models, and inference. The IDSS Triangle codiﬁes elements of
complexity in societal challenges within domains where heterogeneous
data is collected on various components of the Triangle. Such data may
be incomplete, have different time scales, and may not be time-stamped
or space-stamped in a natural way.
Tailoring the approach to a particular challenge using probabil-
istic and statistical thinking can help us formulate the questions needed to
address that challenge. This does not result in a universal solution that we
can apply to every challenge. Rather, it gives us a way of thinking about
each complex challenge that facilitates more productive use of heteroge-
neous data in modeling systems and devising solutions for that challenge.
Vignette
My overall objective in writing this book is to present the case for the
emergence
of
this
new
transdiscipline
-
one
we've
termed
DSS.
We consider DSS to be a transdiscipline because we believe it should be
embedded within all other disciplines where data and systems play a role -
engineering, sciences, social sciences, and management, for example, as
well as other cross-disciplinary domains within academia. The creation of a
cross-university unit in the form of an Institute at MIT was essential to
bringing that transdisciplinary thinking into different ﬁelds and domains.
IDSS was conceived with this vision in mind.
When contemplating the emergence of the transdisciplinary ﬁeld of
DSS, I'm continually drawn to the analogy of the role that mathematics plays
in science and engineering. While a mathematics department chieﬂy is con-
cerned with forging new theories and foundations, equally integral to its
mission is imparting the fundamental principles and the latest tools that are
indispensable to advances in science and engineering. Interestingly, math-
ematics departments have willingly relinquished the sole ownership of dis-
coveries achieved through mathematical methodologies. Mathematicians
wholeheartedly appreciate the integration of their transdisciplinary contribu-
tions into the problem-solving approaches of engineers and scientists.
I'll have more to say about The Triangle and the development of
IDSS as an academic unit (i.e., an institute) in later chapters. For now,
I simply want to stress the importance of The Triangle in helping us to
establish IDSS as a transdiscipline, rather than as a facilitator of sporadic
67
/
Data for the People

interdisciplinary/multidisciplinary collaborations. The Triangle enabled
domain experts to structure their research, teaching, and policy initiatives
around a shared theoretical framework and practical toolkit that could
be reliably employed to understand and craft workable solutions to
intractable problems such as inequality, misinformation, economic devel-
opment, climate change, technology policy, and pandemic response.
In that sense, I recognize a kindred spirit in philosopher and sociologist
Edgar Morin, who said, "The smallest topic, however seemingly minute,
can only be understood within and through its context. In fact, no
problem of any signiﬁcance can be perceived from within a single com-
partmentalized discipline - it always requires transdisciplinarity."
Our problem-solving grows out of substantive empirical and
methodological breakthroughs achieved within a cohesive community of
scholars and practitioners that is distinct in the history of computing. The
structure of an institute enables us to bring together various domains as co-
owners of this new emerging transdiscipline and naturally embeds it within
their own disciplines. Hence our assertion that IDSS cannot be structured
as a standalone entity. We've expressed that distinct set of interdependen-
cies as a Ven diagram we refer to as the IDSS Ecosystem (Figure 4.2).
Responding to a Pandemic in Real-Time: Case in Point
The onset of the COVID-19 global pandemic in 2020 threw
scientiﬁc, political, and economic institutions into turmoil. As reported
cases increased exponentially and unpredictable human health effects
proliferated, policymakers were confronted with a very difﬁcult task -
make decisions about how best to save and preserve lives in a highly
uncertain environment. With only limited and noisy data, the scientiﬁc
21st
Century 
Statistics
Data
Systems
Domain 
Knowledge
Society
Human & 
Institutional 
Behavior
Information
and 
Decision 
Systems
Figure 4.2 The IDSS Ecosystem
68
/
A Transdiscipline Is Born

community went to work in order to extract as much information as
possible about the virus and its contagion. Anti-science communities (a
nontrivial subset of societies worldwide) went into denial. They blamed
the scientiﬁc community for issuing mixed messages - including the
variable guidance about wearing masks.
Faced with dearth of data about this metastasizing threat, coun-
tries implemented various levels of lockdowns. Simultaneously, data
scientists and epidemiologists raced to improve their models of the con-
tagion in order to answer crucial questions such as: Do lockdowns deliver
a causal effect on the decline of infections? Can we predict the apex of the
infection curve as a function of lockdowns? To reach useful conclusions
about these and other questions, many scientists relied on hospitalization
data. Although the data were limited and noisy, experts produced signiﬁ-
cant insights about the mechanisms of the contagion.
A media and public policy battle soon arose, however, among
healthcare specialists on one side and business, economic, and social
specialists on the other. The economic consequences of lockdowns were
severe, and the debates were heated. Is it better to save as many lives as
possible and resurrect the economy in the aftermath, or do you minim-
ize lockdowns to protect the livelihoods on which society depends and
accept a certain level of mortality up front? We must remember that -
even in the throes of a global pandemic -scientiﬁc discovery remains a
process. Given a particular quantity of data sets, we may resort initially
to a severe lockdown and then slowly evolve that decision as we learn
more. Anti-scientists use the evolution of decisions as an indicator of
failure of science when, to the contrary, that is the very nature -and
greatest strength - of science.
The challenges posed by COVID-19 serve as excellent examples
of the Triangle. The biological aspect of the virus, including its size and
ability to attach, forms part of the system's data set. The interaction
between people is a consequence of social data, and government policies
and interventions constitute institutional data. To address any of these
challenges, it is essential to consider the interactions between all
these components.
A Testing and Vaccination Moonshot
Given past experiences with viral epidemics, experts generally
agreed on one point - vaccination was the most urgent and effective
69
/
A Testing and Vaccination Moonshot

intervention. Some even compared it with the twentieth-century pro-
gram to land a human on the moon. The global scientiﬁc community
went into high gear and produced vaccines within the span of a year.
An impressive feat in its own right, this accomplishment also resulted in
the acceleration of new technologies (mRNA, for instance) that will
likely help solve future medical and public health challenges.
Even before the vaccines were ready, the scientiﬁc community
also produced effective rapid tests that helped mitigate the spread of the
virus. Tests, which were created and deployed at unprecedented speed
and scale, gave us a reliable tool for temporarily removing infected
individuals from the network of contagion via quarantine. This was
essential because many infected individuals were younger, largely
asymptomatic, and unlikely to self-quarantine. One key to using tests
effectively was to determine the optimal testing rate - a classic exercise
in control and decision theory. Control theory experts at IDSS and
around the world helped craft approaches for testing protocols that
guided the work of public health ofﬁcials.
Leveraging Data about the Contagion Network
The methodology related to testing protocols is instructive -
and an excellent example of the IDSS Triangle in action. Contagion
occurs in a network in which people physically interact, and lockdowns
reduce those network interactions. Because the speed at which the virus
spreads can be measured scientiﬁcally (biologically, it depends on the
size of the virus plus its ability to attach to molecules in the body), we
can estimate the virus's reproductive factor (R0) by monitoring data on
the number of infections in a given environment.
R0 enables us to calculate the average number of people a single
infected person can infect during the time they are contagious. The
number depends upon the setting. In a dorm in which many students
interact, R0 can be as high as 10. By contrast, R0 can be less than 1 in
casual outdoor interactions. The implications of this spread are signiﬁ-
cant. If R0 = 2, for example, the ﬁrst infected person can infect an
average of two other people, who intern infect four others, and so on.
By estimating the resulting exponential growth, you can quantify the
effective rate for testing within a community. The goal is to test and
quarantine infected individuals faster than the rate at which they are
infecting others, which will reduce R0 to less than 1.
70
/
A Transdiscipline Is Born

When MIT successfully implemented a testing/quarantining
strategy in 2020 based on this methodology, many other higher educa-
tion institutions did the same. The implementation unfolded across
multiple levels: in the Fall of 2020, over half of the students returned
to campus. They were organized into Pods of 8-10 individuals with
restricted external interactions, limited in-person group meetings, and a
heightened emphasis on utilizing outdoor spaces. Students underwent
testing three times a week, a frequency determined by calculations
considering
the
spread
of
COVID
and
student
interactions.
In contrast, faculty and staff were tested once a week. Those testing
positive among students were quarantined in a separate dormitory,
while infected faculty and staff were required to wait for a negative test
result or more than 10 days after symptoms before returning. Despite
the apparent challenges, this strategy proved remarkably effective,
fostering continued interaction among students, faculty, and staff.
We realized the full impact of the strategy when the IDSS
faculty collaborated with NIH/CIMIT to create the "whentotest.org"
app. My colleague Professor Peko Hosoi recognized the importance of
simplifying our theory to have a meaningful inﬂuence. While the app
represented a technical achievement, its straightforwardness demon-
strated a keen understanding of people's needs during the pandemic.
Details of the technology and its implications are covered in 2024
Accelerating Diagnostics in a Time of Crisis: The Response to
COVID-19 and a Roadmap for Future Pandemics by editors Steven
C. Schachter and Wade E. Bolton.
Public Policies and the IDSS Triangle
In the 2023 article "Implicit feedback policies for COVID-19:
why
'zero-COVID'
policies
remain
elusive,"
my
colleagues
Ali
Jadbabaie and Devavrat Shah, in collaboration with their IDSS student
Arnab Sarkar, found that publishing data about the total number of
current infections in a given region produced a healthy feedback effect.
Essentially, people who consumed public reporting about a high
number of infections in their locale were more careful about their
activities within that contagion network. They exercised greater self-
restraint in their interactions with other people in their daily lives.
The implications of this ﬁnding highlight a fundamental char-
acteristic of the IDSS Triangle - the intertwined nature of DSS. As the
71
/
Public Policies and the IDSS Triangle

study by Jadbabaie, Shah, and Sarkar illustrates, the effectiveness of a
policy intervention arises from the interaction among the science of the
contagion, social and economic structures and behaviors, and the trade-
offs embedded in the policy of testing and quarantining. We must
consider all these components when seeking to assess and design the
most effective policy responses.
The Triangle also helps us to assess the ongoing effects of a
policy intervention and adjust as needed. In the example above, the
compromise between human versus economic health turned out to have
a major, likely unintended, bias against historically under-resourced
communities. People suffered greater harm from these policies in homes
where average incomes were lower, where employment was manual,
where healthcare was less accessible, and where the number of individ-
uals per household was higher than average. At IDSS, we believe The
Triangle is essential to addressing issues of fairness, which I'll be talking
about more in the coming chapters.
72
/
A Transdiscipline Is Born

