7
PEOPLE, PROGRAMS, AND RESEARCH
Perpetuating a Virtuous Cycle
As I ruminate on what coalesced at IDSS during the nine years
after we formally launched in 2015, I risk giving the impression that we
began with a fully formed sense of what we wanted the culture of our
new discipline to be. In truth, we didn't spend much time talking about
our vision for the culture at the outset. Instead, we focused on what we
believed to be the necessary ingredients for tackling the interdisciplinary
challenges arising from complex societal and technical systems. Those
ingredients included statistics, stochastic modeling, information theory
and inference, systems and control theory, optimization, economics,
network science, and human and social behavior. We also were particu-
larly attentive to community-building at IDSS. We recognized from the
start that our main purpose was to create a new culture around a
new transdiscipline.
We were conﬁdent that the collision and synthesis of ideas and
methods from these analytical disciplines would produce a distinct and
fertile environment for transformative research. We also understood
that our vision depended heavily on attracting like-minded research
and teaching colleagues as well as a species of graduate students that
we couldn't be sure existed. We believed that we could build it, but
would they come? If they came, we wanted the culture of our new
discipline to grow up among us out of the community we formed
together. We remained attentive to community-building by reminding
one another that it's much easier to launch programs than it is to build
a culture.

The PhDs Will Lead Us
As the birthplace of IDSS, MIT - with its motto "mens et
manus" (mind and hand) - had much to recommend it. Problem-
solving is an essential element of the Institute's DNA, as is the passion
of its faculty and researchers for breaking new ground and collabor-
ating across traditional disciplinary boundaries. All the resources,
talent, experience, and inspiration of MIT were necessary - but not
sufﬁcient - conditions for IDSS to thrive. Ultimately, the new institute
needed to attract, educate, and retain a new breed of doctoral stu-
dents who could bring creativity, entrepreneurial spirit, and enthusi-
asm for the experimental to their work. (Refer back to Chapter 6 for
an overview of the design of such PhD programs.) Our hope was to
show the world the full signiﬁcance of MIT's motto through the
embodiment of its third, unspoken component - heart - which ener-
gizes the humanistic approach to problem-solving that IDSS was
championing.
Most of all, our new IDSS PhD students need to possess a
preternatural facility to work expertly and ﬂuidly among multiple dis-
ciplines including statistics, information sciences, engineering, and
social sciences. In conjunction with those skill sets, IDSS students had
to master a real-world domain such as media, transportation, or energy
markets. Even as they pioneered this powerful combination of capabil-
ities, these doctoral students would establish the foundation of a new
teaching and research community. They would be central to the propa-
gation of the IDSS culture and would energize and broaden the faculty
who contributed to this new discipline.
Extracting Data-Driven Environmental Policies from the
"Beijing Haze"
"Imagine waking up at 8:00am and thinking it's 8:00pm
because it's so dark." That's how IDSS SES doctoral student Minghao
Qiu - who arrived at MIT in 2016 - recounts his personal experience of
the Beijing Haze during the winter of 2013. Researchers quantiﬁed the
human cost of that catastrophic air-pollution phenomenon to include
hundreds of premature deaths and tens of thousands of acute bronchitis
and asthma cases. The same research team estimated the related eco-
nomic losses to be in excess of $250 million.
112
/
People, Programs, and Research: Perpetuating a Virtuous Cycle

For Qiu, the Haze was galvanizing. He resolved to shine a light
on a more complicated aspect of the crisis by studying air pollution,
energy, and public policy as a complex system that produced multiple
undesirable outcomes. To do that, Qiu needed the support of a research
community distinctly focused on tackling broad societal challenges
using rigorous data analysis. Qiu brought to IDSS his Peking
University training in economics and environmental science, and his
SES program colleagues helped him understand how climate-related
issues interact with other components of human society.
In his ﬁrst research 2020 paper at MIT (published by
Environmental Science & Technology in 2020), Qiu collaborated with
his IDSS research advisor, Professor Noelle Selin and colleagues from
Tsinghua and Carnegie Mellon universities to develop a rare "ex-post"
(retrospective) analysis of the policies that may have contributed to the
Beijing Haze of 2013. A key objective of the team was to demonstrate
how retrospective analyses of past policies could improve projections
about the consequences of a potential new policy during its formative
stage. The study manifested a core objective that Qiu shared in common
with the entire IDSS community - demonstrating how data can be used
to address a wide range of complex societal problems.
Qiu characterized his experience of the IDSS culture in a con-
versation with MIT News in 2018. "IDSS/SES's focus on data-driven
policy studies is a perfect ﬁt with my research interest, and I really enjoy
the interdisciplinary atmosphere . . . IDSS/SES allows me to gain a solid
training on both quantitative methods and social sciences. I also value
the opportunity to work with my two co-advisors very closely, which
motivates my research from both science and policy perspectives. The
interactions with students and faculty from different backgrounds helps
me to reﬂect on my own research from different perspectives. Although
we focus on different problems, my cohorts' perspectives greatly
enhance my thinking about quantitative methods and research design."
Measuring Distrust Born of Clickbait
PhD student Manon Revel grew up in the suburbs of Paris,
France, with a passion for journalism - her father's profession. As a
teenager, she reported for the local radio station and launched a school
newspaper. When Revel had to choose a ﬁeld of study at university,
however, she picked science. She earned bachelor's and master's degrees
113
/
Measuring Distrust Born of Clickbait

in engineering and applied mathematics at École Centrale Paris while
continuing to work as a journalist in her spare time.
As she contemplated her next move, Revel looked for oppor-
tunities that would unite her varied interests. "I always felt like I had
these different lives," Revel told MIT News in 2020. "Coming to MIT
was the ﬁrst time I felt that my interests could ﬁnally be put together,
and that I could work on everything in unison." Her plan was for a
second master's degree only, but she found the transdisciplinary ecosys-
tem emerging within IDSS compelling. She joined the SES doctoral
program in 2017 and set to work analyzing the turbulent dynamics of
journalism and society in the aftermath of the 2016 US presidential
election.
With advisors from four academic domains - civil and envir-
onmental engineering, management, political science, and electrical
engineering and computer science - Revel teamed up with Amir
Tohidi, a graduate student in the LIDS, to study the effects of clickbait
ads on reader trust. This formulation is an indication of the thought-
ful thinking around such issues in IDSS - in contrast to much of the
work that was done that focused on detecting such clickbait. For their
research, Revel and her colleagues deﬁned clickbait as a headline or
other concise text designed to trigger clicks on a hyperlink that leads
to content of dubious value or interest. The team trained AI - a
Bayesian text classiﬁcation program, in this instance - to recognize
clickbait and put the tool to work analyzing nearly 1.5 million online
ads from 2016 to 2019.
Revel's data scrap revealed that more than 80% of the ads were
clickbait. Subsequent large-scale and carefully designed randomized
experiments showed that a single exposure to clickbait in proximity to
legitimate content undermined readers' conﬁdence in that content and
in the publication as a whole. The effect was most notable for publica-
tions with medium familiarity - that is, recognition among 25% to 50%
of the audience. Among widely recognized sources such as CNN and
Fox News, however, the effect was negligible. In a time of rampant
information disorder, Revel hopes these ﬁndings will encourage jour-
nalism publishers to think twice before chasing the short-term proﬁts
associated with clickbait at the expense of readers' fundamental trust in
their reporting. She also seeks to expand this line of research to examine
questions such as how people process information related to their
voting decisions, including in her 2021 paper "Native advertising and
114
/
People, Programs, and Research: Perpetuating a Virtuous Cycle

the credibility of online publishers" with collaborators Amir Tohidi,
Dean Eckles, and Adam Berinsky.
IDSS Faculty Are Strong Attractors
During the ﬁrst eight years of its existence, the IDSS student
cohort grew rapidly - doctoral, master's, and other MIT students
afﬁliated with IDSS through their advisors. In 2022, our students'
backgrounds spanned the disciplines of engineering, political science,
economics, management, statistics, and mathematics. This diverse
cohort was the product of a virtuous cycle that originated with IDSS
faculty recruitment.
As explained in Chapter 6, our initial hiring strategy was based
on two key objectives - broaden domain engagement internally and
expand our statistics ﬁrepower with new faculty. To diversify internal
engagement, we welcomed faculty hires and afﬁliates from within all
ﬁve of MIT's schools and a remarkably diverse group of departments:
Anthropology, Comparative Media Studies, Media Lab, Information
Technology, Organization Studies, Management Studies, Urban Studies
and Planning, Political Science, Economics, Mathematics, Physics, Brain
and Cognitive Sciences, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Civil and Environmental Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering.
To grow MIT's statistics capabilities, we recruited external
candidates with nontraditional perspectives in key subject areas such
as information theory, high-dimensional and online learning, theoret-
ical computer science, optimization, econometrics, and networks as well
as core statistics. By 2022, we had developed a large and diverse roster
of joint faculty and afﬁliate members.
Intersectional Research Leads to Actionable Breakthroughs
Associate Professor Caroline Uhler, who came to MIT in
2015 with joint appointments in IDSS and Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science (EECS), exempliﬁes the qualities that make the IDSS
faculty cohort so compelling to our students. Uhler combines deep
research expertise with broad vision, strong leadership skills, and a
passion for teaching. In fact, she graduated from high school in
Switzerland with a plan to teach math, biology, and languages at the
secondary level.
115
/
Intersectional Research Leads to Actionable Breakthroughs

All that changed when Uhler encountered algebraic statistics for
computational biology in graduate school. She changed course and
headed to UC Berkeley for a PhD in statistics. Although much of her
early work was theoretical, her fascination with the nexus of biology
and math (in this case, algebra and statistics) led her to study causality
and gene regulation as a means of learning more about what's going on
inside a cell.
At MIT, Uhler's work expanded to incorporate ML tools along-
side methods from statistics and biology. This approach enabled her to
integrate and translate among vastly different existing data models used
in the study of single-cell biology. One particularly promising applica-
tion of that work was to reveal how a particular disease impacts the
body at a cellular level, which in turn could result in more targeted
treatments for a variety of maladies.
In 2021, the same year Uhler was named co-director of the Eric
and Wendy Schmidt Center at the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
her research group co-authored a paper that applied these new tech-
niques to the global pandemic. The approach identiﬁed existing drugs
that could be repurposed to ﬁght COVID-19. In addition to helping
pinpoint drug candidates for clinical trials, the team's research can be
applied to other diseases where detailed gene-expression data exist.
ML-Aided Cancer Research
Uhler's application of statistics and ML to genomic research has
expanded to include cancer cells. In that pioneering work, her focus is
on characterizing different types of cells - normal, ﬁbrocystic, cancer-
ous, and metastatic - using gene expression vectors of signiﬁcant size
(typically containing 20,000 elements). The objective is to identify
which normal cells can transition into ﬁbrocystic cells, which ﬁbrocystic
cells can become cancerous, and which cancer cells may become
metastatic.
Several challenges complicate this investigation. The large size
of a gene expression vector makes it difﬁcult to pinpoint the subtle
variations that lead to transitions between cell types. Representing
genome expressions as vectors also can be limiting because the
approach overlooks the underlying regulatory network structure that
is critical to understanding how these expressions change. It's also
problematic to track single cells through their evolution because most
116
/
People, Programs, and Research: Perpetuating a Virtuous Cycle

measurement techniques destroy the cells, which hinders traditional
supervised learning algorithms.
To address those challenges, Uhler and her team are pursuing
novel, ML-based approaches. Using nonlinear neural networks, auto-
encoders perform principal-component reduction in high-dimensional
genome expressions, which facilitates the detection of potential changes
in expression. By utilizing optimal transport theory, the researchers are
able to construct cell-to-cell mappings between categories based on their
low-dimensional distributions. That approach provides the most efﬁ-
cient one-to-one association between two populations with a respective
probability distribution that minimizes an expected cost function
(which
often
is
biologically
motivated).
Uhler
and
coauthor
G. Shivashankar provide a good overview of this work in their 2022 art-
icle "Machine Learning Approaches to Single-Cell Data Integration and
Translation."
The success of those ML-based tools inspired further research
focused on intervention. Uhler's intervention program uses transcrip-
tion factors (TFs) - cells with speciﬁc genome expressions that can bind
with existing cells - to transform cell distributions. The goal is to
discover an input-output function, which requires identiﬁcation of the
correct TFs from among millions of options. A key aspect of the
research is to identify encoded variable-level structures that will simplify
the search for new TFs from among previously explored options. This
offers exciting opportunities for collaboration between control theory
and genomics - additive or multiplicative structures, for example, can
signiﬁcantly reduce the search space.
Notwithstanding the technical complexity of Uhler's work, her
efforts represent a signature aspect of the DSS transdiscipline that I hope
nonexperts can appreciate - the productive and sustainable merging of
network sciences, probability, causality, and low data structures to
solve previously intractable problems. That, combined with the resolve
of DSS to imbue such work with ethical guidelines and constraints,
makes me very optimistic about the future.
The Holy Grail of Learning and Decisions
As a control theorist, I have long viewed every challenge as a
decision problem. It was MIT Professor Emery Brown, however, who
introduced me to the contemporary deﬁnition of statistics as "decisions
117
/
The Holy Grail of Learning and Decisions

under uncertainty." Initially, I found that statement perplexing. As time
passed, though, I became convinced that Brown's perspective was the
right approach to ML and statistics. Decisions under uncertainty are
ubiquitous and lie at the core of the new statistical thinking.
Brown's anesthesia research exempliﬁes that mindset. Working
with colleagues at MIT's Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
Brown used electroencephalogram (EEG) data to demonstrate that
propofol - a common medication used for general anesthesia - signiﬁ-
cantly slows down brain dynamics, creating entirely new neurological
patterns that differ signiﬁcantly from those present during normal sleep.
The common notion that patients are simply being "put to sleep" turns
out to be highly misleading, and dispelling that myth has important
implications for anesthesiologists and patients.
Although physicians and researchers have long observed that
the administration of general anesthesia can contribute to brain dys-
function following surgery, they didn't understand the relevant mech-
anisms - or how to regulate them. Brown's research suggests that
monitoring a patient's real-time EEG data during surgery could enable
anesthesia equipment to administer drug levels more precisely and
lower the risk of side effects. The approach uses a continuous feedback
system that measures patient brain activity and adjusts medication levels
accordingly. Brown and collaborators Patrick L. Purdon, Aaron
Sampson, and Kara J. Pavone explore the topic in detail in their
2015 paper "Clinical E lectroencephalography for Anesthesiologists
Part I: Background and Basic Signatures."
To be successful, this approach must achieve a level of precision
that adapts to individual patient variations and accurately detects a
variety of brain states that potentially correlate with other vital signs
routinely measured during surgery. The approach also poses a high-
stakes fundamental research problem of integrating ML (on EEG data)
and control systems (an anesthesia drip) in real-time. In control theory,
we refer to such problems as safety critical because failure has extremely
negative consequences. Brown's anesthesia research demonstrates that
the complex, transdisciplinary interplay among ML tools, control
systems, and patient safety is critical to the cutting-edge advances that
will improve medical practice in the twenty-ﬁrst century. It also repre-
sents yet another proof-of-concept for the habits of mind and method-
ologies of the new DSS discipline.
118
/
People, Programs, and Research: Perpetuating a Virtuous Cycle

