8
PERSONAL REFLECTIONS ON
THE JOURNEY
I embarked on this endeavor not quite knowing what to expect.
Although I had observed the launch of various initiatives and institutes
at MIT (such as the Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research,
Broad Institute, Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, and the
MIT Energy Initiative), I was never directly involved in any of them.
How does one transition from a mere observer to the builder of a
vibrant and sustainable unit within MIT, an institution known for its
competitiveness and high standards? I was destined to ﬁnd out.
Startups within Academia
As at many other competitive academic institutions, the MIT
community rigorously evaluates new initiatives. The quality of every
program is closely monitored, as is the opportunity cost associated with
the allocation of resources to a potentially unsuccessful endeavor.
Appropriately, I think, such evaluations take place irrespective of
MIT's need for a particular initiative. I often liken the MIT system to
a human body in need of an organ transplant. No matter how urgently
the body requires the transplant, the immune system will initially resist
it once it's introduced. Integration is only achieved when the necessary
adjustments align incentives and guarantee that the unit fulﬁlls its
promises.
My personal engagement with the committee of 40 faculty
members who laid out the blueprint for IDSS was at least as important
as their resulting roadmap in helping me shape the results. The depth of

discussions, the diversity of viewpoints, the historical context, and the
array of arguments we engaged in could never be fully integrated into
the ﬁnal report. Rather, it was participating in all the committee meet-
ings and engaging in countless one-on-one discussions that gave me a
profound understanding of our community's expectations.
I must acknowledge that similar ideas and initiatives were being
considered or were underway at other institutions. Every initiative was
unique, certainly, and each institution tailored its approach to fulﬁll
speciﬁc needs. And although I couldn't fully understand from the out-
side the complex challenges faced by other leaders, I actively sought to
learn from their successes and setbacks.
My mentor, Sanjoy Mitter, who was the director of MIT's LIDS
when I was hired, frequently advised, "If you surround yourself with
good people, you will always succeed." I've been guided by this profound
insight throughout my career. In the realm of research, this translates into
working with creative and intelligent students who approach their work
with good attitudes and into collaborating with colleagues whose inter-
actions are stimulating and exciting. But what does this mean for those of
us who are striving to create a new academic unit? And what deﬁnes a
"good" colleague in this context? Does it mean effective administrators,
pleasant individuals, or those who are intellectually strong? What qual-
ities do we need in the individuals who join such endeavors?
Intellectual Strength Is Key
My observations of various department heads and directors at
MIT and other academic institutions convince me that the intellectual
strength of the leaders is far more critical than their ability to run the
trains. This is not to discount the signiﬁcance of the latter but rather to
highlight that strong intellectual capabilities are essential for driving
dynamic and groundbreaking developments within the academic
sphere. Recognizing that no single person possesses all the skills neces-
sary to establish a transdisciplinary unit that spans various departments
and majors, the founding team must collectively exhibit this intellectual
prowess. They also must possess sufﬁcient overlap of interest as well as
the capacity to interact with a broad range of experts from other
domains. My plan was to recruit such individuals and continue
expanding the team to fulﬁll our ultimate objectives.
120
/
Personal Reﬂections on the Journey

Working with such a team can be a challenge. By their very
nature, they are not a group with whom you can be prescriptive. They
must have sufﬁcient autonomy to shape what needs to be done.
Accordingly, I took on the role of understanding and coordinating
their plans, even when it involved resisting the urge to push my point
of view.
Is it necessary to become a psychologist to create and manage
such a unit? Perhaps one adopts some psychological insight along the
way. A signiﬁcant part of this role is comprehending the right incentives
for each of your colleagues (not just the core leadership group). While
an intellectual vision is crucial, it doesn't guarantee continued progress.
You must facilitate the engagement of others through funding, student
recruitment, research collaborations, structured communication (i.e.,
regular meetings), and more. Such components help maintain the
momentum required to realize shared objectives.
Additional Building Blocks and Obstacles
The question of who runs the trains is also vital. Without the
right staff leaders, none of the faculty leadership team's vision can
reach fruition. This was one of the most crucial and challenging
aspects of my role. While assessing the strengths of my academic
colleagues came more naturally to me, hiring the right staff was a
different matter. Fortunately, the ﬁrst few staff leaders who joined
IDSS from within MIT embraced the startup spirit, and they enabled
us to expand from there. In this realm, as well, I learned that provid-
ing a level of autonomy that corresponds to a higher level of responsi-
bility was key. Creating an environment that fostered a startup
mentality was critical for team cohesion - and to achieving the desired
outcomes.
Much as in the business world, conceiving an academic startup
with a unique and promising business model quickly unearths a land-
scape ﬁlled with competitors. This scenario often triggers a perception
of encroaching on other people's domains - as well as their value
propositions and the resources available to them. Anticipating this
circumstance can be nearly impossible. Some of these concerns stem
from knee-jerk reactions to something new, while others are legitimate
challenges within a vibrant and growing institution. In either case,
121
/
Additional Building Blocks and Obstacles

leaders of a new venture must address those concerns with sensitivity.
Successful approaches will vary signiﬁcantly - no one-size-ﬁts-all solu-
tion for such situations - and the complexity of the landscape will
compound the challenges facing a team of founders.
Vignette
When examining the proposed mission of IDSS, economics faculty
members may have viewed the Triangle as something they were already
doing with aspects already embedded in their curricula. We countered that
concern by pointing out that economists often abstract away details of
physical phenomena that risk over-simplifying the systems piece in contrast
to the more complex IDSS approach.
On another front, computer science colleagues had to be convinced that
our quest to establish this transdicipline would not impact their brand or
alter their role on campus. As we strengthened statistics and reafﬁrmed our
commitment to embed the new ideas within DSS into all domains, we were
able to clarify that this was not the role of the CS department.
MIT operates under a system where every degree-granting unit
with faculty members is evaluated by a visiting committee every two
years. This frequent assessment offers an excellent opportunity to pre-
sent a unit's progress, challenges, and accomplishments. As far as
I know, our reviews at MIT occur much more frequently than at many
other institutions (once a decade is more common). Visiting committees
comprise MIT Corporation members, external individuals, both indus-
try and academia and presidential appointees - a decidedly unique set of
perspectives for a startup such as IDSS.
The visiting committee for IDSS provided immensely helpful
feedback and advice that inﬂuenced the characteristics of our entity.
One natural inclination among committee members was to expand our
vision to leverage the ongoing data science and AI revolution and
engage a broader community outside MIT. During our founding years,
the leadership team held ﬁrm to the core mission of embedding our
transdisciplinary approach into all academic units in order to systemat-
ically address societal challenges. Nine years on, IDSS is better-
positioned than ever to pursue its original primary objective -to analyze
and solve real-world challenges.
122
/
Personal Reﬂections on the Journey

Administrative Duties Need Not Be Limiting
Did I become a full-time administrator? As most academicians
can attest, our initial attraction to universities typically stems from our
fervor for research and teaching, not administrative roles. When
I assumed the role of director for the new entity, some of my colleagues
offered their mock condolences. The jest, however playful, highlighted
for me the underlying value system in academia. Psychologically, I had
to justify to myself why I was taking on this role -constructing a new
entity at MIT with the potential to transform research and education.
The endeavor had the qualities of a sponge, absorbing whatever
time I allocated to it. My passion for research and teaching remained
undiminished, but I had to make the decision to reduce my teaching
load while continuing my research. Thankfully, the interactions I had
during this period broadened the horizons of my research. After many
years in an administrative role, I can conﬁdently report back to my
colleagues that I am now more expansive in my research interests and
more excited about a wider range of academic pursuits. I've also seen
this phenomenon at play in the work of my colleagues, a perfect
example of which is the research we've been pursuing regarding sys-
temic racism.
Returning to Ethics
I am not a sociologist or an ethicist, but it strikes me that
technology moves much faster than our social and humanistic under-
standing of its impacts. I ﬁnd the ethics related to various technologies
somewhat puzzling. Would we have dropped a nuclear bomb on Japan
if we had had better training in the ethical issues associated with mass
destruction? Was it genuinely difﬁcult to appreciate the ethical issues
associated with the bomb? Or did utilitarian metrics dominate our
thinking? Ethics is a foundational concept from philosophy that I ﬁnd
applicable across the board. But, the debate about whether something is
ethical requires a new paradigm where social and humanistic responsi-
bility occupies the same level as economic values in our priorities.
Maybe the biggest impact IDSS had on my thinking is the
recognition of the utilitarian dominance of our thinking as we design
systems - whether ﬁnancial, governance, or even social. Monetary
objectives drive systems design and push us towards clear economic
123
/
Returning to Ethics

incentives. Often, such thinking results in gross discrimination and lack
of fairness within communities that do not factor largely in such
metrics. As the shift towards AI increases, the emphasis on those utili-
tarian objectives grows. The result is even more biased in the way that
the systems we build affect our societies. We see this over and over in
technology driven systems such as credit scores, investments, healthcare,
or general resource allocation.
We seem to be chasing our tails with such problems. We create
efﬁcient, low-cost, low-risk systems that discriminate among people,
then we try to undo this effect by tweaking our designs to accommodate
known biases. We now see, however, that our tweaks often create new
biases. Technology has become a tool for discrimination even as we
represent it as combating or removing the biases people bring to their
interactions. I love a quote shared by one of my colleagues in political
science when we were working on the formation of IDSS. She said,
"Engineers and computer scientists look for technology to solve prob-
lems. In humanities and social sciences, these solutions are perceived as
the problem."
The need for a paradigm shift is imminent. I can't say I know
what the new paradigm will be. Economic success, efﬁciency, low risk,
and high margins are all immediate incentives that attract investments.
But humanitarian issues are longer-term issues that are not immediate
drivers for many market players with capital. To regulate effectively, we
must properly assess the short-term and long-term consequences of
every discovery and every technology. Could we have anticipated the
impact of social media on children, on democracy, or on our general
opinions of world affairs? How can such systemic issues be captured
before or just in time to prevent the worst of the negative effects
they cause?
We're Only Human, After All
Two decades ago, I often joked with colleagues about my
research that I never had to think - or care - about people.
I examined problems where the objectives were often related to optim-
ality in some precise metric for decision systems (e.g., designing a
control system for an aircraft or autonomous car). While I have exten-
sively considered uncertainty in such designs, people often were not part
of the decision systems. My work evolved quite a bit in the last decade
124
/
Personal Reﬂections on the Journey

as I recognized that many critical problems arising in engineering
require the integration of human behavior and effects into the design -
the networked transportation systems discussed earlier in this book
being a prime example.
People, of course, are much more complicated than physical
systems. In general, you can't tell people what to do, and they often are
not willing to share their objectives (about which they tend to be quite
strategic). In mechanism design, we try to elicit those objectives by
designing a platform that incentivizes truthful behavior. While brilliant
in conception, often it is extremely difﬁcult to create such mechanisms in
dynamic and uncertain environments. The domain of behavioral eco-
nomics remains the most relevant way of embedding people's behavior
into the overall design of a system - and it holds great promise as a
model for addressing future societal challenges.
This recognition brought me into full alignment with several of
my colleagues. Causality must be one of the most critical aspects of
statistics. If human behaviors dictate how we adjust our designs, we
must grasp the causes and effects of such behaviors. One key advantage
of the integration of AI with an understanding of human behavior is the
potential to avoid the bias created by human decision-making. We have
talked about herding caused by our bounded rationality as decision-
makers and by our oversampling of some key past events that may not
be statistically signiﬁcant, which often results in erroneous conclusions
about cause and effect. AI systems can assist us by providing a sense of
deviation from what appears to be a statistically signiﬁcant conclusion.
I ﬁrmly believe that a systematic understanding of causality will
rely heavily on domain knowledge. One can derive so much in
abstraction, but the speciﬁc nuances of a problem are what ultimately
will lead to progress. Causality beneﬁts substantially from pinning
down the systemic aspects of data creation - not just in engineering
systems, but in many platforms that elicit people's behavior and data.
Ideally, that interaction will lead to better platform designs that enable
the public to access relevant information. We also can hope that the
market for data evolves to include more humanistic standards
and objectives.
I continue to be awed by the forward-looking vision of my IDSS
colleagues. They understand that systems - right there alongside data -
are a fundamental component of the challenges facing humanity.
Although I don't see our society shifting quickly to embrace a new
125
/
We're Only Human, After All

humanitarian paradigm, I do see a plethora of interesting questions that
can only be answered by technical and humanists coming together - and
we are beginning to do so, at least in academia. To succeed, we must be
prepared to make major sacriﬁces on both the technical and humanistic
sides. We are tackling challenges that are ill-deﬁned and that do not
belong to any clear academic community. We will be required to depart
from the tools with which we have grown comfortable and embrace
broader perspectives in our research. Personally, I am at that cross-
roads, and I invite as many of my colleagues as possible to join me.
126
/
Personal Reﬂections on the Journey

