Lecture 12 English Constitutionalism, 1649 to 1689
In the last lecture, we saw how the Tudor State, inherited by the Stewards, collapsed
into civil war and revolution. As in France, the revolutionaries would seek to replace
a thousand years of monarchy with something less traditional, but again, as in France,
the monarchy would eventually be restored. The restored Stewards would prove just as
weak as their predecessors, and that would lead to another revolution in 1688 that would
produce a constitutional monarchy, relative religious toleration, a serious challenge
to France for European domination as well. My task in this lecture is to explain how
England became a constitutional monarchy and Europe's greatest hope to stop the juggernaut
of Louis XIV.
Now, the government that was established in 1649, known as the Commonwealth, involving
rule by parliament, immediately upon the execution of the king, parliament declared England to
be a republic. Like the aristocracy of France, the members of parliament, the landowners
and the merchants who engineered this revolution, now wanted it to stop. They wanted to maintain
the great chain of being with themselves at the top, but without having to listen to a
king, without having to pay high taxes, they didn't want high church bishops nosing around
in their churches. But of course, in killing the king, they had of course violated the
great chain of being. Remember that according to the chain, to break it in any way was to
incur the wrath of God. They had also given the people a model for resistance, and worse,
they talked about it. After the king was killed and the church disestablished, there was no
censorship in England. Some 20,000 pamphlets appeared on all sorts of subjects, including
wacky ideas like democracy and freedom of religion.
In sanctioning a free press, the revolutionaries gave ordinary people a forum to discuss resistance,
and in the case of the new model army, they even recruited them into that resistance.
Many ordinary people didn't want to go back to hierarchy, as one revolutionary said, we
didn't throw one writer off our backs in order to replace him with another. In particular,
a group arose in the army called the levelers that wanted religious toleration, law reform,
and universal manhood suffrage. Back in 1647, even before the king had been executed, at
the Putney debates, the army leadership had debated the forum that England's post-war
government should take. One Colonel Thomas Rainsboro set forth the leveler position that
the poorest he that is in England hath a life to live as the greatest he. His corollary
was that every man that is to live under a government ought first by his own consent
to put himself under that government. So here, half a century before Locke is the notion
of contract and consent bubbling up from the people themselves.
Others took advantage of the new age of freedom to explore religious possibilities, the end
of censorship meant freedom in printing the Bible, freedom to interpret it as one saufin.
The result was a whole series of new religious sects, some of them you've heard of. There
were, for example, the Baptists or Dippers. They were descended from the German Anabaptists
of the 16th century, and they believed that baptism and the choice of faith that it implied
should be delayed until adulthood, when one could make a rational choice. This seems reasonable,
doesn't it? But contemporaries were outraged at the implications of lots of unbaptized
young people. And don't forget that freedom of choice in religion means the end of any
notion of a state church that has everybody as its member.
Then there were the seekers. You didn't stay in this one very long because you were going
from congregation to congregation seeking a permanent home. More alarming to the elite
were the diggers, led by Gerard Winstonley, who believed that the Bible did not sanction
private property. They thought that Christ wanted it to be shared in common. Just imagine
what the landed gentry of England thought of that one. They established communes, which
collapsed because of bad English weather, and also the hostility of local elites.
Then there were the ranchers. They were more alarming still. They believed that nothing
was a sin unless you conceived it to be a sin. According to Lawrence Clarkson, sin
hath its conception only in the imagination. There is no such act as drunkenness, adultery,
and theft in God. What act so ever is done by thee in light and love is light and lovely,
though it be that act called adultery. No matter what scripture saints or churches say,
if that within thee do not condemn thee, thou shalt not be condemned. Woohoo! Contemporary
thought that this gave the ranchers an excuse to a party, party, party. So everyone, including
other sects, condemned the ranchers, leading the parliament to pass acts against blasphemy
and adultery.
They were just as concerned about the Quakers, who, led by George Fox, believed that all
people contained God's inner light, the Holy Spirit or the Spirit of Christ, in equal measure.
That's the rub. This inner light was to be obeyed over the dictates of the state, the
church, even scripture. Now, since everyone possesses the inner light in equal measure,
a peasant must be as good as a lord, a woman as good as a man. Consequently, Quakers refused
to acknowledge earthly authorities like the state, the church, and the courts. Rather,
they publicly stressed God's impending vengeance on what they called the great ones of the
earth. Thus they refused to swear oaths, to tip their caps, to give the wall, or to demonstrate
deference to their social superiors in any way. Moreover, they often gave in to their
inner light, quaking and ranting and preaching in ways that most English people found disturbing.
Some went naked as a sign, others shouted down rival preachers, and always, women played
an important role in Quaker services, even going out into the world to preach and testify.
In other words, the Quakers rejected the great chain of being, root and branch. Now, as this
should tell you, people were reading their Bibles and coming up with all sorts of new
ideas. One of the reasons they were reading their Bibles is they were living in precarious
times and they were looking for clues. They found those clues in the Book of Revelation.
Many people assumed that England was nearing the end times. After all, a thousand-year
monarchy had just ended. The thousand-year reign of the Antichrist. The reign of King
Jesus could not be far behind. The Muggletonians believed that Lodowick
Muggleton, a tailor from the West Country who'd experienced a series of religious visions,
was the last prophet named in the Book of Revelation, with the power to save or dam on
the spot. But most disturbing of all to those who believed in order were the Fifth Monarchy
Men. They believed that the Bible had foretold five great monarchies on earth. Now, four
of those had already fallen, Babylon, Persia, Greece and Rome. Since the Fifth was going
to be the Kingdom of King Jesus, that meant that the current government, the government
of the Commonwealth, must only be an interim arrangement, that Christ's Second Coming
was imminent, and that the best way to prepare for it would be to impose mosaic law on the
whole country. Some were prepared to go farther, ushering in the Second Coming by force. Do
you remember when religion used to be a bulwark of the state? Now, religion seemed to be advising
people to disobedience. Religious toleration and a free press had produced
religious and political diversity, or to contemporize chaos. The English ruling elite was horrified
by the sects, and they began to think better of their little experiment with toleration
and free speech. But in fact, and somewhat ironically, the Commonwealth would be dissolved
by radicals. In 1653, the army was upset. It was upset at being sent to Ireland to pacify
Catholics, which they did with a bloody vengeance. It was upset at not being paid. It was upset
at the slow pace of reform. And so they sent Parliament home. After a number of radical
experiments, the army leadership eventually opted for a conservative solution. They named
its current commander, Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector of England.
Oliver Cromwell ruled England from 1653 to 1658, and in some ways he can be seen as an
anticipation of Louis' policies. First, Cromwell was pretty good at the godlike thing. Though
he was not a king, he assumed many of the trackpings of kingship, and he had a natural
dignity which suited that. Cromwell was in control, mostly. He was a strong, decisive
leader, a tireless worker. He divided England into eleven military districts, each supervised
by a major general, not unlike the French Entente. Their job was to enforce law and
order, regulate the poor law, and guarantee religious toleration. But like the Anglican
bishops who used to Harry Puritan communities, they were also supposed to keep an eye on
Anglicans and royalists. They were supposed to suppress rebellion and riot, blasphemy
and swearing, drunkenness and gambling, fornication, adultery, indecent fashions, ale houses, play
houses, Sunday sports, and even Christmas celebrations. This is rule by Puritans, remember.
This made them terribly unpopular.
His complaints and grumbling over money also gave Cromwell fits, and like Charles I, he
frequently sent them home.
What about religious conformity? Not exactly. Cromwell was a Puritan. But he was what is
called an independent Puritan, so he believed in toleration for all Protestant sects. He
also readmitted the Jews into England, which he saw as part of the Second Coming. But Anglican
and Catholic worship was not tolerated. In fact, the major generals were supposed to
target them.
In foreign policy, well, Cromwell obviously had an army, England finally got its aggressive
Protestant foreign policy. He crushed rebellions in Ireland and Scotland. In Ireland, he used
terror to produce submission, massacring Catholics at Droheda and Wexford, confiscating land,
and burning crops. These actions led to the deaths of perhaps 250,000, and by some estimates,
as many as 600,000 people, out of a total population of 2 million. The Scottish pacification
was much milder. They were, after all, fellow Protestants.
Cromwell fought a trade war with the Dutch. He also fought Spain and took Jamaica from
them. In other words, England had a successful foreign policy for once, but it cost money.
Oliver Cromwell was the first solvent ruler of England since Henry VII, but at tremendous
cost. His government passed excise taxes on necessities, like beer, which hurt the poor.
He confiscated royalist, Anglican, and Catholic lands. This resulted in an annual revenue
of 2 million pounds, but much grumbling and resentment. This was a far higher tax burden
than that imposed by Charles I, against whom these people had rebelled to keep their taxes
low. So Oliver Cromwell succeeded in giving England
good, strong government. He anticipated many of Louis XIV's rules of absolutism, but he
died in 1658, worn out with care, unable to work with Parliament, unpopular with Anglicans
and Catholics because of the confiscations and harassment. As in France, after over a
year of instability, the English people, or at least their ruling elite, decided to go
back home again. England wasn't ready for good government, so it invited back the stewards.
In 1660, Charles I's son, Charles II, was restored to the throne of his fathers. Charles
II would rule England from 1660 to 1685. He was then succeeded by his brother James,
who ruled from 1685 to 1688. In many ways they were much like their father
and grandfather. Charles II was witty, affable, a great conversationalist. When told that
the Countess of Castlemaine had converted to Catholicism, he replied, he never concerned
himself with the souls of ladies, but with their bodies, insofar as they were gracious
enough to allow him. And there's lots and lots of quotations like that from Charles.
He would have made a terrific talk show host. But perhaps not surprisingly, he could also
be surprisingly undignified. Samuel Peeps was once shocked at the king's amusement
at the sight of ducks trying to make more ducks in St. James's Park.
Above all, Charles was made cynical, perhaps by his father's fate. He decided to give himself
over entirely to pleasure. The theatre, music, boon-drinking companions, a virtual harem
of mistresses. The Countess of Castlemaine, beautiful and ambitious. The Duchess of Portsmouth,
French, Catholic, and therefore hated. Nell Gwynne, English, common, pretty witty Nell.
Nell reminds me of one of my favorite stories of western civilization. I can't resist telling
it. One day a royal carriage was rolling down the high street in Oxford where the king was
staying. And it was stopped by an angry crowd. They thought that the carriage contained the
Duchess of Portsmouth, who was widely believed to be whispering in the king's ear all sorts
of things favorable to Catholicism. So they stopped the carriage, they start rocking it,
and it's pretty clear that they're going to drag this woman out, probably to her death.
Out popped the head of pretty witty Nell Gwynne, who said, calm yourselves, good people, for
you are mistaken. I am the Protestant whore. James II, who succeeded Charles in 1685, was
a little more dignified. So good, you get godlike points. There he was a distinguished
military man who'd shown courage under fire. He was at the same time less witty, more of
a plotter. He was famous for the reputed ugliness of his mistresses, which Court Wittes explained
as the penance imposed on him by his Catholic confessors. Even the Countess of Dorchester
admitted, we are none of us handsome, and if we had Witt, he had not enough himself to
discover it. Now the words Catholic confessors should tell you something. James II was a
Roman Catholic, and that would spell trouble. In fact, both men admired their cousin Louis
XIV in more than just his Catholicism. By the way, we've caught up to Louis XIV chronologically
in this lecture. For those of you who don't have a Stuart genealogy at hand, both James
and Charles were cousins of Louis on their mother's side, Princess Henrietta Maria. Though
Charles was lazy, James was a hard worker like Louis XIV. But unlike Louis, neither
Charles nor James had an efficient local bureaucracy at their disposal. They had to rely on unpaid
English nobles and aristocrats to do their bidding in the countryside. Above all, though
restored to the powers of their father, the brothers still had to deal with a powerful
parliament. Give you a few examples. In 1673, Parliament forced the king, Charles II, to
abandon an unpopular war with the French against the Dutch, that is to say he was fighting
on the French side, and also a policy of religious toleration that he wanted to try out. They
did this by threatening to withhold funds. Remember, you can always do that to a king
of England. In 1679-81, the world's first organized political party, the Whigs, attempted
to force Charles to exclude his brother James, then merely Duke of York, from the succession
because he was a Catholic. So clearly money and religion and control continued to be issues
during these reigns. As all of this implies, neither Charles nor James were particularly
wealthy at least at first. At the restoration, Charles II was voted a revenue which was supposed
to yield 1,200,000 pounds a year. But the taxes Parliament voted didn't always yield
that amount. Worse, like his father and grandfather, he loved to spend money on art, on architecture,
on his mistresses, on his 14 acknowledged royal bastards. If Charles was not the father
of his country, he was at least the father of a fair proportion thereof. Parliament was
unwilling to finance these things, so Charles turned to bribes from Louis. In return for
the bribes, he promised a pro-French foreign policy.
In 1685, James was luckier. After Parliament's attempts to displace him from the succession,
there was a strong royalist or Tory reaction in his favor. They were sorry. Some Whigs tried
rebellion, which only made Parliament more cooperative. As a result, it voted James a
revenue of 2,000,000 pounds. James' biggest problem would be religion.
Remember that England was Anglican. There were a few Catholics and more Puritans, but
both were virtually outlawed by past history. That is, Catholics had tried to kill the sovereign
in the 16th and 17th centuries. Elizabeth and James, Puritans had actually managed to
do it in 1649, so both of those groups were sort of beyond the pale. Scotland was mainly
Presbyterian with a poor Catholic minority in the Highlands. Ireland was mainly Catholic,
but all of the power and 80% of the land was in the hands of Protestant settlers.
Both Charles and James were actually attracted to Catholicism. You see, during the English
Civil Wars, they'd had to grow up somewhere, they'd escape the country, they grew up at
the court of Louis XIV, and there they saw what absolutism and Catholicism could do for
a king. But Charles was too smart. He knew his people too well to ever do much about
this inclination. As we've seen, the English hated Catholics. Remember the Spanish Armada
of 1588? Mary Tudor burning Protestants at the stake between 1555 and 1558? The Catholic
plot to blow up the Houses of Parliament in 1605? Catholicism was associated in the
English mind with France and absolutism. It was virtually outlawed. For the king to embrace
Catholicism would have been, like for an American president of the 1950s and 60s, to embrace
communism. Charles tried to introduce a bill for toleration in 1672, but he was forced to
back down by Parliament. Having learned his lesson, he was content to remain a nominal
Anglican until he converted to Rome on his deathbed in February of 1685.
James was not the smarter brother. As Duke of York, rather than to simulate, he openly
worshipped as a Catholic, hence the wig attempt to bar him from the throne. Once he became
king, James tried to pack Parliament to legalize Catholicism, possibly in the hope of making
it the state religion again. Most English people seemed to hate this, so as my students
like to ask, why didn't they just rebel? There were two reasons. One born of the past,
one centered on the future, for the fact that the English did not at first rebel against
James. First the past. No one wanted another civil war. The English ruling elite, most
of whom were Anglican and Tories, remembered full well the chaos of 1637-60. In a way,
this just proved that the Great Chain of Being was right, and so urged on by high church,
Anglican preachers, they had resolved never again to oppose a monarch with violence. Anyway,
they might not have to, and that had to do with the future. The second reason that most
English men and women were willing to put up with James II and his policies was that
they anticipated a short Catholic reign. James II was 52 at his accession, and he had
never been in great health. When he died, he would be succeeded by one of his two daughters,
Mary, or if she should die, Anne. Now, Mary and Anne had been raised when Charles II
was still king, and you remember that Charles is the smarter elder brother. He had insisted
that they be raised as Protestants. Moreover, each had been safely married to a Protestant
husband. Anne, the younger, was very happily married to the otherwise unremarkable but
safely Lutheran Prince George of Denmark, a man of whom Charles II said, I've tried
him drunk. I've tried him sober. There's nothing in him.
But Mary's husband was something else entirely. Thanks to a diplomatic coup in the 1670s,
Mary was married to William of Orange. Do you remember William of Orange? The stad holder
of the Netherlands? The defender of Protestantism? Louis XIV's worst nightmare? And so, in
1686-87, the unpleasant Catholic experiment looked to be a short one. Why risk another
English Civil War? Good Protestants could endure the present Catholic reign as they had that
of Bloody Mary in 1553-58, anticipating the safely Protestant Mary and her husband William
would succeed to the throne. In England in the summer of 1687, the great chain of being
still held. It began to crack at the end of the year. When James's young second wife,
Mary Beatrice Modena, and I'm sorry that everybody in this lecture seems to be named
Mary or James or Charles, announced that she was expecting. Everyone in England knew that
a female child would have almost no significance for the succession, because that female child
would come after Mary and Anne. But according to the laws of primogeniture, which have only
recently been abrogated by the current Queen Elizabeth II, a male child would take precedence
over his elder sisters. There was no doubt that without Charles to thwart him, James
would raise this child a good Catholic. The prospect of a Catholic succession, followed
by a long reign, was intensely frightening to Anglicans and Puritans alike. Catholics
at court were convinced that Mary Beatrice's pregnancy was a miracle, and that God would
give her a boy. Protestants wondered how the Catholics could be so sure. The Queen's pregnancy
came to term a month prematurely in the early summer of 1688. James summoned all his loyal
courtiers to be present at the birth. I should explain that royal births really were always
moderately public occasions. That may seem distasteful to us, but you had to know that
the King had a legitimate heir. In this case, James wanted plenty of witnesses of God's
favor for the one true faith. But with his usual political acumen, James only invited
Catholics and time-serving Anglicans, neither of whom the country was likely to trust. Now
he can invite all the people he wanted, the country wasn't going to trust what they said.
And so, while Catholic courtiers flocked to St. James's palace for the lying in, Protestant
peers got out of town. On the 10th of June 1688, Mary Beatrice gave birth to a boy, dubbed
James Francis Edward. Court Catholics were overjoyed. Court Protestants, and there were
a few, at the moment of birth, they decided to give the Queen privacy by turning away.
Their thoughtfulness allowed them to claim later that the birth was faked and that the
child had been smuggled up the back stairs in a warming pan. The King was actually reduced
to the indignity of declaring to the Privy Council that, yes, this really is my boy.
He ordered bonfires and bells, but there was little rejoicing in the country. The diaries
John Evelyn wrote, a young prince born, etc., which will cause dispute. That was an understatement.
In fact, just a few nights before the birth, a cabal of seven noblemen wrote to William
in the Netherlands, inviting him to invade their country. It was now or never.
After several months of careful preparation, William of Orange landed in southern England
at Torbay on the 5th of November, the anniversary of the failed Catholic gunpowder plot, 1688.
Thanks to Parliament's generosity, James did have an army, the last resort of absolutism.
He had tried to staff that army with Catholic officers, but there weren't enough to go
around, and the infantry was mainly composed of Protestants. Maybe for this reason, James
hesitated to march on William. And as he hesitated, more and more Protestant officers, noblemen,
and justices of the peace, went over to William, and they brought the militia with them. Rather
than face his own summon law with an army he couldn't trust, James II fled to France
on the 11th of December, 1688. He actually thought he could paralyze the British government
by throwing the Great Seal of England into the Thames, but he failed to reckon on that
British ability to just carry on regardless, which is of course profoundly modern and rational.
After a certain amount of debate, Parliament on the 13th of February, 1689, asked William
and Mary to take the crown, as William III and Mary II.
The significance of the Glorious Revolution of 1688-89 as these events came to be called
is that it began to solve most of the problems plaguing English monarchs since the reign
of Henry VIII, and it did so in a way that was very different from Louis XIV's solution.
As for the problem of sovereignty, clearly Parliament was sovereign, the king was not
a god, power came from Parliament, and the people they represented, not the supreme being,
it could be taken away via revolution, it could be bestowed on another, even a Dutchman.
As for the problem of control, the English king clearly remained powerful, with most
of his executive powers intact, you'll see that in subsequent lectures, but his financial
and diplomatic situation dictated that he could no longer rule without Parliament.
That meant, in turn, that he had to choose ministers with which Parliament could work.
By the way, Parliament has met every year since 1689.
So in 1688, England was well on its way to a constitutional monarchy.
Then there's the problem of finance.
In fact, the revolution would lead to a series of wars with France, which would force the
Crown and Parliament to finally solve the former's money problems by tacking the growing
wealth of the English economy.
We'll talk about that in a subsequent lecture.
But English kings themselves would stay poor.
In other words, the English were about to fund their government very generously, but
not their king, who would be restricted to a fairly narrow civilist.
The idea of separating government from the governor, of separating the kingdom from the
king, was very modern.
Compare it to Louis's boast, I am the state.
William was not the state.
There was a state, but it wasn't him.
As far as the problem of religion is concerned, clearly England would not be Catholic.
Or solely anything else from now on.
It's true that it was officially Anglican, but Parliament would have to grant a toleration
to Puritans because they had supported the revolution.
And interestingly, even Catholics would see some of the heat come off as they ceased to
be a threat.
In other words, as long as James wasn't pushing their, once James stopped pushing their agenda,
Catholics were no longer viewed as so much of a threat, and things began to get better
for them.
Again, this is a far more modern live and let live solution than Louis's.
Finally, there's the problem of foreign policy.
William's accession would bring the British kingdoms into the fight against France.
Louis couldn't stand by and see a fellow Catholic monarch deposed.
His mortal enemy, William of Orange, gained the wealth and power of England to be used
against his Grand Crusade.
Now the road to Spain runs through the Netherlands with a boat trip across the Channel.
Now in fact, the ensuing nine years war would be the first of seven colossal conflicts pitting
Britain against France between 1688 and 1815.
But that is a story for another lecture.
In the meantime, in the end, the glorious revolution marks a successful break from the
Great Chain of Being.
English men and women, not God, had chosen a king.
They would eventually be sovereign through Parliament.
They were masters of their own property.
They could choose their religion as long as it was Protestant for the moment.
They could take on the might of France.
Having broken their chains, they would now begin to flex their muscles.
Whoever won this fight would dictate the next century of European history.
