Lecture 17 – Enlightenment and Despotism
In the previous lecture, we examined a traditional society, an ancien régime seemingly little
changed from what it had been in the 15th, the 12th, or even the 9th centuries.
Its basic arrangements were strictly hierarchical, its governments mostly monarchical and authoritarian,
its religions, national state churches, its wealth, political power, legal privilege,
and even access to entertainment were all concentrated at and for the top.
Most people's existence was tenuous, and much of their effort poured into servicing
their betters.
But as we have seen, the 17th and 18th centuries saw cracks in this edifice.
The Dutch Republic had pioneered non-monarchical government and religious toleration.
The English Civil War of the 17th century may have been abortive, but it erred notions
of equality, religious toleration, and popular sovereignty.
The subsequent Glorious Revolution of 1688-89 installed a constitutional government, still
run by the upper classes, but the king at least had to answer to somebody.
All across Europe, the middling orders were growing, larger and wealthier, and more critical
of privileges and state churches.
They were impatient for political power, and above all, the ideas that made the 17th century
an age of reason, suspicion of a priori reasoning, authority, and tradition, attraction to natural
and rational as opposed to spiritual explanations, revulsion against religious intolerance and
persecution, the scientific method, the idea that government was a contract among the people
and with a ruler, these ideas all began to trickle down from the ivory tower into the
court and parliament, the salon and coffee house, the park bench, and the private study.
That trickling down of the ideas of the 17th century is what we call the Enlightenment.
Now, specifically, the Enlightenment was a period of time from roughly 1720 to 1820
when intellectuals applied the methods of the scientific revolution to political, social,
economic, and even philosophical and religious problems.
You'll remember that Hobbes and Locke were pioneers in this approach.
Now, most Enlightenment authors were not so original as they were.
They were popularizers and generalists, like perhaps Carl Sagan or Gary Wills in our own
day, two authors whom I regard very highly, by the way, after all, what am I here but
a popularizer?
They were not ivory tower or laboratory specialists.
These people wrote not scientific treatises in Latin, but vernacular pamphlets, plays,
and novels, often in French, the great international language of its day.
They were read not just by academicians, but by an educated public of kings, nobles, middling
orders, men and women, and of course, each other.
These writers, more interested in a wide audience than an academic career, were known as philosophs.
Now, the great ideas being popularized by the philosophs were often English in origin,
and indeed in Britain and Ireland, a whole raft of philosophers reacted to John Locke.
For example, John Toland, an Irishman, who argued in Christianity not Mysterias in 1696
that nature itself is proof of God's existence, that everything valid in religion can be reduced
to reason, and that in fact anything that couldn't be reduced to reason was nonsense, literally.
In Toland's view, the supernatural was superfluous.
Mysteries were simply produced by manipulative clerics.
Essentially, he was a deist.
Bishop George Barkley, another Irishman, was more sophisticated in the treatise concerning
the principles of human knowledge of 1710.
He tried to respond to rational skepticism with the theory of subjective idealism.
Matter does not exist except as we perceive it in the mind.
This allowed him to posit an overall controlling mind, that of God.
On the opposite end of the spectrum was David Hume, a leading exponent of the Scottish Enlightenment.
We'll meet another later.
His works include a treatise of human nature, an inquiry concerning human understanding,
an eight-volume history of England, and dialogues concerning natural religion, which were written
in the 1750s but was so controversial that it was suppressed until 1779.
Hume argued for limitations to reason, that reason and rational judgments were merely
habitual associations of sensations or experience.
Therefore reason can't demonstrate causation, cause or effect.
In other words, he was a skeptic.
He believed that nothing could be proven that there were no demonstrable facts.
This included the existence of God, belief in which he attributed to fear and superstition.
Hume was an early and self-proclaimed atheist.
For Hume there was no demonstrable absolute right or wrong, people simply acted for their
own selfish happiness.
The best moral stance was to seek the general welfare.
Well needless to say, these positions kept him out of university positions at Edinburgh
and elsewhere.
But the philasauce flourished from Scotland to Sicily, from Portugal to Poland, all across
Europe.
For example, in Germany, Immanuel Kant agreed with Hume about the limitations of reason.
Nevertheless, he sought absolute rules that everyone could assent to and follow.
In the critique of pure reason of 1781, he argues for transcendental idealism, the notion
that matter exists.
But our ideas about it are shaped not so much by empirical facts, but by our own minds,
the mental constructs and categories like space and time, which exist in them as intuitions.
These intuitions, which we all have and largely share, allow us to make moral judgments.
In the critique of practical reason of 1788, Kant argues for the fundamental freedom of
individuals to govern themselves and to follow the laws of the universe.
And in perpetual peace of 1795, he argues for a sort of federation of republics.
But the heart of the Enlightenment was France.
Only because so many 18th century philasauce were French, but also because France seemed
to be the most perfect ground or the fertile ground to try their theories.
France was desperately in need of reform, yet it had a growing middle class who could
read the philasauce, and it was not so poor or oppressive or hopeless as the despotisms
of Eastern and Southern Europe.
In the next few minutes, we're going to examine four of the greatest philasauce, Voltaire,
Diderot, Montesquieu, and perhaps a sort of anti-philasauce, Rousseau.
First, François-Marie Arouet Voltaire.
Voltaire grew up in the reign of Louis XIV, and he was educated by the Jesuits at the
College of Louis Le Grand.
Despite his seeming iconoclasm, he always had a soft spot for these two symbols of the
Ancien Régime.
In fact, he wrote a not uncomplementary history of Louis XIV's reign.
As a young writer, Voltaire got into trouble for satirical writings on the government.
He was sent to the Bastille for 11 months.
After a second stint there, he was ordered to leave France, so he went to England between
1726 and 1729, while his reputation cooled off.
In England, he was overwhelmed by what he saw.
The relative intellectual freedom, the tolerance of different religious beliefs, the openness
of political life, writers able to criticize, even ridicule the authorities, Jonathan Swift
in Gulliver's Travels, John Gaye in the Baker's Opera, Alexander Pope in the Dunsiad, all satirized
Walpole's regime, and by extension the King, and yet they by and large got away with it.
In 1733, Voltaire published the Letters on England.
This is the book that launched the Enlightenment.
It explained to Frenchmen and other Europeans Britain's constitutional monarchy, Britain's
religious toleration, the scientific ideas of Newton, the political ideas of Locke.
Above all, Voltaire contrasted the openness, the rationality, the intellectual vitality
of Hanoverian England with the traditions, aristocratic privilege, state religion, censorship,
and inefficiency of Bourbon, France.
The book was banned in France, so of course, it became an immediate hit.
Voltaire spent the rest of his life writing treatises and essays and fables most famously
candied and a philosophical dictionary.
His basic idea was to attack irrationality, intolerance, and superstition, especially
as it was associated with the Catholic Church in his day.
In his philosophical dictionary, Voltaire imagines a desert, all covered with piles
of bones.
These are all the victims of religious intolerance and persecution, including, he writes, the
bones of Christians slaughtered by each other because of metaphysical disputes.
They are divided into four centuries each.
One heap would have mounted right to the sky.
They had to be divided.
He also notes, quote, the 12 million Native Americans killed in their own land because
they had not been baptized, unquote.
And he also imagines a conversation with Christ, who, quote, only looked with horror
upon those hypocrites who made themselves guilty of all these murders.
Voltaire's Christ asserts that true religion consists in love God and your neighbor as
yourself, and made no distinction in religion any more than he did on earth between Samaritan
and Jew.
Based on European history, Voltaire was expressing what in the 19th century would become the
common view, that when government and religion have been mixed, when churchmen have been
given power, they have proven throughout that history to be intolerant and cruel.
Americans often wonder at the relative lack of religious feeling among modern Europeans,
and Europeans often marvel or despair at American religiosity.
But when they do that, Europeans are remembering the crusades, the inquisition, puritanical
persecutions.
They tried theocracy.
They didn't like it.
Voltaire was the first great European writer to express that dislike.
Of course, stuff like this led to charges of atheism, and eventually to Voltaire's exile
at Farnay in Lorraine, an independent state which later became part of France.
But in fact, Voltaire is really more of a deist, who also wrote that after contemplating
nature in the heavens, one must be blind not to be bedazzled by this spectacle, one
must be stupid not to recognize its author, one must be mad not to worship the supreme
being.
Above all, Voltaire believed that religion was a private affair, not to be imposed by
the state.
Now, while Voltaire is excellent at criticizing the stupidities of his times, and the inefficiencies
of contemporary institutions, and the irrationality of his fellow man, if you've ever read Candide,
you know this, I'm not sure that he's always very clear about what he would erect in their
place.
His motto famously was, eccleses lem fam, crush the infamous thing.
Now that sounds great.
Who doesn't want to crush the infamous thing?
But could you just tell me exactly what the infamous thing is so that I can aim my boot?
What is clear is that Voltaire did not want to abolish the institutions that ran European
society, monarchy, the nobility, the church.
In fact, for long periods of time he was in favor with Louis XV, who was Mistress Madame
Pompadour.
Voltaire was appointed the historiographer of France.
He was appointed a gentleman of the King's Bedchamber.
In 1746 he was elected to the French Academy.
He corresponded with Catherine the Great of Russia, and in 1750-52 was a guest of Frederick
the Great at Potsdam.
This guy is not knee-juric anti-authoritarian.
Rather than obliterate such institutions, what he wanted to do was reform them.
He wanted to persuade them to act for the common good.
He wanted to get them to behave.
The next philosoph on our list was perhaps more practical.
Denise Diderot was also educated by the Jesuits.
He agreed with Voltaire on the need to banish bigotry and superstition.
He was especially unsympathetic to church corruption, which he attacked in his novel
The Nun.
He also didn't much like the feudal aristocracy.
He saw the new science as the way to banish ignorance.
Indeed, he saw it as the savior of mankind.
Famously, he tried to popularize it in the Encyclopedia.
The Encyclopedia was intended as a complete compendium of human knowledge, with articles
by many famous writers, including Voltaire.
The emphasis throughout was on reason and science, and sometimes that emphasis was subversive.
For example, in the articles on servitude and war, Diderot finds both of these human
practices to be unnatural and irrational.
Imagine saying that war was irrational in 18th century France.
Consequently, the French monarchy suppressed the Encyclopedia after the first ten volumes
for bad further publication.
Diderot had to publish the rest secretly.
He continued to add plates and supplements until 1780.
Our next philosoph is Charles II Baron de Montesquieu.
Now Montesquieu took the application of science and reason to human problems even further.
He argued that scientific study of man and his environment would yield the best possible
government.
He also contributed to the Encyclopedia, and he wrote the Persian letters in 1721, which
satirized French politics and French society in the French church.
The idea was having two Persian visitors visit France, and they reported back exactly
what they saw, and that was, of course, damning enough.
But his great work is the spirit of the laws of 1748.
Montesquieu, interestingly, admires both Louis' absolutism and Locke's constitutionalism.
In other words, he's arguing that there's no absolute best form of government.
He argues that the best government is a mix of both, varying that mix per climate.
This is actually a very old idea that can be traced back to Aristotle.
He argues further that governments should divide their powers and separate and balance
them.
Among kings, nobles, and commons in England, this is his great model, and of course this
is the source of our formulation of executive, legislative, and judicial.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau goes further in giving people a share of power.
Now, Rousseau was a native of Geneva, which had a Republican form of government.
As an orphan, he'd been imprenticed to an engraver, but he ran away.
As a young man, he went to Paris, the heart of the Enlightenment.
There he became the secretary to Madame Louise de Warren's.
In her salon, he was introduced to other philosophes, patrons, and women.
Rousseau became notorious for his love of many women.
Salons, by the way, were a way for women to advance intellectual contact outside of the
control of the court, which was of course controlled by the crown, and the universities,
which were controlled by the church.
In his writings, Rousseau is, I think, a sort of anti-philosoph.
In the discourse on the origin and foundation of the inequality of mankind in 1755, he argues
that, yeah, reason is good, but he increasingly found his heart a better guide to right conduct.
This may explain his numerous love affairs, it recalls Pascal, but it also looks forward
to the Romantic movement.
Rousseau trusted nature.
Unlike Hobbes or even Locke, Rousseau argues that natural man was happiest in the state
of nature.
Nature doesn't corrupt him, as society does.
He doesn't have to pay taxes or fight religious wars.
He has enough to eat, he gets exercise.
Here we see the influence of the New World noble savage idea, and also in anticipation
of the 19th century conservation movement and the 20th century counterculture.
If you like to go camping or want to live in a commune, Rousseau is your philosoph.
Other philosophs, Voltaire and Diderot, agree that civilization needs some work, but Rousseau
is the first to advocate just chucking it, going back to nature, starting from scratch.
That emphasis on freedom from societal restraint permeates his educational system.
In Emile, 1762, he argues for an educational system that emphasized freedom of expression,
self and the self-discovery of the individual, as opposed to rote memorization and the breaking
of the child.
Obviously, Rousseau would be a great influence on later educational theory, for example Montessori
and the Waldorf movement.
In the social contract of 1762, he argues that big states are, by virtue of their size
and their need for centralized control, corrupt and corrupting of the human spirit.
He thinks people should live in small states in which citizens know and trust each other,
like Geneva.
Government policy was to be the will not of some king or representative body, but the
general will of the people.
In other words, Rousseau seems to be advocating, in print, some form of democracy.
But there are problems.
Do you remember Calvin's Geneva?
Its emphasis on conformity?
Rousseau is sensitive to the charge that simple rule of the majority can lead to tyranny.
What are the people in their wisdom vote to outlaw redheads?
Or people with brown eyes?
Or Jews?
Or Poles?
Now, Rousseau tries to get around this by saying that the general will shouldn't necessarily
be a simple majority vote, but at this point he gets somewhat vague as to what it should
be.
He argues that individuals should submit themselves to the general will as part of their social
contract with each other, in effect forcing them to be free.
These later, Hitler and Mussolini would agree.
So there are problems with this philosophy.
In the Confessions of 1782, he writes an autobiography which emphasizes emotion and
the moral ambiguity of adult life.
This influenced Romanticism.
Now overall, before Rousseau, Filasov had argued for an end to privilege and bigotry.
They wanted intellectual and personal freedom and equality under the law and scientific
progress and the betterment of social conditions.
But they were not revolutionaries.
As Dieter Rowe said, we will speak against senseless laws until they are reformed and
while we wait, we will abide by them.
The other Filasov saw reform as the responsibility of current monarchs and nobles.
Only Rousseau suggests that the whole rotten system of the Ancien regime should be eradicated
and power given to the people.
In fact, both of these solutions would be tried.
Rousseau's radical solution would bear fruit in the American and the French revolutions.
But first, kings and nobles would get their chance.
But which kings?
Neither Britain's Georges nor France's Louis seemed to have paid that much attention to
the Filasovs.
Louis did a little bit, but it doesn't seem to have affected his policy.
Rather, it was three central European monarchs who most assiduously read and tried to respond
to the Enlightenment.
All three were absolutists, but they did see the need for reform of their bureaucracies,
the nobility, the church, and their economies.
But they saw themselves as the instruments of that reform.
Louis XIV, as you know, famously said, I am the state, Frederick the Great responded
by saying, I am the servant of the state.
In other words, these rulers felt a responsibility to look after not just their own interests,
but those of their people as well, so we can call them enlightened.
But they reserved to themselves the right to define what that interest was.
They would act upon it themselves without consulting or empowering the people in whose
name they served.
And so they remained despots, enlightened despots, not unlike college professors.
Catherine the Great was the first ruler since Peter the Great to have the internal stability
in Russia and a long reign to continue his policies of reform and westernization.
And Catherine was actually a German princess who learned Russian.
Sophie Frederica Augusta von Anhalt Zerbst, I think we can agree that's a German princess.
She ascended the Russian throne in 1762 after a half-century of alternately strong and weak
czars.
Specifically, she ascended the throne because of a palace coup against her own husband,
Peter III, assisted by her lover, Count Gregory Orlov, plus the imperial guard.
Peter was accidentally killed a few days later.
The circumstances are rather murky.
Catherine had read a number of the phyllisauce and she claimed that Montesquieu's spirit
of the laws was her Bible.
And she did indeed try to westernize, and so by contemporary definitions, civilize Russia.
She invited writers to Russia like Voltaire.
She founded schools, exclusive boarding schools for aristocrats, more of a skeleton general
educational system for the populace.
She encouraged journalism.
In 1767, she named a legislative commission elected by all free men, that means everybody
who wasn't a serf, so it's not that good a deal, to reform the law.
In the end, they made little progress.
They fought along class lines and the only results were increased religious toleration
and limits on the use of torture in trials.
I guess those are actually pretty good results.
But in 1774, she faced a peasant's rebellion that soured her on reform.
Disatisfied Euro serfs rebelled across East European Russia, led by Emilian Ivanovich
Pugachev, an illiterate Cossack who claimed to be Tsar Peter III still alive, so this
is a sort of Elvis moment in 18th century Russia.
He was joined by coal miners, Cossacks, Tartars and Bashkirs, suppressed ethnic groups, and
also the old believers who were a suppressed religious group.
They wanted reprisals on government officials, they just slaughtered hundreds of nobles,
but also the abolition of serfdom and taxation.
They were eventually crushed by the Imperial Army and Pugachev was taken back to Moscow
in an iron cage and executed.
Following Pugachev's rebellion, Catherine's reforms were designed to bolster her own power,
not relieve her people.
In 1775 she divided the country into 50 provinces with 300,000 people each, each with a governor,
and then further divided each one of those provinces into 10 districts with 30,000.
So this is very rational, very enlightenment, but it takes no account of ethnic groups or
traditional associations, it was really a matter of divide and conquer.
She also increased the power of the aristocracy in the Charter of Nobility of 1785.
The aristocrats of each province could form an assembly and petition the Empress.
Well that sounds pretty good, doesn't it?
Except by law no one else could petition the Empress.
The power of aristocrats of life and death over their serfs was confirmed and extended.
Aristocrats could even sentence their own serfs to hard labor in Siberia.
Again as a college professor there is a certain amount of attraction to this when it comes
to students, but anyway, nobles were exempted from taxation and military service, but they
were granted full unrestricted ownership of their estates and favorites were given
more land.
By the end of Catherine's reign in 1796, 52% of the population of Russia were serfs.
In the end, Catherine is known as the Great, mostly for her foreign policy successes.
She fought two wars with the Ottoman Empire and extended Russia's borders south to the
Black Sea.
Along with Prussia and Austria, she carved up Poland, obliterating that ancient state
from the map of Europe between 1795 and 1797.
Possibly she also received this title because of her sex life, she's known to have had
at least 21 lovers, but not because of that her despotism was particularly enlightened,
especially during her last years.
Now Frederick the Great of Prussia was maybe a better candidate for the role of enlightened
despot.
He had a first-class mind, he was trained by his father as a soldier and administrator,
but as we've seen he also composed and played the flute.
Above all, he really got what the philosophs were on about.
As crown prince he wrote the anti Machiavelle against the doctrines of you know who.
He agreed with the philosophs that his role as king was to combat popular ignorance and
superstition.
Enhance the general welfare and promote religious toleration.
So Frederick rationalized in simplified Prussian law in the codex Frederickianus of 1747.
He also gave Prussia some of the fairest justice in Europe.
Like Colbert and Louis XIV he encouraged industry and established tariffs to protect it.
He promoted new scientific agriculture.
He drained marshes and he eased some of the burdens on the serfs.
He encouraged immigration to Prussia of middling tradesmen and professionals and different
ethnic and religious groups, though his record on the Jews was mixed.
He encouraged education and was sympathetic to the American Revolution.
Still, he was a despot who believed in the age-old hierarchical structure.
The new law codes strictly defined ranks, by the way that's the same thing Catherine
is doing in Russia, making it harder to move up, harder to move into the aristocracy.
He gave the Prussian Junker aristocrats increased legal control over their serfs.
And his wars against Austria drained the treasury and imposed hardship on the peoples who served
him.
Was there no European ruler who was willing to risk his own power to make society better?
Was there no one in power radical enough to consider fundamental change?
Yes, there was.
But his story would remind us of the problems with the notion of enlightened despots.
Joseph II of Austria truly was motivated by an enlightened concern for his subjects.
But he also demonstrated that one man might be overwhelmed by the enormity of trying to
reform the Ancien Régime.
Joseph was the eldest son and heir of our old friend Maria Teresa, who, having stricken
a blow for feminism just by staying on the throne, named him co-ruler in 1765.
He became, in effect, regent.
He was actually contentious of the philosophs, he liked them very much.
But after the defeat of the Seven Years' War, he saw that Austria needed reform.
And so he reformed and centralized the bureaucracy of the empire in Vienna.
He forced the nobles to pay taxes.
He placed tariff barriers around the empire, and he limited the amount of labor required
by serfs.
As emperor, beginning in 1780, he went much farther.
He devised a new law code.
It should be obvious.
You can't really be a self-respecting enlightened despot and not devise a new law code.
They all do it.
He reformed the government, separating the executive from the judiciary.
He declared religious toleration for all, period, lifting penalties on Protestants
and Jews.
He limited the power of the Pope over the Austrian Catholic Church.
The state assumed the training of priests, the financing and regulation of schools.
He dissolved the contemplative monasteries in an amazing move.
He used the proceeds to endow hospitals for the poor.
He imposed proportional taxation on everyone, no exceptions.
He also, to make for a more efficient empire, imposed German on the whole empire for administrative
efficiency.
You may remember that Austria-Hungary involved Austrians and Hungarians, as well as a wide
variety of Balkans peoples and Belgians, Flemings and Dutch in the north.
Finally, Joseph II abolished serfdom, and he even redistributed some aristocratic land
to the serfs to get them started.
Here finally was a ruler who attempted to really do something for the poorest and most
numerous of his subjects.
So what do you think the reaction to this program was?
Utter revulsion.
It was too much, too fast.
The Roman Catholic Church and clergy hated Joseph for disestablishing them as the sole
legal religion and for confiscating church property.
Belgians and Hungarians erupted an open revolt at having to learn and use German.
Maybe everybody speaking the same language is more rational and efficient, but it's
also insensitive and impractical.
Aristocrats hated him for weakening, then abolishing serfdom.
In order to watch over all of his enemies, Joseph II was finally forced to establish
a secret police.
Joseph II died, worn out with care just ten years after his accession.
His epitaph reads, Here lies Joseph II, who was unfortunate in everything he undertook.
Clearly, the hope of some writers that a single rational philosopher king, educated according
to Enlightenment ideals could reform the Ancien Regime, eradicate foolish traditions, reduce
privilege and bigotry, promote intellectual freedom and the general welfare was impractical,
so long as hierarchy remained strong and entrenched interests remained powerful, which they would
do right up to 1789.
But remember, there was an alternative, Russo and revolution.
In the 1770s and 80s, Europe saw another, more radical attempt to put Enlightenment
ideals into practice, one which came, surprisingly enough, from America.
