Lecture 28, Nationalism, 1815 to 1848.
Up to this point in our post-French Revolutionary post-Napoleonic lectures, that is, our lectures
on the Industrial Revolution, we've concentrated on Western Europe, mostly Britain and France.
Now, if you've come to feel that these lectures have been biased towards the area west of the Rhine,
you will get no argument from me. What about Middle, Eastern and Southern Europe?
It took most of the 19th century for the ideas of the French Revolution
and the possibilities of industrialization to cross the Rhine, the Danube and the Alps,
and it was not until early in the 20th century that they made any headway east of the Oder and Vistula.
This is not surprising. At mid-century, illiteracy stood at over 65% in Italy and Spain.
It stood even higher in Eastern Europe. In such places, the big issues were not so much workers' rights,
but peasants' rights, the abolition of serfdom, not so much the vote or a free press
as the right of one's own ethnic group to have a country.
To understand why that was so, we have to go back to the reactionary legacy of the Congress of Vienna of 1815.
Remember the Congress of Vienna? It was called to solve the mess created by the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars.
In particular, it was to restore peace and the balance of power, restore the ancien régime.
In fact, this period in European history is sometimes referred to as the restoration
and put the genie of the French Revolution back in the bottle.
The Congress was dominated by monarchies, Britain, Austria, Prussia, Russia and France,
and by three great conservative statesmen, Metternich, Kesselre and Talleyrand.
They restored Bourbon monarchs in France, albeit constitutionally, and also in Spain and in Naples.
Now, as you'll recall, they also ringed France with strong states.
This is the idea of balance of power, dividing the rest of Europe up among the remaining great and lesser powers.
So, for example, Belgium was absorbed into the Kingdom of Holland to counterbalance France in the north.
Austria, which had controlled Belgium as the former Austrian Netherlands, had to get something in return,
so they got northeastern Italy, Venizia, including Venice, in compensation.
Piedmont's Sardinia to the south got Savoy, Genoa and Nice to balance off Austrian gains.
Prussia got territory on the Rhine to form a buffer against France.
The Russian Tsar also became the King of Poland and ruled Finland directly.
Sweden took Norway from Denmark.
The 300 states of the old Holy Roman Empire were consolidated into 38.
Now, the good news was that the European state system devised by the Congress of Vienna worked for 99 years.
The next general European war would not take place until 1914.
But that does not mean that the people who lived under it were happy.
If monarchies were preserved by it, then the new liberal ideas coming out of France and England were largely repudiated.
Many Europeans were now ruled by people of a different nationality and culture, the Belgians by the Dutch.
Some Italians by the Austrians, who also ruled Czechs, Slovaks, Hungarians, Poles, Romanians, Serbs, Slovenes and Croats.
Can you see why Metternich worried about nationalism?
Other Poles were ruled by Russians or Prussians, Finns, Ukrainians, Estonians, Latvians and Lithuanians by Russians as well.
Norwegians were ruled by Swedes, albeit with plenty of autonomy, and inhabitants of one German state were ruled by officials from another.
Apart from the French constitution, the arrangements of 1815 clearly ignored the new ideas of liberalism and nationalism.
In fact, the five great powers were intensely fearful that these forces would once again erupt into revolution,
would bring down their Ancien regimes and break up the old empires.
In fact, we've already seen in previous lectures how that would eventually happen, dramatically in France, gradually in Britain.
What did the great powers do about it?
They formed the Holy Alliance in September, 1815.
The Holy Alliance was supposed to be a sort of United Nations of its day,
except that only the five great powers, the counterparts of today's permanent members of the Security Council, would have any say in it.
It was dreamed up by Sir Alexander I, who had something of a missionary complex.
The idea was that the five great powers would rule their peoples with a kind of paternalistic Christian love as an antidote to godless democracy.
And if that didn't work, their leaders would hold periodic conferences to discuss their differences and possible trouble brewing, summit meetings if you will.
Finally, if that didn't work, and any of them suffered a liberal or nationalistic revolt, all the others would send troops to crush it.
Maybe we should call this paternalistic Christian tough love.
In 1820, four of these powers, Russia, Prussia, Austria and France, signed the Tropault Protocol, agreeing to do just that,
that is, send troops if revolution broke out anywhere within their empires and indeed anywhere within Europe.
So the Holy Alliance was to be a league in defense of monarchy, conservatism and imperialism.
In a way, the rulers of Europe were pledging to not allow 1789-93 to happen again.
This is predicated on the notion that if only they'd acted in time, there would have been no French Revolution.
Now at first, the Holy Alliance and the conservative backlash that it represented was pretty successful.
In Spain and Portugal, Napoleonic liberal reforms were abolished by the restored Borbaugh, Ferdinand VII.
He restored the powers of the Church and the nobility, and he censored the press.
In the Papal States, Pope Leo XII also abolished Napoleonic reforms, revived the Inquisition, drove Jews back into the ghetto,
he even restricted wine drinking and banned art depicting nudity, which, if you stop and think about it, in Rome is quite a lot of banning.
He turned the Papal States into a police state.
In Russia, Prussia and Austria, liberals were fined and imprisoned. Remember what happened to Pushkin?
In 1819, Prussia and Austria agreed to the Carlsbad Decrees, stifling the freedom of expression at universities.
Remember what happened to Marx?
But in the end, the Holy Alliance was not terribly realistic.
The British Foreign Minister, Lord Castle Ray, called it a piece of sublime mysticism and nonsense.
In practice, it didn't actually last very long.
From the first, the British were skeptical, can you tell.
They wanted no part of suppressing other people's revolutions, so they didn't sign the tropal protocol.
Many British people, for example, supported the revolutions in South America, against Spain and Portugal.
As we've seen, the British government grew more liberal in the 1820s and 30s
and soon lost interest in reactionary monarchical Christianity.
Many Britons supported liberal revolutions in Greece against the Ottomans in 1829
and, as I said, in South America against Spain and Portugal in the first half of the 19th century.
After 1830, France, too, experienced liberal revolutions, again, as we've seen in 1830 and in 1848.
So, gradually, what's happening here is Europe is splitting into a liberal West and a conservative South and East.
For the rest of this lecture, we will concentrate on the revolutionary pressures facing the latter.
In Central, Southern and Eastern Europe, the period 1820 to 48 was another age of revolutions.
It was provoked by the increasingly pressing ideas of liberalism and nationalism.
The increasingly harsh repression of the Ancien Régime.
But it was also spurred by the new ideas of romanticism and socialism.
Now, these revolutions began in Southern Europe in 1820.
In Spain in that year, liberal intellectuals revolted in favor of a restoration
of the more liberal Bonapartist Constitution of 1812.
The great powers, following the tropal protocol, agreed to send French troops to suppress the Spanish rebellion.
They restored the Spanish monarchy yet again, which tortured and executed hundreds of rebels.
Thousands more were imprisoned or driven into exile.
But in the meantime, the revolution had spread to Portugal and to Italy.
Again, liberal intellectuals demanded constitutions.
In Italy, the Carbonari agitated for Italian unification and expulsion of Austria.
This time, the Austrian army, again following the tropal protocol, suppressed the rebellion.
Remember that part of Italy is ruled by Austria at this time.
Liberals were arrested, the Carbonari were condemned by the Pope.
The next revolution occurred in Russia in 1825, and it too was a failure.
In December of that year, Alexander I died suddenly.
When the troops assembled to take their oath to the Nuzar, Nicholas I,
some officers, soon to be known as Decemberists, sought to proclaim the more liberal Grand Duke Constantine.
The Decemberists also included Russia's liberal intelligentsia and some aristocrats.
But again, these revolutionaries were disunited, and there was no popular following among the peasants.
They were above all outnumbered and easily crushed.
Nicholas I, already conservative, pathologically fearful of reform, established a secret police,
the third section to spy on the opposition, and the reign of Nicholas I would be among the most repressive in Russian history.
This would defer issues that would erupt again in 1905 and 1917.
The Balkans in Greece saw the best chance for success in a series of revolts between 1817 and 1829.
You see, in 1817, the Balkans in Greece were still controlled by the Ottoman Empire.
In fact, the Ottoman Empire had been a pretty well-run and relatively tolerant empire,
but in Europe it was viewed as corrupt and oppressive, so any rebellion that happened here was pretty much OK by the signers of the Holy Alliance,
who remember our self-advertisement Christian.
So in 1817, the Serbs rebelled and gained their independence.
In 1820, a Russian general of Greek descent named Alexander Yipselanti,
yes, that Yipselanti, led a Greek revolt against the Turks.
This failed when the Tsar failed to act in his support because Metternich advised him against it.
Metternich may have been part of the Holy Alliance, but he was still nervous about revolutions so close to home.
In 1821-23, however, a second round of revolts began at the grassroots,
so in other words, the people now sort of took up the issue.
Greek peasants killed every Turk that they could lay their hands on.
The Turks retaliated by hanging the Greek patriarch of Constantinople,
pillaging Greek Orthodox churches, and massacring thousands of men, selling Greek women into slavery.
This enraged Western public opinion.
Greece was portrayed as the very cradle of Western civilization fighting against barbarian occupiers.
The rebellion was portrayed as a holy crusade, a word loaded on both sides of this fence.
It was supported by liberals and romantics like Byron and Shelley.
Money was raised to send food and arms to the Greeks.
In other words, once the great powers decided they liked a revolution, it had a chance.
In 1827, a combined British, French, and Russian fleet defeated the Ottomans at Navarino.
In 1828, Russia advanced on Constantinople.
In 1829, all parties signed the Treaty of Adrianople.
Greece received its independence the following year to be ruled by a German prince named Otto.
Russia was appointed as protector of the semi-independent provinces of Wallachia and Moldavia in western and eastern Romania.
This was the beginning of Russia's interest in the Balkans.
It increasingly portrayed itself as the protector of the Slavic peoples against the oppressive Turkish and Austrian empires.
Russia is going to play a very important role in destabilizing this part of the world.
Eventually, this arrangement would lead to the Crimean War between 1853 and 1856.
Britain, France, and Sardinia would actually join the Turks to restore the balance of power.
In other words, they worried that Russia was getting too powerful in the Balkans.
They wanted to prevent Russian domination of the Black Sea and eastern Mediterranean.
But the Crimean War was by no means going to end the tensions in this part of the world.
Meanwhile, out west, France and Belgium experienced a series of revolutions in 1830.
And again, these only succeeded where the Great Powers didn't interfere.
Now, we've already talked about the 1830 Revolution in France.
That was the year that Charles X was deposed in favor of a constitutional monarchy under Louis Philippe.
From this point, the revolution spread to Belgium, Germany, Spain again, Portugal again, Italy again, Poland.
But these revolutions were only successful in France and Belgium.
In the last case, the Great Powers were so occupied with rebellions closer to home in Russia and Poland and Austria and Italy
that they acceded to Belgian independence on the promise that Belgium would remain neutral from hence forward.
In other words, the point was you can have your country as long as you do not upset the balance of power.
The other rebellions were crushed by Russian and Austrian troops in fulfillment of the tropal protocol.
In Poland, thousands were executed or banished.
Ten thousand Poles died or fled between 1830 and 1831.
Those Poles would mount a successful propaganda campaign against the Russians.
Think of Chopin's revolutionary etude.
But the biggest of all European revolutions exploded in 1848.
During one remarkable year, the entire continent west of the Elba turned to rebellion.
Why?
Well, the revolutions of 1848 were precipitated all over Europe first by bad weather, which meant poor harvests.
The 1840s became known as the Hungry 40s.
In Ireland, the potato blight ruined the potato crop between 1846 and 51, leading to a million deaths and massive immigration.
Throughout Europe, bread prices rose.
Poor peasants couldn't afford bread anymore.
Even urban workers began to starve.
The slump in the economy hurt urban workers because peasants could no longer buy products because they were spending so much money on food.
According to at least one German aristocrat, describing textile workers in Prussia,
As long as there was a sure and honest livelihood, none of the Silesian weavers paid any attention to communistic agitation.
Despair was aroused among them by hunger.
Peasants and workers expected the Ancien regime states to do something, yet they did nothing.
The rebellions began as usual in France on the 22nd of February, 1848.
Now this is the revolution of 1848 that we talked about in a previous lecture that replaced Louis Philippe with a republic under Louis Napoleon,
thus maintaining the requirement that all French rulers be named Louis.
This touched off nationalistic revolutions all across Europe with two exceptions.
Britain, which was already becoming more or less liberal, and Russia, which had pretty effectively stifled dissent.
Elsewhere, liberals and nationalists hoped that Louis Napoleon would support their revolutions in a sort of unholy alliance.
Now I'm going to go around Europe. I'm going to begin with the German states.
In March of 1848 liberals revolted in order to create a new German state.
Now at first glance their chances looked pretty good.
Germany was ethnically and linguistically homogenous.
Nearly everyone is German and speaks German except a few include Austria-Hungary.
There was no foreign occupying power to get rid of, rather about 40 little states.
They already worked together in a customs union called the Solverein.
All they needed was to agree on aims and leaders, but therein was the rub.
Everybody had a different goal.
German liberals wanted a united Germany with a liberal constitution, but the middle class just wanted economic prosperity.
Workers had the usual industrial gripes.
Peasants, mostly in Eastern Germany, just wanted land.
And finally, most Germans weren't used to thinking of themselves so much as being German.
They were Bavarians or Hessians.
Above all, the revolutionaries needed one of the German states to act as a leader.
Either Austria-Hungary or Prussia had to agree to lead the new Germany, but neither of these wanted a liberal constitution.
So in the midst of all this ambituity, delegates from all over Germany met in Frankfurt
to draft this new liberal constitution for Germany.
This set of delegates was elected by all German males, and it consisted mostly of professionals and academics.
So this parliament was derisively nicknamed the Professor's Parliament.
You might think I'd be insulted, but if you've ever sat in an academic committee meeting, believe me, it's pretty accurate.
They sat for over a year debating whether to offer the crown to the king of Prussia or the emperor of Austria.
But Austria was dealing with its own rebellions, and in the end, pretty well crushed them.
And that left the Prussian king.
But the Prussian king wasn't any happier to be a constitutional monarch than the Austro-Hungarian emperor would have been.
So in 1849, the Frankfurt constitution was finally completed.
The new Germany was to be a constitutional monarchy, parliament elected by universal manhood suffrage,
and the crown offered to Frederick William IV, the king of Prussia.
But Frederick William was encouraged by the fact that the Austrian emperor was doing pretty well against his rebellion,
and by the fact that his own middle class was pretty conservative and the aristocracy didn't want to change,
and so he refused the crown.
He said, I will not stoop to pick a crown out of the gutter.
And so the idea of a united liberal Germany was dead.
Or was it?
In fact, in the wake of 1848, nearly every German state did enact some form of a constitution with a parliament.
And 1848 had put unification on the table, that wasn't going to go away.
But equally clearly, if the German king isn't going to accept a crown from the gutter,
then the revolution was going to have to come from the top.
Let's now turn to Italy, and a process known famously in Italian history as the Risorgimento,
the resurgence of Italian unity and greatness.
Now, Italy was like Germany, a region and a culture, not a unified nation state.
As in Germany, most people identified with being Tuscan or Venetian or Roman.
They didn't think of themselves as being Italians.
You'll remember that in the Middle Ages, Italy had been divided into various wealthy and independent city states.
In 1848, there were five main divisions in Italy.
The kingdom of Piedmont Sardinia in the northwest.
The kingdom of Tuscany in the north.
The kingdom of Venetia, controlled by the Austro-Hungarian Empire in the northeast.
The papal states in the middle.
And below them, the kingdom of the two Sicilies, a pretty conservative monarchy run by a bourbon.
So even more than in Germany, the issue for Italian liberals was first nationalism,
then how to make Italy into a state, then liberalism.
But as in Germany, the nationalists, led by Giuseppe Mazzini and his secret organization, Young Italy,
couldn't agree on who should lead Italy.
Now obviously not Austria, that would rather defeat the point of nationalism,
but should it be Piedmont Savoy, the Pope, the two Sicilies?
Finally, as was the case in Eastern Germany, Austria-Hungary and Russia,
this was mostly an agricultural economy.
There was no real industrial base or urban proletariat.
In a way that made things easier, there's a smaller number of groups to please,
but it also makes things harder in terms of building weaponry, for example.
The revolts began in January 1848 in Sicily.
The idea was to force the Bourbon monarchy to push for national unification.
They wanted to make the Bourbon king, the king of Italy.
The revolts spread north to Austria and Venice.
So how did these two places react?
Austria crushed its Venetian revolt, of course.
But so did the government of the two Sicilies in its territory.
The Pope condemned the rebellion and fled Rome.
Briefly there was a Roman republic under Mazzini and the Carbonari leader Giuseppe Garibaldi,
but in 1849 the French intervened on the Pope's side and crushed that republic.
Only King Charles Albert of Piedmont Sardinia embraced the Risorgimento.
He enacted a liberal constitution.
He attempted to aid the Venetian rebels.
He was defeated at the Battle of Navarra by the Austrian army in 1849,
which made him a national hero in Italy.
He was the only ruler of any of these states to stand up
and try to fight for some kind of national unification.
So national unification in Italy had also been placed on the table by the revolts of 1848.
As in Germany, it's very clear that national unification won't come from the bottom.
It's going to come again from a king.
Let's turn to Austria-Hungary.
Austria-Hungary was right for a different kind of revolution.
Now, Austria-Hungary wasn't much more united than Italy.
It had a corrupt and cumbersome government.
It had a small but growing urban middle class that wanted political power and reform.
It had a few industrial workers, but most people in the Austro-Hungarian Empire were peasants.
They were free, they weren't serfs, but they were poor.
But the main factor was this empire's vast array of disparate peoples.
Ethnic Germans in Austria, Magyars in Hungary, Czechs in Bohemia, Slovaks, Poles, Italians,
Slovenes, Croats, Serbs, Romanians.
All had Mazzini-like figures that urged national cultural revival.
They wanted their own language taught in schools.
They wanted their own literature and history and political rights.
So in a way, the issue for the peoples of the Austro-Hungarian Empire is the opposite of Germany and Italy.
They want out.
They want their own individual little states, or at the very least, autonomy.
But in another sense, the revolutionaries have the same problems here they have in Germany and Italy.
They're not united. They can't agree on aims.
Well, the revolution began with riots in Venice and in Hungary and in Vienna in the spring of 1848.
Austria's corrupt government was on the defensive from the very beginning.
The conservative foreign minister, Metternich, finally resigned.
The emperor, Ferdinand, fled to Innsbruck, promising an elected parliament, an indecensorship, and Hungarian home rule.
He convenes a national assembly, though what national assembly might mean in such a polyglot empire, I'm not real clear on, to draft a constitution.
The first thing they do is they pass the March laws.
And what the March laws basically do is grant Hungary some provision of self-government,
and also abolish the last vestiges of aristocratic privilege, feudalism, and the last bits of serfdom left in the empire.
Now in Hungary, there's a nationalist leader, a Mazzini figure called Laros Kosut, who proclaims complete independence.
He's named virtual dictator in April 1849 of the New Hungarian Republic.
He abolishes serfdom. Sounds good, but this offends the landlords.
Moreover, he offers nothing for other ethnic groups within Hungary.
Nothing for Czechs, nothing for Serbs, Croats, or Romanians.
Instead, he imposes the Magyar language on them, so now that he's got his own Hungary, he's just as bad as the Austrians.
He wants everyone to conform to his own nationalistic prejudices.
In other words, one man's nationalism is another man's oppression.
Gradually, the Austrian monarchy, under a new assertive young emperor, Franz Josef, began to reassert itself.
It mobilized the army under Count Josef Radecki.
It began to gather allies, including those Serbs and Croats and Romanians who were so upset at the Hungarians,
so we've really got a sense of divide and conquer here.
He also gets the Russians on his side.
Together, all these armies crushed the rebellions in Italy.
Remember that the Italians are also a rebellion against the Austrians, and then those in Hungary.
So that's right. The next time you clap your hands to the tune of the Radecki march at a Viennese New Year celebration, this is what you're celebrating.
In 1849, the National Assembly was dissolved and an authoritarian constitution was imposed.
So here, too, the Revolution of 1848 was a failure.
All across Middle and Southern and Eastern Europe, the old monarchies and aristocracies had reasserted themselves.
The Ancien regime still lived. It still had breath. But was it healthy?
Now, I have to confess to you, I've always had trouble with the revolutions of 1848.
All that sound and fury. Did you get a little confused? I get a little confused.
And what did it accomplish? Apparently nothing. All these rebellions, except for France, failed.
But as I've matured as a historian, I've come to realize that the great events in history that don't happen, the dogs that don't bark, are sometimes as important as the ones that do.
And I think the failure of these revolutions actually tells us six very important things about Europe at this time.
First, as we've seen, the fact that these revolutions occurred at all tells us that liberalism and nationalism, and in France, which remember also at a revolution in 1848, even socialism, were important and viable movements in Central and Southern Europe.
The second thing they tell us, the fact that they failed, tells us that the Ancien regime of powerful monarchs and wealthy aristocrats and standing armies still had a great deal of residual strength to it.
This thing is not yet dead. We also learned from the failure that there was little unity on the other side.
Different groups were attracted to one or other of these movements to varying degrees and for different reasons.
Middle-class people have one reason, students have another, peasants have still a third.
There was very little revolutionary unity across national boundaries, which is what Marx wanted.
There wasn't even unity within countries or would-be countries.
As in Britain and France previously, liberal intellectuals wanted government reform and universal manhood suffrage and a free press.
The middle class wanted government reform, but the vote for itself alone and economic equality and concessions.
The working class wanted the vote and social welfare programs, and some even wanted socialism, which of course the middle class wanted no part of.
And as for peasants, they couldn't care less about any of this. They just want land.
Yet none of these programs had a chance unless their backers were unified. These revolutions couldn't succeed unless they all worked together.
The third significance of the revolutions of 1848 was what happened to the radicals who advocated them.
Many were prescribed in their own countries. Mazzini and Kalsuth had to flee.
Kalsuth traveled widely, including in the United States, promoting Hungarian independence.
In fact, many former 1848 revolutionaries fled to the U.S.
They became part of a massive wave of European immigration from this period.
And in the U.S., they helped to form new radical movements, labor unions, women's suffrage groups.
They became socialists and anarchists.
The fourth significance of 1848 is that it showed that before the liberal peace could be solved, the national peace had to be solved.
That is, before Germany and Italy and Austria-Hungary could enact liberal constitutions, they had to sort out whether they would be countries or not.
In other words, they had to go through the process that Britain and France had experienced from the Middle Ages to the 18th century, and obviously do it in a very, very short time.
Fifth, since it was clear that unification, or in the case of Austria-Hungary, devolution, would come from the top down,
it was highly doubtful that the result would be liberal democracies.
In every case, the hopes for national unity began to focus on a king or a great leader.
As this implies, the champions of reform in 1848 had to grow less idealistic and more realistic, more practical.
Sixth, it should be clear that German or Italian unification depended to a great extent on what happened in the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
Remember, they were involved in the Italian situation, they're involved in the German situation.
In other words, for once, the key to Europe's future lay in the East and the South.
