Lecture 29, Nationalism, 1848 to 1871.
If industrialization and its attendant reactions, liberalism, romanticism, and socialism were
the key to European politics west of the Rhine, 1848 proved that nationalism was the crucial
question and movement east of it.
All across Eastern and Southern Europe, Germans, Italians, Hungarians, Czechs, Slovaks, Romanians,
etc. had begun to embrace the uniqueness of their own history, language, and culture.
They'd begun to see that history, language, and culture as different and often superior
to those of others.
Above all, they'd begun to argue that to preserve these things, they needed to live
in states of their own.
For Germans, this meant national unification.
For Italians and everybody else, it meant the removal of foreign occupiers, then national
unification or independence.
As we've seen, the crowned heads of Europe wanted no part of either, for that would mean
the breakup of old empires and the passage of liberal reforms and limiting constitutions.
Speaking practically, in many ways, the key state for all of this was the Austro-Hungarian
Empire, for its weakness would make German and Italian unification possible and render
the Balkans unstable, thus making Russia and the Ottoman Empire players in the great game.
As we've seen, the Austro-Hungarian Empire barely weathered the revolutions of 1848 through
a combination of concession followed by repression.
But the problems which led to 1848 did not go away.
The Ottomans continued to weaken, leading to instability generally in the Balkans, specifically
independence movements in Balkan states, whether administered by the Turks or the Austrians.
Austria lost a friend and broke up what was left of the Holy Alliance when it failed to
support Russia in the Crimean War.
The Russians responded by publicly supporting the claims of the ethnic Serbs and Hungarians
and Romanians to get out of their respective empires.
But secretly, what the Russians really wanted to do was move in and become the next big
imperial power in the Balkans.
Austria's response was tighter repression.
Now, Austria's obsession with its eastern and southern problems would facilitate the
unification of 1st Italy and then Germany.
In Italy, Austria lost the initiative to Piedmont Sardinia, in Germany to Prussia, 1st the unification
of Italy.
You will recall that after 1848 it was clear that the king of Piedmont Sardinia was the
key to Italian unification.
From 1849, that was Victor Emanuel II.
The monarchy had stood up to Austria, albeit unsuccessfully, and it had retained the liberal
constitution of 1848.
Every other Italian ruler had repudiated the Risorgimento and liberalism and unification.
In 1852, Victor Emanuel named the extremely competent Count Camiglio di Cavour as 1st
Minister.
Now, Cavour never planned to unify Italy, but he did see the need to strengthen Piedmont
Sardinia against its Austrian rival.
Cavour fostered the creation of a modern industrial and financial state in the north of Italy.
He encouraged industry, he fostered a modern financial infrastructure, he maximized government
revenue, which he plowed into the reform and expansion of the armed forces.
He also established diplomatic ties with Napoleon III and sounded him out.
What would Napoleon do if Piedmont Sardinia went to war against Austria?
Napoleon III, hoping to weaken Austria, promised aid in return for Savoy.
That is, the Piedmontese were to give up Savoy, which was Piedmontese territory that was otherwise
surrounded by France.
Now, Austria noticed all of this and issued an ultimatum, stop the preparations or else.
When the Piedmontese refused, Austria invaded Piedmont Sardinia.
Napoleon III, sensing a chance for military glory, used the French railway network to
get his troops there too.
The very mobile French and Piedmontese forces defeated the Austrian army at Magenta and
Sulferino.
By the way, the bloodiness of Sulferino, which lasted 15 hours, inspired the Swiss philanthropist
Jean-Henri Dunin to recruit local peasants and vacationing tourists to help the wounded
at the battle, but afterwards he helped to found the International Red Cross.
The Austrians were thrown out of Piedmont Sardinia by the end of 1859.
Now what?
Should the Piedmontese continue south?
Should they stop?
Napoleon III, who didn't really want a strong Italy any more than he wanted a strong Austria,
answered the question by concluding a separate peace in July with the Austrians and occupying
Rome, which would then block the Piedmontese from moving south.
So Victor Emanuel's forces stopped.
But in 1860, Nationalists in central Italy rose up.
Victor Emanuel hesitated.
He didn't want to offend the Pope, but eventually with Napoleon III's agreement, he annexed
Parma, Modena, Romagna, and the biggest prize of all, Tuscany.
Napoleon III got Nice and Savoy as previously agreed.
So that's it.
Now the ruler of Piedmont Sardinia rules most of northern Italy, should his forces stop.
But in April of 1860, Nationalists in southern Italy and Sicily, led by Giuseppe Garibaldi
and his carbonari, rose up.
The rebellion was wildly successful, crowds flocked to him, nobody much liked the Bourbon
monarchy of the two Sicilies, fearing that Garibaldi might establish an Italian republic.
Kavor ordered the Piedmontese army to march further south.
When the two armies met, Garibaldi knelt and submitted to Victor Emanuel as king of Italy.
The next day, he resigned as dictator of the southern provinces with a one-word telegram
to Victor Emanuel, two words, I obey.
Victor Emanuel was proclaimed king of Italy in March of 1861, but not everyone agreed.
Venizia remained officially Austrian until 1866.
The Pope disliked the new arrangement and Rome remained under papal control, backed
by French troops, till 1870.
Liberals were disappointed, they wanted a republic.
Still, contemporaries thought that the unification of Italy was an apical event, they expected
a revival of the Roman Empire.
But in fact, Italy had problems which ran deeper than administrative fragmentation,
and it didn't help that Kavor died from overwork in 1861, removing the architect of Italian
unity.
First, there was north-south regionalism, the north was prosperous and industrial, the
south was poor and agricultural.
While poverty and illiteracy among Italian peasants held the economy back.
There was a lack of coal and iron ore, which retarded industrialization.
So that in the end, the unification of Italy did not really change the balance of power
in Europe very much, its major effects were to embarrass Austria and raise the prestige
and ambitions of Napoleon III, Italy itself remained a second-rate power.
The other big unification project on tap for the 1860s, Germany, would turn out rather
different.
Here too, the weakness of Austria, the pretensions of Napoleon III and a great minister would
prove to be catalysts.
Now you'll remember that German nationalists knew that either Prussia or Austria would
have to take the lead if there was going to be a united Germany.
Austria-Hungary was the sentimental favorite, it already was an empire, it was the natural
successor to the Holy Roman Empire, the first German Reich.
On the downside, Austrian government was inefficient and corrupt and repressive and obsessed with
its eastern problems, and of course had just been humiliated by Piedmont Sardinia.
Prussia was more of an upstart, but it had advantages.
It had a more homogenous population, apart from Poles and its eastern territories.
It had an efficient government, it was economically strong, it had healthy agriculture in the east,
it had the Ruhr Valley full of raw materials and industry in the west, the arms of Krupp,
and it had the best-trained army in Europe.
Finally, Prussia had a secret weapon, as chancellor from 1862, Otto von Bismarck.
Bismarck was arguably the most brilliant and significant European statesman of the 19th
century.
He was born in 1815, a Junker, a Prussian aristocrat and landowner, but his mother was
from a middle-class family of civil servants and academics.
This was probably important in broadening Bismarck's perspective.
Now he was an indifferent university student, and he was bored by a civil service post.
He resigned in 1838.
After a decade of wild living, he once said that his chief ambition in life was to drink
a hundred thousand glasses of champagne.
He settled down, married, and got religion.
Lutheran pietism seems to have given him self-discipline.
He entered the Prussian Assembly in 1847.
He was a dedicated royalist and conservative, and he believed that politics should be governed
by practical considerations and realistic aims.
What he called, railpolitik.
Bismarck is eminently quotable, and with your permission, I'm just going to give you some
quotes.
A statesman must wait until he hears the steps of God sounding through events, then leap
up and grasp the hem of his garment.
Be polite, write diplomatically, even in a declaration of war what observes the rules
of etiquette.
Laws are like sausages.
It is better not to see them being made.
Never believe anything in politics until it has been officially denied.
People never lie so much as after a hunt, during a war, or before an election.
When a man says he approves of something in principle, it means he hasn't the slightest
intention of carrying out in practice.
Politics is not an exact science.
Politics is the art of the possible.
The great questions of the day will not be settled by means of speeches and majority
decisions, but by iron and blood.
And finally, this is my personal favorite, there is a providence that protects idiots,
drunkards, children, and the United States of America.
Beginning in 1849, Bismarck served as ambassador to the German Confederation, and then ambassador
to Russia, and then ambassador to France, and all of these gave him valuable diplomatic
experience.
He was appointed chancellor in 1862, and early won the respect of King Velhelm I of Prussia
by obtaining funds for the army, holding in check the forces of liberalism and Catholicism
and socialism, and he did this by taking a page from Napoleon III's book.
He conceded generous social welfare programs, providing health, an accident, and old age
insurance at a time when that was relatively rare in 19th century Europe.
Now Bismarck's ultimate aim was not to unite Germany, he just wanted to ensure precious
supremacy among the German states, especially in the North.
Unification was the nationalist liberal dream, remember?
But Austria would not cooperate.
Austria attempted to subtly undermine Prussian influence with the North German states, so
Bismarck began to prepare for a showdown of iron and blood.
He made an alliance with Russia.
He favored Italy and France in disputes with Austria, and he engineered three wars.
These were not so much wars of conquest as demonstrations that only the Prussian state
and its military could protect the interests of Germany.
The first of these wars was the Dano-Prussian War of 1864.
It began with a dispute over the independence of Schleswig-Holstein on the border between
the German states and Denmark.
Now the situation was that ethnically Schleswig was heavily Danish, it's the one to the North,
and Holstein was heavily German, it's the one to the South.
But by long tradition the hyphenated Dutchie had been loosely ruled by the Crown of Denmark.
In 1863 the Danes made a terrible mistake, they annexed Schleswig-Holstein.
Both Prussia and Austria sent forces North in the interest of the German Confederation,
but what they were really doing was vying with each other to be seen as the protector of
German interests.
The combined army easily defeated the overmatched Danes.
The peace of Vienna gave Prussia and Austria joint responsibility for Schleswig-Holstein.
Prussia administered Schleswig, Austria-Holstein, which of course only added to the possibilities
for tension and resentment between Austria and Prussia.
Those tensions and resentment would boil over into the Austro-Prussian War of 1866.
Now clearly the question of who leads Germany, who protects Germany, was heating up.
So once again Bismarck prepares for war.
He holds a secret meeting with Napoleon III, getting him to agree to stay out of it.
In the spring of 1866 he drew up an alliance with Italy on Austria's southern border,
and remember the Italians had their gripes against the Austrians who were still occupying Venizia.
He counted on the British to do nothing.
British foreign policy after the breakup of the Holy Alliance was more or less to concentrate
on its overseas empire and pursue what it called splendid isolation from Europe.
But Bismarck still needed a pretext, so he used disputes over the administration of Schleswig-Holstein
to send troops into Austria and Holstein.
Now most smaller German states saw through what Bismarck was doing and they supported Austria.
Hanover, Hesse, Saxony, Bavaria all lined up on the Austrian side,
and Austria declared war on the 14th of June 1866.
But Prussia had the Italian allies, a more efficient government, more railways and heavy industry,
and the Prussian army under its commander Helmut von Moltke.
The result was an easy Prussian victory, sometimes referred to as the Seven Weeks War,
which culminated in the decisive battle of Königratz.
The resulting piece of Prague was really pretty lenient.
It did not so much punish Austria as strength in Prussia.
Austria paid a small indemnity.
It ceded Holstein to Prussia, which also got Hanover as part of the deal.
Venizia finally went to Italy, that's what the Italians got out of their support for the Prussians.
So now northern Italy is united.
The old German Confederation established in 1815 was dissolved,
and a new north German Confederation established in 1867.
This included the north German states, but it excluded Austria,
and the southern states which had supported Austria, Bavaria, Baden, Württemberg.
The king of Prussia would control foreign policy.
The upper house, or Bundesrat, was elected by its constituent states.
The lower house, or Reichstag, was elected by universal manhood suffrage.
Some internal affairs were controlled by individual states,
and by the way, Hungary also used Austria's defeat as an opportunity.
They forced a dual monarchy, that is to say from hence forward,
Franz Josef was emperor of Austria, but he was separately king of Hungary.
They got a restoration of the parliament they'd lost in 1849, and a measure of autonomy.
Now at this point Bismarck was satisfied.
Prussia is the preeminent state in north Germany, in fact the de facto head of north Germany.
Austria is not especially resentful.
But there are two problems.
First, France.
France grew alarmed at the growing might of Prussia.
If you hadn't figured this out by now,
Napoleon III's plan was that the Austrians and the Prussians would fight each other
and basically beat each other senseless,
and then Napoleon III would step in and solve everything and become the arbiter of Europe.
Sort of the way he had been for Italy 10 years before.
Maybe pick up some German territory along the way for his resurgent French empire.
But instead, Prussia seemed to be reviving a strong German presence on the western border of France.
Remember, Prussia owns the roar, and that's right on that western border.
This was very unpopular with the French people.
Napoleon III also had to make up for a recent failed foreign policy gamble.
He tried to set up a French emperor in Mexico.
We're going to talk more about that later.
It's really quite silly.
But Napoleon III needed to retrieve his prestige.
So he went to Bismarck, and he said,
Look, I need something in this deal.
How about some German territory?
Maybe Luxembourg?
Or I'll be happy with Belgium.
But unlike Kevur, Bismarck didn't cave.
He said no.
And he begins to realize clearly the French problem is not going to go away.
The second problem after the 1866 war is the South German states.
They're not part of that North German confederation.
They're worried about a growing Prussia,
but they're more worried about France.
For his part, Napoleon III also worries what the South German states will do,
and whether they'll join Prussia.
He said, I can guarantee the peace only so long as Bismarck respects the present status.
If he draws the South German states into the North German confederation,
our guns will go off by themselves.
Clearly, Bismarck's wars were not over.
He began to plan to fight France on Prussia's terms.
Now, once again, Bismarck began to line up his ducks,
maneuvering France into isolation and war, first isolation.
Remember when Napoleon III had asked for German territory?
Bismarck immediately goes to the Southern German states and tells him that.
Point third, the French want some of your territory there.
Then he tells the British about Napoleon III's request for Belgium.
Now look at a map.
Belgium is strategically very important for Britain,
and if Britain is worried about another Napoleon crossing the channel,
they sure don't want him to have Belgium.
So in both cases, note that Bismarck is pursuing real polity.
He is violating secret negotiations.
He's breaking the seal that were made in good faith with Napoleon III,
even if their import was deceitful.
Still, he needs a pretext for war.
So now France has no friends.
Bismarck needs a pretext for war.
That would come from Spain.
Now, it just so happens that in the late 1860s,
there was a revolution against the repressive Spanish Bourbon.
Gee, that's news.
That's something we haven't seen before.
Now Spain, as usual, needed a new king.
Bismarck persuaded the provisional Spanish government
to offer the Spanish crown to a relative of Wilhelms,
another Hohenzollern, that's William's family, called Prince Leopold.
Now, Bismarck didn't give a fig about Spain,
but he knew that the French did.
To understand that, look at a map.
How would the French like having a strong Prussia
with lots of German allies on their western border
and a Prussian prince to the south?
It sort of reverses Louis XIV's dream into a nightmare.
So the French Chamber of Deputies
and the French press grow increasingly bellicose.
At this point, neither Wilhelm nor his family
fully realize what Bismarck is up to.
Wilhelm, wanting peace, advises Leopold to withdraw.
You don't want to be the king of Spain.
But the French, spoiling for a fight, want more.
In particular, Napoleon III needs to be seen as standing up to Bismarck.
So they demand that Wilhelm promise
to renounce the throne of Spain for the Hohenzollerns forever.
Specifically, the French foreign minister
orders his diplomatic representative in Berlin.
Vincent, Count Benedetti.
To go to Wilhelm and secure a promise,
while the latter was vacationing at Bad Ems, a spa.
There, on the 13th of July, 1870, on the shady promenade at Ems,
in full view of the other spa-goers, Benedetti demands the promise.
It's an utterly humiliating moment.
Wilhelm refuses and later in the day gives order
that Count Benedetti is not to be admitted to his presence.
He then writes a telegram explaining what had gone on to Bismarck.
And this is the pretext that Bismarck had been waiting for.
Bismarck took the telegram, which was almost apologetic in tone,
and he edited it.
And he highlighted the unreasonableness of the French demand
so as to rally the Germans.
He also highlighted the imperiousness of Wilhelm's dismissal,
so as to goad the French.
Now, I'm going to read to you from the two versions of the Ems dispatch.
First, this is what Wilhelm wrote to Bismarck.
Listen carefully for its gentlemanly tone.
Count Benedetti intercepted me on the promenade
and ended by demanding of me in a very important manner
that I should authorize him to telegraph at once
that I bound myself in perpetuity never again to give my consent
if the Hohenzollerns renewed their candidature.
I rejected this demand somewhat sternly,
as it is neither right nor possible
to undertake engagements of this kind forever and ever.
Then I decided in view of the above-mentioned demands
not to receive Count Benedetti anymore,
but to have him informed by an adjutant
that his majesty had now received from Leopold,
confirmation of the news,
which Benedetti had already had from Paris
and had nothing further to say to the ambassador.
His majesty, that's Wilhelm, suggests that your excellency,
that's Bismarck, to your excellency,
that Benedetti's new demand and its rejection
might well be communicated both to our ambassadors and to the press.
Yes, they might well indeed.
Here's Bismarck's version.
After the news of the renunciation of the Prince von Hohenzollern
had been communicated to the imperial French government
by the royal Spanish government,
the French ambassador in Ems made a further demand
on his majesty the king,
that he should authorize him to telegraph to Paris
that his majesty the king undertook for all time
never again to give his assent
should the Hohenzollerns once more take up their candidature.
His majesty the king thereupon refused
to receive the ambassador again
and had the latter informed by the adjutant of the day
that his majesty had no further communication
to make to the ambassador.
Bismarck then made sure he sent off two copies,
one to Napoleon III, one to the French newspapers.
He hoped that they would be a red rag to the Gaelic bull.
Now at this point, Napoleon III is smart enough to know
he'd gone a bridge too far,
but his cabinet and the French people want war.
The first shot was actually fired by the emperor's son
on the 1st of August 1870 to cries of a Berlin, to Berlin.
But in fact, it would be the Germans
who would get to visit a foreign capital.
That's because as usual,
Prussia had the more efficient government,
they had industrial might, they had rail,
the better railways, they had the better trained army,
they had allies in the south German states,
the Austrian state neutral.
Using their extensive railway system to get to the border,
Prussian and Allied German troops swept into France.
The Germans won a series of bloody battles
climaxing at Sedan on the 1st of September, 1870.
On that day, the French lost 39 generals, 2,700 officers,
84,000 men, including 17,000 dead,
and Napoleon III, who surrendered his person to Bismarck himself
in a weavers cottage in Danscherie.
Napoleon III got too close to the lines
and he got captured by Prussian troops.
In effect, Napoleon III had abdicated.
Since he could no longer speak for France, the war dragged on.
I want to talk about the effects of this war first on France,
then on Italy, and finally on Germany.
Napoleon III's defeat at Sedan was the end of the Second Empire.
Liberals and Socialists proclaimed a new republic,
the Third Republic, and they immediately sought peace.
But Bismarck insisted that France give up the rich western provinces of Alsace and Lorraine.
The French Foreign Minister, Jules Favre, tried to argue that
the days of conquest and passing land around like poker chips were over,
that seizing French provinces would permanently embitter the two countries.
Favre is the wisest man in Europe.
But Bismarck didn't listen.
He insisted and the French resolved to fight on.
Now at this point, at towards the end of 1870, beginning of 1871,
the Germans surround Paris and they lay siege to it.
Food shortages lead the Parisians to eat horses and hunt rats in the sewers
and butcher the elephants at the Paris Zoo for food.
Bismarck added to their misery over Wilhelm's doubts,
and those of the Prussian general staff,
by bombarding the city with artillery.
So here we're laying the grounds for future hatreds.
On the 28th of January 1871, the French finally signed an armistice.
The Peace of Frankfurt worked out by May was very harsh.
France was to pay an indemnity of five billion francs.
France was to be occupied until the indemnity was paid.
It was then to cede Alsace and Lorraine to Prussia over the objections of their inhabitants.
The fall of France and the Peace of Frankfurt weakened the republic from its inception.
They're ensued throughout the late 19th century a great period of national shame,
recrimination, reevaluation, and a desire for revenge.
The citizens of Paris actually seceded in 1871 and proclaimed the Paris Commune,
which existed for two months as a self-governing communist entity.
There was political equality of all classes and genders,
but the groups behind the Commune weren't united.
They include communists, feminists, and anarchists, all with different real agendas.
In May, the government restored order after bloody street fighting.
The communards responded by setting fire to much of Paris in order to halt their advance.
The whole thing is a disaster.
In the end, the troops executed thousands in the streets.
In the aftermath, the government deported or executed many of the communards.
So here we have a story of French defeat compounded by internal misery
that is going to be retold again and again until 1914.
For the Germans, all this was just desserts for Napoleon's high-handed methods
after conquering most of Germany in 1806.
People still remembered Yenna better, so this goes back.
For the French, the result was to focus national hatred away from Britain and towards Germany.
Now, the French defeat actually left the Italians free to seize Rome.
Rome, remember, had been occupied by French troops and coups with a pope.
This completed their unification, and Rome became the capital of Italy in 1871.
The pope, in protest, retreated to Vatican City, becoming the prisoner of the Vatican.
What was the effect on Germany?
Bismarck was able to use the war and Prussia's victory as an argument that all Germans needed
the protection of living in a single German empire.
And so on the 18th of January, 1871, in the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles,
a hall dedicated to celebrating the victories of Louis XIV, usually over German princes.
In other words, here's one last humiliation for the French.
All the German states, minus Austria, acknowledge Wilhelm I as Emperor or Kaiser of all Germany.
Now this event changed the balance of power in Europe forever,
and has repercussions into our own time.
France was no longer the greatest economic and military power on the continent,
though they would relinquish that status only reluctantly.
Rather, in the center of Europe, its agricultural bread basket and industrial heart,
where there had been a loose concatenation of small, backward, agrarian feudal states
since the days of the Holy Roman Empire, there now arose a new empire, the Second Reich,
equipped with an efficient government, rapidly expanding industry, fertile agriculture,
the best army in Europe, and an emperor and a chancellor willing to use it.
For the next 50 years, Europe would try to adjust to that new reality.
That was made more dangerous by the proximity of other great empires to the east in various
states of development or decay. Remember that in 1871, the Austro-Hungarian Empire had not
solved its nationalistic problem. The Ottoman Empire grew weaker. Russia was anxious to take
advantage of that situation. What role would Germany play? The strength of Germany and Russia,
combined with the weakness of Austria-Hungary, would render central and southern Europe unstable
for two generations. One final point. In solving their nationalistic problems,
neither Kvore nor Bismarck had concerned themselves over much with ethical or moral issues.
The Christian idealism of Tsar Alexander I, they had pretty much started wars to suit their purposes.
The idea of a holy alliance, dubious in 1815, was laughable in 1871. Rather, international
diplomacy and politics were now clearly decided by considerations of rail politics and expenditures
of iron and blood. Other old verities, the supremacy of France, German weakness, British
neutrality, were also swept away in the German tide. Could Europe adjust to the new rules?
Could Europe contain this new colossus and its ruthless leadership?
That will be the question for the next lecture, and the next lecture, and the next lecture, and the next.
