Lecture 33 Decadence and Malays, Circa 1900
In October 1914, a young British naval officer named Grupert Brook penned the following poem
after assisting in the evacuation of Antwerp. It is called, somewhat ironically, Peace.
Now God be thanked, who has matched us with his hour, and caught our youth and wakened
us from sleeping, with hand-made sure, clear eye and sharpened power, to turn as swimmers
into cleanness leaping. Glad from a world grown old and cold and weary, leave the sick
hearts that honour could not move, and half men in their dirty songs and dreary and all
the little emptiness of love. Oh, we who have known shame, we have found release there,
where there is no ill, no grief, but sleep has mending. Not broken save this body, lost
but breath, nothing to shake the laughing heart's long peace there, but only agony,
and that has ending, and the worst friend and enemy is but death.
Now like so many men who joined up in 1914, Brook would in fact be dead by the following
spring, not a glorious death in battle, but a victim of blood poisoning while in transit
to the Mediterranean theatre. But Brook's six war sonnets, of which Peace was one, would
make him a household name in England. His obituary would be written by none other than
Winston Churchill, then First Lord of the Admiralty.
Now if you listened carefully to the poem, you will have noticed that it welcomes the
war as a sort of rite of purification. England's youth, waken from sleeping, would leave behind
a world grown old and cold and weary, a world of decadence, of debauchery and malaise, full
of shame and sick hearts and half men and dirty songs and dreary lives. They would leave
behind their own shame at what, I'm not quite sure, and embrace the war as a bracing swim.
Even the agony of death is temporary compared to the sense of purpose, the war imparted.
So here's my question. What's wrong with this guy? What was so bad about peace and love
and dirty songs that he would rather die of blood poisoning on a troop ship to Gallipoli?
The answer to that question has everything to do with the state of Europe, and in particular
the European psyche by the end of the 19th century. As the new century dawned, Europeans
faced new social problems on top of seemingly insoluble old ones, new solutions, or at least
diagnoses, a revolution in how they thought about society, the individual, the self, sexuality
and gender, with concomitant revolutions in relations between the genders and in art and
culture. Many people were not comfortable with the challenges of the new century. To
them, the coming of war seemed a blessed relief. It provided a clear sense of purpose, a clear
moral issue, or so it seemed, a chance to serve, to do something unequivocally good, a chance
to block out these troubling new developments, if you will, a whole series of wars at home.
First, there was the old war between the classes. As we've seen throughout the 19th century, the
Ancien regime seemed to be crumbling everywhere west of the Elba. In industrial nations, the middle
and working classes were on the rise, old aristocracies felt threatened, and increasingly,
well, decorative. No government could make policy without the aid and advice of industrialists
or financiers like Gustav Krupp and J.P. Morgan. Workers' parties were gaining seats. By 1912,
the Social Democrats were the largest party in the German Reichstag. The 1890s had seen a wave
of anarchist violence and increasing assassinations of several heads of state, so everything seemed
to be falling apart. The problem of poverty seemed very real and, for once, threatened to affect
those at the top. Even in London, capital of the world's greatest empire, poverty was ubiquitous
and stifling. At the turn of the century, Charles Booth's 17-volume Life and Labor of the People
of London showed people still living eight to a room. In 1911, the British Liberal Party
introduced the People's Budget, designed to provide national insurance for workers.
When the aristocracy in the House of Lords balked at the increase in their taxes,
the government introduced the Parliament Act of 1911, which effectively ended the power of the
Lords to stop legislation from the Commons, so here the power of the British aristocracy was
more or less broken. Related to the social wars of Europe was a war over gender roles.
The fight for equality, and in particular the vote for women, was destroying old traditions
and demanding changes. Now, one reason for this is that women seem to be everywhere now,
as capitalism became more systematic, and especially during periods of depression in
the 1870s and 90s, many middle-class families found what working-class families already knew.
They needed two incomes, and that meant more and more women in the workplace.
By the early years of the 20th century, suffrage had become a huge issue, at least in Britain,
with violent public demonstrations. For example, on the 1st of March, 1912, an army of well-dressed
women with hats and muffs took hammers from those muffs and broke the windows of expensive shops
in Haymarket, the Strand, Regent Street, and Bond Street. Militant suffragettes also engaged in boycotts,
they bombed public buildings, they chained themselves to the gates of Parliament,
they went to prison, they went on hunger strike, and they committed suicide.
On the 4th of June, 1913, at the running of the Derby, in full view of the royal family,
Emily Davison threw herself under the hose of the King's horse in protest of her disenfranchisement.
The war was a great relief to those who didn't want to have to deal with the breakdown of gender
norms. But because World War I would be a total war, ironically, women would be enlisted in the
war effort. They would become nurses at the front and factory workers at home, so that when the war
was over, they would all have more reason to feel entitled to the vote. Europe was also gripped
by conflicts over religion and philosophy in 1914. By the late 19th century, religion seemed to be
in full retreat. England, Austria, and Russia still retained state religions. But in republics
and new monarchies, the church was being disestablished. In France, for example, the Third Republic
moved towards secularism. Jews remained second-class citizens in most European states. In Russia,
pogroms were encouraged by the Tsarist regime. Remember the end of Fiddler on the Roof? The
villagers of Anatovka are fleeing. What are they fleeing? They're fleeing a Tsarist pogrom.
Elsewhere, antisemitism was thought respectable and was often used by conservatives to explain
economic depression. It was Jewish bankers or Jewish industrialists who caused that. In Austria,
Carl Luger founded the Christian Socialist Party and got elected Mayor of Vienna in 1895
on a program of antisemitism. In France, a Jewish army officer named Alfred Dreyfus was accused in
1893 of sending French military secrets to the German embassy. He was court-martialed, found
guilty, and sent to Devil's Island for life. But beginning in 1896, evidence emerged that
Dreyfus had been framed by fellow officers, and that evidence of the framing had been hushed up.
This became a cause celeb in France. Dreyfus' case was taken up by liberal writers like Emile Zola,
who wrote Jacuz, attacking Dreyfus' accusers. Right-wing elements in the army and the Roman
Catholic Church defended the verdict. Finally, after several more trials, Dreyfus was pardoned
in 1899 and restored to rank. A liberal government then passed legislation in 1905 to separate
church and state even more profoundly. The 19th century saw a general waning of religious life.
Laws forcing people to go to services were repealed. And as Europeans came into contact
with other cultures throughout their empires, they increasingly saw that others found meaning
and paths to God through very different ways, Islam, Hinduism, African cults. Some wondered which,
if any, was correct. Workers sought leisure and sports on Sunday mornings, not sermons.
Among the middle and upper classes, religion came to seem irrational, barbaric, or quaint.
It was seemingly attacked by science and Darwinism. It was most definitely attacked by Marx.
German philosophers, in fact, had long begun to take God out of the machine.
Emanuel Kant had built his moral system on pure reason. Hegel and Marx argued for historical
processes that, like natural ones, had nothing to do with the hand of God. To the well educated,
at least, for the first time in European history, atheism became thinkable. Arthur Schopenhauer
argued that the world was driven by either will, sheer, per-blind emotional force, or idea, that is,
rationality. Friedrich Nietzsche, a professor at the University of Basel, argued in a series of books,
The Birth of Tragedy, Thus Spaked Zaratustra, Beyond Good and Evil, On the Genealogy of Morals,
Etche Homo and the Will to Power, all published between about 1872 and 1908,
for the pre-eminence of will. In these works, he argued that religion was a series of lies purported
on an unwitting and uncritical public, that God was in effect dead as a force to give meaning
to life. Rather, he believed that real accomplishment was only possible for the ubermensch, or superman,
an individual of supreme will and boldness, unbound by tradition or morality. Here is an
excerpt from Beyond Good and Evil. What is good? All that heightens the feeling of power, the will
to power, power itself in man. What is bad? All that proceeds from weakness. What is happiness?
The feeling that power increases, that resistance is overcome? Not contentment, but more power,
not peace at all, but war, not virtue, but proficiency. The weak and ill constituted shall
perish, the first principle of our philanthropy, and one shall help them to do so. Do you remember
Machiavelli? You can see why Nietzsche is often blamed for Adolf Hitler, the Nazis, and the modern
cult of personality. But can you also see how his ideas also helped to explain Rupert Brooke?
Brooke was sick of the daily sordidness of ordinary life, and apparently he was sick of the sick.
He wanted desperately to be part of something bigger and better,
the work of the superman. He believed that this could be found in war, certainly not in science.
Friedrich Nietzsche eventually went mad, and at the end of the 19th century, psychologists began
to try to figure out what that actually meant. Early psychology had grown out of religion and
philosophy. It assumed a split between mind and body, body, and soul. It assumed that the mind
was the rational part. Think of Locke. Sigmund Freud was a Viennese physician who upset that easy
dichotomy. He was especially interested in women suffering from hysteria and in the interpretation
of dreams. He thought that dreams were deeply indicative of what was really going on in sight.
He developed the theory of the unconscious mind, containing feelings and drives that we suppress,
indeed must suppress, to be able to live with each other in society. These are housed in the
id, Latin for it, which harbors pleasure and passions like rage. The ego, or I, the rational,
conscious, calculating self, and the super ego containing the rules, the conventions,
the values, and laws that keep us civilized and which we tend to follow unconsciously.
According to Freud, the human mind is a constant battleground among these three
subconscious forces. From these theories, of course, develop modern ideas about clinical
psychology, psychiatry, techniques of psychological analysis, with tremendous implications for other
fields like education and social work. Perhaps even more importantly, from Freud's work developed
a whole new understanding of the human self, a retreat from a completely conscious, self-fabricated,
self-controlled renaissance man such as Castiglione and Machiavelli proposed. Man was rather more
like Hobbes' or Darwin's creatures, or perhaps even like the post-Lapsarian man described by
Christian theology. He was driven and stymied by instincts and natural forces that were beyond
his complete control. In 1930, Freud seemed to echo both Nietzsche and Marx when he wrote
in Civilization and its Discontents. Men are not gentle creatures who want to be loved. They are,
on the contrary, creatures among whose instinctual endowments is to be reckoned a powerful share
of aggressiveness. As a result, their neighbor is for them not only a potential helper or sexual
object, but also someone who tempts them to satisfy their aggressiveness on him, to exploit his
capacity for work without compensation, to use him sexually without his consent, to seize his
possessions, to humiliate him, to cause pain, to torture and to kill him. Civilization has to
use its utmost efforts in order to set limits to man's aggressive instincts. Hence, therefore,
the use of the methods intended to incite people into relationships of love, hence the restriction
upon sexual life, and hence to the ideal's commandment to love one's neighbor as oneself,
a commandment which is really justified by the fact that nothing else runs so strongly counter
to the original nature of man. Now, Freud believed that through psychoanalysis
one could at least come to terms with these deep-seated inner blockages and drives,
but it was always in some sense a losing battle. Albert Einstein, a physicist working in Switzerland
just after the turn of the century, equally destabilized the view that man is master of the
universe. As will be recalled after Newton, it was widely believed that science had cracked
the mysteries of the universe. Newton had discovered unchanging physical laws by which
nature worked. It only remained for his successors, men like Faraday and Darwin, Pasteur, Maxwell,
and Planck, to fill in the blanks. But in 1905, a young physicist named Albert Einstein, newly
doctored by the University of Zurich, proposed the theory of relativity, which upset all that
certainty. I suppose that every educated person knows the famous formula E equals mc squared,
that is, energy E is equal to the mass of a particle m times the square of the speed of light,
c squared. In other words, mass can be converted into energy. Now, this would eventually lead to
the atomic bomb, though no one was worried about that in 1905. The more immediately scary implications
of Einstein's theory of relativity is that if the speed of light is constant, then time and motion
adjust. They are relative, they adjust relative to the observer. That is, at extreme speeds,
time and space warp. They don't behave in the unchanging fashion of the Newtonian universe.
Now, in a way, this was just as disturbing to people around 1900 as Copernicus and Galileo's
repudiation of the old Ptolemaic universe. What was true on Earth was not necessarily true everywhere
in the universe. In 1927, Werner Heisenberg's uncertainty principle declared that the very
act of measuring a thing changes the thing being measured. Niels Bohr's atomic theory revived
an old Greek theory that matter is not solid, but composed of atoms in constant motion.
Now, all these trends also affected the social sciences. The greatest sociologist at the turn
of the century, the Frenchman Emile Durkheim, rejected Kant's optimistic notion that positivism
would lead invariably to universal truths. He argued that communities are fragile. They're
really sets of shared values and norms much more than they are places. When those norms break down,
for example, when your economic situation forces you to move to a city, the result is
alienation from the community or what Durkheim calls anomy. Durkheim saw anomy as very symptomatic
of modern life. It explains suicide, which is the title of his most famous work. What all this meant
to the general public at the turn of the 20th century was that nothing was certain, nothing was
solid. There was no fixed point from which truth could be measured accurately. Everything was in
constant motion, constant strife. Remember, this was also the age of the express train, the automobile,
and from 1903, the aeroplane. And yet nowhere in this hurtling dog eat dog world was there to be
found the kindly face of God. No wonder that men like Rupert Brooke thought that war was both natural
and a relief. We see all these beliefs reflected in turn of the century, high culture.
Now, the last time we looked at European high culture, romanticism had under the pressure
of the industrial revolution given way to realism. By the dawn of the 20th century, realism's depiction
of life in all of its sordidness was one of those things that was convincing men like Rupert Brooke
to retreat into infantile fantasies of military glory. But among artists themselves, realism
was evolving into modernism. The writers of the late 19th century popularized many of the ideas
described above. Now, as we already noted in a previous lecture, Thomas Hardy's novels
address social problems and often challenge old verities. But it is his poetry, which is truly
modern. First, it's not poetic, but written in fairly simple, clear and direct language.
Secondly, Hardy's poetry largely reflects the idea of a questioning of a God ordained universe.
Hardy's poetry raises the same questions that Nietzsche does. Rather, he sees a universe that's
run by crass casualty and dicing time. Or perhaps, God is asleep at the switch. In God forgotten,
Hardy imagines an angel speeding from earth to ask God on behalf of the human race,
why he allows such misery. The earth, sayest thou, the human race, by me created, sat its lot.
But it perished surely. It lost my interest from the first. Happily, it died. Of doing as it durst.
Henry James, an American who eventually settled in England, was a great psychological novelist.
In Turn of the Screw of 1898, he writes a ghost story for turn of the century adults,
in which it's not clear whether the ghost of Peter Quint is actually trying to possess two
children, or is the creation of a nanny's overactive imagination, one in which her
subconscious fears and foibles have taken over. Now, most of his novels, the Americans,
the Europeans, Daisy Miller, Washington Square, Portrait of a Lady, The Bostonians,
The Wings of the Dove, and The Ambassadors, written between the 1870s and the early 1900s,
are about the ruthless world clothed in delicate sensibility and impeccable manners
of the transatlantic rich. So he's very much a novelist of manners.
Oscar Wilde was a great wit who deflated the popular Victorian notion that art exists to teach us
a lesson in plays such as The Importance of Being Earnest of 1895. He also smashed social
convention in his life. In that same year, his lover, Lord Alfred Douglas, exposed him publicly
as a homosexual, a criminal offense in most of Turn of the Century Europe. The resultant trial
exposed another side of life that many contemporaries would have preferred to keep hidden, and some
commentators took this as a sign of a decadence among British youth that was sapping the strength
of the empire. James Joyce, an Irish novelist, attacked the verities of Irish life while exploring
the internal workings of the human psyche. He was famous for his stream of consciousness technique,
which takes realism to new heights, or in the case of Molly Bloom's menstrual narrative about sex
at the end of Ulysses, New Depths. He wrote three novels of ever greater technical command and
difficulty, Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, Ulysses, and Finnegan's Way. It used to be said
that there were only about a dozen people in the entire world who had understood Finnegan's Way.
Marcel Proust's 16-volume Remembrance of Things Past is also a deeply psychological
set of novels. It describes the physical and mental life of a gentleman in the minutest detail.
Turning to painting, Impressionism, as we have seen, broke from the idea that art should portray
the thing itself. Rather, art was increasingly about the point of view of the artists. Impressionists
like Renoir and Monet emphasized the momentary play of light and shade. Van Gogh invested his
subjects with psychological intensity. Like Proust in literature or Wagner in music,
he seemed to reveal the inner self, in this case a tortured inner self. Some painters went further,
abandoning the portrayal of natural objects at all and expressing their emotions through abstract
forms. Vasily Kondinsky in Russia, for example. Pablo Picasso, like Igor Stravinsky in music,
explored a huge variety of approaches. In his Blue Period of 1901-03, he focuses on the poor
and outsiders. In his Rose Period of 1904-05, he concentrates on entertainers. In his 1907
African Period, he displays strident and unharmonious colors. This was followed by Cubism from about
1907-1918 and Surrealism from 1925-1936. Now, his art, I would argue, does to visual reality
what Nietzsche did to belief and what Freud did to the human psyche,
what Joyce did to narrative convention, and what Einstein did to physical reality.
It explodes basic conventions. It shows the subject from many angles at once. Once again,
there's no fixed point of truth from which the dispassionate observer observes.
Music also broke from romanticism into modernism and fragmentation. Wagner was the dominant
composer of the 19th century after Beethoven. Now, in a previous lecture, we explored the
Wagner the Nazis would embrace, a musical nationalist writing vast epics based on German
national myths. But Wagner was also a musical revolutionary, first in the sounds he produced,
especially his use of rich, what musicians call chromatic harmonies, but also in his use of themes,
tunes, as light motifs to represent not just people and things, but what people were thinking
or what their subconscious mind was thinking. You'll get two characters on stage
and their tunes will play and then you'll hear a third and you'll realize, oh, they must be
thinking about this other individual. Sometimes Wagner will use this to explore hidden motives.
So in this way, Wagner is anticipating Freud. Claude Debussy explored chromatic harmonies
further. He used triads to create moods, not stories in pieces like La Mer, the sea,
Images, images and his preludes for piano. This is the musical equivalent of painting's
impressionism. And it gave birth to a long tradition of French musical impressionism
advanced by Maurice Ravel and Eric Satie, among many others. Their pieces, with the possible
exception of the annoying bolero, eschewed to tonic grandiosity for the precise brilliance of a jewel.
In Austria, Gustav Mahler was the diametric opposite of Debussy. He wrote ten gigantic
symphonies, each a world unto itself, each is vast in length from 50 to 100 minutes,
each is vast in orchestration. Indeed, each one seems to have been an attempt
to find meaning in life through a different philosophy, a peculiarly 20th century quest,
I think. His eighth symphony, the Symphony of a Thousand, is a setting of the final scene of
Gertes Faust, which will give you some sense of the titanic forces that Mahler is dealing with,
and also that sense of quest. But in his last works, written as he was dying, his writing becomes
sparer and less tonal, more dissonant. Mahler is laying the groundwork for 20th century music,
even as he lay dying. The New Vienna School, which succeeded Mahler, took up where Mahler left off,
included Arnold Schoenberg, Alban Berg, and Anton Weber. Schoenberg was deeply conscious of being
part of a long Germanic tradition in music. He saw the logical development of that tradition
as always moving towards greater dissonance, greater freedom from tonality. Beethoven was
more dissonant than Mozart, Wagner more dissonant than Beethoven, Mahler more dissonant than Wagner.
Schoenberg embraced 12-tone music, a musical language that strikes untrained ears as harsh
and dissonant and difficult. Weber wrote very precise spare pieces lasting only a few minutes.
Berg wrote longer and more lyrical pieces, for example his violin concerto, as well as the
opera's Wozzeck and Lulu, which are full of raw animalistic behavior very 20th century. In a similar
vein, the composer Richard Strauss in Elektra and Salome deals with a very Freudian and rather
animalistic human passions. In Russia, Igor Stravinsky proposed a different take on modernism.
He believed in a music that was almost pure rhythm, devoid of romantic storytelling,
celebrating a raw animal energy. He started with three great ballets written between 1911 and 1913.
The Firebird, Petrushka, and The Rite of Spring, each more dissonant and animalistic than the last.
In Rite of Spring, the dancers portray half-naked primitive humans with painted faces and bodies.
They writhe and contort to savage rhythms, violent harmonies, elemental themes that must have seen
chaotic and incoherent to most auditors. As in science and psychology, humans are in this art
reduced to their animalistic state. Indeed, at the Paris premiere of The Rite of Spring in 1913,
the crowd rioted, sort of a warm-up for the violence to come the following year.
Mahler, the New Vienna School, and Stravinsky were unbeknownst to them writing the mood music
for a new, more brutal century. The crowds that cheered the coming of war were perhaps
reacting against all of this. Men like Rupert Brooke hated this new godless,
themeless, sordid struggle for raw power and existence. Undoubtedly, Brooke saw just such
animalistic tendencies in his Teutonic opponents, Kaiser Wilhelm in particular, just as Wilhelm
undoubtedly saw them in his enemies. The irony, of course, is that the men who marched away from
this society and off to war in what they thought was an ennobling and inspiring crusade would
actually end up proving Darwin and Marx and Nietzsche right. They turned Europe into a slaughter
house, the ultimate animalistic metaphor.
