I want to start this lecture with a quote.
This is a quote from In Memoriam, written by Alfred Lord Tennyson in 1850.
It goes like this,
Are God in nature, then at strife, that nature lends such evil dreams, so careful of the
type she seems, so careless of a single life, that I, considering everywhere her secret
meaning in her deeds, and finding that of fifty seeds she often brings but one to bear.
What did Tennyson mean by that?
Well, this was the era of Darwin and the discovery of evolution by natural selection.
And so what Tennyson was expressing was that death is common nature.
It almost seems like nature is wasteful of organisms.
What's the significance of that, why should it be?
Darwin looked at this problem and in an act that I think makes him ingenious, figured
out how it all goes together, figured out that populations of organisms vary genetically
within their ranks, individuals are not all alike, they have different characteristics
because they have somewhat different genes.
And depending on what's inflicted upon them by the climate or by organisms such as predators
or pathogens, some survive and some don't.
And that survival, unlike what's suggested in the Tennyson quote, really isn't random.
That's the whole key to what Darwin was talking about when he meant survival of the fittest.
Survival isn't random, it's dependent on characteristics of individual organisms within
populations and nature is a very severe selector, sometimes extremely severe.
Let me give you an example of what Darwin called natural selection.
You may think it's not a real example because it involves humans and many people think that
humans are so different from the rest of nature they shouldn't be considered in this context,
but it will make a point and I think it will be a point well worth making.
And this is your introduction to Darwinian evolution.
And if you want to call this example something, call it size matters.
And it's about bighorn sheep.
I don't know if you've ever seen bighorn sheep, you can see them in the Rocky Mountains.
These are the animals where the nails, the rams, have very large curled horns and each
year they assemble and they butt heads quite literally and quite forcefully.
For access to females, it's a competition, a competition where the largest males with
the strongest muscles and the thickest necks and the strongest butters win.
That gives them the ability to breed and so the genes that gave them the strong shoulders,
the big bodies, the muscles, the horns get moved into the next generation and sheep that
don't have that array of genes that are smaller, that are weaker, that have smaller horns
tend not to reproduce.
So those genes are disproportionately omitted from the next generation.
This is the essence of natural selection.
But the bighorn sheep is much sought after by hunters and not just any bighorn sheep.
The animals are hunted for trophies and their heads are mounted by taxidermists and they
end up in dens and man rooms of people who shoot them.
Only the males have these horns and the largest, heaviest males, as I said, have the biggest
horns.
The best bighorn trophies are therefore those that come from the largest males.
There's also a competition among human males to get the largest sheep heads.
It is precisely these animals, these large males, that are normally the most successful
at mating.
Bighorn males vigorously butt heads and in general those bighorn rams the largest of
the largest horns succeed.
They are what Darwin would call the most fit.
The term fitness means the probability of reproduction and these are the ones that have
the highest probability of reproduction.
In a study by an ecologist named David W. Coltman, published in 2003, revealed clearly
that trophy hunting has reduced the average body weight and horn size of bighorn rams
in a period of over just three decades.
This is due entirely to selective hunting for the largest animals of the most impressive
horns.
These researchers studied some 30 years of data.
These are data on hunting at Ram Mountain in Alberta, Canada.
They demonstrated that both the body weight and the horn size are strongly under the influence
of genetics.
That is, they're inheritable.
This is a big deal.
For a trait to evolve, it has to have a genetic basis.
But what these researchers showed was that horn size is most definitely related to specific
genes that don't occur in every animal.
In other words, some animals have genes for smaller horns, some for larger horns.
It sorts out each generation, but then those that tend to make most successful are only
the ones with the genes, the largest ones.
After those animals are selectively shot, as the heaviest animals with the biggest horns
are systematically eliminated by the hunters, only the smaller males are left to breed.
These males give rise to lighter weight males with smaller horns because on average they
carry such genes.
Don't miss the point here.
In this case, the survival of the fittest is the small horned animals because of predator
humans are selectively removing the large horned ones.
Evolution is happening right before your eyes in three decades in big horned sheep, where
the large horned sheep are being selected against and the small horned sheep are thus
benefiting and become the most fit in the population merely because of selective hunting pressure.
Human trophy hunters are acting as a significant selection pressure on the sheep.
The result is the population is evolving, underscore that word, evolving smaller males
as these are all that remain to breed.
This is evolution and it's only taken three decades for it to be evident in big horned
sheep population.
Evolution involves genetic change in a population.
It's the gradual process by which the living world has developed since the very origin
of life.
Darwin thought it was very gradual.
Darwin thought evolution was like watching the hour hand of a clock.
You want to sit around and watch the hour hand of a clock?
It never moves, except it moves.
You just can't see it move.
Except in the sheep population you're really watching the minute hand of the clock.
There the selective pressure from human hunting is so severe that you can actually see the
evolution in a mere 30 years.
Why is this important?
Well, any wildlife biologist or ecologist would be concerned because under natural conditions
the largest big horns are the ones that survive the best.
This may mean that the smallest big horned sheep are weak for other characteristics.
You see one of the things that ecologists have learned about these apparent signals in nature
like the strength of big horned sheep or the size of the horns or even the color of birds
is that they're honest signals.
What is an honest signal?
Well, if you want to impress the girl and you go out and rent an expensive car and you
rent an expensive suit and you go out and impress her, she's going to think, oh, yeah,
I want to go out with this guy.
Look at him.
He's got a great car.
He's dressed really well.
Well, you're faking it.
You don't really have that.
But if you actually have the money to afford that, you're presenting an honest signal.
You're really showing that you're well endowed with resources.
It turns out that if you look at things in a serious way, like if you look at the immunocapabilities
of smaller male animals, they will be less than larger males.
This is another way of saying smaller males might very well be more susceptible to various
diseases and parasites than larger males.
Larger males are large for a reason.
They have enough leftover energy to really be able to be healthy animals.
That is perhaps a bit of a generalization, but I think you get the point.
Evolution in the case of big horn sheep has enabled females to choose males and males
to mate with females that are generally the healthiest in the population.
As humans alter this evolution, they may not only be selecting for smaller males, they
may be selecting for weaker males that are more disease-prone.
So that's an example of natural selection, and yes, it really is natural selection because
predation very frequently is an important selective force in nature.
Just because that predator happens to be human doesn't negate the example.
We see lots of examples of selection.
We all know that we're worried about going to hospitals now because we might contract
the Staphylococcus that has evolved resistance to all known antibiotics.
That's a very big concern.
We all know that pests like mosquitoes and flies and various things like that adapt to
insecticides by evolving resistance, and so evolution is very much a reality, and this
is the process that Darwin described called natural selection.
How does it affect ecosystems and how do ecologists integrate the reality of evolution with their
studies of ecosystems?
For that we have to consider another component, which is biogeography.
It is obvious that today's world consists of several immense continents separated to
various degrees by oceans.
In addition to the continents, there are numerous islands ranging from large ones, such as Madagascar
and Barneo, to extremely tiny islands whose names few would recognize.
Some islands, such as South Georgia, near the Antarctic Circle are rather isolated, while
others are termed archipelagos because they're in close proximity within their own ranks.
The Hawaiian Islands and Galapagos Islands are both examples of archipelagos.
These are clusters of islands that are close together.
Some islands are far from a continent, some islands are near continents.
It turns out, and you can in fact model this very precisely, this is not a casual statement,
this is backed by a very strong mathematical foundation, that the larger the island is,
the more species you will find on it.
And the closer to the mainland the island is, the more species you will find on it.
That's because islands generally get their initial population of species by immigration
from mainland populations, much of which is pure chance.
And so the closer an island is to a mainland, the more species it's apt to get.
The larger an island is, the more ecologically diverse it may be with regard to climate,
and so the more different kinds of species it can hold.
And thus large islands near continents will have more species in general than large islands
away from continents, and small islands near continents, more species than small islands
away from continents.
So you can see how you can work this out.
This is the study of biogeography.
Biogeography is that branch of biology that looks at the differences in the plant and
animal and ecosystems from one continent and island to another, and looks at the patterns
of those differences and tries to figure out why those patterns exist.
The study of biogeology compares various regions of the earth that are geographically distinct,
and then tries to look at the processes responsible for those distinctions.
Now in some cases, such as the famous Darwin Finches at the Galapagos Islands, I'm sure
you've heard of those, organisms evolve and are unique to a single region.
The Darwin Finches are an example of what we call an endemic group.
Endemic means that they evolved in the Galapagos Islands.
The original colonist was not from the Galapagos Islands.
Genetically, it seems to be a kind of finch that we find in mainland South America.
But once the colonists got to the Galapagos, they not only evolved, they diversified.
And so from one species of finch that was presumably the original colonists, there are
now 13 species, and arguably there may be as many as 15 species that currently exist
on the Galapagos archipelago.
So endemic species are one kind of group of organisms that evolve in a particular region.
In other cases, you may have a colonization event where a species spreads very widely
after having moved out of its original area into new areas.
An example of this is a little bird called the cattle egret.
The cattle egret colonized the Americas from Africa way back in the 1940s and continues
to spread.
It's what we call an invasive species.
It's doing quite well because it has a kind of way of making a living that is unique.
Cattle egrets, as the name suggests, like to hang out with cattle.
They'll hang out with horses too.
They're not particularly like sheep.
But what they do is they use these animals as beaters.
They hang out with horses, sheep, cattle, whatever, and as those animals walk around
and the pastures that they're in, they scare up insects and the cattle egret snag the insects.
So they have this unique way of making a living, which means that they've been able to spread
pretty much all over the world.
So just to get back to the two points here, we have a colonizing species and then we have
an endemic species.
Typically, on islands, there are colonists that then evolve endemism after that.
If you go to the island of New Caledonia, which is in the Pacific, how many of you have ever
been to New Caledonia?
If you go there, you can look for a bird called the kegu.
It's a strange bird.
It's a gray bird, kind of like a little heron with a long bill and a crest that walks around
on the understory of the forest.
Now, if you look at the genetics of a kegu, its most close relative is something called
a sunbitter.
You can see sunbitterns in Panama.
They inhabit quiet, shady streams, the same in Colombia, Venezuela, places like that.
And so this is another element of biogeography, the relationship evolutionarily.
This brings evolution and biogeography together.
New Caledonia is nowhere near Panama, but at one time, on all the continents, including
the little islands that became New Caledonia, were part of the great continent of Gondwana
248 million years ago.
These animals all, at least their precursors, inhabited a similar area.
And so what we see is that sometimes animals are separated by continental separation, and
then they evolve accordingly.
I'll give you some more examples of that.
Over the past few months, I've been in two different areas in the earth.
I've walked rainforests in Ecuador, and I've explored rainforests in Queensland, Australia.
Now consider for a moment, walking in a rainforest along the Napo River in eastern Ecuador, and
compare that with a similar walk in a rainforest in Queensland, Australia, that's literally
half a world away.
Initially, you'd be impressed with the similarity of both of these forests.
On first glance, you couldn't tell whether you're in Ecuador or whether you're in Queensland.
You just couldn't.
The climate would be hot and muggy, very humid.
It might be raining part of the day, or even most of the day.
Looking up at the forest, you'd see it was very complex, fine, tall trees, dense.
Trees have wide buttresses, they look alike.
The crowns of the trees would widen into a broad canopy.
Tree branches would be covered by numerous epiphytes, plants such as orchids, for instance,
which attach and grow on the tree.
One's impression of both of these forests is that they are much alike, but they are not.
They're alike ecologically, and they're largely different evolutionarily.
The organisms comprising each of these forests have evolved similar characteristics because
they're existing in similar climates.
Their histories are climatically the same, but their genetic histories are different
because they're isolated from one another.
Queensland, Australia has been isolated from the part of the New World that is Panama and
Venezuela and Colombia for a very long time.
Indeed, upon closer inspection, I like to look at birds, and so I look at the birds in
these forests.
And upon closer inspection, it would soon be learned that everything, the birds, the
trees, the mammals, the insects, even the fungi, are quite distinct from each other in
most cases.
There are a few things which are similar, fig trees, for instance, but largely they're
different.
The forests are both within the tropical rainforest biome, and their major structural
characteristics evolved in response to the fact that both are situated in a climate that
is hot and rainy throughout the year.
Think of what that is telling you with regard to Darwinian natural selection.
You have many different genes, but in different regions where the climatic conditions have
been the same, different genetic entities have evolved to look very similar because those
are the adaptations that allow for survival.
The science of biogeography recognizes that the ecology and the general appearance of
ecosystems that are widely scattered is a case of convergence, that in fact ecosystems
look alike only on a superficial basis when they're widely separated from one another.
Tropical rainforest, for instance, has been present since the time of the dinosaurs, the
Jurassic period of the Mesozoic era, some 150 million years ago.
But those forests bear little resemblance to the forests of today, even though they existed
in a time of heat, humidity, and rainfall.
But the species composition will be very different because many kinds of organisms present in
tropical rainforest today hadn't evolved 150 million years ago in the Jurassic.
Natural history of the ecological planet of Earth reaches back some 4.5 billion years.
But for our purposes, we'll just think of it as 248 million years ago at the beginning
of the Mesozoic era.
At that time, the Earth was a single giant continent called Panjaya.
But soon after the Mesozoic began, Panjaya began to break apart.
First into two supercontinents, Laurasia to the north and Gondwana to the south.
I've mentioned Gondwana before.
Laurasia was a continent that was composed of what is now North America, Europe, and
Northern Asia.
As I mentioned, Gondwana land included South America and Africa and Antarctica, India,
Madagascar, Australia, and a variety of what has become small islands, probably including
South Georgia.
Evolutionary patterns began to take different trajectories between Laurasia and Gondwana
as these two supercontinents initially separated from one another and as they in turn broke
up within their own ranks.
Australia has been long isolated from the rest of what was once part of Gondwana.
It's nearly 66 million years ago that Australia split from Antarctica and Australia and Antarctica
had split from other southern continents earlier.
So you had Antarctica and Australia fused, then they finally broke apart.
In Australia, the big island continent has been drifting ever since.
And as I mentioned earlier, marsupial mammals such as kangaroos, which thrive in Australia,
are there and diverse because placental mammals, just by the chance realities of biogeography
and history of the earth, seem not to have been present in Australia when it was isolated.
Marsupials thrived for a long period of time.
They continue, many of them, to live in South America, but Australia is indeed the continent
of the marsupials.
Given that marsupials were likely the sole mammalian occupants of the entire continent
of Australia and given that they had millions of years to adapt to a wide range of habitats
and lifestyles, it's not surprising that they did exactly that.
The only placental mammals that really natural to Australia are bats and bats could fly there.
So you don't have any marsupial bats that have evolved.
But it was only 45,000 years ago that placentals really got to Antarctica in the form of humans
and presumably the dogs they brought.
The absence of placental mammals resulted in the evolution of marsupials, such as sugar
gliders.
I've seen sugar gliders.
They look absolutely remarkably like flying squirrels, but they're not.
They're sugar gliders and they're marsupials.
There is a mole-like marsupial that looks and acts like a placental mole.
There are marsupials that look like mice.
There are marsupials called bandicoots that bear a striking resemblance to placental
rabbits and hares.
And there was even a big marsupial predator, the thylacine.
Some people think the thylacine still, it's called the Tasmanian wolf, that it still lives
somewhere in Tasmania, but there have been no confirmed sightings of it for many, many
decades and it's considered to be extinct.
It was shot out of existence by people who colonized.
This evolutionary phenomenon where you have marsupials that have what evolution is called
adaptively radiated into so many life forms that there are such striking resemblances
to similar life forms that are placental mammals is called convergence or convergent
evolution.
Convergent evolution is one of the most powerful arguments for natural selection and it's one
of the most powerful pieces of evidence for how organisms are adapted rigorously to certain
environmental and climatic realities.
Convergences are common throughout the world's ecosystems.
Convergence is so common that it often presents evolutionary biologists with real difficulties.
Is an apparent similarity among certain organisms a result of sharing a common recent ancestor
or is it a case of ecological convergence where you have two very different organisms
that evolved similar characteristics because of selection pressures in their separated environments?
We used to not really know the answer to that very well but today as you might be able
to guess with the advent of genetic sequencing, DNA sequencing, we can actually answer these
questions.
Let me give you an example.
There's a group of large flightless birds and I'm sure you know at least one of them.
Everybody knows when an ostrich is and most people know that ostriches live in Africa.
Africa is widely separated from South America but there are a group of ostrich-like birds
in South America and we call them rias.
There are two species of them, a common ria and a smaller one called Darwin's ria named
after you know who.
Now if you go to Australia, you find a bird that looks a bit like an ostrich called an
emu.
You may have seen emus since they actually get farmed in various places.
Emus look a little like rias and look a little like ostriches.
There's another flightless bird in Australia which you can see in Queensland in the rainforest
called the cassowary.
Birds also find their way to New Guinea where there are several species of them, New Guinea
once being part of Gondwana land.
And then if you go over to New Zealand, you'll find kiwis, odd nocturnal birds which are
like small versions of ostriches.
That's a bit of a stretch but they're all very similar.
Now these birds have one thing in common and ornithologists like to call them ratites, R-A-T-I-T-E-S.
That refers to the absence of a bony carina or keel on their sternum.
Your breast bone is flat but a bird's breast bone isn't.
It has a large piece of bone projecting out of it where the muscles of flight attach.
But these large flightless birds don't have that projection.
It isn't used in them and so it has essentially disappeared over evolutionary time.
For many years it was debated as to whether or not the ratites are genetically closely
related or simply an example of convergence.
Think about it.
How does an ostrich colonize South America?
It can't fly and it damn well can't swim.
So when you find very similar birds anatomically separated by thousands and thousands of miles,
birds in South America, Africa, New Zealand, New Guinea, Australia and yet they're underpinnings
anatomically are extremely similar.
You say to yourself, what is this?
An incredible convergence or is it a genetic connection?
Well it turns out if you look at their DNA it is without any question a genetic connection.
The ratite birds are all each other's nearest relatives, kiwis, cassowaries, ostriches,
bees, emus, they're all closely related.
What they are an example of continental drift isolating them in different isolated continents
and then their evolution took different directions.
Indeed this should be self-evidence since cassowaries live in rainforests and emus live
out in open savannas.
It's hard to see that as an example of convergent evolution.
So geneticists have been able to answer the question that posed a problem for biogeographers
for a lot of years concerning the origins of these flightless birds.
But there are other cases where it's just the opposite where in fact it is a case of
convergent evolution and that would certainly be the case if you compare something like
a sugar glider for instance with the flying squirrel.
They have very little in common genetically other than they are both mammals but one of
them is a marsupial and one of them is a placental.
A key issue therefore in ecology and one that certainly gave Mr. Darwin a lot to think about
was what exactly is a species.
How do you define a species?
Well before we do it let's take a little trip to Africa.
If you travel throughout East and Central Africa you're going to see elephants.
It's one of the great thrills of being able to see one of the last wonderful megafaun
as the last megafauna on earth.
Once these giant animals roam throughout North American Europe they roam throughout Asia.
There are still Indian elephants in Asia but the place to see the megafauna as close as
possible to what it once was is Africa.
As large and unmistakable as the ponderous elephants are it may surprise you to learn
that until quite recently taxonomists those are people who study the details of animals
and try to tell us what species is what.
Thought there was but one species of African elephant.
Now they think there's two.
It was assumed that the African elephant was somewhat variable from one place to another
but still a single species.
What do I mean by variable?
Well some of the African elephants have ears that are rounded not pointed.
Some of them have tusks that are straighter than others and these differ by populations.
Some populations have straighter tusks.
Some populations have curled tusks.
Some populations are a little smaller in body size than others.
It turns out that by looking at genetics there are probably two species of elephants in Africa.
The second species is called the African forest elephant and it compares with the African
elephant in general in that the African savanna elephant or as we now call it is larger in
body size.
Its ears are differently shaped and it has more curled tusks.
The results of the molecular analysis suggest that forest and savanna elephants are each
as distinct from one another as lions are from tigers.
Now mind you lions and tigers are not that distinct they're genetically quite similar
but we all know the difference between lions and tigers and even though you can essentially
force them to hybridize in a zoo they don't hybridize in nature.
And so the thought is that these forest and savanna elephants are really different enough
from each other that they should be considered separate species.
But that tells you is that animals don't have to look very different in order to be different
species.
The ecology is determined species by a combination of factors the anatomy the ecology and the
genetics.
The most widely used definition of a species is that it is a population of reproductively
isolated organisms reproductively isolated from other populations.
What that says is that savanna elephants in general don't reproduce with forest elephants
forest elephants reproduce with forest elephants.
And so these two populations are diverging they are now separate species.
Species really do form by that process by genetic divergence.
Most people are familiar with the example of the Darwin's finches on the Galapagos Islands.
Because the islands are in archipelago they allow the separation of different populations
of finches.
But these finches don't fly over water particularly over oceans with any great regularity.
So it's a great combination and the Galapagos Islands you have islands that are close together
indeed you can easily see one island from another in many cases.
That allows the infrequent colonization by populations of finches and that allows subsequent
genetic divergence.
And so from one kind of colonizing finch has now come 13 or even more species.
It's surprising how fast this can happen.
Let me give you another example.
When I was younger I used to like to keep aquariums and one of my favorite fishes that
I had was called a Miki firemouth.
It was a beautiful fish which belonged to a large group of bass like fish called the
cichlids.
Cichlids are indeed colorful freshwater fish and many people who are aquarium enthusiasts
have cichlids.
There are about 300 species in the Americas.
You can see them if you snorkel in the Amazon or in rivers in Central America at least one
species comes as far north as Texas.
But by far the most species of cichlid fish is found in East Africa clustered in three
lakes that are formed in the Great Rift Valley.
These lakes are Lake Victoria, Lake Tanganyiga and Lake Malawi.
Now in Lake Victoria there are just over 400 species of cichlids.
Compare that with Lake Tanganyiga where there are just over 200 species of cichlids.
And Lake Malawi has somewhere, nobody's figured it out yet, between 300 and 500 species.
You know what you just heard?
Imagine that.
These lakes are big.
400 species, 200 species, 500 species, that's amazing.
Now factor this in.
The oldest of the three African lakes is Tanganyiga.
That formed about 9 to 12 million years ago.
The youngest is Victoria whose origin is only between 250,000 and 750,000 years ago less
than a million years old.
Remember Darwin thinking about how slow evolution was, how gradual?
Having only Lake Tanganyiga, if one assumes it to be 12 million years old, it's maximum
age.
It has 200 cichlid species, that is a minimal speciation rate of one species every 60,000
years.
Where's this business about it takes a million years to make a species?
One species every 60,000 years.
However, researchers are fully in agreement.
The amazing variety, the diversity of cichlids in the African Rift Lakes arose recently.
Within the past few million years, demonstrating that speciation can occur with impressive
rapidity.
This is based on states of DNA.
If you look at the DNA from these cichlids from Lake Victoria, that demonstrated that
this cluster of species is extremely closely related, showing that they are all very recently
evolved from a common ancestor.
How closely related are these 400 species?
Maybe you don't want to know, but I'll tell you that the average genetic distance between
two species of cichlid fish, two different species of cichlid fish from Lake Victoria,
is less than the average genetic distance between two humans selected at random from
people waiting for a subway.
In other words, the amount of human to human variation in the human population exceeds
the degree of genetic distance in separate species of fish in Lake Victoria.
This is a tremendously rapid rate of speciation.
It amounts to about one species every 500 years.
So biogeography and evolution are both powerful processes that ecologists have come to understand
and provide the important foundations and mechanisms for how ecosystems form and indeed
evolve.
In our next lecture, we'll start to look at some of these ecosystems much more closely.
