Imagine yourself a century or two ago making the trek westward, moving from
eastern North America, say some place like Boston or New York, and heading west.
What faces you is a very, very interesting ecosystem, the one that forms
the basis for this lecture, which is grassland, and later we'll talk about
savannah. As you would move westward through the Ohio Valley, you would begin
to see that the great deciduous forest, the forest of oaks and beech trees and
maples, would start to give way to a different kind of ecosystem. As eastward
is Ohio, you'd start to see patches of grassland intermingled among the
deciduous forest. It's not a sharp separation, it's a gradual separation.
Some grassland here, some forest there. But by the time you come west of the
Mississippi River, you would begin to see that you're in a very different kind of
ecosystem from the one you left. You would see the sight of millions of bison
grazing on what would seem to be endless prairie. Imagine the thought of walking
across the entire area. The grasses would be waving in perhaps what might be a
gentle breeze, but within 24 hours could be a torrential rainstorm or even a
tornado. But that sight of bison in the breeze portrays to the mind's eye a kind
of idyllic vision of a grassland biome in North America at the Sea of Grass or
the Great North American Prairie. Grassland appears at first glance to be highly
monotonous, a two-dimensional landscape of nothing but grass. But when you look
closer, you find it's also populated by wildflowers, many kinds of wildflowers,
and in some places there are some trees and shrubs as well.
Grasslands do not all look alike, though they may at first glance. Because of
differences in annual precipitation, some grasslands contain predominantly tall
grasses, others mixed and others short. Grasslands are kind of like ordering
coffee. It comes in small, medium, and large, and whether it's small, medium, and
large depends entirely on how much rain and snow it gets in the course of the
year. This pattern of different sized grasses is quite evident in North
America. The tallest grasses typify the most eastern regions, and the shortest
grasses are those most close to the Rocky Mountains. Think about it. As you move
eastward from the Rocky Mountains, you have increasingly more moisture coming
down from Canada and coming up from the south. This moisture is least where it
comes in contact with the Rocky Mountains, because as moisture tries to move
over the Rocky Mountains, it rains for the most part on the mountains, and by the
time the air mass crosses the mountains, it has very little moisture in it. But as
you move progressively east, more and more evaporation occurs, and so as you move
toward the Mississippi River from the west, you get a bit more rain and a bit
more rain and a bit more rain, and that's reflected in the kinds of grasses
that you find. As you approach the Rocky Mountains, grasslands become
predominantly short, even mixing with desert. Just as to the east, the tall
grasses, such as you find in Ohio and even places like Montana and the
Dakotas, that begins to mix with deciduous forests, so it's really a
moisture gradient effect. Grassland, wherever it occurs, gives the impression
of vast, vast openness. There is a good reason why Montana, which is mostly
grassland, is often called Big Sky Country. In grassland, the horizon is more
sweeping than any other place except possibly the open ocean. In North
America, grassland dominates the central part of the continent, from South Central
Canada, areas such as Winnipeg, for instance, all the way down into eastern
Mexico. States such as Montana, North and South Dakota, Kansas, Nebraska,
Oklahoma, are historically grassland dominated, and natural prairie, as I
mentioned, occurs as far east as Ohio. Now that may be a bit shocking, because if
you're familiar with driving around the country today, you don't see that, because
this is the area that has been converted into the great agricultural belt. Most of
what was once natural grassland is now agricultural land, and in fact, grassland
today, in the natural form, exists only as small and hopefully well-protected
patches, examples of the kind of prairie that used to be far more vast. Grassland
is also the natural vegetation of the Central Valley of California, another
area that is very largely agricultural today, and you wouldn't have any
inclination that natural grassland was once dominant there. The grassland
biome occurs in many, many other places in the world. In South America, for
instance, it can be found extensively in Chile and Argentina, where the
grassland is called the pompous. Throughout Europe, grassland is often
referred to as step, S-T-E-P-P-E, and in central and southern regions of
Africa, it's called the veld, V-E-L-D, but in North America, the word for it is
prairie. In general, the mean annual precipitation is less in grassland than
in forest, but there is a very wide range because factors other than
precipitation, as you'll learn, influence whether an area is grassland or not. In
the short grass prairie of Colorado, such as you find when you're approaching
Denver and see the Colorado Front Range in front of you, for example, the mean
annual precipitation is a meager 10 inches per year. 10 inches essentially is
almost desert level, but there's just enough of it distributed throughout the
year that it supports short grassland, emphasis short grassland, but you have
to be careful when you walk around in that short grassland because there's
patches of things like cacti, for instance, prickly pear cactus, which is a
desert plant, so you really have a kind of intermingling between the desert and
the short grassland in eastern Colorado. In some prairie regions, mean annual
precipitation can be as low as six inches a year. There is a gradient in
precipitation, as I mentioned, from west to east with increasing precipitation
moving eastward. Thus, tall grass prairie is found in eastern regions, and much of
the central prairie is nixed grassland, a little tall, a little short, a little
mixed. Because North American grasslands are confined to the interior of the
continent, there are no mitigating climatic effects by the oceans, such as
a coral on the eastern and western seaborts. What this means is that in the
prairie region, you experience real extremes in temperature, and indeed
weather extremes in general are commonplace there. The prairie experiences
severe winter blizzards with drifting snow blown by incessant high winds. Indeed,
one of the characteristics of the prairie most recorded in the journals of
settlers and pioneer travelers during the 19th century was the constancy of
wind. I've read many of these accounts, and it's really quite remarkable to read
the comments, the descriptions that people include about wind, in some cases
admiring, amazed by the constancy and force of the wind, in some cases very
disturbed, almost driven mad by the fact that the wind would never, ever cease.
Tarnados, you've seen the Wizard of Oz, you know, Darthys from Kansas. Tarnados
are commonplace throughout the summer months. In spring, one day may be mild,
the next day may be a major blizzard. That's just how prairie weather is.
Natural fire, usually set by lightning, in fact, almost 100% of the time set by
lightning, is a major factor influencing prairie ecology. Because of the weather
pattern in the prairie, thunderstorms are very, very common throughout the summer
months. Heat builds up on the surface of the land, it rises into the air, it's got
moisture associated with it, and so the result is thunderstorm. The result of
thunder is lightning, and lightning hits the ground and sets fire to the dry
prairie grasses. Without regular fires, and I want to emphasize this, in many
areas, prairie would eventually be replaced by forest. In other words, prairie
is supported by fire. Fire is part of the climate, and without it, you wouldn't
have prairie. To give you an example, if you go to South Dakota, to the Black
Hills, you can visit two areas that are kind of adjacent to one another. One of
them is Wind Cave National Park, and the other is Custer State Park. Custer State
Park, Wind Cave National Park, are examples of natural prairie, but they're
located in this area called the Black Hills. You might remember that the Black
Hills is the area where gold was discovered at a time when the United
States government had promised the Sioux Indians that it would be their area in
perpetuity, but once gold was discovered, things got changed. I'll talk a
little more about that in a few minutes. Anyway, at Wind Cave National Park and
Custer State Park, what you see is natural prairie, but the park service has to
burn that prairie regularly, because the other thing you'll see is that at
slightly higher elevations, you have a thick forest of ponderosa pines. This is
why they're called the Black Hills. From a distance, the ponderosa pines make the
hills look quite black. If you look carefully and you're standing on the
prairie, you see that a slow ecological procession is coming your way. The
ponderosa pines whose seeds are wind distributed are moving right into the
prairie and they're thriving, and so without periodic fires, the forest of
ponderosa pines would essentially replace this little remnant prairie, which
still exists in southwestern South Dakota. There's anthropological evidence
that suggests that Native Americans regularly set fire to grasslands for a
variety of reasons. They apparently understood that doing so would maintain
the area's grassland. It was also a method of driving game to a particular
area of making bison herds move where they wanted them to move from one place
to another. Now, I mentioned that the prairie has been largely replaced by
modern agriculture. This is the great wheat belt, corn, wheat, you name it, has
grown out there now. There's a good reason for that, and that is the soil.
Unlike the soil in the east, the soil is very rich with nutrients. It's an
entirely different kind of soil. It's not even an acidic soil, such as you find
throughout most of the eastern forest. This is a soil that's rich with elements
such as calcium, phosphorus, and potassium. The soil is black in color because
of the characteristics imparted on it by the elements it contains. If you fly
over the prairies, or if you fly over what I should say are agricultural fields
today, and the crops have recently been harvested, you will see very clearly this
black color of the soil. The dense roots of grasses effectively tap into this
abundance of nutrients, allowing continual growth through a 120 to 200 day
growing season. It's absolutely perfect for agriculture, and it probably would
have been used even earlier for agriculture, but for one thing. The grass
roots are so tough. The grass roots are so thick that literally they had no way
of plowing up the soil, and it wasn't until the Industrial Revolution came to
North America in the middle part of the 19th century that plows were made that
were actually strong enough when pulled by oxen to cut through this thick
prairie grass and actually make it possible to do cultivation. So that's
what really drove part of the movement of settlers from the east. When
industrialization came to the east, people moved in the Midwest, not just
because it became industrialized in the east, but because opportunities were
better for farming. It simply is a much more nutrient-rich area, all because of
this particular characteristics of the soil. The soil hasn't been glaciated, for
instance, like soils in northern New England and eastern North America. It's
not full of rocks, and it's not thinned from glaciers, having scraped it away. So
because of the natural richness of grassland soils, it's hardly surprising
that agricultural activities begin to dominate the region and continue to do
so today. One of the fears is that a lot of this topsoil is being inevitably
washed away in the process of industrial agriculture. The topsoil is left bare,
it's subject to wind erosion and rain erosion, and one of the concerns that
ecologists have, and this is a global concern, it simply doesn't have to do
just with North America, is loss of topsoil from agricultural regions
throughout the world, and that's something that probably needs some
attention. But back to the prairie. Many species of grasses occur throughout
the biome. It may look very monotonous to you, but if you learn a little bit
about how to identify grasses, and it's not that hard to do, you see that just
like a forest is composed of a number of different species of trees, prairies are
composed of a number of species of grasses. Tall grass prairie in North
America is dominated by species such as big blue stem, which is called a
bunch grass. A bunch grass is a kind of grass that seems to look like a bouquet
of flowers, except it's a bouquet of grass stalks. It all seems to come from a
central, very concentrated area, and then the grass kind of radiates out from
that central point. Bunch grass, as the name implies, has these stems that
radiate from a central cluster, and you can have a whole field full of bunch
grass, and it looks rather uniform, but when you look at it at ground level,
you can see that it really is a cluster of little bouquets of grasses, one next
to another. Under ideal growing conditions, big blue stem, which is one
of the dominant grasses out in the prairie, can reach a height of just
over three meters, which is roughly 10 feet. You know about the expression,
the corn is as high as an elephant's eye? Well, the natural grass can grow
that high as well. This is an interesting implication. I mentioned the
gold rush that followed when gold was discovered in the Black Hills. Well,
as they say, one thing led to another, and the Sioux Indians got considerably
concerned. A general named George Armstrong Custer was charged with
dealing with this situation, and I think we all know what happened to
George Armstrong Custer. Now, if you visit the site of the little bighorn
today in Montana, you can see the stones, the markers that mark where the
Seventh Cavalry fell. I don't think there are very many markers as far as
the Indians are concerned, but there certainly are with regard to the Seventh
Cavalry, and you can see where Custer made his last stand. The thing that you
wonder about is how dumb could this guy have been? You're standing there on a
hill, and you can see literally for miles. Wouldn't he have noticed all of
these people, each of them hostile, coming toward him and his troops? And the
answer, remarkably enough, is no, because the grassland has changed in
Montana since Custer's time. Many of the native grasses have been replaced by
invasive species of shorter stature. In fact, at the time of the little
bighorn incident, with the tall grass that existed there, the big blue
stem, the Indians could and did stand quite comfortably within the grass and
simply shoot Custer's troops as they rode by, not even seeing the Indians. And
this account is well described if you go to the little bighorn. Many grasses are
what we call sod-forming grasses rather than bunch grasses. Species such as
blue gram of grass and buffalo grass are widely distributed throughout many of
the grasslands, particularly in the short grass and medium grass regions. These
grasses are very similar to the grasses that make up lawns. That's why they
call them sod-forming grasses. As I mentioned, fire is a real important and
natural component of grassland environments, and grasses are adapted for
rapid growth after fire. They often spread underground with stems that botanists
call rhizomes, and soon the grasses will completely carpet it area. Root systems
contain much more tissue than the above ground shoots. This is why it was so
hard for the plows to go through grasslands. And so if grass is burned above
the surface of the ground, the root system has so much energy left in it, and the
root systems just fine that the grass sprouts right up again. Now, in case
you're having trouble grasping this principle, just go out with a lawnmower,
cut the grass in the summer, and then watch what happens. In a week, you'll be
out there with the lawnmower again cutting the grass. Grass is very adapted to two
things. Resprouting after it's destroyed by fire, and regrowing after it's been
grazed. Grass is well adapted to grazing, and grazing animals include things like
bison, which used to number in the high millions in the prairie when grass was at
its peak. Grasses are all wind pollinated plants. That makes a great deal of
sense in a kind of one-dimensional landscape where wind is basically a
permanent fixture. Now, it's not just grasses that you find in prairie areas.
Many wildflower species are mixed among grasses, and these include plants called
legumes. Now, you're probably familiar with legumes, beans, for instance, and peas
are legumes. Legumes are these kinds of things like clovers, which in many cases
have bacteria living among their roots, and the bacteria and the plant itself
have a very intimate interaction biochemically. The bacteria are able to
assist the plant in taking nitrogen up from the atmosphere, and this nitrogen
is converted into usable form in the roots of the plants. So when you have an abundance of
legumes, it really further enhances the high fertility of the soil. One of the
reasons the soil was so favorable for growing is it has a lot of nitrogen in it.
Lack of nitrogen tends to strongly limit plant growth. Fertilizer, it's always
nitrogen, phosphorus, and calcium. All of these things are present in abundance in
these soils. Numerous species of composites, which are
daisy-like plants. Now, just picture a daisy and you've got the idea.
Many of them have wonderfully colored flowers grow among prairie grasses.
So if you really know how to look at the prairie, it's an aesthetically magnificent place.
In North America, there are several animals very closely associated with prairie,
but two that are the most obvious are the American bison and prairie dogs. Bison,
once among the most abundant of North American mammals, were hunted to near extinction in the
19th century. Now controlled herds are growing back, but nowhere does the abundance approach
what it once was. Bison were important grazers in the central regions of the prairie, and many
ecologists believe that regular grazing by bison helped to conserve the grassland because it
prevented the invasion of non-grass species. In other words, bison chewed away the invasive
species and left the grass to continue to grow. Thus, it's a combination of low precipitation
to moderate precipitation, periodic fire, and grazing that combine to determine that grassland
will persevere. Let me say that again. There are three variables that seem to combine to keep an
area of grassland, and that is grazing pressure, fire, and moderate to low precipitation. There
are two prairie dog species to be found in North America, and conveniently enough they're called
the black-tailed prairie dog and the white-tailed prairie dog, named for the little color of the
tip of their tails. These animals tend to be keystone species in prairie ecology. Prairie dogs
are really a kind of ground squirrel, a member of the rodent family, and other ground squirrels are
also common throughout the grassland, but it's prairie dogs that exist in vast numbers in prairie
dog towns. The burrowing of prairie dogs helps turn the soil over and helps keep it nutrient rich,
while at the same time the foraging activities, the herbivory, the chewing of grasses by prairie dogs,
actually makes a patchwork of habitats around prairie dog towns that support other species,
things for instance like the mountain plover, which is a kind of bird that only nests in really
short, stubby grassland areas and can only be found where there are prairie dog towns in many
areas. There's also America's rarest mammal, the black-footed ferret, once an endangered species,
I suppose it still is, but it has been reintroduced to several different regions and black-footed
ferrets live around prairie dog towns and feed on prairie dogs. So does another kind of predator,
an owl, called the burrowing owl, which often uses prairie dog burrows. Scattered throughout
much of the central regions of the North American prairie are lakes and marshes, these are called
prairie potholes. Some of them are remnants of glaciation, I guess most of them probably are,
but these prairie pothole lakes and ponds are really essential nesting grounds for many duck
species, species such as canvasback, redhead, as well as numerous kinds of shorebirds and
herons rely on these wetland areas that are natural components of prairies, these pothole lakes.
Most natural prairie in North America has been replaced by agriculture. What was once natural
grasslands are now fields of wheat and rye, corn, sorghum, and other essential crops. So I want
to emphasize again that it's difficult to find natural prairie where once it may have seemed
absolutely and totally endless. There are scattered preserves if you get maps of various states and
you look you can see there various state and even federal preserves that are attempting to
restore prairie in its natural composition and so that you can get some idea of what it must have
looked like. The spread of cattle and sheep ranching in North America has made a major impact on
natural grasslands. In areas that are particularly sensitive such as short grass regions in the
southwest, natural grassland has really been converted to desert because of the selective
grazing by cattle. You see it's pretty obvious. What would you choose? Would you rather eat grass
or would you rather eat a nice prickly spiny cactus or a toxic shrub? Well what happens is as the
prairie short grass prairie mixes with desert and you introduce cattle the cattle are going to
selectively eat away the grasses and this gives an opportunity for the succulents and for the desert
shrubs to move right in and that's exactly what's happened so historically in places like Arizona
for instance in New Mexico where once there was prairie now there's desert. Well I can tell you
more about prairie but we need to move on to a related and somewhat different kind of ecosystem
one that isn't as well known in North America but certainly if you go to East Africa you'll know it
well and that's savanna. Savanna is an open habitat with scattered trees among various grasses. It
looks like a grassland in other words that people simply drop trees into or somebody drop trees into.
Trees particularly acaches may be scattered rather evenly even among the grasses or they may be
restricted to little woodlots and things of that sort. It's very variable. Savannas are quite variable
one from another. Wind is often a major factor and periodic fire set by lightning is extremely
common. In Africa large animal herds are an obvious feature of the savanna but an abundance of large
animals is not a universal characteristic of savannas everywhere. The vast herds of antelope,
gazelles, wildebeest, zebra, elephants, giraffes, service food for lions, cheetahs, leopards,
and hyenas are unique to Africa. Once North America had a megafauna that's the term for what I just
described but much of that has disappeared. The only remnants of the American megafauna are things
like bison and moose and elk. Europe had a megafauna that has long been gone and there was
somewhat of a megafauna in the savannas of South America also now largely extinct.
Most of us associate savanna with east and southern Africa but savanna occurs elsewhere.
In North America believe it or not we have a little bit of savanna. It's called wet savanna
and it's the Everglades of Florida. There is much savanna throughout parts of South America
particularly in what are called the yanos of Venezuela, the cerrados of northern Brazil,
and the pontinal of southern Brazil. Savanna can also be found in parts of Central America such as
Nicaragua and Belize. In Belize for instance the savanna is largely composed of a single kind of
pine called Caribbean pine. Then there's a lot of grasses and then in wet areas some tropical
trees move in as well. Savannas are also found in parts of India, Southeast Asia,
and they're fairly extensive in Australia. Savannas occur in regions with very strongly
developed dry season. That's the real key to a savanna is it has to be a strong dry season.
If the moisture were uniformly distributed it would be it would be tropical forest in many cases.
The severity of the dry season varies among savannas but in East Africa the dry season is
sufficiently severe to require annual migrations of the large animals as they move in search of
food and fodder. Savannas generally receive between 50 and 150 centimeters of precipitation
annually and during the wet months the grasses and trees are green and lush but during the dry
season the landscape turns brown. When I visited Tanzania in February and March it was during the
wet season and the grasses were lush. That is when the wildebeest these large ungulate animals,
hoofed animals, tend to all do their calving. The calves are highly precocial and only takes about
30 minutes for a wildebeest to give birth. I watched it happen. The calf is born. It's wobbly
and wet. The mother stays with it of course and then there's a very risky few minutes while that
calf essentially becomes oriented to standing up and moving and while I watched this birth the
wildebeest herd began to move away and you could almost see the panic in the eyes of the cow wildebeest
as she kept looking at her young and licking it trying to get it to get up and move and eventually
it did and she quickly got back to the herd which brings us to another point. I've been mentioning
herds of bison. I just talked about wildebeest. Why do prairie animals get into herds? And the
answer to that I think is pretty obvious. Herds afford a kind of protection. It's a kind of
insurance policy. The animals are near one another. You have all those eyes that can detect predators
and what you really have if you look carefully is what ecologists refer to as the selfish herd.
What that means is the animals on the periphery are constantly trying to move into the interior of
the herd which is where the safest areas are. The areas that are least likely to be attacked by
predators. Those animals that are on the exterior are the ones that are most likely to encounter
predators and you can see this very clearly with wildebeest herds as well as other herds.
Tropical savannas experience a mean annual temperature that can be fairly high. It can go
up into the 80s or 90s in extreme cases but it's usually quite moderate. The lack of rainfall during
the dry season, the overall high temperature, result in significant physiological stress on
both plants and animals. It's during the dry season it gets very difficult. That's when
something has to happen. Either the animal has to migrate or somehow to adapt to the
reality of the dry season. It's unclear to ecologists exactly what factors combine to determine the
existence of savannas. It's not that we don't have a good idea but in any case in any particular case
various factors may combine in different ways. Not all savannas occur in areas where the protracted
dry season. As a result some ecologists believe that savannas are also caused by things like
nutrient poor soils that for various reasons are simply insufficient to support things like
lush moist forest. Prolonged human agricultural activities have been blamed for causing savanna
formation. The argument is that human use has depleted nutrients in the soil and thus prevented
the normal regrowth of rain forest or seasonal forest. Savanna vegetation claims and essentially
what's left over in the depleted soils. So what this argument suggests is that in some areas
where there have been strong human use for many centuries of these tropical soils the activities
of humans have basically converted the habitat from forest to savanna. Fire is another strong
factor in savanna ecology. Periodic natural fires just as they do with grasslands aid in
promoting regrowth of savanna grasses and sedges at the extensive woody species that in the absence
of fire might eventually come to dominate the region. Because most savannas are also areas
of strong human influence fire frequency may have increased due to human activity. Historically
savannas have been increasing in areas since the middle part of the Cenozoic era. Now to put
that in perspective go back about old 35 to 40 million years ago. At that time prior to that
time there was mostly forest in fact much rain forest and lush forest. But as I mentioned in an
earlier lecture when Antarctica actually took its position directly over the South Pole it really
changed global climate. Global climate became drier and more temperate and that in turn caused
the spread of savanna where once there was unbroken rain forest. So when you look at the evolution
of the grazing animals it traces back certainly to begin to diversify about 35 to 40 million years
ago. It's this climatic shift that was likely the major selection pressure in the emergence of
hominids, ancestors of human beings from east and southern Africa. We really owe our origins to
savanna ecology. Without question the large herds of hoofed animals that inhabit the African savanna
are the animals most associated with savanna ecology. Savannas elsewhere in the world really
lacked this amazing mammalian diversity but it's interesting to note that that was not always the
case. The larger vivorous mammals of African savannas feed either by browsing or grazing.
There is a difference. Browsers are creatures like giraffes that feed largely on leaves from trees
whereas grazers are things like zebra and wildebeest that rely mostly on grasses. When you look at an
African savanna and you see the grazing animals you might get the impression that they're fundamentally
all competing for the same grasses and that's actually not the case. If you look very carefully
you see that different animals eat different grasses and if you measure the characteristics of the
grasses you see why. Let me give you just a straightforward example comparing an animal
such as a wildebeest which is a large bison size creature with a small grazing animal such as the
Thompson's gazelle. The Thompson's gazelle which can be seen abundantly throughout east Africa
favors short grasses that are just emerging. The reason for this is it can digest them more easily
whereas wildebeest crop grasses that are very tall but the taller the grass is the more fibrous
material it has in it. That's what keeps it tall if it didn't have that fibrous material to strengthen
and it would just flop over and so tall grasses are actually considerably harder to digest and
take more energy to digest a program of grass than short grasses do and so Thompson's gazelle
selectively crops short grass and wildebeest selectively crop tall grass. Both of them make
out it's optimal foraging for both of them but both of them can coexist. You can see them in
exactly the same area and they're not competing with one another because they're eating completely
different plants. Elephants exert strong effects on savanna ecology. They damage trees such as
baobabs as well as prevent their regeneration thus eventually converting a savanna that's
fairly dense with trees into one of mostly grassland. Though vertebrates command most attention on the
African savanna it shouldn't be overlooked that there are major numerous insect species that are
very ecologically important ranging from locusts which periodically experience population eruptions
to termites whose tall mounds characterize savannas worldwide. Whether you're in Australia or Africa
you can see these kind of insect versions of skyscrapers the conical mounds of termites.
Termites are a very powerful influence in the savanna because they crop savanna vegetation as
well and with invertebrates that live in the termites digestive system they manage to decompose
and digest cellulose the very tough coarse carbohydrate material that makes up plants.
In the course of doing this termites emit a great amount of carbon dioxide indeed grazing
animals in general and termites contribute to greenhouse effect by making a great deal of
carbon dioxide in their natural metabolism. Human beings as mentioned earlier likely owe their very
existence to savannas. If one habitat deserves to be called quote unquote natural as far as our
own species evolution is concerned it is savanna. It has even been suggested and think about this
it has even been suggested that our fondness for lawns for grassy areas with scattered trees think
of suburbia now stems from a deeply ingrained familiarity with savanna like habitat the term
for that is biofilium. Savanna support a high biodiversity of unique species in addition these
animals as is the case in Africa as well as other areas are dependent on being able to move around
to migrate with the seasons. It's thus imperative that large areas of savanna is being maintained
as sanctuaries for the ungulates and associated species. It won't do to fragment them because
that will simply defeat the ecology of the animals and won't be able to adapt to it.
These must be separated from areas where cattle and other non-native animals have grazed as the
native animals can act as vectors for diseases such as sleeping sickness malaria etc. Such diseases
can devastate cattle as they are not nearly as resistant to the pathogens as a native species
that have had literally millions of years to adapt to them. So savannas are fascinating and
wonderful areas but what happens when you get even less moisture in a biome? Well what happens there
is that you have desert and desert is the subject of our next lecture.
you
