Suppose you spend the better part of a year in a place like Baleen, Brazil, and then you
spend the better part of a year in a place like Toronto, Canada.
With regard to climate, what would the difference be?
Well, surprisingly enough, if you look at the amount of rainfall on a monthly basis
in a place like Toronto, Canada, you'd see that it's essentially the same from one month
to another.
By rainfall, I should say precipitation, since in Toronto, Canada, some of that precipitation
falls as snow in months like December, January, February, and March.
There's roughly something in the neighborhood of 2.5 inches of rainfall that falls per month
or precipitation on average per month over the course of a 12-month year.
It's quite steady.
But if you looked at the daily temperature in Toronto, Canada, you would certainly see
that that changes over the course of the year.
It's quite low in the winter.
It goes up quite high in the summer.
In the winter, it can easily be close to zero, and it can be as high as 80-90 degrees in
the summer.
So if you graph precipitation, you get kind of a straight line, all down kind of low,
about 2.5 inches a month.
And if you graph temperature, you get a very big rise in the summer months.
Now contrast that with Baleen, Brazil.
If you look at the daily maximum temperature and daily minimum temperature throughout the
12-month year, you can basically draw a straight line, and the temperature on average is somewhere
in the mid-80s Fahrenheit.
If you look at the amount of rainfall, that's what really changes.
It's not steady like it is in Toronto.
It's variable.
The wettest months in Brazil are February, March, April, and May.
That's during the rainy season to a certain extent in January as well.
The driest months are September, October, and November.
Now in the driest months in Baleen, Brazil, you have about the same amount of precipitation
as you do in any given month in Toronto, Canada.
In the wettest months, you have something like five times that amount.
This brings us to the topic of this lecture, the tropical rainforest.
Baleen, Brazil is in an area of the world that supports tropical rainforest.
Tropical rainforest is the most lush and diverse of the world's terrestrial biomes.
The word jungle is closely associated with tropical rainforest, but rainforest and jungle,
though related, are really very different habitats within the same biome.
Jungles are disturbed areas where rainforest has been temporarily destroyed, either by
cutting, wind throw, or some other factor, sometimes natural, sometimes human cause.
And jungle is a thick tangle of vegetation that often grows so densely that a machete
is necessary to cut a path through it.
Jungles, however, if left alone, will eventually transform back into rainforest.
That's the process of ecological succession.
I described ecological succession earlier when we talked about the deciduous forest.
It happens in the tropics as well.
And what jungle is, is really a successional area.
And what rainforest is, is really mature forest.
Tropical rainforests are much more open inside and deeply shaded than jungles.
Because as the trees grow up, they provide so much shade that they inhibit growth at
ground level.
And rainforests are composed of many species of trees, some of which grow to great stature,
often in excess of 100 feet.
But rainforest rarely reach statues comparable to the temperate rainforest of the Pacific
Northwest or some of the temperate Eucalyptus forests in Australia.
Rainforest trees, which are broadleaved and usually evergreen, are often rather slender,
accentuating their apparent height.
Branches radiate out high above ground level, like spokes on an umbrella.
And roots emerge as large buttresses at the base of the trees.
These are two very, very general characteristics of what I call typical tropical trees.
This tendency to look like a parasol where the branches all radiate out well above ground
level and the very impressive and striking buttressing net is so common in many species
of rainforest trees.
At ground level, rainforests are very well shaded, as up to about 99 percent.
That's 99 percent of the light striking the canopy fails to reach the forest floor, so
it gets pretty dark down there.
This is why some people find rainforest intimidating.
You walk through a mature rainforest and it's rather dark in there, and the trees around
you are really tall.
Rainforest trees are often abundantly laden with an impressive assemblage of various kinds
of epiphytes, things like bromeliads, cacti, orchids, things like that.
The definition of an epiphyte is, and it's sometimes called an air plant.
It's a kind of plant that can grow on a plant without really parasitizing it, orchids, bromeliads,
and incidentally, if you're wondering about bromeliads, pineapples, and a member of the
bromeliad family.
They tend to be things that have very spiky leaves and sometimes very colorful flowers.
But these epiphytes live on the branches themselves.
The roots of the epiphytes cover the branches and secure moisture as it rains, and with
that moisture they take in minerals as well.
But they don't grow into the branches and parasitize the trees.
So one characteristic of tropical rainforest, not universally, but certainly in many cases
is an abundance of epiphytes.
Sometimes when you look up at the canopy of a rainforest tree and you try to look at
its leaves to identify it, you don't know whether you're really looking at the tree's
leaves or the leaves of some kind of epiphyte that's up there covering the branch.
Another characteristic of tropical rainforest is vines.
Everybody knows that tar's unlike to go swinging around on vines.
Vines really are a reality in rainforests.
They're very typical, and they include such things as various figs, including the infamous
strangler fig, which is common in many rainforests, as well as philodendrons, and then a kind
of looping and twisting kind of vine, which is called a liana.
There are many species of lianas, and they actually begin growth as shrubs on the floor
of the forest, but they're positively attracted to any kind of tree that's nearby, and they'll
start to loop up and grow into the tree and form a very complex looping pattern.
The combination of numerous tree species plus diverse epiphytes and vines make what we call
the physiognomy or physical structure of a rainforest perhaps the most complex of any
terrestrial ecosystem.
You kind of go in there and just scratch your head at the three-dimensional complexity of
the ecosystem.
Animals are generally hard to see well within rainforests.
As the complex physical structure of the forest shelters, the animal inhabits very effectively.
Mammals ranging from canopy-dwelling monkeys to ground-dwelling tapirs and tigers can be
extremely difficult to detect.
Incidentally, if you are in an Indian forest where there are tigers, you don't really
want to detect them at ground level unless you're really careful.
But to be serious, it is true that many people visit rainforests and they want to see animals,
and it can be surprisingly difficult to do so.
In some areas, for instance, where monkeys are protected, they become curious about humans,
they don't fear humans, and they're easy to see.
But in other areas, like much of South America where monkeys are regularly hunted, they're
extremely difficult to see because they'll see you before you see them and they'll scamper
away in the canopy before you can get a real look at them.
Tapirs are large hoofed mammals related to rhinoceroses, and they tend to come out only
at night.
So during the day, you may walk through a rainforest in a place like Brazil or Ecuador
or even Belize, and you'll see tracks of tapirs, but you won't see the tapir themselves.
Butterflies are conspicuous in places where sunlight strikes blooming flowers, attracting
the colorful insects, and I'll say more about butterflies later.
And birds, there are many kinds of birds in tropical rainforests, but you can walk through
a tropical rainforest for a considerable distance and not see a single species of bird, because
many birds are organized into foraging flocks, some in the canopy, some in the understory,
and if you come upon one of these foraging flocks, all of a sudden you'll be surrounded
by birds, they'll be everywhere, and you won't even be able to see all of them, there's so
many, and then they just move away from you as they continue to forage.
So it's kind of a feast or famine with birds.
One thing that's a real characteristic of many rainforests is the constant wine of insects,
particularly cicadas and other stridulating insects that that will go on all day.
That's basically the sound of the rainforest.
Rainforest is found in equatorial regions throughout the world.
Rainforests are best developed in proximity to the equator.
Forests become more subject to strong seasonality away from the equator, and actually there's
a technical difference here.
As you move away from the equator and seasonal effects become more pronounced, we tend to
call them tropical moist forests, but in areas where there's a lot of rain all 12 months
of the year, then that's true rainforest.
Rainforest and moist forests taken together, as I mentioned in an earlier lecture, occupy
roughly a 47 degree latitudinal belt bounded by the Tropic of Cancer to the North, Tropic
of Capricorn to the South.
It's the only actual rainforest in the United States, and I mean tropical rainforest.
We've talked about the temperate rainforest of the Pacific Northwest, but if you want
real tropical rainforest, you have to go to the Hawaiian Islands, though the Everglades
of South Florida rank certainly a subtropical.
The largest expanse of rainforest in the world is found in South America in the Amazon Basin.
Rainforest also occurs in Central Africa, Southern India, and Southeast Asia.
It occurs throughout much of Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Guinea, as well as the Queensland
area in Northeastern Australia.
I won't mention to you the rate of deforestation of rainforest because it changes virtually
by the day, but efforts have been made to reduce the rate of tropical deforestation with
varying degrees of effect.
It's still true to say that rainforest becomes a shrinking ecosystem on a daily basis.
Constant heat and relatively high constant humidity characterize all rainforests.
If you can't handle humidity, it's really not a good place to be.
The growing season, the time in which plants can actively add tissue, is generally year
around.
There are some rainforests that have a bit of a dry season, and there are even some
trees in those forests that may shed all their leaves.
But trees can be deciduous in rainforests for reasons other than moisture limitation.
Some trees become deciduous because after dropping their leaves, they flower, and then
the flowers attract all the various kinds of pollinators, and they see the tree more easily,
presumably by the fact that it's exposed with no leaves on it, just the flowers being visible.
Typical daily high temperatures for a rainforest are about 88 degrees Fahrenheit, though I've
been in some rainforests where I know it was in the 90s, and at night, temperature tends
to drop to something in the low 70s, something like 70 to 72 degrees Fahrenheit.
This can feel cooler than it actually is because of the dampening effect that the high humidity
provides.
This temperature range prevails during all months of the year, so temperature is not
much of a variable.
It's just generally high.
At ground level, humidity can reach as high as 95%, making the air feel downright oppressive.
I've known people who swear they have trouble breathing inside of some rainforest because
it feels so wet.
All precipitation, and there's lots of it, falls as rain.
You're never going to wake up to a winter wonderland of snow in a rainforest.
In any area of rainforest or moist forest, it is usual for it to rain anywhere from 130
to 250 days per year.
That's just quite normal.
The Amazon basin precipitation ranges from nearly 60 inches a year, bear in mind 40 inches
would support lush deciduous forest, so it goes from something like 60 inches to over
100 inches, sometimes 120 inches annually.
Some areas experience as much as 180 inches per year.
I worked in an area in Belize that has that much rainfall, but it's pretty seasonal.
As I said earlier, rainfall typically is seasonal.
That's a real characteristic of the tropics.
It's a mistake to think of the tropics as not having seasons.
The tropics have very definite seasons, but they're rainy season, dry season.
In some tropical areas, there's one rainy season a year and one dry.
In some areas, there's one significant rainy season and one significant dry season, and
then one moderate rainy and one moderate dry.
Of course, in the year, it's quite variable.
Soils are typically heavily eroded of their minerals in rainforest areas.
This is one of the great surprises to many people in rainforest areas.
The soils are not very productive in the sense that ecologists associate with productive
soils.
I talked about how rich the soils are in the North American prairie region.
Well, that's not true in the tropics.
There's so much rainfall that the vital minerals tend to be washed away in the soil.
They're washed right out of the soil, and the soil ends up being things like iron and
aluminum elements that most plants don't find very useful.
Adding to the low soil fertility is the fact that many tropical soils are geologically
ancient, and their great age also has resulted in accumulated leaching.
In other words, just like people, soils kind of wear out as they age.
Thus, it may seem ironic that lush areas of rainforest sit atop some of the world's most
infertile soils.
How can that be?
The answer is in recycling.
Tropical rainforest plants in general are phenomenal recyclers.
You have to consider the fact that you have a very hot and humid environment, an environment
in which fungi absolutely thrive.
And so the rate of decomposition is very high.
A tropical leaf may fall to the ground, and in a very short period of weeks there's nothing
left of it.
It's been completely decomposed.
Now what happens to that amount of chemicals that's in the leaves?
Well, what happens is it never goes in the soil.
It moves very quickly back into the vegetation.
In fact, tropical vegetation tends to short circuit the recycling process through something
called surface roots.
When tropical trees have buttresses, these buttresses radiate out into very widespread
surface root systems.
And so as decomposition is occurring in the surface, literally in the litter layer before
it moves very much into the soil, the root systems of tropical trees are right there to
grab it up.
So this is an incredibly efficient system of recycling.
And thus tropical rainforests can be lush and thrive in areas where the soils are really
terrible and if you tried to grow crops on them for year after year, you wouldn't succeed.
You may have heard of something called slash and burn agriculture.
It's sometimes called swidden agriculture.
Native peoples have been able to do agriculture to a reasonable basis in a limited way on
many relatively infertile tropical soils because what they do is they cut the vegetation
down and they burn it.
And the burning of the vegetation is kind of a fertilizer effect.
It releases all these minerals into the top layer of the soil and then it's possible to
do farming for a number of years.
That very quickly depletes the amount of minerals that were put there after the burning and
so the crops have to be moved to a different area.
So people who do this slash and burn or swidden agriculture use a plot for as short as just
two or three years or maybe as long as five or six years and then they have to move on
to a different plot.
But it does work and when you think about it, what slash and burn agriculture really does
is kind of mimic natural disturbance and succession.
People are cutting the trees down just like wind throw wood by burning them or they're
letting them quickly decompose so their minerals are available and then they can do a little
bit of farming and that works.
Infertile tropical soils are often deep reddish in color due to the accumulation of iron and
aluminum oxides in the surface layers of the soil and these are chemicals which plants
simply don't use.
Most tropical soils also have very high clay content.
Now clay is a kind of microscopic gummy little particle and it makes soils compact very easily
so it's another problem.
There isn't a lot of oxygen in tropical soils because they're so compact and when it rains
clay makes them feel very slippery and gummy.
If you walk through tropical mud you'll get the idea very quickly.
Now not all tropical soils are infertile.
In fact there's a big range of fertility within the tropical areas with regard to soils.
For instance in areas where there's been recent geological activity like volcanism for instance
when volcanoes bring up really rich minerals and if those minerals go into the soils then
in fact those soils will be very fertile soils and that is the case in some areas in
Central and South America.
Now the one thing that I can tell you about tropical rainforest that most everybody knows
but it is indeed true is that more species of organisms comprise tropical rainforest
than do any other ecosystem on earth.
It is just an amazing area for its biodiversity.
Indeed it can be said that one of the unique characteristics of tropical rainforest is
the high species richness that typifies it.
Indeed more than 50% of the world's total species are thought to inhabit rainforest.
Nearly 300 different species of trees have been identified within a single hectare that's
approximately two and a half acres.
That's not a very large area of some Amazonian rainforest.
That's 300 different tree species.
The closest you can come to that is 30 different tree species in equivalent areas in areas
like the cold forests of the Great Smoky Mountains in the temperate zone.
That's 30 compared to 300.
In contrast, most areas that are still in the tropics that aren't tropical rainforest
have far lower species richnesses.
For instance tropical dry forests, savannas and other kinds of ecosystems that aren't
typical rainforest with much lower species richness.
So there is something unique about rainforest in holding so many species.
In fact if you look at the number of nesting bird species as you move say from polar regions
down to the equator, you see a progressive increase in number of nesting bird species
toward the equator and then you see a sudden dramatic jump.
And that sudden dramatic jump happens as soon as you hit rainforest.
It just jumps up by at least an order of magnitude.
This is also true for things like insects, snakes, various kinds of plants.
It's not just one kind of organism, it's many kinds.
Animal life is indeed stunningly diverse.
There's a lot of animals that are pollinators, seed dispersers.
There are more bird species, more insect species, more frog species, more snake species in rainforest
and any other kind of ecosystem.
In one area in southwestern Amazonia, 1,234 species of butterflies have been identified
from within a mere 2 kilometer area.
The total species richness of insects and other arthropods is unknown.
I mean it simply can't be measured, there's just too much of it and we haven't explored
that much yet.
But one estimate, based on carefully collected samples from single trees, suggested as many
as 20 to 30 million arthropod species, those are various kinds of insects, millipedes,
centipedes, scorpions, etc., may reside within the world's rainforest.
That's far in excess than all the described species on earth thus far, but it is only
an estimate, or maybe we should even call it a guesstimate.
Bertebrate diversity is high as well.
Within a single reserve in Amazonian Ecuador, 81 species of frogs have been documented.
That's the same number of frog species found in the entire United States.
This is in one small area in Ecuador.
Bats are highly diverse in rainforests around the world.
In African, Asian, and Australian rainforests, they're very large bats, they kind of resemble
those monkey flying things in the Wizard of Oz, and these are called flying foxes because
they have very dog-like faces.
These impressive creatures dine mostly on fruit, and they're essential to dispersing
the seeds of various kinds of fruiting trees.
In South American and Central American rainforests, bats are found to consume all manner of things.
When we think of a typical bat in North America, we think of an insectivorous flying nocturnal
mammal.
It flies out and snaps insects up.
Well, in Central and South American rainforests, there are bats certainly that consume insects,
many of them, but there are also fruit-eating bats, nectar-eating bats.
I've described nectar-eating bats when I talked about the Suvaro cactus in the previous lecture.
There are fish-eating bats.
There are bats that are specialized to fly over ponds and streams and snag fish.
They gaff them with the long claws and their feet.
There are bats that specialize in eating frogs.
Indeed, it's a big risk for a frog to vocalize in certain areas in the tropics because rather
than attracting a lady frog to mate with, it may attract a bat, which catches it, flies
off, and eats it.
There are bats that specialize in eating birds.
There are bats that specialize in eating other bats, and there are even a few species of
bats that feed on blood, the infamous vampire bats.
In the tiny country of Belize in Central America, land with approximately the area of the state
of Massachusetts, there are 84 bat species, compared with a total of 40 found within the
entire United States.
Birds are among the most species-rich group of vertebrate animals in rainforests, roughly
twice as many species of birds, 1,695, are found in Colombia in northern South America
than in all of North America.
North America has about 700, 800 species of birds.
There are 1,600 in Colombia, and that's typical of other Latin American countries, Peru and
Ecuador as well.
There are far too many species of rainforest birds to even attempt to summary here, but
like bats, they demonstrate many modes of feeding and adaptation.
One of the largest birds of prey, perhaps the largest in the world, is the harpy eagle
of South America.
It's the largest of the world's eagles, and it feeds on tree sloths and monkeys, which
plucks from the forest canopy during its swift flight.
There are similar eagles to the harpy in Africa, tropical Asia, and New Guinea.
The dinosaur-like flightless cassowaries of Australia and New Guinea feed mostly on large
fruits taken from the forest floor, and indeed it's important to state here that there are
so many fruiting in animals in the tropics because fruit is not a seasonal crop in the
tropics.
Fruit can be found 12 months a year, that's not the case in the temperate zone, and so
because some fruits are available all year in the tropics, various species of birds and
other kinds of animals have specialized on feeding on fruits.
It can fairly be asked, why is there such a high diversity of life in general in the
tropics?
Why is it?
And the antariz ecologists aren't sure.
There is no single variable that seems to describe why the tropics should be uniquely diverse.
But we have some fairly good and you might say fairly obvious ideas as to why this is
the case.
One is energy.
Remember I've been talking about primary productivity in various lectures.
I mentioned how deserts have very low primary productivity.
While tropics have the highest primary productivity, the highest amount of photosynthesis of any
ecosystem terrestrially in the world, it's extremely high.
So the fact that there's such a wide energy base in the plants certainly suggests that
there could be a lot of opportunity to transfer some of that energy to various animals and
microbes that rely on those plants.
Not only that, but the plants themselves are structurally complex.
The rainforest isn't two dimensional like the prairie appears to be or to a certain
extent deserts.
It's three dimensionally complex, so it offers lots of different structural areas for species
to be, particularly things like insects.
Another variable is area.
Historically, at least, tropical rainforests have occupied extremely large areas.
And this allows opportunities for evolution of different species.
And so the speciation rate in the tropics because of a combination of high energy in
large area may have been pretty high.
There's also evidence that the tropics has a tendency to accumulate species.
You can think of it this way.
Think of speciation, the evolution of new species is kind of akin to birth rate.
And think of extinction, the loss of species is kind of akin to death rate.
Just as a population is determined by the rate of birth relative to the rate of death,
if birth exceeds the rate of death, the population grows.
If death exceeds the rate of birth, population declines.
You can think of a community of evolving organisms in the same context.
So if you have a high speciation rate and you have a low extinction rate, you're just
going to start accumulating species over time.
That seems to have been the case for the tropics.
The tropics are climatically relatively stable.
That means they don't go through dramatic periods of glaciation.
They don't go through dramatic changes.
Sometimes tropical forests may shrink or expand because of global climate change.
But by and large, this combination of high energy, big energy base, large area, and relative
stability.
It's a fairly benign place physiologically.
It's warm.
It's wet.
These are the very conditions that are perfect for life.
This may have permitted in general a higher rate of speciation over long periods of time
than extinction.
There's nothing in the books that says rate of speciation ought to equal rate of extinction.
Sometimes rate of extinction is far higher and an area will lose species.
That seems to be the case now for earth in general.
The extinction rate is probably well higher than the speciation rate largely for reasons
having to do with our own species.
But getting back to the tropics, historically, the rate of speciation may have been sufficiently
high that the tropics just simply accumulate species.
So what do they do with them as they accumulate them?
Well in the tropics, it's really not the physical environment you have to contend with that
very much.
It's not going to drop to below zero at night.
There's not going to be high winds.
Even fire is relatively uncommon.
So what happens is the main selection pressures on organisms come from the organisms themselves.
And many tropical organisms have evolved elaborate interactions.
Indeed, the interactions among species are far more elaborate in tropical areas than
in most other ecosystems.
Let me give you a couple of examples.
For one thing, unlike grasslands and eastern deciduous forests and places like that where
a lot of the trees are wind-pollinated, wind isn't much of a factor in a closed rainforest.
Rainforest tends to absorb any wind relatively quickly.
So most pollination of trees is not done by wind, it's done by animals.
All manner of animals range from insects to bats to hummingbirds.
So there are these, to varying degrees, very elaborate mutualisms among various kinds of
animals and plants in terms of pollination.
That also includes seed dispersal.
There's a unique kind of nocturnal bird that's found throughout northern South America called
the oilbird.
It looks kind of like a gigantic whipper-wheel, and they call it the oilbird because it feeds
exclusively on fruits.
It feeds on the fruits of palms and laurels and other fruits that have very high oil content,
very high fat content.
In fact, they're called oilbirds because when the baby birds start to grow, they get actually
larger than their parents because they're fed nothing but these fruits that contain
very high amounts of fat.
So the little kids get really big, and they're getting a little bit of protein, but they're
getting a lot of fat.
Still they need a lot of protein, so the birds get bigger and bigger and bigger while
they're accumulating enough protein to mature, and in the course of doing so, they get very
fat.
And they can actually be boiled down for oil.
They've been used by Native Americans for torches and things of that sort.
It's a very, very strange bird.
But the oilbird, in the course of feeding on these fruits, is a very effective disperser
of the seeds of the fruits.
The oilbird can fly up to 150 kilometers a night seeking fruit, and as it flies over
the rainforest, it's defecating the seeds of the fruit or regurgitating them, as the
case may be, and thus it's an extremely efficient seed disperser.
One of the most unique interactions in the forest is the fungus garden ants.
If you ever go down to Amazonia or to Central America, you'll see the little ants carrying
pieces of leaves.
These are called leaf cutter ants, but the real name for them is fungus garden ants.
These are animals which climb up into the trees and start cropping the leaves.
You'll see that the leaves are cropped off in neat little pieces.
They carry the leaves into their underground cities, is really what they amount to, their
huge colonies of these ants.
And what they do with them there is they grow fungus on them, and they eat the fungus.
So the ants feed on the fungus that they actually grow, their little agricultural ants, and
the fungus grows on the leaves.
The fungus is only found in these ant colonies, and when a queen ant goes to found a new colony,
she takes some of this fungus with her.
So there's this absolutely elegant mutual interaction between the ants and the fungus.
The only place the fungus is found in the world is in these ant colonies, and the ants could
not exist without the fungus because it's virtually the only thing they eat.
They crop all manner of different tropical plants simply to satisfy the fungus, and in
that way they can tap into a huge amount of energy because most tropical plants are full
of noxious chemicals that are adaptations to minimize the amount of herbivory on the
plants.
The ants have evolved a magnificent way of getting around it.
Well, as I mentioned earlier, the rate of deforestation in tropical countries is fairly
high, and another thing that's happening today in tropical areas is a lot of fragmentation.
Bars are being cut into smaller and smaller and smaller patches, and because of all these
elegant mutualisms and various other complex species interactions, fragmentation is having
a disproportionately large effect on reducing species richness in many tropical areas.
Ants are studying very hard the effect of fragmentation right now and trying to see
what kinds of things can be done to mitigate the effect of fragmentation throughout the
tropics.
Why should we worry about tropical rainforest?
Well, one of the things that tropical rainforests seem to do is photosynthesize, and in this
time of climate change where people are more and more concerned about carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere, rainforests form natural carbon sinks.
They suck up carbon dioxide like gigantic green sponges.
To many people, the thought of large areas of rainforest is perhaps a way of mitigating
the effect of carbon dioxide increase in the atmosphere.
It's not as simple as that, and a lot more research needs to be done, because the fact
is that carbon dioxide may also be released by rainforests a lot as well, so we really
don't know what the answer is yet to the notion that rainforests may form very effective
carbon sinks, but we know this much, and that is when rainforests are cut and burned, it
does release carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
When rainforests are converted into pasture, it has the net effect of increasing carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere, and in fact global deforestation has really been a factor as
well as fossil fuel burning in increasing carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere.
I'll mention a little more about carbon dioxide and greenhouse effect in the final lecture,
but right here I simply wanted to connect it to the realities of what is occurring in
the tropics.
In our next lecture, we'll move from the richest ecosystem on land to the largest ecosystem
that exists in the world, and that is the marine ecosystems of the open ocean and coastal
areas.
