Once upon a time, there was a little girl named Goldilocks, and she was very selective about eating porridge.
Now mind you, I didn't read very many fairy tales when I was little. I couldn't even tell you the story of Goldilocks.
But the one thing I know about Goldilocks is that the porridge had to be just right.
I think there were three bears or something like that that were involved.
But it was the porridge that was interesting. It couldn't be too hot and it couldn't be too cold. It had to be just right.
Astrobiologists, a word that I'll define in a moment, like to compare our planet, the Earth, with the famous porridge of Goldilocks.
Earth's characteristics, which I'm going to outline for you in this lecture, make it just right to support life.
It's what we call the Goldilocks effect.
Now what's an astrobiologist?
An astrobiologist is a person who studies life on other planets in the universe.
Mind you, we don't know about any life on any other planets in the universe, but I guess astrobiologists are optimistic.
And they should be. There's an awful lot of possibilities.
But at the same time, it may surprise you to know just how many things have to be in place in order for life to exist.
Earth is an ecological planet. But why? That's the subject of this lecture.
Earth is 4.5 billion years old. That's nearly as long as the Sun.
Earth formed in the shadow of the Sun. It was part of the mass of material that was part of the formation of the Sun.
It formed along with the rest of the solar system, the other planets, the comets, the asteroids, etc.
Now the universe itself began about 13.8 billion years ago with an event that physicists refer to as a singularity or more popularly the Big Bang.
So the Earth and the Sun are much younger than the rest of the universe and that's a necessary thing because it took a while before the stars forged the various elements comprising the rocky planets.
In other words, elements such as iron and nickel and magnesium and calcium and phosphorus and oxygen and nitrogen had to be made and they were made in the interior of stars.
And these stars had to go through their generations of activity before those elements were emitted to the general solar system or the general universe and became part of what is our solar system.
Earth is the third planet from the Sun. The Sun is roughly 93 million miles away.
Can you name the other planets? Well, think about it. There's Mercury which is the closest to the Sun and then there's Venus.
Then when we pass Earth, there's Mars and then there's a group of rocks called the asteroid belt and then there's the huge planet Jupiter.
You'd be surprised how much we might depend on Jupiter. Then there's another planet, not quite so large, the one with gorgeous rings called Saturn.
And then the outer planets are the two big gaseous ones, Uranus and Neptune and then the little tiny one that everybody is arguing about as to whether even it should be a planet that's Pluto.
So those are the nine planets of the solar system or depending on how you come down on Pluto, the eight.
But Earth is the third planet from the Sun, as I said, about 93 million miles away and life is only known from Earth.
The Sun's characteristics, particularly its age and temperature, make Earth suitable for liquid water.
And if you did what I asked you to in the first lecture and made up a list of why you think Earth is an ecological planet, the conditions on Earth that are such that life can be sustained,
hopefully you put water right at the top of your list and not just any water, ice won't do, nor will it do for water to simply be in gaseous form.
It needs to be in liquid form and at 93 million miles from the Sun and with the Sun's characteristics, we have liquid water on Earth.
And everything we know about the biochemistry of life is dependent on liquid water and so that's really big deal.
It is very difficult to form scenarios for life's evolution or for its persistence without liquid water in cells.
And cells make up organisms, indeed the very concept of the organism is based on organizations of cells and cells are mostly composed of water.
All biochemical reactions we know of require what we call aqueous solution, another way of saying water.
I mentioned the Sun's age, that's kind of important too.
The Sun is a relatively average kind of star as it's often described by astronomers.
It's not a particularly big one or a particularly hot one and that's all of the good.
You see, the hotter a star is, the shorter it lives.
It tends to burn itself out pretty fast.
So a cooler star will last longer.
And the Sun has been around now for 4.6 billion years and it has several more billion years to go before it starts to significantly deteriorate.
When that happens, it will swell up, will cool and become what's known as a red giant.
It may get so large it actually engulfs what would then be just the charred cinder of what used to be the Earth.
But in any case, the Sun's lifespan, if you want to look at it that way, is significantly long enough that it allows life and not just any life but complex life to evolve.
That's also a big deal.
So I hope you have the Sun on your list of things that make the Earth the ecological planet.
When we think about water, we can look at the planet that's probably, well it's not the nearest planet to the Earth, that's Venus.
But if you look at Mars, a planet which we're spending a lot of time exploring these days with robotic probes,
Mars seems to show evidence that liquid water once flowed on its surface.
And that's intriguing a lot of astrobiologists because of the possibility that life might somehow still exist on Mars if indeed it ever did.
Or looked at the other way that life once was on Mars but isn't any longer and perhaps we could find some evidence of that.
Evidence from a variety of sources suggests that Jupiter's moon Europa may contain a liquid ocean, perhaps salty, beneath the dense over-topping layer of ice evident on the moon's surface.
Now what's Europa?
There's a big planet Jupiter in a telescope and you can see it quite well in a small telescope.
You'll see four Galilean satellites, four large moons that surround Jupiter.
Now Jupiter has many, many moons, it has dozens of moons.
But these moons are so large that you can actually see them from Earth.
In fact, it's kind of fun to watch them change positions over the course of several days, the so-called Galilean satellites.
These were the satellites that Galileo studied when he got into such trouble with the Catholic Church for arguing, in fact, that the Copernican view of the solar system,
indeed that it is a solar system, that Earth revolves around the sun and not the other way around, was actually correct.
That's another story.
Anyway, Europa has ice, a very thick layer of ice and it seems to have liquid under the ice.
Liquid is water.
Water may be salty.
Salty means minerals.
Minerals mean that you could potentially put cells together that life could actually evolve.
What might be crawling or swimming around in that European ocean?
Perhaps someday we'll actually go there and try to find out, at least robotically.
Earth's only natural satellite, which we call the moon, incidentally, that is a name derived from the Greek for menstrual cycle.
It's a pure coincidence that the menstrual cycle in humans happens to be approximately a month long and that, of course, reflects the full cycle of the moon from
into its various patterns of new moon, full moon, etc.
Anyway, the moon is unusual as planetary satellites go because of its size.
It is a very large object in comparison to its home planet, so to speak.
In fact, the diameter of the earth is about 7,926 miles.
The diameter of the moon is 3,476 miles, so the moon is proportionally quite large in relation to earth.
The earth and the moon are unusual and an astronomer is characterized as a bi-planetary system.
This is only because the moon is so large and it's so close to about 238,000 miles away, although it's getting a little bit more distant each year, a few centimeters as its angular momentum declines.
Now, given Isaac Newton's insights regarding the importance of gravity, the moon has a strong effect on the earth.
The moon is lifeless, and we'll talk about that in a moment.
The moon is not an ecological planet because it has no atmosphere.
It's not quite strong enough to hold an atmosphere, and so you have to take your own atmosphere along with you.
That's why the astronauts that explored the moon in the late 60s and early 70s all had to wear space suits.
It would be really hard to breathe up there.
The moon is just not small enough to capture an atmosphere, and so that's another characteristic of the ecological planet.
It has to have an atmosphere.
It has to have something to transport gaseous molecules that can be used by organisms.
Have you ever thought of the consequences of not having a moon?
Suppose the earth didn't have a moon, and by the way, do you know how the moon formed?
You might have thought it formed just as the rest of the solar system formed,
by chance the earth and moon formed at about the same time when gravity pulled everything together.
Astronomers don't think so.
They think what happened is that shortly after the formation of the earth, the earth was struck by another planet,
perhaps the size of Mars.
This is a little hard to envision, but you can see very nice computer simulations out on the web.
Anyway, this planet struck earth, pulverizing it,
and part of that collision, part of the debris from that collision,
by gravitational attraction formed the moon.
And so the moon was originally formed in a colossal accident,
and the moon was originally closer to earth than it is now.
How do we know this?
The crust of the moon and the crust of the earth are strikingly similar.
This is one of the values of having actual moon rocks to study.
And astronomers have pretty much agreed that the likely formation of the moon was in this kind of cataclysmic collision
that occurred very early in the history of the earth.
But getting back to the question, what if earth had no moon?
There would be no moonlit nights, and many romantic songs would not have been written.
One of my favorites is the Moon of Manukura.
I remember Darth Lamor singing that.
And then Bing Crosby saying right back at her, Moonlight becomes you.
It goes with your hair, et cetera.
Eclipses would not occur, and people love to go look at eclipses.
Wolves would have nothing to have at.
But the consequences of moonlessness would be ecologically much more profound.
The moon, which is today about, as I said, 238,000, it's actually 238,860 miles from the earth,
was considerably closer when earth first formed.
The proximity of the moon to the earth and the proportionally large size of the moon to the earth
means that throughout its existence the moon has exerted a very strong gravitational effect on earth.
Of course, earth exerts a very strong gravitational effect on the moon, too,
because the moon doesn't have any liquid water on it.
The earth does have liquid water on it.
So the tidal cycles are affected by the moon.
We have high tides, low tides.
That's because of the gravitational attraction by the moon.
And, of course, the sun.
Real high tides, which we call spring tides, occur when the sun and the moon are in alignment.
And neat tides, which are more moderate, occur when the sun and the moon are about at right angles to one another.
Now, why is that such a big deal?
Well, for many years, biologists have thought that life might have first evolved in molecular form in tide pools,
where molecules could be concentrated, where energy would be available,
and where cells could have the at least precursors of their own formation.
We think that life spontaneously evolved on earth.
We have to envision some kind of scenario for it.
One of several different scenarios is that it may have had something to do with tidal cycles,
providing the conditions that were optimum for forming molecules.
I don't think we'll ever know, but it's certainly a possibility.
That may be, in fact, less important than another characteristic of the moon.
What is generally less well known in terms of the effect of the moon on earth's biology may be more important.
And that is that the moon may have stabilized the tilt of the earth in space,
what astronomers call the earth's obliquity.
If the earth's obliquity had undergone numerous substantial changes,
it would make the planet wobble in space, kind of like a top when it's losing energy.
Earth's climate, thus, would have undergone far more frequent and severe alterations,
because the climate of the earth is very much related to the position of the earth relative to the sun, as you'll soon learn.
Thus, the earth's climate would have undergone far more frequent, severe alterations,
possibly too severe to permit complex multicellular life to evolve.
Maybe not to prevent life from evolving.
You could have an earth full of bacteria,
but you wouldn't have an earth full of bears and lions and people.
And so the moon's gravitational calming effect, if you want to call it that,
may have been of utmost importance to the evolution of its future inhabitants.
The moon, a lifeless place, may have helped make life more possible for its larger neighbor.
What else is it about the earth that makes it an ecological planet?
Well, in 1957, it was called the International Geophysical Year.
You might remember October of 1957 was when the Russians launched Sputnik,
the first artificial satellite, and that was certainly a shock.
But something else came out of the International Geophysical Year,
something else that was a monumental discovery.
A man named James Van Allen discovered that the earth is surrounded by a very strong magnetic field.
We call them the Van Allen radiation belts, and that too is important for sustaining life.
You see, the earth is constantly being bombarded,
being bombarded by potentially harmful radiation from space,
most of which comes from the sun, but it also comes from only other stars,
and this is in the form of cosmic rays.
The sun emits what is called the solar wind, particles that are highly charged.
The solar wind, for instance, makes for the aurora borealis that you see from high latitudes.
Radiation of this sort could certainly be harmful to life,
particularly large multicellular life forms.
You probably know that it's not a good idea to become irradiated.
Well, with too much radiation from space,
again you could have an earth that has bacteria,
maybe some simple organisms, but likely not complex multicellular life.
We exist happily along with elephants and redwood trees,
and so how are we protected from these cosmic rays and solar wind?
Well, the answer is that the earth generates this strong magnetic field, the magnetosphere,
which was discovered first in 1957, the Van Allen belts.
They reflect jackets around the planet.
These belts intercept cosmic rays from space and solar wind particles from the sun,
affording magnetic blanket to protect the earth.
So let's review.
We have liquid water.
We have a moon that stabilizes the obliquity of the planet,
and now we have a protective jacket of magnetism that protects us from cosmic rays.
These things make the ecological planet, but there's more.
Oh, by the way, did you ever wonder how earth got its oceans?
What was it in the formation of the planet that gave us the liquid water in the first place?
Astronomers don't really know.
The most prevalent idea was what is known as outgassing,
that as the planet finally cooled from a molten state,
water vapor essentially was emitted from the coalescing planet.
This formed a very dense atmosphere, which as it cooled literally rained enough to form the oceans.
But there's another very prevalent thought right now,
which is that in the very early stages of the earth's development,
there was a great deal of cometary impact.
Comets were whacking the earth one after another.
Comets are big ice cubes.
They're made of dirty water.
And the more comets that hit the earth, the more this water would accumulate on the earth.
So many astronomers now believe that the impact by vast numbers of comets
in a very early and turbulent part of the earth's history
was at least in part, if not in large part, responsible for providing the earth with its oceans.
Now, what else?
We have a big brother in space that really may be very helpful to us
in keeping earth the ecological planet.
Jupiter is an immense planet.
Its diameter is 88,700 miles.
That's about 11 times the earth's diameter.
You could fit 1,000 earths into Jupiter.
That's how big it is.
Jupiter is immense in comparison not only with earth,
but with virtually all other planets in the solar system.
This huge mass means that Jupiter exerts a very strong gravitational attraction on things
that pass reasonably close to it, things like asteroids, comets, and meteors.
There are many objects in space that have trajectories
that occasionally cross the orbital path of earth.
Even as I'm recording this lecture series in the news,
there is information about an asteroid that's expected to come very close to the planet Mars
and may just hit the planet Mars.
You may know that the last of the dinosaurs
likely became extinct 65 million years ago after an asteroid or comet
about 10 kilometers or 6 miles in diameter struck the earth.
We know just where that happened.
The scar is in the Yucatan Peninsula area.
There are many objects in space that have trajectories
that occasionally cross the orbital path of earth,
and these things could impact the earth to the point where major extinctions occur.
Now, if one of these hits every 100 million years or so, like seems to be the case,
yes, there's a lot of extinction, but it creates opportunities for new things to evolve.
But suppose an asteroid struck the earth, oh, say, every 10 million years or so,
that would be a very different story.
The earth could be struck so frequently that multicellular life would be prevented from evolving.
The presence of a large planet such as Jupiter
likely reduces the number of potential collisions with earth
with potentially catastrophic space debris.
Jupiter can be thought of as a kind of cosmic vacuum cleaner.
Sweeping the inner solar system of potentially dangerous objects doesn't always work.
We certainly know that earth's been struck quite a few times in the past,
but it might be struck quite a few more times if it hadn't been for our big brother
sitting further out in the solar system.
While it is true that previous devastating events on earth
have been followed by the evolution of new life forms,
if mass collisions were far more frequent,
such calamities could prevent the formation of complex ecological communities.
What about seasons?
The earth is a seasonal planet.
Earth's ecology is strongly seasonal.
Summer, fall, winter, spring.
We folks that live in the temperate zone, I live in Massachusetts,
we look forward to the fall leaf colors and look forward to the snows
and tranquility of winter, the growing season of spring and summer.
What makes earth a seasonal planet?
How important is that for earth's ecology?
Well, I'll answer the last one first.
It's very important for the earth's ecology.
The diversity of ecosystems on earth is far more than what it would be
if earth was not a seasonal planet.
That will become evident in the remaining lectures in this series.
But what gives earth seasons anyway?
Do you know why the earth has seasons?
There was a short film made at Harvard University some years ago.
You can still find it.
It's called A Private Universe.
It is very funny.
What happens in the film is that as the great minds of Harvard are lining up to graduate,
someone walks around with a microphone and simply asks the students,
they ask professors as well, what causes the seasons?
The answers are cute.
By far, the most common answer is, oh, well, the seasons are caused because,
well, in the winter, the earth is farther from the sun,
and so it has to be colder, and in the summer, the earth is a little bit closer to the sun,
and so that makes the earth warmer.
Yeah, right.
That's not the reason.
Why does the earth have seasons?
The earth is tilted 23 degrees and 27 minutes.
Call it 23 and a half degrees in its orbit.
Planets vary in their axial tilt.
Axial tilt causes seasons.
Mars' axial tilt is somewhat like earth's, and Mars has seasons.
If you look at Mars, you can see the growth of the polar ice cap on it periodically,
as it moves through its long orbit around the sun.
As earth progresses around its orbit,
its tilt places the northern hemisphere toward the sun for part of the orbit,
while at the same time, the southern hemisphere points away from the sun.
When this situation occurs, more direct solar radiation, logically enough,
falls on northern latitudes than southern latitudes.
North of the equator days are long, while south of the equator days are short.
It is the northern summer, it is the southern winter.
During the northern winter, the situation is, of course, exactly reversed.
More light falls on Buenos Aires than in Minneapolis.
Snow falls on Minneapolis.
Now, yes, the earth does orbit in an ellipse around the sun,
and at some time, the earth is a little closer to the sun than in other times.
In fact, in the northern winter, the earth is actually closest to the sun.
But by far, the more important effect is not that.
It is the axial tilt of the earth and just which hemisphere is pointing toward the sun and when.
Seasonal changes of earth result in latitudinal differences in daily.
As a matter of fact, patterns of temperature and precipitation.
I want you to remember those two words, temperature and precipitation.
And these are indeed the major determinant of climate on the planet.
These patterns are at the very essence of how ecosystems function,
a force profoundly influencing how species adapt.
You don't find polar bears wandering around Ecuador.
There's a reason for that.
Think about the annual migration of thousands of bird species around the globe,
as well as overland migrations of caribou, wildebeest, and so many others.
Think about the amazing physiological changes that result in such events as fall color changes in leaves,
in hibernation, in animals.
You know what hibernation is?
Animals like woodchucks actually slow down their heart rate.
They slow down their breathing rate.
They go into a sleep equivalent to what happens when you are under dense anesthesia.
They even have a unique form of fat, which metabolizes in a way that sustains them
when they sleep this deep sleep for months at a time.
What an adaptation.
And it's all because of climate.
Each of these elegant ecological patterns and many, many more occurs for a reason.
It occurs because the earth is tilted 23 and a half degrees and it's axis.
It is indeed a significant tilt.
There's yet another reason why earth is the ecological planet.
Take a look at a map.
If you have a globe handy or even a map of the world, you might want to bring it out for this next part.
The position of earth's continents and the fact that their positions have changed throughout history
has also had a strong and profound effect on earth's ecology to say nothing
of the evolution of all the different kinds of organisms that have ever been on the planet.
Just look at a map showing the positions of the oceans and various land masses.
Look at South America and notice how the east coast of South America
looks almost as though it could fit rather well against the west coast of Africa.
Look at those two continents without the oceans.
You'll see the continental shells of each continent and they fit even better.
There's a reason for that. They once were connected.
If the globe shows relief, if you're looking at a globe that shows mountain relief,
notice how the Himalayan mountains form a very rugged boundary at the border of India and Asia.
There's a reason for that.
India literally moved and moved in a way that it smashed directly into the south coast of Asia.
The Himalayan mountains are the result of that very, very large collision.
And look at Australia alone, an immense island continent in the southern Pacific Ocean.
Once these continents were united together, 248 million years ago,
there was a giant southern continent called Gondwana,
consisted of Africa and South America, consisted of Antarctica, India, Madagascar, and Australia.
Those continents, that continent of Gondwana broke up
and the existing continents and their positions the result of continental drift.
The occurrence of cataclysmic events such as earthquakes and volcanic eruptions
informs us that Earth's geology is very, very active.
Unlike Earth's moon or planets such as Venus, which once had a pretty active geology that seems not to be anymore,
and Mars, Earth is dynamic, continually rearranging its surface because of processes occurring in its interior.
One of the great scientific discoveries of the 20th century was that the crust of the Earth itself is changeable,
and that as it changes, the continents that rest atop it actually move in relation to one another.
And the term for this process is plate tectonics.
I don't really have time to give a detailed description of plate tectonics,
but you can think of it sort of in the following way.
Suppose you take some sauce, like tomato sauce, and you put it on a burner on an oven and you begin to heat it.
And then you put a few crackers on the top of the thick layer of tomato sauce.
What you'll see is that as the convection currents of heat move up through the tomato sauce,
it will provide energy to move those crackers around.
If you think of those crackers as continents, you're getting a rough idea of what happens on Earth.
The Earth's magnetic interior, its radioactive interior,
generates a great deal of energy, which is transmitted as heat in an area inside the Earth called the esthenosphere,
somewhat below the crust.
The esthenosphere manages to heat the surface of the Earth,
such that large plates of basalt and granite,
actually the plates are made of basalt, the continents granite and the continents sito and basaltic plates,
and they move in relation to one another.
That's also responsible for generating the van Allen radiation belts,
so the fact that the Earth has a magnetosphere is related to the fact that it has an active plate tectonics.
Continental movement caused by plate tectonics has mighty, mighty consequences for the Earth's ecology.
Without such constant movement, Earth's climatic history would have been very different and far less variable.
If continents move about the surface of the planet, they affect changes in the ocean currents, the air currents, and the climate in general.
Think about this.
The Earth is a very dynamic planet.
The climates never have stayed the same, and that's because the Earth has moved the continents around,
and if the continents move around, the climate has to change.
If the climate changes, life forms have to change.
As more coastlines exposed, for instance, shallow coastal water species such as corals, tend to proliferate.
But when coastline is minimized and when continents fuse,
extinctions of organisms seem to be common, because there's just not as much area available for many kinds of organisms.
Separation of the continents acts to geographically separate organisms, and that's a huge deal in evolution.
If two populations are separated, they can diverge genetically.
So as continents separate large numbers of populations, you have a stimulus for evolutionary change.
And this allows evolution to proceed along varied and different pathways from continent to continent, from island to island.
The isolation of Australia, for example, led to the diversification of marsupial mammals,
making Australia unique as the land of marsupials.
Marsupial mammals are things like kangaroos, wallabies, things like bandicoots.
These animals give birth to tiny, tiny young, they look like embryos,
and then these little tiny things migrate to a pouch on the mother,
where they connect to one of the teats and continue their growth.
Most of you have probably seen pictures, if not actually seen, kangaroos with joeys in their pouch.
Marsupials don't just occur in Australia.
We have a marsupial in eastern North America.
It's called the Virginia opossum.
And in fact, there are numerous species of opossums in South America.
Why? Because South America was once connected to Australia in this giant continent, Gondwana.
And as Gondwana broke up, Australia got the marsupials.
Just by chance, placental mammals weren't on Australia.
And so Australia has undergone this great diversification of marsupial animals, but that's not all.
The birds in Australia are all strikingly related to crows, believe it or not.
Not modern crows, but the precursors of modern crows.
There's been a massive adaptive radiation, as ecologists like to refer to it, of crow-type birds,
even though they don't look like crows.
They look like thrushes and orioles and warblers and things like that.
But they trace their genetics to crows.
This is again the result of isolation of the Australian continent.
And among the plants, we have over 600 species of eucalyptus trees in Australia.
Eucalyptus trees are unique to Australia, although they've been transplanted to many places throughout the world.
They all come ultimately from Australia, and all of this is part of this isolation
that occurred as a result of Australia breaking apart from the other continents and being isolated as it is.
Part of the great biodiversity of mammals through the Cenozoic may be attributable to continental separation,
stimulated by high levels of speciation among groups isolated one from another.
Earth, the ecological planet, has changed continuously and dramatically since its origin,
an evolving planet in an evolving universe.
We need to really remember that.
Change is inevitable.
This is why evolution is such an important process.
Evolution is what allows life to keep up with change.
As the fictitious character Ian Malcolm said in Jurassic Park, life finds a way.
Life has to find a way because the planet keeps changing the game.
The scale of change has varied both in time and in area.
And we'll talk more about that as we go through these lectures.
But any careful consideration, history of life on Earth, shows that change is the rule, not the exception.
Sit down at any place on Earth and watch it long enough, and it's going to change.
Life exists only because it has the potential to change as circumstances around it change.
The tapestry of life through time has been woven on Earth, generated by millions and millions of species.
It's a kind of temporal montage, if you could look back on the history of Earth, of fascinating ecosystems,
most of which will be forever relegated to history.
Be that as it may, the Earth today is full of fascinating ecosystems.
In our next lecture, we're going to look at the distribution of global ecosystems,
learn something about the kinds of major ecosystems that we're going to focus in on,
and talk about for the rest of the lecture series.
After listening to lecture two, a student posed this question to Professor Criter.
Why didn't you mention the atmosphere in this overview of ecology?
That's a really good question. I probably should have said something about the atmosphere.
But the original atmosphere on Earth did not have any oxygen in it.
In fact, quite the contrary, if oxygen had been in it, probably life wouldn't have evolved.
Why is that? Oxygen is a kind of molecule. We need it to digest our food.
It tears other molecules apart in what's called oxidation reactions.
Oxygen really isn't a builder of molecules. It's a destroyer of molecules.
When life first evolved on Earth, it was all microbial.
And Earth was probably a planet that had an atmosphere that had everything in it but oxygen.
Probably had things like ammonia, carbon dioxide, methane, that sort of stuff.
You couldn't breathe that kind of atmosphere. But microbes thrived in it.
When microbes originally evolved, they probably ate each other as a food source.
But one of the things that happened early in Earth's evolution was the evolution of a process called photosynthesis.
I'll be talking about photosynthesis in other lectures.
But photosynthesis is the process by which plants, as we call them, but it was started by microbes, things like bacteria,
take molecules and tear them apart and rearrange them and incorporate some energy from the sun while they're doing it.
What photosynthesis is, is this.
Organisms, through their biochemical systems, manage to take a molecule like water and break it apart.
Water consists of H2O, two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen.
What happens is that microbes, plants break this water molecule apart.
They take the hydrogen atoms and combine them with carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and energy from the sun.
And low energy compounds like carbon dioxide thus become high energy compounds like glucose.
This is photosynthesis.
But when they break the water molecule apart to take that hydrogen and add it to the carbon dioxide and the energy from the sun,
what becomes of the oxygen?
What becomes of the oxygen is that it goes straight out into the atmosphere.
So it's a waste product, in other words, of photosynthesis.
So when life first evolved, it also created the first great pollution event on the Earth.
Microbes started polluting the environment with oxygen and oxygen began to tear cells apart as quickly as they were built up.
And one of the great adaptations in the history of life is the ability to sequester and to use oxygen.
In our cellular systems, we actually use oxygen to our advantage to more efficiently extract energy from molecules such as glucose.
That's why we depend on it.
But you don't need an atmosphere of oxygen in order to have an ecological planet.
Quite the contrary, it may be so that most ecological planets, presuming there are others in the universe,
are mostly microbial and have atmospheres that don't have oxygen.
