The world's oceans are the largest and most voluminous of Earth's ecosystems.
The major variables of importance in determining ocean ecology are the amount of solar radiation
received and the abundance of available elemental nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen,
and G what I just said applies to every single ecosystem.
So what about solar radiation in the ocean?
What about nitrogen and phosphorus?
Well, we'll get to that.
The topic of oceanic productivity is a complex one because the ocean varies a great deal
in how much carbon dioxide it's able to fix in the form of organic material depending
on where it is.
Open oceans, for instance, are not very productive.
They're very much like deserts, and I'll tell you why.
Whereas coastal areas are much more rich, and I'll tell you why as well.
Oceans do not exhibit life zones that are comparable to those found terrestrially.
It is helpful in understanding the great diversity of oceanic life to recognize patterns in
zonation determined by depth, but it's not so much latitude and longitude as it is depth.
Consider that the ocean's average depth is about two and a third miles, this is something
like 3.7 kilometers, and that the deepest trenches in the oceans exceed seven miles,
substantially deeper than Mount Everest is tall.
Rural conditions change radically from surface waters to deep waters.
In addition, conditions near shore and over the continental shelf are different from those
far from shore in open ocean.
This combination of factors adds a complexity to the productivity patterns of the ocean
and indeed to the biological communities that one finds as you go from one place in the
ocean to another.
So to make this a little bit more understandable, we're going to divide this lecture into a
comparable zone by zone discussion, and we'll start with the pelagic zone.
When you're on a ship on the open ocean far from shore, you can't see the shore, and you
look at the rolling waves of the sea, you're looking at the pelagic zone, you're at the
very surface of the pelagic zone.
Now suppose you had access to some kind of submersible, something like a diving bell
or a little submarine or something like that, but a device that could take you many fathoms
and a fathom, incidentally, is nautical term for six feet, that could take you many fathoms
below the surface.
What would you find?
Well, you'd begin your journey, obviously, at the ocean surface, and you might look
up and see the sun shining brightly above you and take a last look at it for a while
as soon as you go below the surface.
This is where most of the photosynthesis, of course, is occurring, ecologists refer
to it as the euphotic zone, being quite literally the zone of light.
Now if you were to drag a plankton net at the surface of the ocean, you would soon pick
up tiny particles that we call phytoplankton, these are single cell diatoms, they have names
like diatoms, dinoflagellates, various other kinds of minute plants.
Plants have to be very small on the surface of the ocean because there is no place to
put in a root system, and so they need to be adapted so they don't sink, and the lighter
they are, the more they'll stay in the water column.
In addition, by being small, they have a very high surface area in relation to volume, and
that means that what few minerals, atoms of nitrogen, phosphorus, calcium, magnesium,
and there are in these surface waters, they can easily take in through standard diffusion.
So there's real adaptiveness in having minute single celled plants as the primary producers
in the pelagic zone, but you need a microscope to see them well.
Some phytoplankton, in fact, are collectively called nanoplankton, that means they're so
small that they can't even be captured in standard plankton nets, they have to be centrifuged
from water columns that are collected from the oceans in order to just see them.
So those are the grasses and trees of the pelagic zone, the phytoplankton, and feeding
on the phytoplankton are hordes of various kinds of zooplankton, these are tiny animals,
some of them are single celled, but most are multicellular.
Among them is a group called the copepods, which are really tiny crustaceans, they're
about the size of a grain of rice or even smaller, and joining them are larval forms
of animals such as barnacles, crabs, and jellyfish.
You see many of the invertebrates of the ocean as well as the fish have tiny larval forms
which are part of the zooplankton for the time that they're larval.
Zooplankton form a food base for numerous kinds of small fish, which in turn support
larger fish and other organisms including tuna, mackerel, sharks, sea turtles, whales,
porpoises.
So there's quite an elaborate food chain or even food web in the pelagic zone.
The term plankton incidentally is taken from the same Greek root as the word planet which
means wanderer.
Plankton organisms are so small that they have very limited mobility if any at all against
the currents and so it's really the currents that move them around.
All of the fish, the cetaceans such as the whales and porpoises, turtles, and even the
larger invertebrates such as squid and shrimp are collectively referred to as necton, N-E-K-T-O-N.
This term refers to the fact that they can move effectively against the currents.
Much of the life in the open ocean is confined to the first 600 feet or so where light penetrates.
If phytoplankton is abundant, light will attenuate at a more shallow depth and if phytoplankton
is in low density such as is the case in many tropical seas, light will penetrate more deeply.
So if you're going to do a little scuba diving in the open ocean, what you're going to learn
is it gets dark pretty fast.
If you go down there in that diving bell, you're going to lose light quite quickly.
You won't even be down a thousand feet before you're in total darkness.
What happens incidentally is there's a daily migration of a lot of the kinds of plankton
and necton.
They move to the surface at night and feed and then they move down below the surface
in the daytime.
This is a thing that's been known ever since radar discovered the fact that there's this
pattern of scattering that occurs in a daily basis.
Once your diving bell passes through the last twilight of the euphotic zone, you will have
entered the permanent darkness, which is known as the mesoplegic zone.
You would notice far fewer kinds of fish, presuming you have lights on your diving bell,
but what you would see would astound you.
If you turn the lights off, you'll see all sorts of little blinking things around you
because numerous species of fish and invertebrates which are found there are bioluminescent,
illuminated by tiny lights similar to those found in fireflies.
And by the way, fireflies are not flies, they're beels.
Bioluminescence is a form of cold light created by the oxidation in certain protein molecules.
Most of the bioluminescent fish are tiny, no more than the size of a quarter.
These include schools of fish called lantern fish and hatchet fish.
Joining them in the water column would be various species of squid and shrimp, also bioluminescent.
With luck, you might see a huge sperm whale swimming past you.
That's not bioluminescent, incidentally, but it's plumbing the depths for its principal
prey, which is the giant squid.
Though deeper still, your diving bell is withstanding many hundreds of pounds of pressure
per square inch as you enter what's called the bathyphilagic zone.
The deepest, deepest part of the ocean, profoundly dark and extremely cold.
It's about 32, slightly higher than 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
Water is not ice, but it's very, very cold.
And there's just absolutely no light other than that supplied by the bioluminescence
of the organisms that may be around you.
As is the case with the mesoplegic zone, the permanent habits of this deep water area
are very largely bioluminescent and have to depend on organic material that they found
trickling down from above.
There is no productivity here.
There's no photosynthesis.
There's nothing that's fixing any energy.
These guys are down there waiting for stuff to come to them.
So a fish that dies in the surface waters or a whale or something like that is really
consumed as it's making its way down to the bottom of the ocean.
You might see the skeleton of a tuna or swordfish drifting past your diving bell, but little
more of the deceased creature.
Energy is at a real premium at this depth, and the organisms seem to be, although there's
not a lot of research here because they're a very hard area to do research in, the organisms
seem to be reasonably well adapted to finding these masses of food and consuming them very
quickly.
Some amazing fish inhabit the deepest depths of the ocean.
Many are small, their color permanently black, though some in fact most have bioluminescent
patterning, particularly around their heads.
Some of these fish are popularly referred to as swallowers or gulpers or viper fish,
and these are really amazing to behold.
They're not all that large, but they have absolutely immense jaws with needle-like teeth.
A swallower has an abdomen that can expand to hold a fish literally longer in body length
than it is.
These are adaptations to the reality of the fact that prey is very scarce at these depths,
and so these animals are very loosely put together to swallow and to hold prey that are much,
much larger, but they eat relatively infrequently.
There are also species of deep-water sharks and rays, as well as deep-water squids and
octopuses, and these are amazing-looking things.
Deep sea anglerfish are chunky with huge mouths that snap up prey attracted to the bioluminescent
lure that they wiggle to entice the prey within capturing distance.
These fish have very wide, gaping mouths.
They wiggle this little bioluminescent worm-like thing on their heads, and then when something
comes suitably close, they quickly open their mouths, creating a suction, and it goes.
What's curious is the life cycle of some of these deep sea anglerfish.
When they were originally collected and brought up onto the decks of ships that wanted to
study them, sometimes the scientists identified these odd worm-like, what they thought were
parasitic animals attached to the body of female anglerfish.
These turn out to be male anglerfish.
This odd characteristic is adaptive.
The male anglerfish bites into the female and literally fuses with her body.
It then becomes a parasite, its blood vessels taking nutrients from the female.
This is an adaptation to the infrequency of encounter at this profoundly deep, huge, dark
place called the bathipalagic zone.
These fish have evolved a unique means of reproduction, where a female anglerfish becomes
permanently attached to one or more males that travel with her for the rest of her life,
and presumably when she sheds eggs, they shed sperm.
If you go down to the very bottom of the ocean, you're in the benthic zone.
The RMS Titanic, subject of several popular motion pictures, many books, and a very ambitious
and successful underwater search rests on the benthic zone of the North Atlantic Ocean.
The term benthic refers to bottom.
It can be applied widely.
You hear the term benthic applied to lakes and shallow bays, but here I'm applying it
the greatest depth through the oceans.
Once it was believed that no life could exist on the ocean bottom, it seemed incredulous
to scientists at the time to think that an environment so deep, so dark, so permanently
cold, with no productivity, under thousands of pounds of square inches of water pressure
could support any living things.
Such a view was, to say the least, naive.
Another fanciful idea was that the ocean bottom was uniformly covered by a curious organic
jelly, which actually was given a name.
It was called the Thibius, and it was sort of akin to organic slime of sorts.
If you ever saw the old science fiction movie The Blob, well, it was thought that The Blob
lived at the bottom of the ocean.
So such a suggestion may sound like the plot of an old episode of Star Trek or The Blob
or whatever.
It required a serious oceanic expedition called the Challenger Expedition.
There's been some good books written about that.
That expedition was from 1872 to 76, and it disproved the concept of the Thibius, and
it most certainly disproved the concept that there was no life at the bottom of the ocean.
It's quite the contrary.
When your diving bell has reached bottom, you observe the soft sediments that cover
the ocean floor.
Sediments that are far younger than the ocean itself, many of them the countless tiny shells
of the pelagic forms of amoebas comprising part of the permanent zooplankton.
Yes, there are actually little one-celled amoebas that have calcium carbonate shells
in them.
We call them foraminiferans.
And these shells accumulate in vast amounts on the floor of the ocean in some places.
There are organisms moving about or protruding from the sediments.
You might see things such as brachyopods, odd clam-like creatures that were far more
diverse and abundant a long time ago in the Paleozoic era even before the dinosaurs evolved.
Or waving serenely in the slow bottom currents, you might see crinoids, plant-like stalked
echinoderms related to sea stars and sand dollars whose ancestry also reaches back to the very
first appearance of multicellular animals in the fossil record.
In some places the ocean floor may be virtually covered with active brittle stars or bizarre
looking sea cucumbers all roaming the ocean floor.
It is amazing to see films of this, the sea cucumbers on legs looking like little odd
cows and sheep wandering around on the ocean floor.
Perhaps you might see the odd looking tripod fish which supports itself on two spiny extensions
of its pectoral fins.
Those are the fins on either side of its gills and one from its caudal fin on the tail.
It looks just like a fish on a tripod.
Should you find a dead whale or some other carcass at the sea bottom, it would be swarming
with all manner of fish.
Among the oddest of the deep sea fish are hagfish which are attracted to these carcasses.
Hagfish are unique.
They're not like bony fish, they're not like sharks.
They're jawless fish and they may be among the only remaining lineages of some of the
first of the vertebrates that go back many millions of years ago.
The closest relatives of hagfish are things like lampraise and they're also jawless and
some of those inhabit fresh waters, but hagfish are found in the deeper waters of the ocean.
Another name for hagfish which is fairly suggestive is slime eel.
The reason it's called that is that hagfish have a unique and one might say aesthetically
disgusting adaptation that enables them to really get free access to this carrion that
they occasionally find at the ocean bottom.
That is, they're capable of exuding a large amount of very sticky mucus through their
pores and what they can do is they can actually tie themselves in a knot and pull themselves
right through the knot.
They're extraordinarily flexible.
So what happens is when they colonize one of these carcasses it quickly becomes full
of this slime on the surface and things like sharks or other fish which may also want to
feed upon it risk getting this mucus in their gills where it could cause them real harm
and so this gives hagfish an advantage in feeding in these unique amounts of food that
they can find there.
You may even see in elongate fish called a grenadier or ratfish.
These sometimes compete with hagfish for access to whatever organic material they can find.
Ratfish have these long rat-like tails behind them.
It should be said that we probably know least about the benthic zone and the mesoplegic
and deep polegic regions than we do about any other ecosystem on earth.
It's simply very difficult to explore.
Scientists are now realizing that bioluminescence is a very significant adaptation with regard
to communication perhaps protection from predation and many other functions but you just can't
go there and study it.
You can't set up a field site in the deepest parts of the ocean.
Our visits to these regions have been extremely limited.
One of the things that was learned some years ago was in the area of the Galapagos Islands
and there are other areas as well.
There are deep-sea trench areas where there are real thermal vents.
Heat is literally coming up from the ocean bottom because of plate tectonics.
This heat supports a large assemblage of bacteria that are able to make organic material, taking
it from the elements of the water and using the heat fundamentally as the catalyst to make
these reactions occur.
In these areas, gigantic clams, worms, and various other things are found in these areas
of the big black smokers as they're called because these towers of bacteria seem to rise
from the greatest depths of the ocean.
There's so much we don't know about this particular ecosystem and it's hard to know
if we'll ever really get a full understanding of it given the difficulty of getting there.
In the coastal shallow ecosystems of the world's oceans, we know a great deal more.
This is called the literal zone and let's give our attention to that right now.
Coastal areas where the presence of continents makes the sea shallow support very complex
ecosystems.
The literal zone is a term that can apply to lakes and estuaries as well as oceans and
it's the shallow area at the edge of a body of water where light penetrates all the way
to the bottom.
This makes photosynthesis throughout the water column possible and, in fact, you can
have rooted plants because in the literal zone, for instance, in the Pacific Northwest
and places like off of Monterey, California, there are vast forests of kelp that are essentially
rooted to the bottom.
These are not traditional roots.
These are really called holdfasts.
They simply anchor the plant.
They don't root it into the soil but macroscopic plants such as kelp can grow in abundance
in these kinds of areas.
The literal zones of the world's oceans support many kinds of ecosystems.
We could almost do an entire lecture series on the different kinds of literal zone ecosystems.
These include the kelp forests that I just mentioned, as well as prime fishing grounds
such as the Grand Banks of the North Atlantic and even tropical coral reefs.
But we'll talk about tropical coral reefs in the next lecture.
Literal zones are ecologically diverse and productive because physical conditions are
very conducive to biodiversity.
Not only is there light throughout most, if not all of the zone, but proximity to shore
is a good thing because it means that nutrients are regularly introduced, transported from
rivers to the sea.
This has a fertilizing effect.
Shallow waters get regularly fertilized by the influx of materials from rivers, streams,
etc., and that makes things more productive.
Currents and tides tend to mix well together.
This also further assures the availability of nutrients and abundance of dissolved oxygen
so that plants, animals, etc., have plenty to breathe.
Many kinds of fish and invertebrates inhabit literal waters, as well as cetaceans such
as whales and porpoises and seabirds and even turtles.
The literal zone is a prime area of reproduction for many forms of life in the sea, and shallow
waters can serve as ideal nurseries for juvenile fish.
We're concerned about the world's fisheries.
There seems to be decline in many of the kinds of species of fish.
Literal areas are the areas where the juvenile forms of fish that are often found far from
shore get their start.
These are areas where small fish can find enough to eat, and so one of the things to
bear in mind about the kinds of fish that rely on for food is that they may not just
be pelagic.
They may have a very strong component of their life cycle associated with near shore waters
and even within estuarine waters.
The intertidal zone is a unique place within the literal zone.
It's the place where sea and land meet.
The definition of intertidal zone refers to the area generally exposed between low and
high tide.
You may find tide pools.
This is the area on sandy beaches between the rack line and the place where you go actually
into the water.
Intertidal zones are composed primarily of marine organisms, including some of the hardiest
examples.
Like the literal zone, it is an area of diverse habitats.
It may be rocky, sandy, composed mostly of mud, exposed at high tides.
There's a lot of variability.
Intertidal zones may be associated with such coastal ecosystems as salt marshes and tropical
mangrove swamps, which we'll also discuss in the next lecture.
Brockey intertidal zones have many kinds of algae, often called seaweeds, among which
are various barnacles, mussels, crabs, snails, and other life forms.
There is usually a fairly clear zonation from low to high tide, with only the hardiest creatures
able to tolerate prolonged exposure to air.
Just look for instance at a dock piling exposed at low tide, for example, and you will likely
see brown and red algae still partly submerged, partly mixed with mussels, and above them
you'll see a zone primarily barnacles, and above that you'll see a zone that's primarily
just bacteria.
So there is this zonation pattern, and those organisms that are least able to tolerate
exposure are down near the lowest part of the intertidal zone.
Those that are most tolerant, barnacles are pretty tolerant, are up at the upper part
of the intertidal zone.
Sandy and muddy intertidal zones are frequently too unstable to support many organisms on
their surfaces, but they both have a diverse infancy, as we call it, of various burrowing
worms, mollusks, etc.
For instance, this is where you dig clams is in this muddy intertidal zone.
In some areas, however, there are impressive forests of kelps, as I mentioned earlier.
These are probably the most rich areas of the literal and, to a certain extent, intertidal
zone.
Real kelps aren't found in the intertidal zone, but many forms of large algae are, and
ecologists have measured the growth rate of these kinds of macrophitic plants, as we like
to call them.
This is really quite stunning, and it's very easy to do.
If you look at the frond, it's not really called a leaf, it's called the frond of the
kelp.
If you look at the frond of the kelp, what you find is that there's a base where the
thing that looks like the stem meets the leaf.
It's kind of like a fan at the base of the fan.
If you take a little clipper and you make a hole at that point where the stipe, as it's
called, meets the frond, and then you just leave it alone and watch it over a period of
weeks, you'll see something fascinating.
That is that the little hole you put at that base will move progressively outward toward
the tip of the frond.
What that means is that the whole frond is growing.
You can literally measure the growth rate of the kelp by looking at the rate at which
that tiny little hole moves as the frond grows.
What you find, and you can of course measure this far more precisely, is that the amount
of carbon fixed, the amount of photosynthesis that's occurring in this kelp is astronomically
high.
These are very, very productive waters.
This is one of the reasons why intertidal and literal zones are so ecologically useful
to many species of organisms in terms of reproduction.
They afford a great deal of potential food.
These are highly, highly productive areas.
When talking about these macrophitic plants like kelp, I don't mean to ignore the fact
that there's still plenty of phytoplankton and zooplankton there as well.
This is an ecologically complex zone.
Ecologists like ecologically complex zones because they make natural experiments and
they're fairly easy to manipulate.
I haven't spent a great deal of time talking about how ecologists do experiments, but let
me give you a couple of examples here for this particularly unique region which has
a rich ecological history with regard to what we've learned about ecological processes.
In a nutshell, and this is going to sound like a diversion at first, but bear with me.
If you go from the equator to the polar region, what you find is you're going from an area
where it's biologically cushy, like in the tropical rainforest where it's warm and wet,
to an increasingly biologically challenging area such as you find in the poles.
What is the tendency that you see with regard to the diversity of organisms, plant and animals?
You see a reduction in diversity as you move from the equator to the poles.
It seems like where it gets more physically challenging, fewer organisms have adapted
to those challenges.
This is also probably a reflection of energy constraints.
There's simply not as much energy to support organisms at higher latitudes.
Now, go back to the intertidal zone.
When you go to the lowest part of the intertidal zone and sub-tidal zone, that's the equivalent
of going to the equator.
You have a high diversity of organisms because for marine organisms, that's where it's the
most cushy.
That's where there's the least amount of exposure, and that's where there's all of
this food available, all these nutrients available.
This is where the kelp are growing, and the kelp are the equivalent of the tropical rainforest.
But as you move up in the intertidal zone, what you find is that organisms become progressively
less dense.
In other words, what ecologists call the biomass, the collective weight of the ecological community
declines, and they become less diverse.
And finally, you find just a few outlier barnacles, kind of the polar bears and lemmings of the
intertidal zone, that are up there at the highest levels.
Barnacles are really, most people think of them as, they must be some kind of mollusks
because they look like little shells.
But barnacles look like little volcanoes, and when they're immersed in water, they open
up these shells and they start waving their little jointed appendages.
Barnacles are actually crustaceans.
They're related to things like shrimp and crabs.
And for a short period of time, they gather in phytoplankton while they're immersed in
water, and then they kind of hole up by closing up during the time that they're exposed.
So we see a diversity gradient, as you go from low in the intertidal zone to high in
the intertidal zone, that is similar in general to the diversity gradient we see when we go
from equatorial regions to polar regions, a fascinating similarity.
There's another similarity as well.
If we're talking about the unique organisms of polar regions, we often talk about their
physiology, the notion, for instance, that an arctic fox can change the color of its
fur in one period of the year compared to another.
In winter, it's white.
In summer, it's a complex brown color.
This is a really unique physiological adaptation.
We talk about hibernation or migration or something like that.
So it's not so much the species interactions we're talking about when we go to the high
latitudes.
It's the ability to tolerate what nature throws at you climatically.
Such is the case with the intertidal zone.
Barnacles certainly have their predators, but their main thing they're up against is
desiccation.
The forces of the physical environment itself.
But when you get lower in the intertidal zone, you're coming closer to going to that rainforest
analogy where most of the interactions are among the animals themselves.
The real selection pressures of the environment are among the animals and the plants.
Let me give you an example.
There was a study done in the Pacific Northwest where the various kinds of animals in the
intertidal zone were studied, and the study attempted to get at the factors that determine
the diversity of these animals.
There was a particular kind of starfish, a big sea star.
And starfish are voracious predators.
They feed on all manner of different things ranging from clams to other kinds of invertebrates.
The researcher got the notion, what would happen if the starfish were removed from the
area?
And so he did.
He took the starfish away from some areas and he let the starfish remain in other areas.
And you can do this through a series of exclosures that prevent the starfish from getting to
some areas and enclosures which keep them in other areas.
What he learned was that the high biodiversity of this intertidal area began to decline and
decline precipitously.
What was happening was this.
As soon as the starfish was removed, there was great competition at the lower intertidal
zone among all the different kinds of organisms that remained.
And gradually they started to replace one another and started to drop out.
In other words, it was kind of like a game.
Who could eat the most algae?
And who was the victim who ate the least algae?
And it ended up that primarily one kind of muscle and a muscle is a kind of clam, one
kind of muscle ended up essentially taking over an area which, when the starfish was
around, had been a rich and diverse area.
And so what was learned was at the lower part of the intertidal zone, biological interactions
are the most important thing determining the structure of the community while at the upper
levels of the intertidal zone, it's more the ability of the organisms to adapt to the
physical environment.
This is probably very similar to what we see in this latitudinal diversity gradient when
we compare the ecology of the tropics with the ecology of temperate and polar regions.
It's a fascinating comparison.
In our next lecture, we're going to stay in a kind of marine theme, but we're going to
look at some of the unique coastal marine ecosystems, the salt marshes, the mangrove
forests, and we'll take a quick look at coral reefs as well.
