For this, the final lecture in this course, I want to talk about current issues in global
ecology and I want to begin with a quote from a man named Peter Raven.
Peter Raven is an ecologist and he was president of the American Association for the Advancement
of Science in the year 2002 when he wrote a paper with the following words in it.
We must find new ways to provide for a human society that presently has outstripped the
limits of global sustainability.
If you think about that statement, it's a somewhat shocking statement.
How do we provide for a society that in Raven's opinion has already outstripped the limits
of global sustainability?
This question of sustainability has been raised repeatedly and in recent years.
Ecology is sometimes called a subversive science because it seems to commonly espouse views
antithetical to well-established disciplines such as economics.
Conservation can historically be viewed as a sociopolitical movement that places intrinsic
value on nature.
Ecology is often confused with conservation, but it shouldn't be.
Ecological science was not founded to promote conservation, it was founded to promote understanding
and biology of the environment and how organisms interact in it.
However, it should be noted, of course, that ecologists typically have sympathies toward
the natural environment and are obviously interested in conservation.
As ecology has matured as a predictive discipline, approaches to conservation have become increasingly
based on science, increasingly more rigorous, and thus ecology has been at the forefront
of such approaches.
The field of conservation biology is now recognized as one of the sub-disciplines of ecology.
Ecologists have also developed applied and restoration ecologists sub-disciplines, so
ecological principles are really being widely applied in ways that weren't even imagined
a few decades ago.
In other words, ecology has gone through a maturation phase.
It initially was a way of describing the complexity of the environment.
Then it became a way of unveiling patterns of nature and explaining how these patterns
of nature could be understood.
And now the understanding is sufficiently deep that ecology can be applied to real questions
about conservation and about how to restore habitats that have been changed by anthropogenic,
i.e., human activities.
However, continue to arise about how best to utilize value and preserve what are perceived
as natural environments.
Humans at least in western culture often consider themselves as somehow apart from nature.
Think about that.
Do you really consider yourself to be part of nature?
Do you know where your food comes from and how it's raised?
Do you know anything about what the natural ecosystems are around where you live?
Some years ago, the historian Lin-White Jr., in fact it was in 1967, published a paper called
The Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis.
And in this paper what Lin-White argued was that in the Judeo-Christian theological view
of man and nature, there is a dualism, a dichotomy, where humans see themselves as significantly
apart from nature that they don't really feel any deep kinship with it.
This thesis was based on the notion that humans always saw nature as an opponent.
Nature is something to be conquered and suppressed.
And the pattern of civilization from the time of the agricultural revolution some 10,000
years ago has been to do exactly that, to convert habitats from a wild state to a cultivated
state such that humans can be comfortable in them and can exploit them to their advantage.
Basing the human desire to tame nature on Judeo-Christian theological views however has
been challenged and today certainly if you look at a country like China not known for
its Judeo-Christian values, you see a country that has very much affected its environment
often in extremely negative ways, a country that faces very severe environmental challenges.
And so Lin-White's thesis really focuses on the fact that as humans move through their
cultural evolution, they begin to see nature as more and more distant and thus they begin
to lose the concept of what nature might be doing for them.
And that's what this lecture will hopefully focus on.
Technology driven by science and economics coupled with human population growth have
exerted strong anthropogenic effects on global ecosystems.
This is absolutely undeniable, you don't have to be a rocket scientist to understand it.
This has resulted in a global loss of topsoil, which I mentioned in an earlier lecture, a
global loss of overall agricultural land, a well-known depletion of the ozone layer,
the addition to the atmosphere of various greenhouse gases particularly carbon dioxide
though methane is also increasing at a very high rate and ongoing losses of biodiversity.
Superimposed on all of that is the potential for a relatively rapid change in climate.
Humans demand a uniquely large percentage of the Earth's net primary productivity and
renewable fresh water.
We are in short the most important animal that's ever lived on Earth with regard to
our ecological footprint.
Now, in 1968, the year after Lin-White published the historical roots of our ecological crisis,
another important paper was published by a scientist named Garrett Hardin.
The title of that paper was Tragedy of the Commons.
In it, what Hardin did was draw an analogy.
He talked about the old fashioned notion of a New England commons and a commons is a
common area where everybody could graze his cattle and as long as that common area contained
enough forage for everybody's cattle, it could be used free and the concept was the commons
belong to no one because it belonged to everyone.
And what Garrett Hardin did was simply take the analogy in this direction.
Suppose each farmer has say three cattle grazing on the commons and there are ten farmers
that's thirty cattle and suppose the commons will support forty cattle, each farmer could
add another cow without degrading the commons.
But once you get to the point where there's enough cows and only enough cows to keep the
commons functioning but any more will start to degrade it, you can still add cows because
the cost of the farmer who adds an additional cow that results in the degradation of the
commons is less because it's borne by everybody but the benefit of having the additional cow
goes entirely to the farmer.
So what Garrett Hardin was arguing is the commons concept only applies when you have
a relatively unlimited resource and where you can continue to cheerfully agree that
no one owns exclusive rights to that resource because the resource is so vast it can't be
used up in the first place.
But commons in fact can be overgrazed and that was Hardin's point.
Math can be viewed as a global ecological commons where resources such as soil, air,
water, wildlife are the common resources of humanity.
Concerns are focused on how best to manage global resources for sustainability.
Consider the world's fisheries for instance.
Philosophers and legal experts have consistently seen the world's seas as a global commons.
There was this notion of the freedom of the seas to move about on the seas and to harvest
from the seas.
But the world's fisheries, this common area, are in dramatic decline because as fundamentally
a commons type resource there has been inadequate study, regulation, and agreement about how
to best manage fisheries.
This is undeniable.
There are many, many, many sources of data showing a decline in various species of the
world's major fish.
We've gotten very good at hunting fish.
Too good.
It is necessary to abandon the concept of a free commons and replace it with one in which
all interested parties are willingly subjected to strong regulation regarding the degree
of exploitation.
Realistically, that's the only possibility for maintaining healthy fishing in the future.
The major environmental problem facing citizens in this century is how best to ensure that
nature's ecosystems remain sustainable.
That was the point Peter Raven made.
And sustainable means such that we continue to enjoy the diverse ecosystem services essential
to a functioning biosphere.
I'll speak more about what these ecosystem services are, and some of them may really
surprise you.
Economic analysis of natural ecosystem function compared with gains derived from human development
demonstrates that it is often in the long-term economic best interest of society to preserve
natural ecosystems.
I'll say that again because it's an important point that I want to make throughout this lecture.
If you do an economic analysis of the value of natural ecosystems, and as you'll see this
is not so easy to do, but it is nonetheless not impossible to do, what that often shows
is that the collective gains derived from human development are not as much as the payback
would be if the environment had been left reasonably natural because of the ecosystem
services that the environment provides.
You'll see what those are.
More and more a field is emerging called environmental ethics.
Environmental ethics has emerged from the pragmatic need to recognize and value the
natural environment and its component species.
Still in its infancy as a discipline, environmental ethics attempts to rigorously provide a rationale
for how applied conservation biology ought to be practiced to the collective good of
humanity.
This concept of environmental ethics can be traced back to an essay that was written
a long time ago by a man named Aldo Leopold.
Leopold wrote about something he called the land ethic.
In other words, what ought to be done about natural lands, what ought to be our responsibility
to the natural landscape, and what Leopold did was to show the various functions that
landscapes have in enhancing human survival and human comfort levels, and he tried to
develop the argument that a landscape itself must have some kind of at least theoretical
rights because of the fact that it has value.
Biodiversity loss today is arguably the single greatest problem in conservation biology.
As I mentioned in an earlier lecture, species might accumulate over time where speciation
rates exceed extinction rates, or extinction rates may exceed speciation rates, in which
case biodiversity declines.
There has been a history of increase and decrease in biodiversity throughout the history of
life on the planet.
There have been five major extinction events over Earth's history, and many ecologists
believe today we are experiencing the sixth major extinction event.
Extinctions do not have to happen overnight.
If you have an appreciable number of extinctions in number of years, say less than a thousand
years, you have a catastrophically high extinction rate, and that seems to be what's happening
right now.
Biodiversity can be expressed as numbers of species, genetic diversity among populations,
or ecosystem diversity.
This discussion is to how best to really perceive biodiversity.
It's not known how many species actually inhabit the Earth today.
I've made this point in previous lectures.
We really don't know how many other kinds of species there are on Earth, but we do know
that the changes in habitats that are occurring because of our activities are really eliminating
many habitats, and these habitats, thus the species in these habitats, are eliminated
as well.
No ecologist today, than I know of, believes that the current rate of extinction does not
exceed the rate of speciation.
We all believe that it does.
There are many causes for biodiversity loss.
Principle among them are things like habitat loss, pollution and contamination, over-exploitation,
such as is seen in modern industrialized fisheries operations, or in the decline of great ape
populations in Africa.
The ape situation is particularly appalling.
Ever since the 20th century, populations of the large African apes, particularly chimpanzees
and gorillas, have been in decline.
Today, there are so few of them, there's real concern about the potential for their extinction.
Gorillas are in decline for a couple of different reasons, both of which would seemingly be
possible to change.
One reason is that they're hunted for bush meat.
Many kinds of animals are hunted, not just in Africa, but in other tropical places for
bush meat, and so gorilla populations are declining because of hunting pressure.
But they're also declining because of disease.
Various kinds of diseases such as Ebola, which seem to be emerging from rainforest areas
and other habitats that are in decline, are affecting these populations.
Another major cause of biodiversity loss is the increasing number of invasive species,
that by various means are entering ecosystems in which they did not evolve.
It is amazing, ranging from plants to animals, how many different kinds of invasive species
there are today, exerting very strong impacts on various ecosystems.
These exotic invasive species often outcompete or predate native species to the point of driving
them to extinction.
Global climate change is also affecting diversity patterns.
But why care about the loss of biodiversity?
That's a good question.
Some people argue, okay, biodiversity is declining, extinction rates are high, but so what?
This is the cost of human progress.
This is the cost of the reality of industrial and human population expansion.
Nature services, the natural ecosystem functions upon which all life, including our life,
humanity, depends, are diverse and numerous, but their importance was not really recognized
until recently.
Part of the reason for that goes back to the commons example.
There was once an expression, I remember it from when I first started studying ecology.
The solution to pollution is dilution, meaning just throw the crap out into the environment
and somehow it'll go away.
I can remember as a child riding and watching people carelessly toss things out car windows
alongside the road, but it didn't matter.
Nature was so big it would absorb it.
The solution to pollution is dilution.
While nature services, ranging from the purification of air and water, the cycling of movement
of nutrients, the generation and preservation of soils and renewal of soil fertility, seed
dispersal, pollination of crops and other vegetation, maintenance of biodiversity, these
are all services that nature provides that we don't pay for, they're provided without
any taxpayer cost.
But how essential are these services?
In other words, if we look at them in light of a modern economic analysis, dollar value,
if you will, what are nature services worth?
If they're not worth much, then this whole argument about preserving biodiversity and
worrying about the Earth's natural environments really falls short.
If on the other hand nature services can be seen to be worth a great deal in realistic
economic terms, we have to look at them in an entirely different light.
A team of researchers led by Robert Costanza, and this is from a paper published in 1997,
using numerous databases to estimate that nature services, presuming that humans had
to somehow pay for them, would be worth about $33 trillion annually.
To repeat, $33 trillion annually.
This is the collective estimate of nature services.
Now there was that old expression by Tip O'Neill, I think, when he was Speaker of the House,
that gee, a billion dollars here and a billion dollars there, and pretty soon you're talking
about real money.
Well, this is $33 trillion.
Where does that stack up?
Well, it's noteworthy that this estimate is about double the gross world product.
The total of all gross national products, which at that time was about $18 trillion.
In 2002, updated estimates suggested a rough average of $38 trillion.
Experts for nature services, with a range of between $18 trillion and $61 trillion.
Now $18 trillion and $61 trillion is a very wide range, but the wide range reflects the
extraordinary difficulty in attempting to measure the macroeconomic worth of all ecosystem
goods and services.
Some economists, I think, fairly have criticized the effort by Costanza and his team of researchers
for a number of reasons, including the assertion that the exploitations were made inconsistent
with macroevolutionary theory.
But macroevolutionary theory is also subject to various interpretations as well.
In response, a team of 19 researchers, including economists as well as ecologists, examined
over 300 specific case studies in an attempt to compare what they termed marginal values
of goods and services delivered by the biome when relatively intact and when converted
to typical forms of human use.
In other words, what this team tried to do is look at natural ecosystems and do a cold,
honest, economic analysis of what kinds of marginal values they would provide versus
the values provided when these same systems were converted into various forms of typical
human use.
Robert Costanza, who authored the previous study, was part of this research team.
Their results were consistent in showing that natural ecosystems have at least the potential
for greater overall societal economic gain, that's economic gain, than do ecosystems converted
to narrow economic objectives.
Let me give you an example.
In one study in Malaysian tropical forests.
It was initially clear that reduced impact logging, meaning a fairly mild form of logging,
did not provide the immediate economic benefits to individuals that would be obtained with
high intensity sustainable logging, which is normally done there.
This is an area of the world where the disappearance of rainforest is very high.
So what that means to get back to our commons analogy is if you're an individual and you
want to log in Malaysia, you want to do high intensity unsustainable logging.
What that means is you want to cut out so many trees that that forest can't reproduce
itself effectively.
That's different from reduced impact logging where you take out trees selectively but leave
a crucial number that will continue to reproduce.
So the individual gets the immediate benefit, however, what happens.
Local logging reduced social and global benefits through the loss of forest products.
This is other than timber.
But there are many other forest products like various fruits and things like that.
It also reduced societal value because it eliminated a large amount of flood protection.
It reduced the stocks of carbon, thus enhancing greenhouse effect.
And it reduced endangered species, threatening more species.
The total economic value of the forest was about 14% greater when managed to be sustainable
using reduced impact logging techniques.
Now again, I want to be very clear.
What the analysis showed is not that the forest should be untouched.
Not that the forest should be kept as a just a conservation area.
Quite the contrary.
It said of course the forest can be used for logging, yes.
But it should be used in a modest way, not in an intensive way.
Because using an intensive way, it pays a large amount to a small group of individuals
but used in a low impact way.
It provides a greater amount in the long run to many more individuals.
In a second example, we talked about mangroves in an earlier lecture.
In a second example, a mangrove ecosystem in Thailand was converted to aquaculture, specifically
shrimp farming, something that is occurring in many, many places in the world's tropics.
There was no question that short term economic interests were well served by this conversion.
However, when societal benefits of leaving the mangrove ecosystem intact were included
in the economic analysis, that result changed.
Evidence such as the sequestration of carbon, that is to say sucking up carbon from the
atmosphere, storm protection, which is no small thing in an area subject to typhoons,
and protection for fish added much more value to the intact mangrove forest than to the aquaculture
ponds.
The estimate showed that the intact mangrove forest was worth about 70% more than the aquaculture.
Again, the important point here is that this 70% more would be dispersed among many in
the inhabitants of the area, whereas the profit from converting to aquaculture would be much
more narrowly dispersed.
You can see the difficulties, incidentally, in converting concepts of traditional economics
to this more environmentally sustainable concept.
You have to buy into the notion that there's real value in doing things a different way
than is traditional.
I think back to things like the Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act.
Air was once seen as a common, so was water.
If a town wanted to dump its sewage into a river, so be it.
It wasn't until the 1970s that efficient laws, at least in this country in the United States,
were enacted to protect water and to protect air.
That eliminated the notion that these were commons and said that if you're going to do
something to them, it's going to cost you.
Most economists agree that climate change is the most significant factor now influencing
Earth's ecology.
Climate change has always occurred throughout Earth's history, for many reasons that have
nothing whatsoever to do with humans.
But today's climate change is unique in that human activities do, in fact, at least seem
to be forcing much of this climate change, and much of this is due to greenhouse effect.
It is well known that greenhouses emit light and trap heat.
Some atmospheric gases have an analogous effect to that of the glass in a greenhouse.
Gases such as water vapor, methane, nitrous oxide, and carbon dioxide act to block heat
energy from passing easily through the atmosphere.
Rather than a quick and easy transit from Earth to space, the heat is trapped, retained
within the atmosphere for a relatively long period of time.
The heat does eventually begin to radiate out, but there's more trapped in the interim,
so the atmosphere stays generally warm.
The more greenhouse gases there are, the more this effect of trapping heat is manifested.
In fact, without some greenhouse effect, we couldn't exist.
Greenhouse effect is what makes this planet habitable in many ways.
It's just a question of too much.
You can't exist without protein, carbohydrate, and fat.
It's just a question of how much you take in terms of how you look and how you function.
By this phenomena, the retention of heat energy by certain atmospheric gases is the essence
of greenhouse effect.
It is tremendously important in mitigating rapid temperature fluctuations on Earth.
It's like a sponge absorbing and slowly releasing heat, and it's really contributed in an essential
way, as I just said, to making the Earth a very habitable planet.
Recall that the ecological planet is an example of the Goldilocks effect, situated at precisely
the right distance from the Sun for water to exist in liquid form.
One profound benefit of the presence of oceans of liquid water is that greenhouse gases and
in particular carbon dioxide can be absorbed into the oceans, and in the case of carbon
dioxide, by a series of purely physical reactions, the carbon dioxide will slowly move into the
sediments of the ocean where it becomes calcium carbonate, which is a solid, and it's locked
away.
In the event that carbon dioxide begins to decrease in the atmosphere, these reactions
are fully reversible, so the ocean can actually emit carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere.
There is a rough balance here.
But the thing is, it's just a rough balance.
Without the oceans, any buildup of carbon dioxide, such as the case with volcanic emissions,
for example, it's not just us burning fossil fuels, if it weren't for the oceans, the activity
of volcanoes would not be correctable, and the atmosphere would continually increase
in carbon dioxide concentration that, in turn, would trap more and more heat.
And eventually what you would get is what is called the runaway greenhouse effect.
The volcanoes would keep spewing CO2, it would have nowhere to go, the Earth would keep heating
up, and we would become somewhat similar to the planet Venus, where the surface temperature
on Venus is, and get this, it's a little warm there, about 900 degrees Fahrenheit.
That's warm enough to melt lead.
Although the oceans can and do absorb carbon dioxide, it is clear that since the onset
of the Industrial Revolution, atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration has increased
steadily, and today is about 385 parts per million by volume, compared with 315 parts
per million as recently as 1960.
So it's going from 315 parts per million, and incidentally it was considerably less
than that at the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, to the current value, which is
going up and up and up, to 385 parts per million.
This increase has generally correlated with the growing use of fossil fuel, and particularly
in the latter part of the 20th century, with increased global deforestation.
I mentioned that when tropical forests are cut and burned, this releases a lot of CO2
into the atmosphere, whereas if tropical forests are intact, it may suck up a lot of CO2, kind
of a carbon sponge.
These two factors have combined to release a significant amount of carbon dioxide, a
process that's ongoing, and which is altering the atmosphere to the degree that Earth is
likely warming and the climate likely changing.
The result of climate change will be to alter ecosystem properties and species interactions
globally.
We already see indications of this fairly strongly.
Some species, such as the polar bear or the Arctic, may be seriously endangered because
it has a unique dependency on shelf ice for its ecological welfare.
Polar bears hunt seals, and seals give birth on ice, and without the ice, the bears have
nothing to eat.
Penguins in the Antarctic are becoming isolated between inland breeding colonies and coastal
feeding areas, reducing their reproductive potential.
Things like emperor penguins, if you saw that film in the March of the Penguins, emperor
penguins have to walk anywhere from 20 or more miles inland.
They walk off the shelf ice and into areas where they breed, and as that ice changes,
it tends to break up in patches so that the penguins can no longer access their breeding
colonies, and this is certainly going to reduce their numbers, whether or not it reduces them
catastrophically as yet to be seen.
There are other problems as well.
The breakup of the ice in Antarctica is also resulting in things such as more precipitation.
That precipitation is coming down on nesting colonies of penguins, and it's essentially
preventing the eggs from hatching by making them wet and cold.
The penguins aren't able to incubate them effectively enough, so there's lots of things
going on, and it's interesting when climate changes rapidly, this sets up a selection
pressure that really does result in a lot of loss of biodiversity, and that may be inevitable
in this century.
There on the planet, where ecologists measure populations or ecological processes, changes
seem to be occurring, and many of these changes are negative, though by no means all.
Greenhouse effect is a mixed bag, and climate change is a mixed bag if indeed it's really
going on, and I think it is.
So as we come to the end of this lecture series, what really are the take-home lessons for
you?
What do you really need to know about the ecological planet?
Well, I think the central take-home lesson isn't one of pessimism, but one of reality,
one of pragmatic reality.
You should understand that ecosystems are not merely there, they're not merely decorative.
Ecosystems provide services.
In the spring of 1997, the Ecological Society of America released a study done by a team
of eminent ecologists, and the title of the study was Ecosystem Services Benefits Supplied
to Human Societies by Natural Ecosystems.
I think it's appropriate here to briefly name what these services are so that you can
think about this relative to the sustainability of the planet and what we need to do to ensure
it.
These are the services that ecosystems provide.
They do not come out of your pocket, you don't pay taxes for them, you get them merely
because you inhabit the ecological planet, and they include the natural purification
of air and water, mitigation of droughts and floods, the generation and preservation
of soils and the renewal of their fertility, detoxification and decomposition of waste,
pollination of crops and natural vegetation, dispersal of seeds, cycling and movement of
nutrients, control of the vast majority of potential agricultural pests, maintenance
of biodiversity, protection of coastal shores from erosion by waves, protection from the
sun's harmful ultraviolet rays, partial stabilization of climate, moderation of weather extremes
and their impacts, and provision of aesthetic beauty and intellectual stimulation that lift
the human spirit.
We could say much more about each one of those things I've touched upon virtually every
one of them in this lecture series.
In a sense, this is an exciting time for ecology because it's really challenged.
When I first became an ecologist, it was in the 1960s, and ecology was looked upon to
provide some kind of direction, some kind of guidance for how to treat the environment.
We were beginning to realize that the environment was at least potentially threatened.
Rachel Carson had written about silent spring, the use of pesticides, for instance, and the
effects they were having on non-target organisms.
The first Earth Day was in 1970, but ecologists weren't well equipped to answer the questions
that they were posed at that time, and in the intervening decades since then, that has changed.
Ecology really isn't a position to respond to the realities of what human culture and
its collective and powerful influence are doing on this, the ecological planet.
And so on that note, hopefully of encouragement, I thank you for listening to this lecture series,
and I hope you were educated by it and learned more about this one unique pale blue dot in
space, which is our ecological planet.
This ends lecture 14.
Now that you've completed this course, be sure to test your comprehension by taking
the final exam.
You'll find the exam on this course's webpage at www.modernscholar.com.
This course, produced by John J. Alexander, is copyrighted 2007 by recorded books LLC.
The lecture text is copyrighted 2007 by John Criter.
The lectures were edited under the direction of Ian McCulloch.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
