The boreal, or northern coniferous forest, is a vast bio that encircles the far northern
latitudes, covering just over 10 percent of Earth's terrestrial area.
It is strongly identified by the wild yodeling call of the common loon, which nests on the
seemingly innumerable lakes, most of which trace their ancestry to the melting glaciers,
lakes that dot the boreal forest throughout.
This is a land of Christmas trees.
It's a land of relatively low tree species richness, indeed in many areas you can count
the number of species of trees on the fingers of one hand.
It's millions and millions of spruces, furs, and a few pines intermingled with larches.
Larches incidentally are kind of interesting trees.
We have one we call the tamarack.
This is a needle-leaf tree that loses its needles.
It's a deciduous needle-leaf tree.
It loses its needles in the fall and grows them back in the spring.
There are a few broadleaf tree species, also in the boreal forest biome, things like aspens,
birches, and willows.
Many willows, for instance, characterize moist areas.
As I mentioned a long time ago, when I first introduced the boreal forest several lectures
back, it's often termed the spruce moose biome because of the prevalence of the largest
animal, the moose, and all of the spruce.
Moose feed on aquatic vegetation.
They're found in bogs, which are another feature of the boreal forest.
Numerous bogs interrupt unbroken vastness of a forest of Christmas trees.
In addition to moose, animals such as lynx and wolverine, and boreal bird species such
as the goshawk, boreal owl, and curious bird called the red crossbill can be found in boreal
forest.
Crossbills are birds.
There are actually several species of them whose bills really cross.
When you first see them, they look like some kind of mutation.
But the crossbills function like forceps to reach into pine cones and literally pluck
out the seeds from between the scales of the pine cones.
So crossbills are magnificently adapted to feed on the seeds of pine, spruce, and furs.
The boreal forest in Europe and Asia looks very much like the boreal forest in North America.
The species aren't exactly alike, but they're very closely related.
It's a biome, as I said, like a ring kind of encircles the northern part of the planet.
The northern third, the boreal forest, where trees are stunted and shrub-like due to the
severity of climate, is traditionally called tega, T-A-I-G-A.
This is taken from a Russian word that refers to the density of the trees.
But the word tega is now often generalized to include the whole biome.
So sometimes you see the boreal forest referred to as the tega biome.
They are considered today to be interchangeable terms.
Much of the region of the northern Caniphas Forest has been subject to recent glaciation.
By recent, I mean within the past 20,000 years, of course, the glaciation events go back prior
to that.
There have been several episodes, in fact, many episodes of glaciation, but most recent
was about 20,000 years ago.
Glaciers are huge in glaciers' way, massive amounts.
And so the result of glaciation is that the soils in these areas are relatively poor because
they've been scraped so severely by glaciers.
The other reality is an abundance of lakes and bogs.
This is also created by the scraping action in these immense heavy glaciers.
If you get to go to places in Alaska, for instance, you can actually watch glaciers calving or
melting in segments during the summer growing season.
And it's mighty impressive to watch massive chunks of ice drop off a glacier into the
water.
As I said, glaciers produce a great many kinds of lakes, but they also produce bogs.
And what's the difference between a bog and a lake?
Well, we'll have something to say about bogs later on, but for now, the difference is simply
this.
In a lake, you have an influx and you have an outflow of water.
There are streams and rivers that feed into a lake.
Bogs are isolated.
They don't really have an inflow or outflow of water, so they're really stagnant.
They have water in them, but they don't have any way of the water moving in or out.
That means that bogs eventually fill.
That is to say that material, plant material from the surrounding area washes in and very
gradually fills the bog.
And this is really important for ecologists because it gives us a very clever way of tracing
the history of the area, as you'll see.
In North America, the boreal forest begins roughly at the Canadian border, though it's
also found in northern New England and northern Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin.
But it also extends in the mountain regions.
One unique extension of the boreal forest is what's called the Appalachian extension.
This extends from Maine all the way down to Georgia, it's the Appalachian Trail.
And the Appalachian extension is identified by the fact that red spruce replaces white
spruce, white spruce being the prevalent tree throughout the eastern part of the boreal
forest.
But on the Appalachian extension, it's red spruce.
They're very similar.
You have to be a good botanist to tell them apart unless, of course, any spruce tree you
see in Georgia you know is a red spruce.
And instead of balsam fur, the traditional Christmas tree that many of us have had, it's
Fraser fur in the Appalachian extension.
So these are at high elevations along the Appalachian Mountains.
In addition, in the American West, the boreal forest intermingles with the coniferous trees
found in the Rockies, Cascades, Sierra Nevada, as well as with the temperate rainforest of
the Pacific Northwest.
Now the temperate rainforest is deserving of the term unique.
So I'll devote a couple of minutes to talking about that in the last part of the lecture.
We won't deal with that right now.
Now to get back to the boreal forest, white spruce abundant throughout the boreal forest
is replaced by closely related Engelman spruce throughout the high elevations of the Rocky
Mountains.
But where these two species come together, they occasionally hibernose.
So what we see here is a pattern of speciation depending on the degree of isolation from the
original boreal area.
These trees that are on the Appalachian extension are different species.
Many of these species that are out west are somewhat different from what would be found
in the boreal forest in Northern Canada.
The growing season becomes increasingly shortened as one moves north in latitude through the
boreal forest.
And it ranges from about 120 days in southern regions, that's not too bad, something like
four months, to as short as 90 days or less at what we call tree line, where the forest
finally gives way to arctic tundra.
And this is a very ragged transition.
As I want to emphasize again, it's not a sharp transition.
It's hard to know exactly where tree line is.
The trees begin to get progressively shorter, for instance, and I remember I took a train
ride from, I guess it was Winnipeg up to Churchill, Manitoba.
And it was really obvious that the forest was just kind of getting shorter and shorter
and shorter as we approached Churchill, which is on arctic tundra.
And finally, there were just these scattered small trees before we got there.
In general, the mean annual temperature ranges from about four degrees centigrade to minus
five degrees centigrade.
Now bear in mind that zero degrees centigrade is a 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
So you're not getting much above 40, 45 degrees Fahrenheit, and you're getting down pretty
low to something like 15 or so degrees Fahrenheit for part of the year.
And a few places, temperature extremes from the heat of summer to the cold of winter range
as much as 100 degrees centigrade, that's a lot.
That means it's a lot warmer in the summer than it is in the winter, and that certainly
sets up conditions that are difficult for organisms to adapt to.
Winters are almost always long and cold, and usually all the precipitation falls as snow.
And snow is actually a good thing for the organisms, both plants and animals, because
one of the reasons trees are able to survive at the highest elevations is because snow
covers the trees, and that actually protects them.
Because when you're covered by snow, the coldest it's going to get is 32 degrees Fahrenheit
or zero degrees centigrade.
It could be much, much, much colder than that outside of the snow.
So things like birds, for instance, various kinds of grouse will burrow into the snow
and completely cover themselves over with snow, and that's how they stay, quote, warm
unquote, during the cold arctic night, or in this case, boreal forest night.
And in terms of trees, branches can survive, and leaves can survive under a blanket of
snow, where if they were exposed to top the snow, the wind itself would kill the leaves
and branches.
I'll have a bit more to say about that later as well.
In winter, the ground is frozen, and that prevents plants from taking up the moisture
from the soil that they need in order to function.
This is really the key to winter dormancy.
When people see plants that lose their leaves in temperate zone forests or plants in boreal
forests that shut down for the winter, the reason they're shutting down is because the
soil is frozen.
They can't get water, and so they just have to tough it out.
What happens with northern tree species is that they undergo a complex physiological
process, and I'm talking here about the spruces and the furs and things of that sort, and
it varies somewhat among species, but it's generally called winter hardening.
And what it does is it essentially converts some of the material, some of the liquid inside
of the cells and outside of the cells, to anaphrase, if you want them for one of a better term.
And this enables them to withstand subzero temperatures without experiencing severe damage
to the tissues.
You see, if the water freezes inside a living cell, you know what happens when water freezes.
You get ice, and ice expands, and so the cell would break.
What winter hardening does is prevent that from happening.
It's really quite amazing that these trees have evolved as characteristic of anaphrase.
The other thing that's an obvious factor of the boreal forest is that the trees are conically
shaped.
Being an evergreen tree with needles doesn't automatically mean the tree will take a conical
form.
Look at the pine trees, for instance, that grow in places like Georgia.
They don't have a conical form, but if you look at spruce and fir trees in the Arctic,
they do.
And what that does is provide them with a natural way of shedding snow.
When the wind blows, they blow back and forth with their conical shape, and the snow just
kind of fluffs off them.
Most of the snow is quite light.
It's not heavily laden with water because the air temperature is so cold it results
in a very light snow, and it doesn't accumulate because the very shape of the tree is an adaptation
to shed snow.
Soils are typically acidic, thin, and nutrient poor.
What does all that mean?
Well, it means you don't have to dig down very far to get the bottom of the soil.
That's what thin means.
Acidic means that they actually have a tendency to be acid.
If you put the soil in water and you test for the acidity, if you use litmus paper,
for instance, it will turn red, showing that the soil is acidic.
And nutrient poor is simply the result of glaciation.
The glaciers have made the soil so thin it hasn't had time to age and accumulate nutrients.
But why should it be acidic?
Well, there are two reasons for that.
One is that the acidic nature of the soil comes from the fact that needles, this is
all part of the complex physiology of the leaves, the needles of the trees, when they decompose,
which they do when they fall off, they decompose such that they are acidic.
They actually add acid to the soil.
The very nature of leaf decomposition does that.
Secondly, there is a rapid, a fairly rapid, snow melt in the spring, and thus all the
water that was present in the form of snow suddenly sinks down into the soil.
It gets wet.
And that water isn't neutral.
As it moves through the soil, hydrogen atoms from the water actually grab on to other minerals
or else accumulate in the soil, and hydrogen atoms make soil acid.
The very definition of acidity, if you remember from your general chemistry, is the concentration
of hydrogen atoms.
So there are a lot of hydrogen atoms that get to be in these northern boreal forest soils.
The word we have for these soils is spotosol.
You see, soils vary from one biome to another.
They vary for physical reasons and they vary for biological reasons because of the kinds
of organisms that grow on them and how those organisms affect them.
And spotosols are acidic, due in part to the breakdown of needle leaves, and that, as
I said, tends to add hydrogen to the upper soil layers.
That will have an interesting effect, incidentally, in another lecture where I'll talk about
what acid rain does.
Boreal soils are what we call well leached.
That is to say the minerals in them are moved from the surface of the soil down to a lower
depth in the soil.
That's what soil biologists call horizons.
They're various soil horizons.
This is simply because as the water moves through the soil, it carries the minerals with it.
Where the minerals come from, they come from the decomposition of the leaves, stems, roots,
things like that up near the surface.
And as the water moves through the soil, it picks up these things and it moves them down
to a deeper horizon.
So when you dig into these soils, they tend to have a stratification, a series that kind
of looks like a layer cake effect.
The upper soil horizon is usually a very grayish color.
Because the growing season is short, there is usually a significant buildup of leaf litter.
And what this does is make the ground very soft underfoot.
Now why should that be?
Well, once the plant sheds its leaves and it doesn't shed them all at once in the boreal
forest, the needles kind of just drop off and new ones grow.
But what happens to them after they hit the ground?
Well, what happens to them is a series of little animals, in many cases insect type animals,
worms, things like that, begin to chew on them.
And then they're invaded by bacteria and fungi.
It's really the bacteria and fungi, which are the key decomposers in all ecosystems.
Recycling is ultimately dependent on bacteria and fungi tearing things apart, releasing
the chemicals that are in those things, making them re-available.
That's what recycling is.
We didn't have these bacteria and fungi.
Life could not go on because everything would eventually be locked in bodies.
When the bodies died, that would be that.
But when bodies die, they get decomposed.
And so what happens is the bacteria, the fungi, the other decomposers, they can only function
when it's warm.
And it's not warm for all that much.
So year after year, there is this very gradual buildup of leaf litter.
That's what makes walking on this litter so soft, it's almost a cushiony effect.
Bogs are particularly acidic due to both the influx of decomposing needles, I already mentioned
that decomposing litter, as well as the prevalence of the unique species called sphagnum moss.
Sphagnum moss, which is very abundant in these northern bogs, simply in its own biochemistry
tends to add hydrogens to the water, and that makes them more acidic.
You might know that bodies that have been found in bogs are very slow to decompose.
And bogs in Europe, for instance, there have been bodies pulled from the bogs, and you
can do a perfectly reasonable autopsy of them because even though they may be many hundreds
of years old, they're still relatively intact.
Some boreal soils have permafrost, not many, but some do, where the soil remains frozen
throughout the year.
Now, throughout much of North America, two species, the white spruce and balsam fir,
are the dominant upland species of boreal forest.
But in wet areas, in boggy areas, those are replaced by black spruce and various willows
and tamarack, the American larch tree that I mentioned earlier that sheds its needles.
In addition, in areas that are subjected to recent fire, and fire really is a component
of boreal forest, that will support stands of asmonds, birches, and jack pine.
Jack pine is one of those species with serotonous cones that actually need to be burned before
they will open and release their leaves.
In Eurasian boreal forests, these tree species are replaced by others, but they're very similar.
Let's talk about bogs for a minute.
Bogs were virtually all created by glacial retreat.
When the glaciers melted, they left these big holes in the ground filled with water,
melted from the glaciers.
And bogs are generally abundant throughout the boreal forest.
They provide good habitat for a large number of species, in fact, insectivorous plants such
as sundews and pitcher plants.
These are plants which actually capture things like flies and basically digest them, as well
as many other specialized plant species, including the aforementioned sphagnum moss that occur
in bogs.
The real significance of bogs for ecologists is it gives us an opportunity to look back
into time, because around bogs there are trees, and these trees shed pollen when they reproduce.
And some of that pollen falls into the water of the bog, and it goes down and accumulates
with the rest of the sediments that gradually accumulate in bogs.
And if you could look at a bog over a long period of time, it begins to shrink.
It gets characteristically smaller and more shallow and smaller and more shallow.
And this is solely because of material washed into it through the natural cycling of leaves
falling off of trees, branches falling down, dust blowing in, things of that sort.
So bogs fill, and it's possible for you to take a core of the material in the bog, which
is called peat.
Peat is the collective filling of the bog, and it's full of pollen, it's full of all
sorts of things, and pollen doesn't decompose very readily.
Partly this is because the bog is very acid, and the acidity tends to suppress the bacteria
that would ordinarily be present that would decompose.
The pollen is also the reason human bodies don't decompose when they're thrown in bogs,
because the decomposing organisms, the bacteria, are not there.
And so we can look back in time by doing sediment cores from bogs, and we can actually calibrate
the time, and we can see the change in vegetation that has occurred since the retreating of
the glaciers.
It gives us a way of documenting how various plant species return to latitudes that they
had been basically forced from during the cold of the glaciation.
So ecologists have found bogs to be remarkably useful as a key to looking back into time
to see how ecosystems have gradually changed.
In the most northern regions of the boreal forest, the trees are much reduced in stature
due to the severity of the winter weather.
It is here that trees, such as spruces and furs, take on a really twisted appearance,
which is called crumholtz, it's a word that is spelled C-R-U-M-M-H-O-L-Z, and it literally
means twisted wood.
These plants tend to look spreading and shrubby, and it's a growth form, it's really a growth
form determined by the severity of the climate.
The more the wind blows, the less probability is that the trees' branches can survive in
that wind.
But if they have a protective blanket of snow, they can get through it.
And so whether you're up on Trail Ridge Road in the Rocky Mountains or up in far northern
latitudes of Canada, you'll see this zone of crumholtz, little shrubby trees, low to
the ground, some of them won't even come up much beyond your ways.
With dense branches spreading out, these are the branches that survive the winter.
It doesn't mean they won't continue to put up a few branches that go above the snow,
but those branches won't be there in the spring, they'll be dead.
So crumholtz is another unique characteristic of boreal forests at their highest latitudes
and boreal ecosystems up on alpine areas.
What about the animals?
While characteristic mammal species include things like the red squirrel, the ermine,
and ermine is another one of these animals that can change its pellage, in the summer
it's a brown, rich color, in the winter it turns white.
Barying hair, the name also implying that in the winter they turn white, in the summer
they are more the color of the soil in the woodland.
Lynx wolverine, grizzly bears, blackbird, lynx wolverine, grizzly bears, and black bears
are all common in these areas.
Bears locate in dens for the winter, but they don't actually hibernate, a lot of people
think bears are hibernators, but they don't, they actually go into a deep sleep and wake
up from time to time.
Mammals such as hare and lynx remain active throughout winter months, the former trying
to avoid predation by the latter.
One of the other characteristics of boreal areas as well as temperate forests in general
is the presence of beavers.
Beavers have had a remarkable history in these areas, in fact it's very much related to human
history because the first trappers that went out west were principally going there to try
and get beavers.
But beavers have had an amazing impact on the landscape, in fact because of their activities
of damning, create lots of wetland habitats, habitats which they then abandoned, those
habitats then grow back in the forest even as beavers make new wetland habitats.
So they've been a very strong disturbance factor in creating habitat that serves for
species not found in closed forest.
Another common rodent in boreal forest is the porcupine.
Porcupines are common indeed in boreal forest throughout North America but they're absent
from Eurasia.
There's a good reason for this and that's a biogeographic region.
The reason is that porcupines are actually native to South America.
They're not boreal forest species originally.
They migrated from South America over the Isthmus of Panama when the glaciers were in
fact in full force and the sea level was lower.
When the sea level was lower, porcupines were able to move.
Many animals moved from North America into South America.
Many animals moved from South America to North America, things like armadillos and opossums
for instance and even ground sloths that was called the great faunal interchange occurred
about two million years ago and that's where the first porcupines came to North America.
So porcupines are associated with North American boreal forest but not European strictly for
biogeographic regions.
One of the characteristic animals of the boreal forest is the gray wolf.
Gray wolves are really an intrinsic part of the forest but of course wolves were one of
the animals most hunted when Europeans came to North America.
You're probably familiar with the fact that in recent years wolves were reintroduced to
Yellowstone National Park.
This has been an important factor and in fact they've been there long enough now that we
begin to get some kind of good idea about exactly what the function of wolves is in the
ecosystems in which they belong and it's a very significant function.
One of the problems in Yellowstone is that the elk herd has become increasingly large
and wolves prey principally on elks.
They like to prey on cows but to a certain degree they prey on bull elks.
And so wolves do this by the fact that they cooperate as they hunt.
They're a unique predator in that sense, kind of the North American version of lions.
They bunch up and coordinate their attacks.
It turns out that since wolves have been reintroduced to Yellowstone National Park they've had a
really strong effect on elk populations and this has led to the possibility that aspen
trees which seem to be in trouble in Yellowstone are beginning to recover because elk prey
very heavily on aspen trees.
And as the elk herd became larger and larger the kind of forage that they depend on became
more and more reduced.
And so by reintroducing wolves what is essentially established is a top-down food chain where
the predator at the apex, the wolf, exerts an effect that moves all the way through to
the base of the food chain, in this case the aspen.
In this sense wolves may prove to be what ecologists refer to as a keystone species, a very, very
uniquely important species in their particular ecosystem.
I want to spend the last few minutes talking a bit about the temperate rainforest, which
is a unique coniferous forest in many ways.
What do we mean by a temperate rainforest, aren't rainforests really something of the
tropics?
Well no they're not.
There are forests in North America that are uniquely large, the trees are of the greatest
stature of any trees on the planet, eucalyptus trees compare fairly favorably, but if you've
ever been to the Pacific Northwest you know the one thing that you see is tall trees.
The Pacific Northwest of North America, the states of California, Oregon and Washington
and the Canadian province of British Columbia, is the site of a coastal forest comprised
of Sitka spruce, western hemlock, western red cedar, grand fur and common Douglas fur,
and these are arguably the most majestic of the earth's forest, it's called the temperate
rainforest.
There's a good reason for that and that is in order to sustain trees of that stature
you need a lot of moisture, and because of the unique location in the Pacific Northwest
where the waters are cool and where there's a great deal of evaporation from the ocean
and a great deal of rainfall you have a sufficient amount of moisture to sustain such forests.
In California this forest also includes the highly imposing redwood and giant sequoia
trees, these are trees that often exceed 300 feet in height.
This coniferous forest, composed of the most statuesque of all North American tree species
is a land of tall trees, high rainfall, how high?
Well, up to about 138 inches annually.
The only exception to that is the coastal fog along California, there you have less rainfall
but the fog is so continuous, so pervasive that the fog itself provides enough moisture
to sustain these gigantic trees.
In many ways the temperate rainforest is ecologically similar to the boreal forest, it's just larger
and more lush.
It really isn't similar to a tropical rainforest in very many ways at all, it really should
be thought of as a unique component of boreal forest.
But these trees as I mentioned routinely exceed 200 feet in height and they have trunks fully
eight feet wide at their bases.
It is normal for the trees to live anywhere from between 400 and 700 years and some of
them may even top a thousand years in lifespan.
This incidentally is a longer lifespan than most tropical trees have.
This forest is also unique in many areas because it is what we call an old growth forest, one
in which the trees have not recently ever been felled by axe or saw.
The complex physical structure of an old growth forest, particularly an old growth temperate
rainforest, makes it very different from the small stature more rapidly growing spruce
fir forests that typify most of the boreal region.
And this is why there is such a controversy about logging in these areas.
Obviously with trees this large logging is a very economically viable activity because
not only do you get a lot of wood in these trees but actually the trees are relatively
fast growing.
So when you clear cut a section of northern forest and particularly if you do an old
growth forest, yes you remove all of those trees that are old but then you begin to replace
them with denser growths of trees that can be harvested again by the time they get to
60 years.
But you have completely changed the characteristics of the habitat.
Old growth forest is structurally unique and in fact you may be familiar with the controversy
a number of years ago over the northern spotted owl.
The northern spotted owl is a species of bird that requires old growth forest.
It will not survive, it will not nest in any other kind of forest and in fact the northern
spotted owl is the dubious honor of having made the cover of Time magazine on June 25th,
1990 when this controversy was really raging.
Well the spotted owl is protected and there are sections of temperate rainforests that
are not being cut, some of them for instance with an Olympic national park.
In addition we have learned that another unique bird is part of the old growth forest and
this is a really bizarre story.
One of the quizzes for people who like birds is what was the last bird in North America
to have its nest discovered and the name of that bird is something called the marbled
murelet, the marbled murelet.
It's a tiny little sea bird about the size of a starling which can be found diving in
the oceanic waters off of the Pacific Northwest.
There are other kinds of murelets there as well, they look like tiny little penguins
and these murelets for the most part nest in rocky areas on islands and places like
that but nobody could find the nest of the marbled murelet until a few years ago it was
found in the tops of the trees of the temperate rainforest.
This is a little sea bird that flies in, makes a nest and lays an egg in a forest and apparently
it doesn't do it in anything but old growth rainforest so it's not only the spotted owl
but the marbled murelet and quite a few other animals that are really dependent on this
forest but the other characteristic of the temperate rainforest in its old growth form
is that it's a very magnificent system and it shouldn't be forgotten that part of ecology
has an aesthetic component and that's the reason why so many people want to conserve
at least some tracks of this unique ecosystem.
Well in our next lecture we'll move further south yet into the temperate forest, that
area of broadleaf forest that all turns so colorful in the fall and learns something
about the ecology of that biome.
