Recorded books is pleased to present the Modern Scholars Series, where great professors teach you.
My name is L.J. Ganser, and I'll be your host.
Today, we begin a course entitled The Ecological Planet, an introduction to Earth's major ecosystems.
Your professor is John Critcher, a professor of biology at Wheaton College in Norton, Massachusetts.
John is a fellow in the American Ornithologists Union and past president of both the Association of Field Ornithologists and Wilson Ornithological Society.
For more information on this course, please visit its webpage at www.modernscholar.com, where you'll have access to links to related sites,
a seminar room to share your thoughts with other students, and, yes, of course, a final exam.
And now we begin The Ecological Planet, an introduction to Earth's major ecosystems.
Lecture one, Ecology and the Big Picture, and now, Professor Critcher.
I first began my study of ecology in the 1960s when I was in college.
At that time, like a lot of college students, I was kind of into folk music,
and one of the songs I liked a lot had been recorded by a group called Peter, Paul, and Mary.
It was a song by Woody Guthrie, and it was called, This Land is Your Land.
The evocative words of that song, things like redwood forests, Gulfstream waters, the sparkling sands of her diamond deserts,
even the weak fields waving in the dust clouds rolling, they were all very, very interesting to me because I wanted to see those places
and more than see them, I wanted to study them because I was interested in the environment and how the environment works.
How did I get that way?
Well, I missed my high school graduation in 1962 because I was attending a National Audubon Society camp
that was located in coastal Maine in the rocky coasts of Maine.
There, I learned about ecology for the first time. They would take us out into the inner tidal zone, the area between high tide and low tide,
and yeah, we'd learn the names of all the different kinds of organisms, the different kinds of snails and clams and mussels.
We even learned the names of the different kinds of algae that one could find there.
But we did more than that. It's easy enough to learn the names that feels pretty powerful to be able to go put a name on things,
say, that's a common periwinkle or, oh, that's Irish moss, a kind of algae.
But what they taught us at the Audubon camp was how it all goes together.
We learned, for instance, that the little snails, the common periwinkles, are like sheep.
They graze on the algae that cover the rocks in the inner tidal zone.
Why don't they eat all the algae was one of the questions that was asked.
Well, they showed us the dog welks, the snails that eat the periwinkles, like tigers in India or lions in the African savanna.
These snails eat the other snails, and they even showed us that the snails that eat the algae are far, far more abundant than the snails that eat the algae.
These are the lessons of ecology, food chains, and how organisms interact and how nature is structured.
One of the things we did at the camp was to go to a field that was full of wildflowers and various kinds of birds and butterflies and things of that sort.
And when we looked closely at the field, we saw that it was really full of trees, small seedlings and saplings that were moving in,
and were eventually going to grow up and replace that field and make it into a forest.
We were learning about how nature works, what it is that holds nature together, how the organisms interact, and that's what ecology is.
I was hooked, and I decided I had to study ecology, and I've been doing it for about four decades now.
Ecology is really the scientific study of how life forms interact and coexist.
It's concerned not only with how living things adapt to each other, but also how they interact and adapt to the non-living components of their environment,
things like the air, water, the various minerals, various chemicals that are in the soil.
I guess the simplest definition of ecology is the study of organisms in relationship to their environments.
But another definition, perhaps a little more precise, is it's the study of what kinds of factors influence the distribution and abundance of each of the species of organisms in nature.
And these factors can be divided into two very broad categories, which we call abiotic and biotic.
Abiotic factors are things such as temperature, precipitation, phosphorus.
Phosphorus is very important, plants can't grow without it.
Oxygen levels, salinity, even the presence of fire may surprise you to know that fire is a natural component of climate.
Without it, some ecosystems couldn't exist.
Biotic factors are interactions.
Things like predation.
I mentioned the big sails spraying on the little sails, or lion's spraying on gazelles.
Predation, parasitism, pathogens, disease, for instance, the organisms that cause it have a large influence on many populations, and competition for resources.
There are also mutually beneficial interactions among organisms when two organisms of different species seem to cooperate to a common goal.
All these kinds of things exist in nature, and all those kinds of things are what ecologists study.
Why should we study ecology?
Well, the title of this lecture series is the Ecological Planet.
We are the only planet we know of that has life, and life is pretty complicated.
Life is complex, abundant, and at the same time our species is growing and changing the world in which we live.
By the middle part of this century, by about 2050, there could be upwards of 10 billion or more humans on the planet,
and we are having a very strong influence on the ecology of the planet.
It behooves us, it is pragmatic, for us to understand how the life forms of the world interact and how the ecosystems, that's a word you'll learn very shortly, how the ecosystems are held together.
Ecology is derived from a Greek word, ekos, or sometimes pronounced ekos, meaning home, and it's the same root, interestingly enough, as the word economics.
Both disciplines, ecology and economics, study how things relate within complex systems.
Most people know what economists study.
Economists study the flow of money and goods and services through economic systems and how these various interactions structure economic systems and how they change economic systems.
Ecologists focus on things like energy flow and how the energy from the sun structures ecological systems, how atoms combine and recycle as life uses energy to maintain itself.
Ecologists, just as economists look at interactions among industry and labor, etc., ecologists look at species interactions, predators and prey, for instance, or competing organisms,
organisms which want the same resources and have to compete to get them.
The word ecology was first coined in 1866, so you see the scientists, not a particularly old one.
It was coined by a German scientist by the name of Ernst Hegel, and Hegel was attempting to form a word that described what Charles Darwin called the economy of nature.
Darwin published his very important book on the origin of species in 1859, and he used lots of examples of what has come to be known as ecology,
but Darwin didn't have ecology as a word, so he kept just describing it as the economy of nature.
Hegel gave Darwin that word later, ecology.
For instance, one of the things that Darwin wrote about was clover in English fields.
He realized that clover, in order to thrive, had to be pollinated, and it was dependent on an insect called a humble bee, in order to be pollinated.
That's not a bumble bee, incidentally, that's a humble bee.
But humble bees were periodically preyed upon by field mice, so Darwin realized that if field mice became abundant, clover might decline.
Why? Because field mice would eat the humble bees, and thus the clover wouldn't be pollinated, and so it wouldn't reproduce as well.
So Darwin also realized that predators of mice, things like stoats or even cats, would be very important to the health of clover.
Why? Because the stoats and cats ate the mice, so the mice didn't eat the humble bees, so the humble bees pollinated the clover.
Well, that's ecology. It's interactions. It's the kinds of relationships that we often call balance of nature.
Now, nothing in ecology really makes sense unless you understand it in environmental context.
That's the real essence of ecology, the environmental context.
For instance, go to a zoo and look at an animal in a zoo cage or a zoo enclosure, say a kangaroo.
Well, it'll look interesting, it'll be certainly curious, and it might behave a little bit, who knows.
But I was recently in Australia, where I saw kangaroos in the wild in the open grasslands and savanna habitats, which are their natural habitats throughout much of Australia.
And to really learn about a kangaroo, you can't watch it in a zoo. You have to study it in the wild.
In the Australian Outback, where groups of kangaroos forage for food, they groom themselves, they defend their territories, they compete for mate, they do mating, they reproduce.
So it is with all other things. So it is with plants, so it is with animals.
If you go to an arboretum, you can look at trees, but you're not seeing trees in the context of their environments.
Ecology looks at living things in context, in context of the environments, and, in fact, as they make the environments, as they comprise the environments.
Sometimes ecology is simply called the scientific study of natural history, and its roots really trace all the way back to the ancient Greeks.
Aristotle could be considered the first natural historian.
Aristotle looked carefully at fish and birds and various other animals, and he looked at how they relate to their environments, how their various structures reflect
the characteristics imposed upon them by their environments.
Some people would say Aristotle may have even been a little bit of an evolutionary biologist. I think that's a stretch.
But Aristotle at least recognized the correlation between the structure and behavior of various organisms and the environments in which they live.
And he described these things well, and initially the first attempts at doing ecology were all descriptive.
But ecologists are far more than descriptive now.
Ecology encompasses a broader discipline with more penetrating questions.
In fact, much of ecology is non-intuitive.
You can't become an ecologist by just going out and looking at nature. You have to learn how to ask questions about it.
So how do you do that? What do ecologists really do?
Ecology is a science that attempts to uncover patterns in nature.
Think about that word patterns, patterns in nature.
And once a pattern in nature, for instance, the pattern of one of the patterns that I saw when I was at the Audubon camp was the pattern of the distribution of the algae in the intertidal zone.
The red algae, like Irish moss, was down low in the intertidal zone, almost sub-tidal.
The green algae was next highest. It was exposed more than the red algae, and the brown algae was higher still.
That's a pattern. Ecologists try to find patterns and then explain them, discover causal, empirical explanations for these patterns.
And these are the explanations that ecologists then test by doing manipulations the same as any other scientist does.
Ecology is an experimental discipline.
At the same time, ecologists study what I guess you would call the big picture within the biological sciences.
Things like how open fields of grasses and wildflowers can and do with time develop into closed, shadowy forests.
Ecologists look at why large predatory animals, such as jaguars, for instance, or great white sharks, are so much rarer than their prey species.
Why should that be?
Ecologists study why the gain or loss of but a single species in a habitat can radically affect and alter that habitat while other species come and go with little of any discernible effects.
For example, if you look at sea otters, you can find them off the coast of California in places like Monterey Bay, for instance.
If you look at sea otters, sea otters have a profound effect on the environments they're in. We call them keystone species. Why is that?
Well, because sea otters eat sea urchins.
Sea urchins are a kind of invertebrate animal related to starfish, and sea urchins have voracious appetites for kelp.
And kelp forests form the basis for one of the richest marine ecosystems off coastal California.
However, sea urchins reproduce very quickly, and when they reproduce quickly, they become abundant.
When they become abundant, they eat a lot of kelp, so much that they begin to destroy the kelp ecosystem.
And sea otters eat so many sea urchins because they're mammals, they're warm-blooded, they have high metabolisms,
that sea otters essentially control the sea urchin population, thus allowing the kelp to thrive.
Therefore, ecologists refer to sea otters as keystone species. They hold the entire ecosystem together.
There are many examples of this, while at the same time, as I mentioned, there are other species that seem to occupy far smaller influences within their ecosystems.
Ecologists also look at the distribution of large kinds of habitats. This is going to be one of the main focuses, in fact, the main focus of this lecture series.
Why are some regions of the Earth covered with rainforest, while other regions are nothing but deserts?
Ecologists also look at how things like phosphorus and other minerals like nitrogen and carbon dioxide, things of that sort, move through the environments.
Indeed, help structure the environments.
And ecologists today are concerned with such major global questions as the potential for climate alteration, how complex effects caused by pollutants change ecosystems.
One of the things that concerns us the most is the effect of invasive species, species which are moved around the planet into ecosystems where they did not evolve and where they essentially do not have natural predators, natural checks.
And of course, overall, the decline of biodiversity.
It may interest you to know that probably the rate of extinction today is as high as it's ever been in the history of the planet, with very few exceptions.
There have been five major extinction events in the history of Earth, and many ecologists today believe that we're in the sixth major extinction, because largely of anthropogenic or human generated activities.
At the base of ecological study is the organism, the organism.
It's the organisms that are the great chess pieces on the board of the environment that move around, that determine the game, so to speak.
Ecologists study organisms in the context of both their present and their past histories.
Ecologists become very evolutionary in its focus.
For instance, when I studied ecology, I used a book called Fundamentals of Ecology, the second edition.
It was published in 1959, and it was written by a great ecologist from the University of Georgia named Eugene P. Odom.
Odom really set the agenda for ecology and influenced many, many ecologists and their careers.
But in that book, which has 496 pages of text, the word evolution is given six pages.
And the word natural selection, the process by which evolution happens, is discovered by Charles Darwin and described on the origin of species in 1859.
Well, natural selection gets no mention at all in Fundamentals of Ecology.
That has changed.
Ecologists recognize that species not only have a context in the present, but they have a context in the past.
Species evolved.
Let me give you an example.
There's a lot of squirrels around this year, and in a couple of years there won't be so many.
There's also a lot of blue jays around.
Why is that?
Squirrels and blue jays eat acorns, and acorns are produced by oaks.
Periodically, oak trees go through a process that ecologists describe as nasing, M-A-S-T-I-N-G.
Nasty means that all of the oaks in a given region seem to synchronize their reproductive efforts and literally flood the market with their reproductive products, in this case acorns.
Acorns hold the seeds of the oaks.
They are the reproductive investment of the oak trees.
Blue jays eat acorns.
They also plant acorns, and so blue jays are both a predator and a neutralist, a helpful organism to oaks.
Yes, they eat a lot of the acorns, but they also plant a lot of them.
Squirrels do the same thing.
There are other things like wild turkeys and various insects that eat acorns.
By masting, what oaks manage to do is periodically flood the market with so many acorns that they can't all be destroyed by the various animals that would eat them.
And so some of them have to survive, and the forest reproduces.
But in other years, oaks produce almost no acorns, and then inflated populations of blue jays have no choice but to migrate, and populations of squirrels, which can't find enough acorns, have to disperse.
Without looking in the evolutionary context, without asking what the sense of this process is and envisioning it as an adaptation, you really can't understand it.
So ecologists had to become evolutionary biologists as the discipline has matured in the latter part of the 20th century.
What do ecologists study?
I mentioned organisms.
Well, ecologists look at about three units of organization.
The first is the population, and I mentioned blue jays and oak forest as a population of blue jays.
It has a population of white oak trees.
It has a population of scarlet oak trees.
This is the species, the composition of an ecosystem species by species, but species don't exist as individual animals.
They exist in populations.
The ecologists study population biology, the population of blue jays of oak trees, et cetera.
For instance, ecologists speak of the grizzly bear population at Denali National Park in Alaska, or the right whale population in the Gulf of Maine in the Atlantic Ocean.
When the focus is on questions pertaining to whole populations, the term population biology is used, populations are often divided into different subpopulations.
For instance, in a large barn, it may interest you to know that the house mouse population may differ genetically from one end of the barn to the other.
Populations organize themselves in local groups, which ecologists call deems, and those deems can vary genetically, one from another.
But no natural environment consists of but a single kind, a single organism, at least I can't think of a natural environment that's comprised entirely of one organism.
Thus, various populations, called ecological communities, coexist within the same locality.
Now, I've given you two words, population and community.
We hear them all the time.
We use them in our everyday language, but they have very specific meanings in ecology.
Population, a group of animals or plants or microbes, all of the same species.
Community, a group of interacting species in a given region.
For instance, grizzly bears, along with caribou, dolls, sheep, and arctic ground squirrels are each part of the arctic tundra animal community in Denali.
Right whales, along with various oceanic birds, such as gannets and greater shearwaters, plus other whale species, such as humpback and minky whales, along with numerous fish species, oceanic invertebrates, and tiny plants called phytoplankton are all part of the Atlantic pelagic, that means open sea community.
These communities are organized in food chains, which ultimately are organized in food webs.
That's the very structure of the ecological community.
Our organisms are interdependent on one another for food and fiber.
Ecological communities, by necessity, interact with the non-living or abiotic environment, the air, the water, the substrate, whatever.
The combination of the living, the biotic, and the abiotic components of any habitat forms the broadest unit of organization in ecology, indeed the broadest unit of organization in all of biology, what we call the ecosystem.
The interactive association between a community of organisms and a physical and chemical environment is what we call an ecosystem.
Now, you can roughly think of an ecosystem as kind of the same as a habitat.
It's just a little more formal in its meaning because the implication of a habitat is just, it's a place you can describe, you can look at it, you can say, oh, that's a marsh, or that's a swamp, or that's a field of wheat.
But an ecosystem has an implication that the organisms of that marsh, that swamp, that field of wheat, have an interactive dependency not only among themselves but with the environment in which they're in.
The field of wheat, for instance, could not be just anywhere.
The soil has to be of a certain kind for wheat to grow.
The temperature has to be favorable.
The amount of rainfall, precipitation has to be favorable.
And so that's the concept of the ecosystem, a concept which was only first delineated in any formal sense in 1935.
So you see ecology as a relatively recent science.
Ecologists study what are called open systems.
Earth is an open system.
It gets its energy from the sun.
It emits energy to the universe.
And ecosystems are that way as well.
For instance, ecosystem boundaries are often very, very fuzzy.
I'll give you some examples.
You walk into a woods and you see a decaying log.
There it is.
It's a fallen tree and it's starting to decompose.
You can start to look into that log and see all kinds of invertebrate animals living in it.
If you look at the bacteria and fungi in it, you certainly can see a vast array of different kinds of organisms.
You'd be surprised with just how many things can live on the energy and decaying log.
So you could look at the decaying log as an ecosystem.
You could measure the amount of energy in it.
You could measure the energy used by the different organisms.
You could measure how the minerals from it are being released into the soil.
You could measure the interactions among the organisms dependent on it.
But on a larger scale, the woodlot, which has the decaying log, is also an ecosystem.
You could look at exactly the same parameters.
You could measure how much energy is going into that ecosystem from the sun.
You could measure how much precipitation, et cetera, et cetera.
And so you could look at the function of the woodlot in exactly the same way as you look at the function of a decaying log within it.
But you could also look at the entire regional forest of which the woodlot is butt apart.
This would be an even more major scale of looking at an ecosystem.
And the largest ecosystem known is called the biosphere or ecosphere.
And I think you probably know what that means. That's the Earth itself.
Now the Earth itself is not all alive.
The interior of the Earth is certainly not alive.
And up above a certain point in the atmosphere, things get a little tough for living organisms.
The biosphere is actually a fairly thin layer, probably about 25 kilometers or so,
of living matter that inhabits the crust and atmosphere of the Earth.
And this is thus far the only known area in the universe to have an ecology.
We'll talk about that in the next lecture.
So when we talk about ecosystems, we're looking at very major units of organization, not so major.
It's not the size or area of the system that is in question.
What it really is, is the measurement of the processes which sustain the system
and how the systems interact one with another.
It's important to remember that the ecological systems are open.
Let me give you an example.
Phosphorous cycles in the environment and phosphorus is an essential element to life.
You have a lot of phosphorus in you and without it you couldn't exist.
And that's true for all life forms.
Phosphorous ultimately comes from volcanoes.
Volcanoes produce the minerals.
They bring them up from the interior of the Earth and phosphorus begins to cycle.
It's not like oxygen or carbon that have a gaseous phase.
Phosphorous can move through the environment, but it moves through the environment in a particulate way.
It can be part of dust, for instance, or it can be washed from one ecosystem to another.
So what happens with phosphorus?
Well, think about a feedlot or maybe a wheat field.
You put fertilizer on the wheat field to grow the wheat.
The fertilizer contains phosphorus.
It's an essential growth mineral.
What happens when the wheat field is cleared?
The soil washes away.
That soil contains phosphorus.
Where does it go?
Well, the wheat field ecosystem that had the phosphorus in it, that phosphorus moves into streams and rivers and it washes into the ocean.
Where does it go into the ocean?
It circulates in the ocean and it ultimately begins to trickle down to the ocean floor.
But before it trickles down to the ocean floor, it probably cycles through a great many different kinds of organisms, plants and animals.
What happens when it gets to the ocean floor?
Well, it just sits there or it doesn't, as the case may be.
There are places in the ocean, such as off of the west coast of South America, where there is a phenomenon known as upwelling that occurs.
Upwelling is currents that move from the bottom up to the surface and occurs because of high winds that blow away surface waters and thus create the upwelling phenomenon.
And so bottom waters and deep waters come up to the surface.
These deep waters are cold because as you get down deeper and deeper in the ocean, the water gets colder and colder until it's just above the freezing level.
Cold water is rich in oxygen and oxygen is very necessary for growth.
So the phosphorus, nitrogen, calcium, magnesium and other minerals from the ocean bottom are brought up in this oxygen-rich water.
And the phosphorus, which had been maybe in that wheat field some months ago, is now up in the surface waters off of the coast of South America,
where it's being used by all manner of organisms, first by phytoplankton, the little tiny plants that photosynthesize.
These phytoplankton are eaten by a variety of zooplankton, eventually fish, and eventually that phosphorus atom finds its way perhaps into a shrimp or a large fish or something like that.
Or it may find its way into a bird because there are large colonies of sea birds that nest off the coast of western South America, off of Chile and Peru, on various islands.
And these birds move the phosphorus out of the sea and back on the land again when they have droppings, when they poop in essence, they bring the phosphorus right back on the land.
So phosphorus is what we call a leaky biogeochemical cycle.
It tends to move easily from one ecosystem to another.
And an atom of phosphorus that was in one place months ago could be in an entirely different place on Earth, yet performing very nearly the same function as far as organisms are concerned, months later.
So environments are not independent of one another.
Environments interact with one another.
And ecologists are beginning to realize that it is extremely important to get a context on how the whole Earth works, not just system by system, but how everything integrates.
To that end, ecologists have organized what they call long-term ecological research sites.
We call these leader LTER.
And one of the kinds of ecological research that's occurring today is to study how these various sites which range from polar regions to temperate zone areas to tropical regions, some on land, some on water, how they actually function and how they relate to one another.
To give you an example, there's a leader's site in northern New Hampshire called the Hubbard Brook Forest.
The Hubbard Brook Forest has been studied for many, many years.
I'll say more about it in a future lecture in this series.
But the Hubbard Brook Forest is one which is so vast that it allows the study of the forest intact, in other words, without disturbing anything.
But at the same time, it is possible to manipulate part of the forest.
In fact, some of it was clear-cut to study the effects of clear-cutting on things like the movement of phosphorus, nitrogen, and the overall effect on the soil and water tables and that sort of thing.
So ecology has gone from a kind of philosophic study by the ancient Greek thinkers to be something quite different.
It is now a vital part of biological research.
It is the major unit of organization in biology.
If you think of what biologists do, they start with the study of molecules, things like DNA, for instance.
These molecules are organized into cells.
The cells are organized into tissues.
That's the study of cells and tissues is histology.
Tissues are organized into organ systems and organisms.
Organisms are organized and here we get to ecology into populations and communities and ecosystems.
So those are the units of organization and ecology.
What we're going to do in this lecture series is look at the major ecosystems of the earth.
We're going to look at the polar regions.
We're going to look at deserts.
We're going to look at tropical rainforests, grasslands, savannas.
And we'll also look at marine systems.
And in fact, we'll look at the relationship between marine systems and terrestrial systems.
All of this is what ecologists do and we're going to try and look at these things as they relate to one another.
In order to do that, we really need to understand some context of the earth itself.
Before you listen to the next lecture, I have a challenge for you.
I think you should sit down and try to make a list of what characteristics of planet earth make it possible for life to exist.
You might be surprised at how hard that is or maybe it'll be easy to see what you come up with.
But when you think about it, why is it that earth, the third planet from the sun, seems to be the only planet that we know of now.
Certainly none other in the solar system that we can identify that has life.
What are the characteristics of earth that make it possible for earth to be the ecological planet?
This will be the subject of our next lecture.
Thank you.
