Unfortunately, the dynamic of positive feedback and super linear skating leads to the speeding
up with the pace of life. So you have to do things faster and faster, and that eventually
leads to a socioeconomic heart attack. And that's the issue. And so how do you get around that?
I am pleased and honored to welcome my next guest, the physicist Jeffrey West to the program.
Jeffrey was a professor at Stanford. He was the leader and founder of a high-energy physics
group at Los Alamos. And most recently, he was the president of the Santa Fe Institute. He has been
long fascinated with general scaling phenomenon in biology and nature. Today, we talk, among other
things, about Kleiber's law, which states that the metabolism or the energy use of an organism
scales to the three-quarter power of its size. And we apply that not only to human bodies,
but to human exosomatic energy, how much we use in cities and the whole world with fascinating
ominous implications. For those of you that have long followed this podcast, this conversation
is a must-watch and also enjoyable. Jeffrey is kind of like a wise kind of physicist version of
Gandolf. And I learned a lot. I think this is at the core of what people need to understand
about the linkage between human nurture and human nature as biological organisms,
how we use energy and materials. Hope you enjoy it. Please welcome Jeffrey West.
Jeffrey West, welcome to the program.
Nate, thank you so much for having me. I'm delighted to be on your podcast.
You are an important human to have on this podcast because the great simplification at its core
is about the metabolism of cities, economies, our culture. And you are probably the most world-renowned
scientist on the concept of metabolism and scale. So I really wanted to get you on,
and I'm glad we finally connected. Yes. As I said, I'm delighted to be on,
and I'm sorry we couldn't do it sooner. So I, of course, have like 20 questions
just for starters. But if you could, in your lifetime of work at the Santa Fe Institute
and elsewhere, you have a very wide biology systems approach to the world. If we could start
with just a flash round of explaining some key concepts in not too lengthy answers,
just as a foundation that apply to the theme of this podcast. So let's start with the basics.
What is Kleiber's law? So Kleiber's law is, first of all, is named after a man named Max Kleiber,
who was a biologist, what is now UC Davis in California. And he discovered, I guess is the
right word, a remarkable systematic law in biology for what is presumably the most fundamental
quantity of interest, not just for an organism, but almost for any system. That is, how much
energy does it need to sustain itself and indeed to do the activities to function.
And that's called, of course, in biology, that's called metabolic rate. Roughly speaking,
it's equivalent to how much food you need each day to stay alive. And what Kleiber did was he
both gathered past evidence and did some measurements himself of metabolic rate
for a whole spectrum of animals, mostly sort of from mice to elephants. And what he discovered
was that there was a very systematic and mathematically extremely simple scaling law
for how that quantity scaled from the, well, in this case, the smallest mammal to the largest
mammal that he could measure at the time, although he did also have some measurements
someone else had taken on whales, blue whales. But what he discovered that was so important
was the following. So first of all, you have to recognize to plot a mouse and an elephant on the
same graph is a challenge of itself because an elephant is maybe 100,000 times heavier than a mouse.
And so instead of plotting it 1234 in terms of grams, the natural way to plot it is by factors of 10.
One, 10, 100,000, etc. In which case on ordinary sheet of paper, you can get both a mouse and
an elephant. And when he did that, and that's called plotting it logarithmically, when he did that,
he found something extraordinary. The points lie almost precisely on a straight line,
which is kind of amazing because each one of these organisms has evolved by natural selection.
So by which we mean that it's gone through this sort of, roughly speaking, arbitrary and chaotic
process in competition with every other organism in the biosphere, so to speak. And so it's
historically contingent. That's how we think of organisms as historically contingent,
meaning that if you plotted it the way I just described, you would expect, okay,
there might be some correlations, but they would sort of be spread all over the graph,
each point reflecting, so to speak, the historical trajectory of the organism. Quite the contrary,
they all line up beautifully on a straight line. And what in addition that he discovered was that
the slope of that line was very close to the number three quarters, 0.75. And that became known
as Kleiber's law for metabolic rates. So if it was so robust across all these organisms
of historical contingency, the implication is it functions akin to a natural law,
something going on on our planet and with species alive here.
Yeah, so one of the things that you've implied by that is that what Kleiber did was, of course,
for some subset of organisms, almost entirely mammals, but later he and others expanded it
across the entire sort of spectrum of organisms from cells all the way up to ecosystems. And
they discovered this law is indeed incredibly robust. It applies to any taxonomic group of
organisms, whether fish, birds, mammals, cells and so forth. And so therefore, it's sort of natural
to conclude that this is in that sense, a law of nature. It may not be a law of nature, sort of
like Newton's laws with governing motions and so on, in the sense that they're precise. Because if
you look at the graph, each point lies just, you know, slightly off from that straight line a little
bit. But in that statistical sense, it's an extraordinarily robust law that metabolic rate
scales the language of it as the three quarters power of mass across the biosphere.
So as you survey an animal and their size gets bigger, the amount of energy they need to sustain
themselves per day scales according to their mass, but not one for one, but to the three quarters power.
Indeed. And what is the scientific speculation on why it's three quarters power?
Yeah. So first of all, let me just say a word about that three quarters. That three quarters
obviously less than one. So we call that sublinear. And three quarters less than one means that,
you know, if it were one, the slope of one, that would be linear, which means if you
double the size, you would double the number. So you would double, you'd need twice as much food.
So this law has this extraordinary consequence that every time you double, you actually save 25%.
So there's this systematic economy of scale that goes from the smallest to the largest.
And that has profound consequences for the whole structure of the biosphere,
including the sustainability of the biosphere, which maybe we can come to later.
But going to your question, namely, you know, what is the origin of it? That's what got me into the
game because I learned about this scaling law many years ago. And for various reasons started
getting very intrigued by it, especially because it's so antithetical to one's sort of naive idea
of what evolution by natural selection is going to produce, all this sort of randomness and
sort of arbitrariness. And quite the contrary, as I said earlier, this is very highly systematic
and predictable. And that got me involved in trying to understand it, especially because
I learned that there wasn't any generic sort of universal explanation. And I got involved in it.
And I came up with this idea, the following, that if you ask what is common to not just birds,
birds, fish, mammals, and so forth, but also plants, plants also satisfy the same law,
which are quite different. What is similar about, well, the thing that's similar is that
they have this huge challenge of having a huge number of component cells. We have about 100
trillion inside us, and they have to be sustained, fed in a sort of roughly speaking egalitarian and
efficient way. And the way we've done it, we, meaning natural selection, have done it, is evolve
these networks that serve as cells, either like a circulatory system, respiratory systems, and so
on. And the idea was that I worked on was the idea was that this is universal, and that it is the
mathematics and physics of these distribution networks of energy, resources, oxygen to the cells
that is constraining metabolic rate to have this simple scaling law. And if I could understand it
and do the mathematics properly, I would be able to derive the number three quarters
from the properties of the networks. So between a mouse and an elephant is a human. So the human
would be our internal body with 100 trillion cells would lie in that logarithmic chart between a mouse
and an elephant. But what about outside of the body, our transportation networks in our cities,
in our global economy? How does that apply? Because that isn't an animal. That is a social
and economic structure built by animals. So, yes, so let me just give us a little, a few words
about the background to this. So this theory was developed based on networks, just thinking about
organisms to begin with. It was actually extended to forests, which is a community of organisms.
And does it apply to forests as well? Yes, it applies to forests. That's what's amazing, actually.
It applies to trees, plants. And when you put those all together to form a community,
it applies to them. So it was very natural when we extended it to all these things we found,
you know, it was sort of almost a complete theory of the scaling of almost any
physiological attribute or trait of an organism, and to any of its life history events, like, you
know, how long you live, how long you take to mature and so on. But then when all that work was done,
brewing in the background was your question. Human beings are special. We've done something
extraordinary, including what we're doing here. We've created this incredible technology. We,
once we discovered language, which this technology doesn't seem to the viewers, but we are using
quite a bit of energy right now with the light and the internet connection and the
embedded energy and all the microphones and everything. Absolutely. And so it was natural
to ask the question, you know, what about the what, you know, the socioeconomic activity
that we have created, which for one of a better word, I like to now use anthroposphere,
or sometimes I like the word a bannosphere, because one of the things that has become very
apparent in this last century is the planet is dominated by cities, which is our very
manifestation of our evolution from hunter-gatherers to becoming sedentary communities, and then
forming these massive cities and all the fantastic things and also the bad things that come along with
urban living. So going to your very question about how does that change metabolic rate?
And this is a fundamental question. First of all, you have to ask the question
about just organisms in their natural state. In their natural state, what I talked about,
metabolic rate scaling with the three quarters power, you have to ask yourself, first of all,
what is the what is our metabolic rate? How big is it? First of all, what we call our basal
metabolic rate, which is simply the amount of energy you use. So sitting around doing nothing,
doing that number is 100 watts. That is two, but most people don't realize that's 2000 food calories
a day, which is how much food you need to eat to stay alive, is only 100 watts. You only operate
the energy of a light bulb, which is truly extraordinary. Now, if you add in your hunting
and gathering, so to speak, I mean, before we became this marvelous socioeconomic entity,
it goes up by a factor of two or three. And that's true across all mammals. That's true of a mouse,
it's true of an elephant. If you include their actual activity, it's two or three hundred, two
to three times bigger. So our sort of natural active metabolic rate, and there's still people on the
planet that live this way, is somewhere between 200 and 300 watts. So anyway, so now you ask about us
participating as we are here, as you said, using energy to fuel this communication system, to have
the energy that was used to make the laptop that sits in front of me, to have this office,
this nice office I'm in, to produce all those books behind me, to have an automobile out in
the parking lot that I'm going to go home, I have a home, I have all this stuff that's part of me.
We think of it as, it's actually me and it's you. It's your exosomatic metabolism. Exactly,
exactly. And if you add all that up and you ask how big is it, it's not a hundred watts,
it's not even two or three hundred watts. If you're an American, it's about 11,000 watts.
Our social metabolic rate is about a hundred times what our natural basal metabolic rate is.
So on on Kleiber scale, 11,000 watts would scale to what size of an animal?
It's about 30, what is it? It's equivalent to about a dozen elephants. That's the number I
usually keep in mind. It's about the blue whale is the biggest mammal, the biggest organism that's
ever existed. It's not quite a blue whale. We're maybe a half to three quarters somewhere in there,
the size of a blue whale. So each of us on the planet roughly, or each of us certainly in the
United States and developed countries are acting as if we were the size of almost a blue whale.
Or 10 to 12 elephants. Certainly about a dozen elephants.
So that's the U.S., which is about four or five times the global average, right?
No, it's not even four or five times. It's more like about two to three, actually,
believe it or not. It's kind of amazing, actually. It's not as big as people think.
And it depends a little bit, you know, I mean, getting measurements of social
metabolic rate is actually quite a challenge to know exactly what you put in there and what you
don't. You do include the military, you know, questions like that. Exactly. So there's all
kinds of question mark, but nevertheless, you know, there and this is work, you know, that now
I'm beginning to push very hard on that we need seriously to come to terms with what we mean by
that and what that number is and get it for different countries, different cultures and so
forth. Let me ask you this. So you've been a lifetime scientist and systems analyst. At some
point in the last 20 or 30 years, you were working at a computer or a notebook and you
discovered that the metabolism of the average American was a dozen elephants. Did you at that
moment like, was that like disgusting and profound? Like, oh my God, like, was that a shock to you?
Yes, I think it was at the time because I really was, you know, this was near the beginning of the
work and I hadn't sort of put it all together and I hadn't seen its extent. And most importantly, I
hadn't seen its consequences. And this was one way that sort of made me sit up when I realized,
when I turned the equation around, that is, given if I take seriously that metabolic rate
of 11,000 and ask that question, how big an animal are we actually equivalent to? And seeing
how big it is, that already blew my mind. And then beginning to realize that, well, at that time,
there were, you know, 7.2 billion people on the planet. And each one of us in our own way wants to be
having a social metabolic rate of over 10,000 watts. And that is extraordinary. And that brought
to home to me the challenge that we have in sustaining, you know, what is brought to us
so far to this stage. So not only are we functioning metabolically as a dozen elephants,
but that is our global cultural goal is to get to that point or beyond that point.
Yeah, no, I think that's right. I think that's, you know, and, of course, it's even more so,
it's, you know, those of us, the leading edge of this, namely in Western Europe and the United
States are pushing to get more, actually. I mean, that's what the economy, you know, that's the
paradigm that we're in. You know, it's been most successful, it's been an extraordinarily successful
paradigm, you know, the discovery and exploitation of fossil fuels coupled with the discovery and
exploitation of capitalism and entrepreneurship and, you know, the extraordinary creation of wealth.
It's been phenomenal. I understand the natural law aspect of Kleiber's law as it pertains to mice
and individual humans and elephants and forests and the like. But if a human system like a city
or an economy, the social metabolism got bigger, does Kleiber's law automatically apply to that?
Or is there, on the social metabolism, is there less of a natural law and more of maybe a nature
versus nurture wide boundary of possibilities? Yeah, this is a really important question and
not one that's easy to answer. First of all, what you call Kleiber's law strictly only applies to
organisms. That's this three quarters. When you look at analogs to social metabolic rate,
they could be proxies like, you know, GDP, GDP of a city could be GDP of the planet, but GDP of a
city or, you know, the wages in a city or the number of patents it produces in a city, how
much innovation is produced, all these are sort of proxies for or results of social metabolism.
What we discovered was that instead of the three quarters, we see a number like 1.15,
and which is instead of being less than one, which meant sublinear was the word I use, which meant
the bigger you are, the less you need per capita, in that case, per cell for an organism.
When you come to a city, you're exactly the opposite. The bigger you are, the more you need
per capita, in that case, per human being. There's a metabolic positive feedback. Exactly.
As a positive feedback, and that positive feedback can be traced back to the positive feedback
for the dynamic and the process of what cities were evolved to be, namely to facilitate and
encourage social interaction. And so that positive feedback is a result of the positive feedback
in social interaction that comes from me talking to you until you talk about this thing that we
build on each other. So it's creating new nodes and each node requires more energy.
It creates new nodes and it creates new ideas. We're continually creating ideas and creating
wealth. And that, as I say, has been enormously successful, and that leads to this super linear
scaling. And what about villages or people living in the countryside? Are those smaller
entities with 10 houses or 100 houses different than a big city like Santa Fe or New York?
Well, Santa Fe is a small city. It's bigger than a few houses. It's bigger than a small village,
that's for sure. Well, the thing is that what is amazing is that the data shows that this dynamic
systematically increases with size of the city. Because it increases the chance of more interactions
and great cities encourage more interaction. I mean, New York is maybe the prime example of a
place where the buzz of the city is visceral and really encourages, not only that, it encourages
not just interactions, but it encourages potential and possibility. And that tends to be absent
as you go down in size. This may have to be a three-part podcast because now you're getting
into some deep areas that I've speculated a long time. Let me first ask you,
do you have an opinion on what Howard Odom called the fourth law of thermodynamics, which is the
maximum power principle? Which maybe that's related to Kleiber's law, that organisms and ecosystems
self-organize to take advantage or to degrade an energy gradient. Do you believe that?
Well, in some form of it, I do believe. Yes. And in fact, all the work that I do
is based on something that's slightly more general than that, in fact. And that is, all of these
systems evolve towards optimizing something. We're called it something. So for example,
just to give you, just to go back to take it out of the socioeconomic characteristics to talk about
organisms again. So the way the derivation and calculation of Kleiber's law follows
from the network theory is that all mammals that have ever existed share the same kind of
cardiovascular system that has evolved to minimize the amount of work your heart has to do
in order to pump blood through the system to supply energy to the cells, energy and oxygen
to the cells to sustain life. And the idea is that you minimize that in order to gain a
fitness advantage by being able to devote more energy in the case of organisms to sex and
reproduction and the rearing of offspring, which is Darwinian fitness to project into the future
your genes. And so there's a kind of, so you optimize the structure of the network in order to
minimize the amount of energy. And so this is one of a number of these kinds of optimization
principles of which Odoms is another one. And cities, you could argue, have evolved to do two
things because they are much more sophisticated in some ways than an organism because they have
two pieces. They have infrastructure, which is the analog to your circulatory and respiratory
system and all the rest. But they also have something that we've just touched on, and that is
social networks, that feedback, positive feedback. And the city is sort of the integration and
tension between those two. And so in the social, in that, well, let's talk the infrastructure
network, you might hypothesize that the thing that's being optimized is, or as cities evolve,
was that the transport system, whatever it was, even if it's just walking, was such that the
structure of the city evolves so that you minimize the time in order to get from A to B, wherever
A and B are, you minimize the time and the distance. And that's what you try to do when you,
you know, when you go home, you don't take some arbitrary route, you try to, you know, a route
that is optimal in terms of your time and distance and so forth. The social network, on the other hand,
might optimize in order to simply to create interaction, the way the system is to facilitate
more and more interactions, so that more ideas can come to the surface, more wealth can be produced,
and so on. So here's why I brought up maximum power principle. Yeah, so it's very similar to that.
So if we had a city of a thousand elephants, that city would largely have the same metabolism
of the individual elephants times a thousand. Exactly. But if we have humans, there are social
status pressures, there's moving upward in the social hierarchy, there's novelty, there's discovery,
there's incentive, and so I would argue that that dopamine, in a way, is part of the origin
when humans are living in proximity like that in large numbers, that might explain some of your
1.15 positive extra linear dynamic, which is almost a brain equivalent of the maximum power
principle. There's something that we're trying to optimize that's outside our basal metabolism.
It's something social, which is why there's a positive feedback there. Yeah, absolutely. No,
it's exactly right. And by the way, just going back to the biological for a moment,
I said you only require about 100 watts, 2000 food calories a day. But if you took all your cells,
all that 10 to the 12th, 100 trillion of them, and just put them aside and asked,
how much energy does all those cells, if they were not interacting and be part of you,
just laid them out on a table, if you could imagine it, you would require 50 times as much food.
So you have an extraordinary economy of scale in bringing all this together in all of us,
in your whole body, interacting in a highly coherent, integrated way. And so it is with the
city. And I'll give you an example. I think what is in New York is about
100 times bigger than Santa Fe in population, turns out, roughly. And New York produces,
so you might have a naively guess, New York will produce 100 times more patents.
It doesn't. It produces 200 times as many than Santa Fe. And you could ask, how many patents,
if we took all of the individuals in Santa Fe or New York, and you made them into some guru that
sits on the top of a mountain and contemplates the mysteries of the universe, how many patents
would that produce if you took all 15 million New Yorkers and put them on the top of the mountain
and so on. You know how many patents they produce? Zero.
Well, because they no longer care about social status, they want to reflect.
Exactly. So that's all part of what a city is. But without passing judgment, good or bad on it,
that's who we are.
Okay. So if you don't mind, I'm going to read out loud to you one of my favorite quotes that
was in my academic paper on the superorganism, and I'd like your opinion on it because I have
a deep philosophical question for you, and you're one of the first people that I've had live to
be able to answer it. So this is a quote from a book called A Short History of Progress by
Ronald Wright. What took place in the early 1500s was truly exceptional, something that had never
happened before and never will again. Two cultural experiments running in isolation for 15,000 years
or more at last came face to face. Amazingly, after all that time, each could recognize the
other's institution. When Cortez landed in Mexico, he found roads, canals, cities, palaces, schools,
law courts, markets, irrigation works, kings, priests, temples, peasants, artisans, armies,
astronomers, merchants, sports, theater, art, music, and books. High civilization, differing
in detail, but alike in essentials, had evolved independently on both sides of the earth. So
my question to you is, when humans encountered energy surplus, which was the unspent metabolism
outside the bodies in the form of agricultural surplus and eventually fossil hydrocarbons,
was this kind of inevitable, this scaling of cities like almost a cancer that is unfolding?
What are your thoughts? How can you explain that quote that I just said from your biological
systems background? Well, I guess I would have to say, to some degree, it was inevitable.
Namely, you might have even extended that because it was true of China. I mean,
when Marco Polo went to China, he discovered that he immediately recognized city, right? I mean,
and in fact, they'd existed way before the cities of Europe that he'd come from.
So, you know, we have, you know, there's only those three examples, and I'm a physicist,
a scientist, and one has to be careful about extrapolating from special cases or specifics.
Nevertheless, the theory that I have expounded of the origin of scaling, namely that it has its
origins in the networks that support these systems. On the one hand, let's just stay with
cities now for the moment. On the one hand, their infrastructural networks, the roads,
general transport lines, the supply lines, I mean, in modern cities, that would be electricity,
gas, water, and so on. But those are networks, and those are much like biological networks.
And on the other hand, the social networks that we just discussed,
the interaction between human beings, which is universal. I mean, we may look different,
and we have different cultures and different histories and geographies, but roughly speaking,
at the level of which we're having this conversation, human beings are pretty much
identical across the globe. Were you social? Absolutely. So that's who we are. It's in our
DNA, because we evolved from being bands of hunter-gatherers, forming sedentary communities,
discovering language and agriculture, and so forth, and leading eventually to
cities and megalopolises that we have now. So here's the thing, the evidence in favor of believing
that it was potentially inevitable. We discovered all these scaling laws for cities,
namely that and our stages with the superlinear for the moment. If you look at all socioeconomic
activities, whether the kinds of things I mentioned earlier, wages, number of patents produced,
amount of crime, amount of disease, et cetera, anything that involved the interaction of human
beings with each other, and you plot them versus city size, you see these beautiful scaling laws,
namely on a logarithmic plot, straight lines, and the slope is superlinear. It's about 1.15,
and it's the same for all these different metrics, but what is amazing and relevant to the question
you brought up, it's the same pretty much across the globe. That is, the scaling of cities within
the United States is the same as it is in Argentina, as it is in Spain, as it is in Portugal,
wherever. Therefore, it's as if, it's as if in, I don't know, 1800. People realize, my God, the
industrial revolution has come, this extraordinary expansion is going to be happening, we're building
cities like crazy, we need an international convention to bring together as to how we're
going to design cities, and these are the scaling laws that you have to obey, and go out there and
build your cities, but these are, well, of course none of that happened. It never happened. It never
happened, it happened totally organically, the Japanese cities which had nothing to do with
cities in Portugal, I presume, or very little, and cities in the United Kingdom all scaled in a
similar way, indicating that there was this organic dynamic that is already somehow in a DNA
which is being expressed in the organization and dynamic of city.
I sometimes in my public presentation show a graph of CO2 in the atmosphere from Montaloa
overlaid with all of the convening of parties, Kyoto Protocol, all the different meetings,
and you might say, oh, the CO2 is because of those meetings, but the CO2 increase is an
externality of the scaling that you're describing. Yes, absolutely. Oh, absolutely. In fact, I often
show a graph of the scaling of carbon emissions versus city size. So I really, I'm so honored to
have you because I really care about this, not only in what do we do about it, how can we steer
humanity to a better place, but it's just so fascinating. It's like a forensic detective
story, so it's cool despite the horror of the implications. So in theory, though, yes, humans
are you social, we have nature and nurture. Our bodies have this metabolic need, but our 10,000
watts outside of our 100 watt body, that is a social phenomenon. So is there a way that
governance or degrowth or something could come up with social structures that have a sublinear
metabolic scaling instead of a 1.15? Maybe we could reduce that in the future hypothetically.
What are your thoughts on that? Well, that's a tough question, one I quite a bit of thought to
without great success, to be honest. That is the implications of these scaling laws
for future growth and the future of the planet don't look good. I mean, in fact,
if you just take them to the logical conclusion, it's very hard to see how we can sustain things
as they are. So if we just simply continue in the same mode, I think we're due for some
major collapse at some stage. I hate to be so pessimistic, but it's hard to see how it can
sustain itself. It's sort of Malthusian in a way, but it's much more goes way beyond Malthus because
that statement includes the effects of innovation. I mean, the work that we've done,
you can put in an innovation plays a crucial role in it, in fact, but all it does in quotes all is,
yes, it postpones the problem till later, but unfortunately, the dynamic of positive feedback
and super linear scaling leads to the speeding up of the pace of life. So you have to do things
faster and faster, and that eventually leads to a socioeconomic heart attack, and that's the issue.
And so how do you get around that? Well, you have to change something fundamental,
and that's something to do with, if you believe any of this, it's to do with social networks and
social interaction, which means that it has to be almost revolutionary in the way we interact with
each other and form communities. And ultimately, that's not a scientific question, it's a political
question, it's a sociopolitical question. Or a spiritual question. Or a spiritual question,
yes, absolutely. Because if you took those, I don't know what the number you said, if you took
the 15 million people in New York that were developing patents and put them in the wilderness
somewhere, they would develop zero patents. But then when they came back to New York,
maybe they would have a change in consciousness, and there would also be less patents and less
social striving for competition, because maybe the definition of their self
expanded to include the biosphere and the future and other creatures.
Yeah, I think that's right. Because mostly, the baggage we have, that is us, is mostly material.
I mean, that's the way we think, you know, we identify ourselves with our jobs and our houses
and so on. And at best, in terms of human interaction, we identify with our loved ones and
people very close to us. But we don't identify very much with nature being part of us, even though
we're so obviously kind of came from the natural world, we are part of the natural world, but also
that we're all part of each other. I mean, it's, I know this sounds a bit flaky, but it's sort of
love thy neighbor as thyself kind of thing. And, you know, we are yearning in order to solve this
problem for, you know, some spark, some leadership that inspires us to rethink who we are and move
in a direction towards it. I mean, it's the image, I hate to say it, I'm not a religious person,
I'm not a Christian. But to have a Jesus Christ or a Mahatma Gandhi or a Martin Luther King,
someone that inspires the good in people and the collective. And somehow we've lost that.
That's where my thinking has been going of late.
It's so weird. I mean, I'm, you know, I'm sufficiently old that I grew up in the city,
you know, my very formative years as an adult, with the 60s and 70s, and all the, you know,
flower children and love and all that, which is, you know, but I realized in my old age,
my science is sort of taking me back to realize that has sort of misguided as much of that was
the, you know, that, that sense of love and that sense of being part of the collective
and that it isn't just material well-being that is going to make you happy, that you need
also both, for one of a better word, spiritual, whatever that may mean to the individual,
but you need to be filled part of both the natural and social world.
I agree with that. And that's really the foundation and the ethos of, of this channel.
And, you know, here's a profound question in the same way that an addict can't solve his or her
addiction until he or she has awareness. Can we change our metabolism as a culture without,
without realizing that we have a metabolism? I think we have to recognize these metabolic
scaling laws that you've been working on because if we take that into account, it suggests some of
our, you know, strategies that we're striving for are kind of dead ends and it might suggest other
ones. What are your thoughts on that? Yes, but I don't know, I don't know what those are. I mean,
as I say, I just, you know, I mean, I must say, just going back before that,
it's very hard not to be very pessimistic until you move into this, until you take it out of the
context of materialism and the idea that paradigm shifts and innovation means technology.
It needs to also have that idea of a paradigm shift or a rebirthing needs to be something
that is socioeconomic. And how you do that, I don't know, because I did, I guess my present
thinking, and I basically said it a moment ago, is that I would love to think that it could be
bottom up, but I have a, my experience says that it needs to have some top down meaning
leadership. I mean, I mean, enforced on you, but, but you need, I mean, that's why Donald Trump
really intrigues me in this sense that Trump was, is extraordinary in terms of his charisma
and his being able to tap into what I consider the negative parts of this, the parts that encourage
you to feel very individualistic, not to feel you're part of the collective, not to care about
nature and so on. You know, it's all part of us. I mean, we have all these things, each one of us
contains all this stuff inside us. And he, in some extraordinary way, somehow, what's the
Waltonshowong, he had this moment that he tapped into this part of our nature,
which I think goes against all of this and only encourages us to go further and further and deeper
and deeper in towards the collapse of modern society. And we need, so to speak, an anti-Trump.
You know, someone with Trump's charisma and ability to sense, forget about, you know,
whether he's articulate and intelligent, but he has an extraordinary genius for sensing something.
I agree with you, but let me ask you a scientific follow-up question to that.
Yeah, so this is not, by the way, that was not science, what I said.
Oh, but I know.
This was my personal, emotive opinion.
But scientifically is the anti-Trump, someone that would exhort and inspire the opposite
attributes, would that individual counter the go against the grain of this metabolic
dynamic that you're talking about, this positive energy scaling that we've seen
in human history and around the world?
That's the big question. That is the big question because, you know, the, you know,
another way, a very crude way of saying, well, the origin of this continuous open-ended growth
and super linear scaling is that the principle that, you know, in our socioeconomic activity,
the optimization is that each individual wants more, you know, greed, greed being sort of the
fundamental driving force. And is that part of our DNA? Is that what's been actually happening?
Because by the way, greed is not necessarily always negative. I'm not even being
necessarily pejorative about it because that greed is also to do better, to run faster, to
whatever. So I used it in a very general, not necessarily pejorative sense.
So it's using that energy, turning that energy into positive energy.
A lot of this has to do with metabolic scaling laws on energy use. And the other point that we
haven't made yet is when energy scales, even if we had the ability to scale our continued
energy, the environmental impact and the materials and minerals and all the other stuff scales as
well. But I think on the energy sense, for 95% plus of our history, we didn't have any external
metabolism because we were hunter-gatherers in Tanzania. And so I almost think that our fall
from grace was when we started to store energy surplus. And until energy surplus goes down
and stabilizes, we're going to have these issues. Yes, no, that's of course true. I agree with you.
So, but that also leads to something we haven't discussed and something I'm not an expert on
at all. And that is a source of energy and the idea that, of course, from a physical
viewpoint, there's enough energy to continue this or add infinite of almost the energy of the sun
is clear. We use a very small amount and our problems began. Well, they did begin, of course,
as you say, when we created surplus energy, especially from agriculture and so forth. But
they got amplified enormously in the industrial revolution where we found it very easy not to
use the energy that we are having, getting from the sun, but to use the energy that we got from
the sun and stored on the surface of the earth. And so we just just, you know, what we've done
since about 1800 is simply burnt the surface of the earth. I mean, that's what it is. We're just
burning the surface of the earth as we speak. And which by the way, you don't have to be a physicist
to know that if you're burning the surface of a sphere, it's going to get hot and the flows
of currents of air and things are going to change. So it's sort of a no brainer that you're going to
change the climate and the system is going to get warmer. So that's one of its consequences.
But what we need to do is to change from what is effectively a closed system, namely just the
energy that's already here, to return ourselves once we came to where we have an open system.
We're just using the energy of the sun, which leads us of course to this whole question about
the economics of renewables and the technology associated with it and so on. But in principle,
as I understand it from my colleagues who are experts in this, you know, if there were a serious
global program, we could turn this over and change everything in a relatively short time.
But you'd have to have dedicate, you know, you'd have to give up so much to do that.
It's not feasible. I want to focus on your core expertise, but briefly, I don't think it's possible
because we would have to continually regenerate those constantly. But let's just assume that
you're right that it is possible to get rid of fossil carbon and to replace it with renewables.
Let's assume for the moment that that's right. Don't we still run into the metabolic scaling
of the 1.15 if we have the same governance and cultural aspirations? Absolutely. Absolutely.
No, absolutely. And I'm very glad you brought that back because that's part of my whole sort of
bully pulpit is exactly that is that just solving, just in quotes, solving the energy problem
or global warming or whatever you want to call it is not enough because you're going to put yourself
back potentially in that situation again. It goes a hell of a long way if you could, if it's correct
that we can release ourselves from the dependence on fossil fuel would go a hell of a long way.
But you still have to deal with the social problem or the sociopolitical problem
that is sort of underlying this that's coming from this dynamic in social networks.
I want to move to some deeper, more forward-looking questions, but I have a couple more
like factual ones related to cities. So you said that cities and you explained why
scale super linearly at 1.15, not 0.75. What about the global economy? Is it a collection
of cities from a math standpoint or how does that map? Yes. So this is work that still has
to be done and it's work in progress and it's something. So there's two to come from both
directions. One is that you, you know, you can say, look, the city, the city, the globe
is dominated by cities. You know, in 20 or 30 years, it'll be 70 or 80% urbanized.
Certainly by the end of the century, it'll be, you know, 80% urbanized, which is what
most developed countries or all developed countries are over 80% urbanized. So to all
intensive purposes, you can, certainly thinking longer term, you can think of the city as the
globe, as of some of all the cities. Okay. And that's one way of setting up, setting it up,
so to speak, mathematically and conceptually. But you could also sort of shortcut that,
meanwhile, by asking, just finding out how much energy is being used globally, how much water,
et cetera, et cetera. And then you can think of the globe, the planet, as a single entity.
Okay. Not the sum. It is the sum of everything, but it's also in the same way that you can think of
you as this, as yourself or the sum of all yourselves. And you have to do both, of course.
This is our first conversation. So you probably don't know a lot about my work,
but I wrote a paper called Beyond the Superorganism. And I believe that global human society,
not the hunter-gatherer cultures, but the mass of most of the developed world and those following,
function metabolically like an energy-hungry, mindless superorganism.
Yes, I'm afraid that's true. I had to put the emphasis on mindless, unfortunately.
Mindless in the same way that you said this was inevitable and that we build cities and
Marco Polo and Cortez in that sense. We're not, let's plan this. Let's build this out. No, it's
like those subterranean ant colonies. There's no architectural plan for those. It's a by-product
of them seeking out energy in the most efficient way for their colony. Exactly. That's the idea.
Exactly. Okay. So you have proven that cities are centralized units of society that use resources
more efficiently. And what about as people start to understand biophysical, ecological limits,
and there's many people now advocating for more decentralized models. We need to spread out and
decentralize and not have the central markets and globally interconnected things. How does that fit
in with your scaling models? If instead of having 100 huge cities in the world, we have 10,000
small cities, does that mean we're less efficient and actually have more environmental
ecological impact? Or what are your thoughts on that? Yeah, so that's a very tough question.
The work has not been done, by the way. And I've not given it much thought till recently and I've
not worked on it seriously. And I've only started thinking about it because of this idea of the
so-called 15-minute city, which is, do you know what I'm talking about? No. So it's been proposed,
in fact, one of my collaborators, a very interesting man, and Carlo Racci, an architect at MIT,
is one of the major proponents of this. And that is we need to sort of retrofit cities
so that you can do everything within 15 minutes of where you live. That's it. So it's localizing
this big agglomeration, you know, rather than this sort of old image, which is partially true. That
is, there's a central downtown and then there's all these layers going out to the suburbs outside
of kind of almost concentric, almost onion-like. Instead of that, you have lots of these centers,
which had been talked about before anyway, but now it's people are taking it quite seriously
and putting numbers to it, like making it sort of this 15-minute idea. Anyway, so that got me
thinking about that. And indeed, you know, naively, and I've not done the work, it does what you said.
It would mean that it's less efficient for the collective. You know, that is in the same way
as I said, if you, oh, here's another, here's an example that is like the one I said earlier. If you
took an elephant and you asked the equivalent biomass in mice, so it's the same number of cells,
except in one, on one side you make all those cells an elephant, on the other you make it into,
and I forget the number, you know, 200 mice are equivalent. And you ask, how much energy do they
need? An elephant, the 200 mice, if that number is right, I don't remember the number, but that
number of mice requires, I think it's 20 times as much food as that single elephant. So there's
extraordinary price to pay, you know, you've got to produce so 20 times as much food,
and you're going to produce 20 times as much entropy, therefore 20 times as much pollution,
and waste, and so forth. So applying that example to humans, a bunch of small cities
with the same population and same resource throughput would be an environmentally deteriorating
factor. Yes, they would produce much more. So if you did the same, if you took New York
and you made it into its hundred centipedes, naively, you would, you know, you would produce
much more pollution, you would require much more energy, and you would produce less ideas.
So did you know... That would be the idea. Did you know E.L. Wilson, he passed away?
I did know. He's someone I always wanted to meet. One of his ideas endures, and I have all of his
books, I only have one of yours, is the idea of half Earth, where humans have half the Earth and
all the other nature in wildlife has the rest. I'm just wondering if we just have one giant city,
I mean, how would that work? I mean, I don't think that works either. So the other end of the
spectrum doesn't work either. Okay. Because one of the things you discover, which we only touched
on earlier, is if you start putting, because you need a system, then it turns out you actually need
and you optimize the entire system. And I talked about it in terms of the forest. I said, you know,
we did work on individual trees, and then we put the trees together for the forest. It turns out
you need a distribution of sizes and in order to optimize the system. And that's roughly what we
see. It turns out that is what has evolved. So would you call that a power law? Yeah, that's
also a power law. That also works as a power law. So I often hear about power law in public
conversations that 80% of the points in the National Basketball League are scored by 20%
of the players. Is this really a robust finding? It's a robust, but it works very, very roughly.
You know, rule of thumb, the 80-20 rule, as it's called, sort of works.
I don't know how close it is, but 80% of the GDP is produced by 20% of the cities or 20%
of the people or whatever it is. That's roughly correct. I mean, certainly what is the spirit
of it is certainly correct. Well, the spirit of it is what I'm curious about. How can you explain,
as a physicist, as a scientist, why that happens? Why does that 80-20 rule roughly hold?
Well, that again is the work to show that the optimum structure for optimal use of resources
and energy, if that's how the system, as the system has evolved and new things grow, new towns,
new cities, and the thing is continually adapting and evolving and minor changes.
That arranges itself following a distribution that is a power law. And, you know, just for the
distribution of cities, that's called Zip's Law, after a man named Zip, who discovered it in the
in the 1930s, like Kleiber discovered his law. And most entities do that. You know, the distributions
follow, roughly speaking, that rule. And that rule has that power law as its consequence,
this kind of 80-20 number, roughly. So let me ask you a difficult or at least uncomfortable
question. Again, one of these that I've saved for you specifically. If you took a time lapse,
aerial view of our planet over the last 50 years, 30 years, 100 years,
it looks a lot like a cancer growth. So there are 200 types of cancer. Do you assimilate the
growing form of some cities, metabolisms, and what's happening in the world to different types of
cancers using common descriptors like aggressiveness or speed growth or metastatic, or where does
this analogy hold? And where does it break down? Yeah, I don't know the answer to that. And I
occasionally think about it. And it may be that I don't think about it very much because
some years ago, or I don't know, probably 15 years ago or more, I was interviewed by the
economist about some of this work. And it was about the growth of cities and the growth of
what are called informal communities and the old language slums, basically.
And the word cancer came up in that context. And I meant it very much in terms of
the idea that you have an organism, which is sort of in a metastable situation.
And then at some stage, you know, something starts growing inside it, which maybe shouldn't be there
or should be there, whatever, but it starts growing. And in that sense, that's how I thought of
a slum or an informal community. That's something that's slightly outside, outside of
what was the host system. And this thing is growing in a way that is sort of in some way or another
violating the rules. And I referred to that as cancer without, and I got into trouble.
Because along with the word cancer, obviously, can note something.
Cancer is a physical scientific description, but it's also kind of like a verb.
Yeah, it is. No, and it carries an enormous weight. So I've been very reluctant to...
But it's a little bit... I hear you, and it just looks like visually similar.
And in fact, I suppose, I thought the question I thought you were going to ask, and maybe it was
implied by it, you know, if you were some alien, whatever, taking photographs of this planet
over the last 100,000 years, it would be for the first 95,000, maybe 98,000,
it would not much would change. I mean, there'd be seasonal changes, of course.
But the overall structure wouldn't change drastically, and it would look so. And then,
beginning that last couple of thousand years, it would have gone bonkers. It would have been all
this stuff started growing on it and taking over. And then the last 30 years, it doubled again.
Absolutely. Just going completely crazy. And you might think of that as a cancer from the outside.
That is... Oh, I mean, that's not casting aspersions on anybody except us, us as human beings.
I know. Cancer cells don't like to label themselves as cancer because it's...
No, I'm sure they don't. I mean, I'm sure they're doing what they think is...
They are doing what's best for them. And by the way,
cancers, literally, cancers are us. They're our DNA. They are us.
So is cancer in a human body an example of a super-linear scaling?
No, but cancer, no, it doesn't, actually. What is interesting about cancers is they
are left to their own devices, so to speak. That is, if the body went on living forever
and the cancer just kept growing, it would do what the body did. It would grow and then eventually
stop growing. And some cancers do that. They grow quickly and then they stop. There are some.
But usually what happens before then, of course, they metastasize that is they start
doing bad things elsewhere and then shutting down organs and sort of the
terrible things that lead to mortality. So let me shift this to forward-looking.
Given what you've laid out here on the metabolism and energy use of organisms
and outside of the body exosomatically, how would a physicist listening to this program
who understands metabolism of cities and the inevitable end of linear scaling because we are
on a finite system, the linear scaling of cities, advise government planners on planning?
Well, let's make it first of all local. And I've interacted with many cities.
This work, I would be very reluctant to be prescriptive to actually say,
you know, I'm not a McKinsey. But the thing I tell cities is that you should be cognizant
of these scaling laws because unbeknownst to you and all your predecessors that have been
city planners and builders and so on and extending cities and so forth,
there was this dynamic that is going on in a kind of hidden way. And if you build a city in
violation of the scaling laws, you're going to run into trouble. And indeed, the history of
building major cities, as well as minor ones, but big cities, which, you know, like
Brazil and Islamabad and Canberra, even Washington DC, building cities, de novo, planning cities.
I don't think there's a single one that has been successful.
You know, I mean, they've always been highly criticized. They don't work. They tend to be
soulless. People are very unhappy, dissatisfied. Now, eventually, those organic forces of nature
take over. And eventually, Washington DC turns from being a boring city that most people don't
want to go to and live in, to a city that has only happened in the last maybe 20 years or 30 years,
become a city that's like every other big city of that size, exciting, interesting,
lots of young people, ideas floating around and so forth. But it took, you know, 100 years to do
that, whatever it was. Brazilia is just beginning to turn that corner. It was built in the 1960s
and is at last beginning to somehow evolve into a real city. So, and the point is what happens is,
of course, people determine the structure of a city. So, people don't, you know, you know what
it's like, I always give this example, because I hang around universities, typically, you know,
they build some new quadrangle or whatever in a city, and they have the various buildings around it,
and then they put in paths going across it to go from A to B. And of course, then they open it all
up, and the students and faculty start using it. And some of those paths they use, but many of those
paths they don't, and they start walking across the grass in a certain direction, and they form
their own. Well, that's the sort of thing that happens in a city. Gradually, the city organically
adjusts to optimize whatever it is, the function of that. In that case, this university is four.
So, that's what happens to these cities. The city evolves and changes so as to optimize what it's
there for, and it becomes a real place. So, my advice is follow the, be cognizant when you do it,
of those scaling laws, because most of the things that are done in the building of new towns and
cities is really sort of almost rules of thumb. So, if you followed the scaling laws, you would make
some decisions that would prevent disasters 10 or 20 years from now because of the scaling laws.
That's right. They're there to prevent disasters and mitigate or at least minimize. I wouldn't
say even prevent. I wouldn't be as arrogant as to say that. Minimize. I would say minimize disasters
that are going to occur because of some, you know, we decide, oh yeah, we should put a park here,
we should build this building here, and it should be this time, we should do this and that.
So, on a national level, the horses already left the barn. I'm afraid so.
Yeah, but on a local level, we can maybe take this wisdom.
Absolutely. Or if you are building a new city, which doesn't happen very often,
any longer in the United States, but is happening elsewhere, please for goodness sake,
be cognizant of that. And not just of the scaling laws themselves, but of the underlying dynamic
that is encapsulated in those scaling laws and to do with social interactions and also to think
about how those fold into the functionality of what you want that city to be. It's so interesting.
I'm taking up a lot of your time, but I want to get to some of the key questions that I had
planned to ask you in no particular order. Do the energy use curves of dying societies resemble
those of biological creatures dying of old age? Oh boy, I don't know the answer to that. I don't
know. That would be a very interesting question to do some work on actually. I suspect it's extremely
hard to get data. One of the things that is very hard in this, which surprised me in this work on
cities especially, is difficulty in getting data. The data is out there, but it's all modern data.
You'd also like to get data from 1920, 1820, 1620. Historical data geographically spread around
so that you can start to address these very questions. Now, some of my younger colleagues
looked into this in terms of pre-Columbian cities in Mexico, for example, where there's
archaeological, a lot of huge amount of archaeological data, and using that data to show that urban
systems, ancient urban systems, actually followed these scaling laws. That was very encouraging,
actually. But the question you're asking would be very hard to eke out data. We're very interesting
to think what you could use for proxies for the decaying city and what are you going to measure
that would tell you about it. I mean, there is data, and people have started to look at it,
and I haven't followed it very carefully that came out of our work, looking at ancient Rome,
because there you have the build-up and then the sustenance of a powerful, all-powerful
city empire, and then its decay into the first part of the millennium.
So, in your opinion, are we running our governments more like cities or more like companies?
And what does this mean for the livelihood of our nations?
That's a question, believe it or not, where we're sort of doing ongoing research.
So, let me just tell you, I can't answer that question directly. It's probably more like cities,
actually, but we did ask the question, we asked two questions that have been worked on.
One is, first of all, about universities, people we've asked about. So, there was, you know,
are they more like cities or companies kind of question? I won't go into that, but the question
maybe more direct relevance came out of a conversation which I'm sure you've had informally
with some friend or colleague where you sit around and you bitch about administration and bureaucracy
and how it's getting in the way and it's destroying everything. You know, for us, you know, why is the
National Science Foundation so full of idiots that don't understand?
What is the role of that bureaucracy with metabolism?
Doing, you know, what is all that? So, we, myself and a colleague started talking about this,
you know, bitching, and then it sort of hit me, actually, that, you know, I said, you know,
is it conceivable that actually these bureaucracies are actually quite efficient and optimized
for the collective but are very bad for the individual? That is, at the individual level
dealing with it, it just always seems to get in the way, there's too much of it and so on. But
actually, if you looked at the whole system and the function of whatever that agency is or that
company or that whatever, actually, it's tending towards optimization. So, it's got a very long
story short. We, after several attempts at writing little white papers that got summarily rejected
by funding agencies, eventually it was picked up and given very large funding by the National
Science Foundation. So, we have this big grant to do that and we have a, we have some extremely
good people, people that work with us and we have someone at Harvard Business School,
someone in the Sloan School at MIT and so forth. So, what are you mostly doing with your time now?
What questions are like keeping you up at night that are you're fascinated by and want to pursue?
Well, lots of them, too many questions, but the two major things, and by the way, at the same time,
unfortunately, because I'm into, well into my 80s, dealing with health issues myself, my wife,
inevitably. So, I don't, and I obviously don't have quite the same energy to stay up to two or
three in the morning doing the calculations. You seem like you have a hell of a lot of energy.
I'm doing sort of okay, but nevertheless, so with that caveat, the two things that I'm most
interested in, of the many that I'm working on with colleagues, one that's been a theme throughout
all of this work, and I've never really completed it, and that is, I have this sort of long-term,
morbid interest in aging and mortality, death, and understanding what that process is, and in
particular, to understand why it is that human beings live of the order of a hundred years,
where does the hundred years come from? And that, in a sense, that's why I've got me into all this
work, that, you know, just a side personal comment, that I come from a family of short-lived males,
you know, but my, they all die in their 50s and 60s. Occasionally, someone manages to reach 70,
but so, I assumed I would be dead in my mid-60s, and I started to worry about this question,
which got me interested in the many of these questions that we're now talking about,
and I've somehow violated the genetic rule of my family, because I'm now 83 and I'm still going,
so that's interesting of itself, you know, what is going on here with that, so that interests me very
much, and I'm, but the other question, which I suppose is related to it in a way, is the whole
question that we've touched on is the sustainability, and therefore the mortality of the anthroposphere,
of this fantastic socioeconomic system that we have developed, so, you know, I'm one of these
people that don't fear the fact that human beings will somehow go extinct, I don't think that's
going to happen, and I sort of don't care, what I care about is that we're socioeconomic human
beings will go extinct, I don't want to lose all this, it's fantastic what we've created,
even though it has built into it, in a certain sense, its own demise, can we save it and keep
it going, and try to understand that, so we discussed this earlier in the conversation,
but really trying to develop a science of the anthroposphere, considering it as an integrated
whole, that is the planet is an integrated whole of socioeconomic activity, and I more recently
got much more serious about it, because one of the things I didn't say earlier was that,
unbeknownst to me, a few years ago, a man whom I did know, named Will Steffen, an Australian,
I think he was an anthropologist by training, but Will was, I think, the first person to put
together data of material and socioeconomic metrics for the planet as a whole, and he published this
stuff, and all of them looked like hockey sticks, of course, you know, they're zooming up, and the
data he collected goes back to somewhere in the fifties, and he turned all this the great
acceleration, okay, so he left it at that, and it became central piece for scientists working on
their anthroposphere, now I only came across this by word of mouth a couple of years ago,
and I was very excited when I learned that this data existed, because then I could go back to
what I had been thinking about much earlier, several years ago, but I'd stopped thinking about it, or
so I put it aside, because there wasn't data, and I come from a tradition of physics, that is,
we do theory, we make models, we make, we create ideas and concepts, very important to make
predictions, to understand what's been done, and make predictions that we can test, and so forth,
but this was devoid of data, so I was sort of left hanging, and I thought sometime in the future
there will be, now it has happened, it's very crude, but enough, and the good news for me,
as a scientist, is I wrote down some equations, which I won't go into, I wrote, and for the
anthroposphere, and it made some predictions, they're really post-dictions, because they're for
socioeconomic activity, and the data, it agrees beautifully with the data, and so that has given
me hope, that we can continue this, and really, you know, this is very much scratching the surface
of work in progress, that we can really make a, you know, a serious theory, or put it slightly
differently, a conceptual, quantitative, analytic, mathematical framework, that we can start, start
thinking seriously, in terms of something I termed in my book, sort of grand unified theory of
sustainability, because we do need to bring everybody into this conversation, and I want to
create a framework where everybody can sort of get involved in it, and we can really come to terms
with all these wonderful questions you brought up in the last hour or so. What keeps me up at night
is very simple, is how do we save the biosphere and the 10 million other species we share the
planet with, but how do we reduce our environmental impact without the violence and collapse that
would require us to tighten our belt, and how to how to marry those two things. On your first question
though, Jeffrey, and you know, we could come back and do a second podcast on this, but
just out of curiosity, do you personally use intermittent fasting? And a more important question
is, how would fasting and reducing the caloric input as an individual organism affect, like
consciously having a trump card on your natural impulses at the level of the individual, how would
that affect your metabolic scaling and age and all the other things? Do you have an opinion on that?
It would not affect the metabolic scaling per se, but it would lead to longer life.
Really? You're confident of that? I'm very confident that if you were to reduce,
if you could reduce your metabolism, you will extend your life. Now, how much is obviously
individualistic, and for some people it may not work very much. So do you reduce your
caloric intake? I don't, actually. Well, I don't eat very much. I'm old. I don't eat very much.
So I went through a long period where I did, and I lost 30 pounds. I was 180 and I went down
to 150 without even realizing it. Yeah, it was terrible. And I freaked out when the doctor,
you know, I went for some, you know, this got sort of nothing to with anything, but I went for my
annual exam and I was standing there and naked, and the doctor looked at me and said, Jeffrey,
come into the next room. I want you to look in the mirror. And I looked and it was quite sobering,
I have to tell you. And I did think, gee whiz, I better do something. But I'm now, but I did
reduce it to what I was naturally, you know, more naturally earlier. I now stay around 165 to 70.
So in that sense, the answer is yes. But I don't, I'm not, you know, I'm not obsessive about it.
And it's not sort of part of my consciousness. I agree with that. And it seems logical and
scientifically grounded. The question is, is how do we apply that from the level of the individual
to the level of society? I think that's extraordinarily difficult because of the, again,
the commercial pressures on food and especially fast food and so on. I mean, that's another one
of these things where, you know, sometimes in my darkest moments, I think, yeah, there's a lot to
be said for benevolent dictatorship, you know. Yeah. But I'm such a committed Democrat. And
now you're Democrat, it's ridiculous. Yeah, those two words are, you know what I mean?
It's don't fit in the same sentence. So I've taken up a lot of your time. I have a few questions
that I ask all my guests. And this has been great. I love your work. And I've learned some new
things in this conversation. So you've thought about and worked as a macro observer at the Santa
Fe Institute for a long career on these issues. Do you have any personal advice to the viewers of
this program for their own lives, given the global upheaval and the anthroposphere and the
metacrisis and everything else? Do you have any personal advice given your lifetime of experience
and wisdom? Well, I'm very reluctant to give advice, I have to tell you. Just my... You're a scientist.
Yeah, exactly. So my science gets in the way in a certain sense. On the other hand,
I'm a human being and you know... Exactly. So, you know, I guess it's sort of
hops on what we talked about earlier. And I try to do it myself and I don't succeed.
And that is just be much more cognizant of the fact that I'm really part of the community.
And therefore, the community is part of me. You know, I'm carrying that around with me. And the
community is everything from my community of colleagues here at the Institute to the community
I'm part of in terms of a city, Santa Fe. Part of a community I am as part of being an American,
living in America. I'm part of being a human being that we're all interrelated, interconnected.
And, you know, it sounds again a bit hokey. You know, it doesn't matter what side I'm on,
but you know, people dying in Ukraine or Gaza or wherever, Syria, that hurts.
Because the thing that I began to realize in addition to what we've already said is that,
as far as I can tell, we are the only part of the universe that actually cares.
It's kind of sobering. I mean, I love nature and I can say all those things about nature
that I said about my fellow human beings and community, that I'm also that advice that to
recognize that you are part of nature and nature is part of you. That's where we came from.
And, you know, we're in it together kind of thing. But there is, you know, but the fact is
that nature doesn't care. You know, it does not care. We invented, as far as I can tell,
ethics and morality. We've done terrible things and we're doing terrible things,
but we also do wonderful things and we need to be conscious that we are the only ones.
And that is an incredible burden and incredible responsibility and we should all be aware of it.
So it's me being, we used the word spiritual earlier. I'm not a religious person. I'm not
a believer, but that's my version of belief. I think it's beautiful. We don't have the right
to assume that this story is inevitable and we are the only species able to care.
That's well said. We're the agency of care. You know, I mean,
and that is a hell of a responsibility. We're also, by the way, the agency of understanding.
And we're also the agency of metabolic impact.
All wrapped into one. And all of that stuff. The thing I loved about my own work, I have to tell
you, is the recognition that all these things which are considered disparate and interconnected
sort of don't have much to do with one another. And I've kind of, you know, put into boxes.
Actually, it turns out they're all interconnected and they all do the same thing. I mean, in very
generic terms. But they're all manifestations of the same theme. They're all variations on
the same theme. But that is extraordinary. For the record, I also love that about your work.
So you have been around universities and young people for a long time. How would you change
your advice? What advice would you give to an 18, 22-year-old human who is starting to understand
the broader biophysical backdrop of their time?
Well, do science. I believe in science, strongly. Be a humanist. Read the great books.
And recognize that the two most important things in the universe for human beings
are love and understanding. And if you could, I mean, I say those. It's not that I've heard
here to those. I've tried, but I've failed, of course. But I try to keep those as part of my life.
I can see those right beneath the surface of your science and scaling. I can see those.
This has been an amazing conversation. And I've never met you before this phone call. So
hopefully we can stay in touch. And I'd love to help you with your work.
If you were to come back in six months for a follow-up, what is one topic that we would
just focus on that topic that you're extremely passionate about that you think is relevant
to human futures as esoteric as it might be? Do you have anything like that?
Well, I would, I mean, we've already discussed a lot of it. But I think because that's what I'm
thinking about so much recently is it would be this long-term future of the planet, global
sustainability. Are you writing a new book on that? Are you actively researching that?
I'm actively researching it. It's the question about writing another book. You know, when I
wrote my book, one book, I mean, I've edited all kinds of things, books and so forth. But to write
solo this book, I put called Scale, which I was a, you know, I'm not a natural writer in the sense
that I labor overwriting. I'm happy with the book, but I do labor over it. You know, every
sentence is like, you know, pulling teeth, feeling, which is crazy. You know, I'm warranted,
but I do it. Well, on the next one, just get a ghostwriter. Get all your ideas out and get a
ghostwriter. That book, by the way, the book Scale, I was strongly urged by some very, very
influential people extreme that I, because I was sitting on my butt, not doing anything,
that get a ghostwriter. I had some extremely good people willing to write it. And that actually
got to me in the end, because I said in the end, you know, I can't do that. I'm too much of a control
freak. Yeah, these are my words. Exactly. So, but, and I have even thought about it for, I know,
so I said, after that, I'll never write another book again. I sort of put everything into that.
There's no way. But two things changed that might make me change my mind. One is,
I realized that I sh that book in a way could have been three books or four books, actually,
because it's and one of the things I tried to do in that book was explain everything, meaning
I didn't want to pull things out of the hat. I didn't want it sort of gee whiz and so on.
And the good thing about that now is that if I write another book, I can point to the old book
and say, look, it's already there. Yeah, it's already there. Go read those pages. You're fine.
You know, well, I'm just going to tell you this. I encourage you to write another book or some
version of it because I think at the core of your work is the fundamental question that humanity
faces, which is can knowledge and understanding of metabolism impact our metabolism?
Yes, that's a very interesting way of stating it. Yes, that's exactly right. That's exactly
courted. But by the way, I've got one other thing I wanted to say about why I would write it. And
this shows a slightly negative side of my personality. And that is, you know, I know many
of the science writers that have been very successful and I shot name names. But one of the
things I began to realize is that they were sort of writing the same book again, and they get more
for it and so on. And I was sort of getting frustrated. Why did they do that? You know,
it was and I thought, shit, maybe that's what I should I should actually rewrite some of this
and so on and cash it. And then the other thing was I've worked and it came yesterday. Here's my friend
Venky Ramakrishnan, who is a well known, he just this book just came out. Why we die. Oh, wow.
And Venky is a wonderful man. He's a Nobel Prize winner. And he's a Cambridge University in England,
lovely man. And he's talked to me a lot about this. And I'm glad to see him,
even though I've not written much about it, he referenced me. But I saw that book and it was
again one of these things which happens. I think, bloody hell, I should have written my book on
aging and death, even though there's, you know, there's a whole chapter to it. But people don't
notice that. So it's part of this ego. There's this kind of ego driven thing. Narcissism,
there's ego, but there's also emergence. Because since you wrote read, wrote your book,
you're learning about interconnected things that you have deeper insights now.
No, and I should, and that's what I've tried to convince myself. I should take
those pieces and use those as points of departure. Yeah, expanding further. Yeah.
So maybe I'll do that. I don't know. I'm getting, you know, it's, I don't,
not sure I have the discipline any longer to do it.
I'm sure you're going to do something interesting and productive. Thank you for your lifetime of
work and thanks for your time today. And let's please stay in touch, Jeffrey.
Absolutely, you know, it's there for free to stay in touch. And I thank you for your very challenging,
provocative and interesting questions. I've enjoyed the conversation very much.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases. This show is hosted by Nate Hagens, edited by no
troublemakers media and curated by Leslie Badloots and Lizzie Siriani.
