There are so many contingencies, particularly actually on the geopolitical side, that can
derail what seem to be passive development at any one time. And it's a strange...
And this is what I think it's hard to think about, because on the one hand it is systemic,
but on the other hand, it is vulnerable to contingent events.
Today's guest is Professor Helen Thompson. Helen works at Cambridge University, where she
researches the political economy of energy and the long history that underpins the democratic,
economic, and geopolitical disruptions that we are seeing now in the 21st century. Her most
recent book, Disorder, hard times in the 21st century, is kind of a political science
mirror twin of the logic of the great simplification. Today we talk about the history of the United
States in the Middle East, Israel and Hamas and Qatar, Ukraine and Russia, the importance of energy
in the history of the world, and some speculation on what's ahead. Please welcome Professor Helen
Thompson. Hi Helen, great to see you. Hi Nate, good to see you too. Although we've never met in
person, maybe I should call you Professor Thompson. No, call me Helen. So you have an impressive
economic, political, science background covering history, energy, economics, politics, and much
more. Can you just give a brief introduction, and how did you first get interested in these
topics all the way back to college or high school, or what was your path? Not a tour really. I basically
got seriously interested in energy in I think 2013. And I came at it via really the monetary
environment of the post-2008 world. And I was sufficiently, I wouldn't say aware about energy
questions, but I was sufficiently aware of the macroeconomic implications of energy
to understand that there was a relationship between the post-2008 monetary environment,
quantitative easing, zero interest rates, and the shale boom in the US. And to understand that the
world economy needed shale oil, I wouldn't say that my understanding was much better than that
at that point. But I was trying to work out what I might write as a long book project for
academically that turned out not to materialize for various reasons. And I kept thinking, you know
what, I'm going to have to bring oil into this. And I kept trying to work out a way of doing what
I wanted to do about the crash and about the eurozone crisis, and bring oil into it. And then I
realized that was completely the wrong way to think about things and that I just needed to go in like
via oil. So I started trying to think about how I might write a short book by this point about
the macroeconomic consequences of what I now believe to be a serious oil problem for the world
economy. But I quickly understood that in order to think about that, I needed to think about
geopolitics in a way which I'd never really done before, not in any sharply incisive way anyway.
So I try to teach myself to think geopolitically around this time as well. And things have really
moved from there. I mean, the only thing I would add to that is I'm a child of the 70s. I was born
in 1967 in Britain. My first memory of national life in Britain is the winter of 1974, sitting around
at home, seven years old, my mother trying to cook in the dark evening after evening,
with two small children, candlelight. So I understood in a quite visual sense in a way
that energy had a profound impact or could have a profound impact on daily life. And I never lost
that. But I wouldn't say that until some point after 2013, I connected that in any way to what I
was trying to do as a scholar. I have a ton of questions for you, as you might imagine. Could
you give a one or two minute elevator pitch of your latest book Disorder Hard Times in the 21st
century? So what I really wanted to do in Disorder was try to explain the political shocks of the
2010s, with which people obviously were very familiar, not least in Britain and the United
States, because high on the list of shocks of that year were obviously Brexit, or were seen to be
anyway, Brexit and the election of Donald Trump, and to give them a long history. And I didn't think
that they were just episodes, if you like, of psychodrama in British politics or American
politics. I thought that each of those two things had more of a structural explanation than that.
And I wanted to run with the thought that actually, if I started thinking seriously
and systematically about these events having an energy history, that I will be able to get
somewhere in explaining them that more conventional accounts wouldn't. Now, I'm not enough of an energy
determinist where politics is concerned to think that energy explains absolutely everything. And
indeed, if I had thought that I probably wouldn't have spent time in the third part of Disorder,
writing about democracies quite in the way in which I do. But I wanted also to grapple with
what I see as the longstanding historical problems that representative democracy faces
as a form of government. And I thought there were some things, particularly actually in relation to
the United States and its history as a domestic oil producer, where it was possible to say that
there was a story to be told about the American Republic and what was going on in oil politics
as well. So my book kind of tries to say, look, we should have expected the disorder of the 2010s
because there were these significant structural forces at work centered around not only the
problems of fossil fuel energy, but the difficulties of the energy transition, the geopolitics of the
energy transition. And then unless we could understand those things, we won't get really
anywhere in understanding the economic, political and geopolitical world in which we live.
So I'm glad we're finally having a conversation on camera. My work, as you know,
focuses around the concept of energy blindness in finance, in economic theory, and in broader
culture. And it's always refreshing to talk to someone who sees not energy as everything,
but energy in everything like I do in a different field. So you're a political scientist and a
political economist in your academic stripes. Are your fields political science? Is that
energy blind as well? And is that changing? I'd say that political science is energy blind largely.
I'd say that political economy has a more complicated relationship to this. I think
if you go back to the 1970s and the political economy that came out of the 1970s, indeed,
some of the stuff that, say, I was taught as an undergraduate, I don't think it was energy blind.
I think that political economy was relatively energy aware, not necessarily in the
system dynamics of energy, but the economic and geopolitical importance of energy.
And then it lost that awareness. I think it kind of lost the awareness at the same time in a way
in which the politicians in Western countries lost their awareness. So sometime, and I struggle
sometimes to think, to know where I think this began, it was the late 80s or sometime in the
90s when I think then an energy blindness took over. I think in political economy over the last
few years, there is quite a bit of evidence that actually at least some people are getting serious
about energy again. And I've had a lot less difficulty explaining to people since my book,
this book came out, this longer book Disorder, why energy is as important as I'm presenting it to
be. When I wrote this short book called Oil on the Western Economic Crisis, which came out in 2017,
then I still think most people thought, why is she writing about that?
Well, it didn't hurt the tailwinds for your book that it came out the exact same time that Putin
invaded Ukraine. No, I mean, in the UK, it came out on the actual day of the invasion.
Oh my gosh. So that was a strange experience in itself. But there were things that I was saying
that suddenly people who weren't particularly interested in energy and I think didn't think
they wanted to be interested in energy suddenly would tell me that they were reading it and they
would say, oh, that makes sense. And I give you one clear example of that was what I wrote about
the Suez Crisis. And I spent a lot of time thinking about the Suez Crisis trying to offer a somewhat
different interpretation than certainly we usually get in Britain. And I remember when I was writing
that chapter, and I just took the decision one day that I was actually going to make it the structural
pivot of the second geopolitical chapter. And I thought this could go very wrong. I mean, people
would just think that it's some kind of apology for British imperialism. And then because of what
was happening with Ukraine and the pipelines and the issue of transit and these big shifts,
then almost everybody who was asking me questions in the first few weeks after the book came out
in the UK wanted to talk to me about the Suez Crisis. I'm going to jump around a bit, Helen,
but since you brought that up, could you briefly describe the Suez Crisis and speculate on whether
we're going to have another one? Yeah, I mean, the second part of that's a really very interesting
question. I think that what's important to see from the British point of view, which I'll start with,
on the Suez Crisis, is that in 1956, when the British took military action with France and Israel
against Egypt in the light of NASA and the Egyptian president nationalising the company that owned
Suez Canal, in the British government mine, the British were doing exactly what they were supposed
to do in the post-second world war, which was to act as an imperial power in the Middle East
to guarantee the oil security of Western European countries. Because American presidents were very
clear in the post-war second world war world, they wanted largely the oil of the Western hemisphere
for the Western hemisphere, obviously not least the United States itself. They were only willing to
provide oil to Western Europe countries in an emergency. They didn't really want Western European
countries buying oil from the Soviet Union, certainly once the Cold War got going, that
meant Western European countries and Japan needed to import oil from the Middle East and they didn't
want to have any military responsibility in the Middle East for ensuring the free flow of oil
through the Persian Gulf. That was the British job. Obviously they didn't want the British
behaving in brazen ways like an imperial power that made it very difficult for them with Arab
states, but nonetheless, if there was a threat to Western European energy security, then Britain
was supposed to act as an imperial power and do something about it, which is what British did in
the autumn of 1956 and then Eisenhower obviously up for re-election didn't want that kind of display
of European imperialism, particularly at a time when the Soviet Union was sending tanks into
Budapest and put such financial pressure on the British government, financial pressure that was
made possible by Britain's desperate need now to find dollars to buy American oil because
the Arab states were boycotting the sale of oil through one of the pipelines and the Suez canal
was closed, that it was very easy for Eisenhower to tell the British Prime Minister Antony Eden,
you're out. With the British not being able to continue neither could the French and neither
ultimately could the Israelis. If we just look at it for a moment from the Israeli
point of view, what that showed in 1956 was how vulnerable that they were on transit issues
and that was both about the Suez canal itself, but it was also about the Strait of Turan,
which is like water that gets them up the eastern side of the Sinai Peninsula and made
it possible, would make it possible in time for Iran to sell oil to Israel and that became
a really central issue for Israel, including then in 1967 when NASA closed the Strait of Turan
again and then kept the Suez canal closed for eight years, the second time.
So what happened then during those eight years, the ships had to go all the way around?
Yeah, I mean if it wasn't coming pipeline, it has to go all the way around Africa and
interestingly in that context that is part of the reason then why from 1967 the British
government concludes it can no longer stay in the Middle East, it can no longer carry on being an
imperial power there because suddenly the the oil costs that Britain faces in the wake of the
Six Day War where it's also subject to a embargo, a much greater.
So in addition to culture being energy blind, it's possible that energy experts and
culture are geopolitics and complexity blind. I mean can you imagine, I'm sure you can,
you're an expert on this, the importance of the Suez canal and the Strait of Hormuz as being open
and free and navigable for the rest of the world just in time things and both of those are within
the arena of the current conflict. I think most people don't even think about those important
choke points. No, I mean obviously this raises the second part of your question. I mean if we
look at Israel's position in this though, there's been a really quite substantial change
from the situation either in 1956 for Israel or in 1967. So in the aftermath of the Suez
crisis through to the Iranian Revolution in 1979, then Iran was the principal exporter of oil
to Israel. None of the Arab states were willing to sell oil to Israel. The United States was
operating with its not exports accepting an emergency. So the only state really that was
willing to sell oil to Israel on a contracted basis was with the Iranians. And that was one of
the reasons why in 1967 that NASA blockaded the Straits of Tehran because he wanted to stop
Iran selling oil to Israel. He thought that that was a fundamental weakness of the Islamic world
in dealing with Israel back in 1967. But then when we get to the aftermath of the Iranian Revolution,
although that there's some covert selling of oil by Iran to Israel, this time like through a land
pipeline rather than through the Straits of Tehran, Israel starts looking for other options.
It gets a guarantee from the Americans that in an absolute emergency the Americans will provide
oil. But if we look at who is the number one exporter of oil to Israel today, it's Azerbaijan.
It comes via like pipeline that the vulnerability for Israel in that is actually Turkey's position
because the pipeline's coming through Turkey. In terms of the relationship between the Israeli
government and the Azerbaijani government, it's quite strong. Israel's also selling arms
to Azerbaijan. But it's the transit. It's the transit through Turkey that is probably on that
respect, Israel's vulnerability. So let's put a pin in that. 1979 was a key year in the Middle
East because Egypt recognized Israel. The Shah of Iran was overthrown. Israel gave up its oil
in Sinai as a part of developing better relations with Egypt. And the Iranian Revolution then cut
off Israel from oil supply that the Shah had provided, as you mentioned. So you've observed
that these events made the USSR somewhat irrelevant in that part of the world until the
Syrian civil war 30 years later, 40 years later. Is there a parallel between the Abraham Accords
in which Saudi Arabia was poised to join the UAE, Bahrain and Morocco in normalizing relations with
Israel earlier this year? And Iran now feeling potentially less relevant in the Middle East
in the same way Russia became after 1979? I think there are possibly some parallels here.
I think that there's, well, I think that there's a paradox, which I don't still think I really
have got to grips with in trying to understand the events of the last few weeks. Because if we
think about the course of the last few years, in particularly actually the first part of this year,
we could see two different things, at least two different things, really opposite things going
on. The first of them, as you said, Nate, was the possibility, the strong possibility it would seem
that the Abraham Accords were going to be extended to Saudi Arabia. And at that point,
you could see that actually not only was Israel going to be able to normalize relations with a
growing number of Arab states, including now the most significant one, but that that was quite
complementary to various of the economic relations, including energy relations that Israel was
cultivating with Arab states, not least being able to do so, because since some point in the 2010s,
Israel has been able to export, I think it's from 2017, has been able to export gas from its offshore
eastern Mediterranean gas fields, and two of the states that it exports to have been Jordan
and Egypt. You've also got UAE involvement in at least one of those gas fields. So you could see
that there was a kind of, not economic unity would be going too far, but economic interdependence
growing between Israel and various of the Arab states takes Saudi Arabia into that. That is a
big deal, a really big deal. And in one sense transformative, I think, from Israel's point of
view. And then you might say, well, Iran shut out of that, no possibility of that kind of
relationship between Israel and Iran tries to sabotage it, though that runs into the issue of
whether they really did know that Hamas was going to attack. But on the other hand, if you look
up to what was going on this year, is you had the rapprochement, the diplomatic rapprochement
between Saudi Arabia and Iran, brokered it would seem on the surface anyway, by the Chinese,
perhaps United Arab Emirates played some part, perhaps Putin played some part. So actually,
you had growing Saudi, apparently anyway, growing Saudi Iranian relations or defrosting, let's say,
relations during the same period in which Iran might not like it's been left out of the Abraham
Accords. And I still think trying to understand how both those things were going on at the same
time, I still think that's a bit of a puzzle. Is it possible? I am absolutely no expert here,
which is why I'm asking you. But there has been obviously tribal conflicts in humanity back to
the Pleistocene. But a big one is between the Shia and Sunni factions of the Muslim
faith. Is it possible that the aversion to the West, the United States, Israel,
is enough an aversion that it could unite some of the previous antagonistic tribes in the area?
And it could be Middle East, Asia versus the West from this current conflict. Do you have
any thoughts on that? I think that that is quite hard to imagine or at least not to see that the
fault lines would assert themselves quite quickly. I mean, I give you one like example,
is the complete difficulty that the Bush administration had persuading the Saudis that
they had to make some kind of accommodation with post Saddam's Iraq, once the Shia majority were
the dominant political force in Iraq. And in that sense, it was easier for the Saudis to have,
I wouldn't say necessarily straightforwardly positive relations with the United States,
but at least complicated relations with the United States that had some payoff potentially for each
side, then it was to reestablish Iraq-Saudi relations in the post Saddam era. I think as well
that if you look at the internal politics of a number of Arab countries, including now like
Egypt as well, the idea that they really want to make common cause with Hamas, both in its
relationship to the Muslim Brotherhood, who obviously were in power in Egypt from 2011-2013,
but also then around support for Hamas, that's I think pretty destabilizing prospect in Egyptian
politics. So I think we always have got a factor into this, like what the risks around domestic
political stability are for any of the Arab states in their relations, not only with Iran,
but also with the Palestinian cause. The Palestinian cause is obviously prominent in
everyday news right now. This is recorded on Monday, October 30th. Obvious to those people that
understand the centrality of energy to our world, the effects of the Israel Hamas situation have
clear consequences for the availability of oil globally, something like half to two thirds of
the world's oil reserves are within 800 miles of Israel. But how is this conflict taken a bird's
eye view, especially during the late 20th century? How is the energy at the center of this
current conflict? Can you give a stratospheric view of that?
Well, I think there are several different things going on here. The first of them is that
Iran's position in the Persian Gulf, and to some extent its relationship with China
around the Persian Gulf are pretty central to any question about the conflict between Israel
and Hamas, spelling out into an original conflict or original war. And I think that there's a way
of thinking about that question that actually goes back to the summer of 2019, which is actually
where I started disorder. Because there we saw what happened when Iran responded to what Trump
called the maximum economic pressure being applied after Trump had entered the Iran nuclear deal with
various attacks on shipping in the Persian Gulf. Then there was the attacks probably by Iranian
proxies on the Saudi oil facilities, Saudi defense system essentially failed.
And then it looked like the Americans, even under Trump, weren't going to make any response to that,
which made the Saudis incredibly angry. And then in January of 2020, so just as the pandemic was
starting in China, we had Trump ordering the assassination of Soleimani, the head of the Iranian
Revolutionary Guard. And the response of a lot of Trump's critics to that was he's so mad, he's
just about to start like World War Three. So even in the quite recent years with pandemic got in
the way of people, I think remembering what was going on in the second half of 2019 and early 2020,
we can see that conflict in the Persian Gulf has got the potential to be incredibly destabilizing.
And so any, for any conflict that moves into regional war in the Middle East, that is
will be central to it. How are we going to avoid a major war in the Middle East?
I mean, what would be the, I think you don't need to paint the worst case. Worst case is
nukes all around the world. You don't even need to paint the bad case, which is the Strait of
Hormuz closes and there's giant bombs and destruction in Middle Eastern countries. What
would be a somewhat benign and a hopeful outcome of the current situation?
I think the benign version is that the presence of the American Navy in the way in which it is
now in the Mediterranean is sufficient deterrent to Iran to ensure that Hezbollah stays out of
anything, doing anything particularly significant in northern Israel. And Iran understood stands
that there would be very direct consequences for it if it were to engage in, even in maybe even
the kind of action that it engaged in the summer of 2019 in the Strait of Hormuz.
A lot of times when there's, and here's me saying this to a political scientist expert,
it seems like there's a conflict between a country and another country. But here it's like this
complicated rat's nest of multiple countries and multiple groups and demographics and
initiatives. I mean, there's Lebanon, there's Syria, there's Russian support there, there's Iran,
there's Hezbollah, there's Hamas, there's all kinds of Houthi rebels. And it seems like there are
tiny little Archduke Ferdinand possibilities everywhere.
No, absolutely. But I think some of that, though, there's a positive story to tell about some of
the complexities of the interdependence. For instance, as I said earlier, Israel exports
gas now, at least it has been to Jordan and to Egypt. That means that these are countries that
have got something to lose from conflict with Israel in a way which has never historically
been true before the 2010s when this offshore Israeli gas production began. Now, there is some
difficulty for Egypt coming out of this. And unfortunately, it does have, I think, potential
ramifications for Europe, because one of the fields, the three main fields in the Eastern
Mediterranean that belong to Israel, Tamar is in the rocket range of Hamas. And so production is
shut down at the moment, which means that Egypt isn't getting the liquid natural gas exports
from Israel that it would usually do. It also exports itself because it has fields in the
Eastern Mediterranean. That means you'll be exporting less to Europe. And we know that European
demand for liquid natural gas is much higher than it was two years ago because of Russia's
war against Ukraine. And so these things become interconnected and disruptive.
So I'm an American and I remember what happened with President Bush and the war in Iraq.
And I have other memories of subsequent presidents. Can you outline the shifting
relationships and perspectives with the United States president's administrations
towards Saudi Arabia and the Middle East from Obama to Trump to currently Biden with the
fist bump to MBS or he refused to shake hands? But it seems like this is all an unfolding soap
opera with massive consequences for our future. Yeah, I think you'd probably need to just start
with like where things were in the Bush Jr presidency. Let's say particularly by 2005.
So once it's clear that Iraq is going to be a quagmire at best and that if a crucial purpose
which to my mind it was of the Iraq war was to remove the sanctions from Iraq's oil exports,
rebuild the Iraqi oil industry, get international oil companies back into Iraq, turn Iraq into
a large-scale oil producer rather than as it had previously been before the sanctions a medium-sized
oil producer. So producing more like 10 or 11 million barrels a day like the Saudis could.
That wasn't going to work out. It's very clear by 2005. So what we see in 2005 and I think that
the shapes of a world that we still live in is essentially that world oil production stagnated.
And then into that in the 2010s came the shale oil boom in the United States and meant that
that stagnation of production that was there I think by 2005 and it was for a whole set of reasons
including geopolitical reasons didn't play out in the way in which it would have done otherwise.
So there was no way that George Bush could find a way out of the Middle East or even think that he
could find a way out of the Middle East. I think the Iraq war should be understood as trying to
address what that administration understood really quite well was the stagnation of production that
was coming in a world in which Asian demand in general and Chinese in particular was growing
quite rapidly. I think by the time that Obama has been in office a couple of years by 2011 probably
the people in the White House with him buy this idea that shale is the fix.
Now shale is a partial fix. It stops I think economically the 2010s being a lot more difficult
than they would otherwise have been but it isn't actually a route out of the United States from
the Middle East altogether. Not least because it's the question of like where the shale oil is
going to be refined and where the American refineries are themselves well suited to all the shale that's
being produced. So the United States isn't actually losing its need to import oil from the Middle
East. It's simply reducing its need to import oil from the Middle East but I think the Obama
administration is emboldened by shale. I think it does several things. It first of all thinks okay
we can now sanction Iran which they've been quite wary about because the Europeans will protest
the oil prices will go too high if too much Iranian oil is taken off the market. We sanction them,
we bring them to the table, we get a nuclear deal with Iran. The sanctions can come off,
we can normalize relations, largely normalize relations like with Iran. That will put the
Saudis in their place a bit too. We don't have to treat them so seriously as we've
as we've generally been doing since the 1970s because we don't need them so much
and obviously it doesn't turn out like that in terms of getting out of the Middle East not least
because ISIS comes along and then he's got American troops out of Iraq by 2012 but the
Air Force is going back in in 2014. Now Trump I think then comes in the exact opposite way of
well let's I use Trump as a shorthand because who knows who exactly was making all the decisions in
the Trump White House but comes in and he is like no we need to be close to the Saudis still
we need to be tough on Iran and so he's willing to be quite tolerant of most things to do with
MBS cultivates personal relationship probably get some payoff in terms of his own corporate
material interfamily interests but I think it's quite then revealing that even when Trump is
the president in the September of 2019 when those Saudi oil facilities are attacked that
the Americans don't actually make a response. I think Biden comes in then and he's back to
flipping it the other way and he's got an added component to it which is that he I think quite
desperately wants the Iran nuclear deal back because he wants Iranian more Iranian oil on the
world markets because he doesn't want to look like he's got an oil policy at all he wants his energy
policy to look like it's just about climate and the energy transition so Iran nuclear deal you
have to know something to understand that that's it oil policy but he's not able to but in that case
you just made the supposition that Biden cares more about appearing to be a climate president
rather than actually being one because he wants the US to use less oil but if more Iranian oil
is on the world market from a CO2 perspective that's more fossil carbon being burned right?
Yeah I mean I think there obviously are like levels of like complexity to that I mean you
might also say I mean you know I don't suppose to know how much deep thinking there has been
about this question inside the Biden White House you might also say that it's quite useful if you
really understand that might be a medium to long-term oil problem that actually you keep some American
production like back and let others like take this case so there's level draining America first
absolutely I don't think that's the deep thinking but maybe maybe it is
but what we know whatever thinking was going on the policy didn't work and so already by the summer
of 2021 he was having to ask the Saudis essentially to increase output which they weren't willing to do
he then made is rather humiliating visit to Riyadh in the next summer in 2022 and the Saudis
have shown no willingness really despite the fact of working with the administration about the Abraham
accords to accommodate the Biden administration's persistent desire for more oil output from OPEC
plus so what do you think about the fact that if you add UAE Saudi Arabia and the new BRICS
nations including Russia that the amount of oil purchasable in the open market not the oil
production but the available oil exports are now over 50 percent controlled by BRICS nations
first of all is that important and a related question I'm just curious from a political
perspective people living in those nations in the Middle East that are selling the stored sunlight
from beneath their lands to the global west and of course they're getting dollars or financial
remuneration for that but it's their legacy of what they have in their lands and it's being
sold to the west do the people there ever get patriotic and nationalistic about that I mean
what is the real feeling beneath the dollar signs and barrels of oil that are flowing
I mean on the first question I think that OPEC plus matters a lot more than the BRICS
okay I mean I think if you look at it in energy terms that India and China and and Brazil as
founders are in a very different position than Russia and I think that China has its own really
quite severe still constraints around its foreign oil and gas dependency and I think it's well aware
of those I think in this case the Chinese leadership really is energy aware yeah so I think that in
terms of is there a power block that would use energy as a weapon against western countries we
should think in terms of like OPEC plus and not think in terms of BRICS okay and I think you might
say that it then really is quite significant that the Saudi Russian axis in OPEC plus has held
through Russia's invasion of Ukraine indeed strengthened because if you go back to the
aftermath of those attacks on the Saudi oil facilities you pretty much had Putin laughing
at the Saudis about the fact that the air defense system that they bought from the United States
didn't work if you go to the spring of 2020 so when the pandemic really started you have been
salmon trying to flood the market with oil after you can't reach an agreement with Putin about how
to deal with the pandemic and then you effectively have Donald Trump putting OPEC plus back together
again because he doesn't want the price of oil on the floor for American shale producers and having
to threaten the Saudis like with military withdrawal or you know military less military support unless
that they play nice with him about that so I mean OPEC plus looks pretty like weak as any kind of
cohesive block in the spring of 2020 we're a long way away from that now OPEC plus can choose to
inflict harm on the Biden administration and I think chose to do so in the run up to those mid-term
elections last November when a quite substantial cut was announced just in the weeks before when
Biden had been pressing obviously for increased output. I was going to ask you this near the end
of the interview but I'll ask it right now given what you just said have we reached the point
or are we approaching a point where the rest of the world can decouple or de facto sanction the
US and other countries in the US orbit without it having disastrous effects on their own economies?
I think you can see that in Russia's case that it has been able to inflict quite substantial harm
on European countries and in particular Germany by cutting off the supply of gas through the
Nord Stream 1 pipeline which just began to do from the summer of 2022 if you look at the economic
data coming out of Germany over the last few months it's pretty difficult that Germany has
experienced a major industrial blow by what has happened and it's not clear that the Russian economy
has taken such a big hit for having done this certainly where oil is concerned it's been able
to sell pretty much the same amount of oil as it was previously doing for a reasonably long
period of time at a lower price than the market price but even that it's not clear that that's true
any longer it's been able to increase its liquid natural gas exports it obviously doesn't yet
compensate from those for what it's lost through selling through the the pipelines that the Yamaha
pipeline and the Nord Stream 1 pipeline to European countries but it's got the capacity
to increase LNG exports further I think the Saudi question is like more difficult because the
Saudis are obviously more integrated financially into the US world and the way that the Russians
were much less so since even just then since 2014 and certainly since those financial
sanctions and Saudi obviously has this does have a military relationship with the United States and
so that acts as some kind of constraint on what the Saudis can do too so it was three weeks ago
just over when the Hamas-Israel situation exploded and at that time I thought that the
implications would be a premium on long dated oil futures and instability to the financial system
and instead oil as of today three weeks later is about at the same level it was before that
happened maybe because you say the US Navy is suppressing volatility but I was surprised and
I don't like to talk about this much because you can get in in social trouble really easily but
since you're a professional in this domain it almost feels like this entire situation
unexpectedly to me and many people is like a Middle East version of a George Floyd moment
where there are people around the world reacting to what's happening and it it it seems like that
puts the international social contract of agreements and supply chains and geopolitical
alliances and everything that we kind of assumed would continue before October 2023 might might
change just because of this you know this this zeitgeist is is changing what do you think about
that Helen well I think there's definitely something going on in that respect I think that
particularly consequentially for the Biden administration just because the US is much more
important as a power than the European states although they face some of the same domestic
political issues around this they're going to come under considerable pressure and obviously in the
case of the United States with an election next year that is going to intensify that pressure
of how far they can go in supporting Israel without causing themselves very considerable
political problems I mean I think that it it is though aided by the fact that the energy
situation thus far is not particularly I wouldn't say it's not particularly worrying because I think
it is worrying but we're not seeing a serious crisis in the energy markets in a way in which we did
pretty much immediately on Russia's invasion of Ukraine and I think that does go back to the fact
that the energy situation in the Middle East including Israel's vulnerability on energy
security issues is just not what it was in the past then we can add in the fact that the United
States as well as being now not insignificant exporter of oil has got the capacity to release more
oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve 180 million barrels released really in the context of the
Russia's invasion of Ukraine none of these things were true in the 1970s indeed the whole
Strategic Petroleum Reserve was created in response to the crisis of the 1970s instead of
being an exporter the United States was on a trajectory in the 1970s to become in the largest
oil importer in the in the world and so I think that the immediate crunch points around the energy
situation are nowhere near as difficult as they were in the 70s but just to go back to a question
that I didn't answer and I think this does come into matters though is I do think there's they
are still you know very profound resentment in a lot of oil producing countries amongst citizens
about what they look what looks to them like foreign extractivism with heavy legacy heavy
undertone still of the imperial past I think if you say like why was it not possible for the
international oil companies that got those contracts from the Iraqi government the western ones
essentially to stay there and do well and turn Iraq into the kind of large-scale oil producer
that the Bush administration had in mind in partly it is because of the domestic resistance that they
ran into in Iraq the political situation now partly that's to do with ISIS but it was also to do
with direct attacks on the headquarters of oil companies from angry Iraqi citizens I mean if the
experiment was can Western oil companies go back into a Middle Eastern country after the age of
energy nationalism of the 1970s and succeed well the answer turned out to be no they can't
have you been over there have you traveled in Iraq Iran no I've never been to the Middle East no
okay um and just as an aside are you teaching right now like this semester what are the what
classes are you teaching what is the title of the class I teach uh first year I part
teacher first year course which is the introduction to politics for the students and the undergraduate
program and then I teach a course called the politics of the international economy to the
third years wow and how do you enjoy that a lot I really like teaching yeah I miss it
I'm kind of teaching with the podcast but it's not the same as sitting in the room with 20 19
year olds and having a conversation you know and they're so curious and bright and have their whole
lives ahead of them and it it feels like a privilege and also a responsibility you know
completely yeah yeah yeah um so we're going to get back to the Middle East and I also want to talk
to you about Ukraine but you're a historian and could you speak briefly because I also want to
talk about the United States can you talk briefly about how energy and oil in particular really
set up Britain and later Germany to become key powers in Europe I don't think most people
look at that history from an energy perspective yeah I think that if we look at the the 19th
century and the real rise to economic preeminence of Britain I mean Britain had obviously established
itself as a perhaps the dominant naval power even in the 18th by the middle second third of the the
18th century before the industrial revolution but its economic preeminence comes with the
industrial revolution and if we say then like well why did Britain industrialize before
um any other country in the world I think that the the answer is not only that it had
significant or abundant domestic coal but also because they've been using coal actually for
a very long time for heating purposes pretty much again unlike anywhere else going back
even the 12th century certainly in the third by the 13th century uh it had
incentive to find ways of extracting deeper coal and the steam engine the first point
purpose of the steam engine was to do precisely that to be used in mining and then the steam engine
ran off coal so you kind of like it's a it's a circular phenomenon if you then look at the way
in which British naval power developed in the 19th century and you look at something that I think is
pretty significant in in in world history which is the and I say world history very deliberately
is the first opium war and the opening up of imperial um china its British steam ships um that
now um are able to be much more powerful than any sail based um navy um could be if you then look
at the German um story Germany um is advantaged like Britain by having coal a lot of coal um
but unlike Britain uh it actually doesn't have iron deposits that are adjacent to the coal
a quite a lot of the iron deposits are in Alsace-Lorraine France doesn't have coal even just saying
that like that explains I think quite a lot as to why between 1870 and the creation of Germany
through the Second World War Alsace-Lorraine is a central part of the conflict between
like France and Germany explains why the European coal and steel community the first part of
the the European project effectively was a means of giving France access to that West German
coal if we then bring oil into it the thing that's really hard for every European power except for
Austria really in the beginning of the 20th century is they don't have any domestically
if you look at the beginning of the 20th century the two large oil producers of the
United States and Russia I don't think it's a coincidence that they are going to go on
albeit in the case of Russia in the form of the Soviet Union to dominate the 20th century geopolitically
to take over the European imperial powers by contrast are going to be you know eclipsed Britain
tries to deal with its oil problem which it does sort of moderately successfully by extending its
empire around oil i.e sphere of influence in Persia what will be Iraq in the post what was
Mesopotamia what will become Iraq in the post First World War world Germany loses desperately
in that contest during the in the in the First World War it ends up with nothing in the Middle
it tries to take Baku which is the basis of the now Soviet oil industry and fails
so Hitler's invasion of Russia has puzzled historians but you suggested it was at least
partly about oil did i understand that correctly from from your work yeah i mean i'm not the first
person who who who he's made this argument though people who know a lot more about that about this
than than i do but i think that if you understand that Germany was in from its point of view and
this is i'm not talking about Weimar Germany so after the the first war in a really very difficult
position because it had lost the war in the Middle East is its bank made well one of its most
important banks if not the its most important bank Deutsche Bank which had effectively operated as
its international oil company in the pre-1914 world held 25 percent of the shares in the what was
then called the Turkish Petroleum Company which had the mandate for the concession rather sorry
for drilling in Mesopotamia and as part of the peace then Germany had to hand over or Deutsche
Bank had to hand over that ultimately to France so the Germans begin in the Weimar period on a
program of creating synthetic fuel which is essentially to create an artificial version of
oil from coal Hitler expands yeah Hitler expands that program but there is no way that he can engage
the Nazis under Hitler can engage in wall of conquest without much more oil supply than they
actually have and by 1941 the second half well by the summer of 1941 it's it's pretty clear
that the conquered territories that Germany Nazi Germany has by that point plus synthetic fuel
is not sufficient and that Hitler and Hitler was i would say apocalyptically obsessed with energy
is is that he thought that there's only way forward for Germany if he was going to stay in
the war was to conquer Baku which is in present day Abajajam which was then the center of the
Soviet oil industry this is going to sound like a obtuse question but if oil is the master resource
and what you said Hitler was obsessed with oil and
homo sapiens historically have gone to war when there are resource or geographical limits
could you imagine fighting a war a kinetic war on renewable energy
no not the same way i mean i think that i think that there is a difference between
the geopolitical ramifications of the arbitrary distribution either under the earth's surface
or under the earth's waters of oil and gas then there is of metals which is what is obviously
an issue in low carbon energy leaving the uranium question aside on on on nuclear and
at a certain point i mean people who are
engineers uh where we engineers is perhaps not the right word but there are people who know a
lot more about metals they just put it that way then than i do and it's not difficult i think
there to imagine that at a certain point that it will be possible to recycle the metals that are
necessary for the energy transition and that it is also possible that it will be possible to
innovate technologically and find ways to do what are presently being done done let's say by like
lithium in relation to batteries in different ways now energies we both know now isn't like that
you extract oil or gas and you get to use it once
and i think that that makes a like that is quite a fundamental difference between where we might be
going geopolitically with the um now that isn't to say that i'm somebody who is really like gong
how optimistic about the energy transition but i'm not at least yet convinced that the the geopolitics
of metals has to be quite as dangerous and fraught as the geopolitics of oil and gas and
particularly oil were in the 20th century so your summary comments there are that we're going to need
a lot of metals and materials in order to decarbonize but that rematerialization won't have the same
geopolitical constraints of those nations that happen to live where there were ancient oceans
and therefore hydrocarbons were buried but let me ask a subset of that which is
is the global cooperation and the geopolitics such that with this George Floyd moment in the Middle
East and the anti-colonialist kind of simmering up around the world will the global north and west
be able to forge agreements in african nations and in southeast asia where a lot of these
metals reside is is there still the the political economy that existed 50 years ago to scale that
is that a constraint yeah i mean that's the point where i'm much more pessimistic i think it's a
particular problem for european countries um both because european countries are significantly
more resource poor than the united states they're also largely quite densely populated there's
going to be much more resistance to domestic exploration for mining in european countries
and i think that ultimately will be in the united states i'm not saying there won't be but i i just
think in europe it's a really made proof to be a really hard constraint on exploring those domestic
possibilities and then for the european countries they're going back to try and cultivate private
sector investment backed by state support often in parts of the world that they once colonized
where people have got long memories about europeans and resource extraction in those countries
and i think you can see that in what was happening in west africa just over the course of the summer
niger in particular where france had been getting a quarter of its uranium
from there was a coup the language of this is partly bound up i think with a certain kind of
resource nationalism and i think that is going to be the the norm for western countries and
particularly european ones in trying to cultivate relationships economic relationships in places
that are metal rich and it's going to be even harder when actually european well it's not here
it's just actually everybody western countries are saying look we're going to do the energy
transition while we've got to keep our fossil fuel energy system going we're going to use that
basically as our insurance policy but you can't do that you've got to jump straight into this energy
future that we don't really trust is quite right coming and we're going to make it a condition
of us doing things that might help you with the energy transition and facilitate our investments
in your metal supply chains by with conditional demands that you don't build new pipelines so
oil pipelines or like gas pipelines or you don't build new coal fired power stations and i just
think that that that that's just like politically just not it's not going to work at all and i think
that everything that happened last year in terms of russia's invasion of ukraine and the european
reaction to that which was when there was a difficulty european countries including britain
which was hardly the most exposed where russian gas was concerned went back to keeping coal fired
power stations that were due to close open and they did this in the british case like just
months after they'd been caught by glasgow lecturing the chinese and the indians and indonesians
about how they had to make commitments to phase out coal by 2045 and what they showed was britain
and others european countries was in the emergency where electricity was concerned coal was the energy
source of like last resort so why should anybody listen so anything european countries have got
to say about phasing out coal when they've when when they've seen that and i think you can hear
quite a number of like indian diplomats or indian ministers say things that make pretty clear well
your hypocrisy was exposed really very very clearly we're just not we were not really interested in
listening to what you've got to say and right now as we speak india is bursting through all time
coal production in that nation and the world for that matter yeah yeah um so let's move to the united
states uh i knew that i would be running out of time with you um and we're we're halfway through
the the time period that i i promised um because you know there's horizontal and and deep vertical
complexity on this entire situation um there's geopolitics uh there's history uh there's energy
and then there's there's money which we haven't talked about so a large part of the united states
geopolitical strength in the mid 20th century came from dominance in energy markets and then we had
the conventional peak of us crude in 1970 followed by uh nixon eliminating the gold standard and from
that period on much of the u.s geopolitical power has come from a huge expansion of dollar
denominated debt predominantly uh and developing nations in combination with the petrodollar to
support the largest military in the world uh is this source of strength from dollar denominated
debt strong enough to hold the geopolitical sway that the u.s is used to even if the dollar were
to become unlinked from the purchase of oil in effect a decline of the the petrodollar
i i think this is a really important question night i think if we go back to the the 70s
and we say why didn't american power unravel more than it did in the 70s because obviously
in significant ways militarily it really did unravel in the in the the 1970s i think the moves
towards financial liberalization and the ability to reconstruct a new dollar system after dollar
gold convertibility been ended by nixon and after the fixed exchange rate regime had come
to an end uh in march 1973 that is absolutely like central to that and if you push that thought
a little bit further and said like why didn't the world that was imagined by some in what now
gets called the global south uh of commodity exporters becoming more powerful commodity
importers falling down the hierarchy so to speak i think a significant part of the answer
is because finance became much more uh central to the way in which the the world economy
worked and the united states was able as you said to basically have world economy on the
debt side credit side run through dollar debt it was able to pay for
its own imports of oil in its own currency which was a luxury that that nobody else had the
buddhist had it for a while and got them in a way like through the the 60s but in the 70s they
into need well until the north sea oil started but they end up with a dollar buying buying
oil in dollar problem indeed just on that i mean the french in the 1980s described the strength
of the dollar after the vulgar shock as a third oil price shock so that there's lots of things
that privileged the united states still about that world that emerges out the world economy that
merges out of the um the 1970s now i think there's an absolutely no doubt whatsoever that that some
of the large oil imports is obviously starting with china would like nothing more than to be able
to be done with the dollar when it comes to buying oil imports and gas imports for that
matter um too i mean china has enough problems it's generated by its foreign and oil gas dependency
without having to deal with the need to pay for this uh in dollars on on on on top of um or else
but i think it's not so clear yet that that's really a very attractive proposition to the
sellers and certainly where Saudi Arabia um is um concerned because Saudi Arabia became
deeply integrated itself into that dollar world the post 19 the post gold dollar world let's call
it that that emerged in the in in the 70s it's willingness to buy um american um debt and i
think then what has happened since 2008 really actually since 2007 since the first bit of the
financial crash in august of 2007 is in terms of dollar credit um the position of the united
states and the federal reserve in particular they've become significantly more important
since then than they even than they were um before and that china is much more vulnerable
to the fed's monetary decision making to crises of confidence in the euro dollar system than it
was pre um 2008 because it was less involved in it so is is that i think now that the the euro
dollar system and and and dollar um dollar debt is actually probably more important than ever
in some respects at least and whatever the incentives to get out of the system which are
overwhelming from the point of view of of china the actual ability to do so is the actual capacity
to do that is is much harder than it would seem i think so there might be a desire to get off of
the dollar as the world's reserve currency um and the way that countries have to buy oil but the
mechanics of doing that i mean the dollar has lots of problems but it's better than all the
alternatives let me ask you this yeah no no go on well i this is kind of a meta question but
what really underpins the strength and ubiquity and confidence in the u.s dollar
is it the productivity and the size of the economy or that we're 90 plus percent energy
independent or is it really the military and if it's the military we're printing more dollars and
going further into debt a trillion dollars every couple months to pay for the military and everything
else there's this like uh unraveling there of of of how it was all put together what do you think
about that i mean i i i think that this is a is is a quite hard question to unpack all the different
ways in which dollar strength works but my instinct is that actually it's the way the
international banking system works that's actually the most important thing now about
the dollar's position um and i think you can see that in the ways in which the united states
has under the last few presidents pretty much like all of them being able to use other countries
companies access to the american banking system to basically make various bits of foreign policy
work so if you say like why would they be able to bring the europeans in line on the sanctions
against iran both in terms of obama's initial policy of getting around to the negotiating table
and then in terms of after trump ended the iran nuclear agreement it's because it's just too
difficult for anyone's companies to be shut out of the american banking system now again
the willingness to use that weapon incentivizes resistance to it because who wants to be constrained
by american foreign policy if they can not be but actually finding ways out i mean the european
as i understand it anyway the european countries tried quite hard to find ways of still being able to
make financial transactions with iran after 2018 and found it really pretty much impossible to do so
so let's move to russia and the ukraine since we're doing a whirlwind tour of international
political economy so russia's invasion in ukraine despite the tragedy there nicely timed for your
book release had profound energy price and security implications for europe as well as other parts of
the world so putin my colleague art burman said on a podcast has a a degree in economics focused on
energy and there are some people believe it was this ghost written or plagiarized but still he
seems to know a lot more about energy than most of his western counterparts so how much of this
ukraine invasion in february of 2022 was about energy versus just a territorial play and how
did his earlier campaign and Crimea fit into this strategy i think that you can't begin to understand
relations between russia and post independence ukraine so going back to december of 1991
without making energy quite central to that and a significant part of that is obviously the pipelines
that ran through ukraine or run through ukraine i should say both oil and gas right so from the
point of view of russia the disillusion of the soviet union and the independence of ukraine was
a complete strategic disaster where energy was concerned because at that point in the 90s all its
oil and gas markets go westwards and the pipelines now go through an independent
state with which it's got historically extremely complicated and so then i think you can say is
is that putin from relatively early from when he came into power kind of worked quite systematically
to try to change that on terms of european markets and that was really not just what the
Nord Stream pipelines under the Baltic Sea were about but his moves to build more pipelines under
the black sea and he wanted to be able to weaken ukraine by shutting it out of russia's transit
system and indeed from his point of view eliminate the risk that ukraine posed to the reliability
of russia as an energy exporter i think if you then go to the Crimea crisis you can see that he
even with Yanukovych he was supposedly russia friendly in office is Yanukovych had been making
deals with various of the western oil companies including for exploration under the for the exploration
under the the black sea and by taking control of Crimea and proving russia's position in the black
sea the direct control of savastopol there was a certain energy logic to that too i think if you
then go though to the events of february of 2022 and say is energy an explanation of this move this is
where i think it's a lot harder to say that there was an energy motive that doesn't mean to say that
there aren't resource energy resources that issue particularly in the in the Donbas and that that
was the area or part of the area anyway where there were some prospects of ukrainian shale
though i should say you shale gas that is that by the time that even by the time that the Crimea
had happened the annexation of Crimea had happened it was already clear that the shale in poland which
had been particularly hyped up as possibly the equivalent to the united states turned out not
to be like that the rocks didn't fracture like in the same way so it may be that ukrainian shale
was always a dead end but he kind of brought that to an end by the moves in 2014 but i struggled to
see really an energy motive for what happened last year i think that's much more about a
basic rejection of ukraine as an independent nation state and some concern about the growth
of nato power around the black sea do you think putin imagined or predicted or believed that he
would lose europe as a gas market when he invaded ukraine i think this is hard i think you can see
that he tried to put some pressure on the european governments in the latter months of 2021 so there
was some reduced supply through various of the pipelines going on often sort of presented as
being for technical reasons but i think it's probably better seen as kind of like warnings
that i could i could do a lot inflict a lot more harm on you um than um this
i think that the thing where you can say that he may have misread the signals quite a bit
is actually on Nord Stream 2 encouraged really by the biden administration which would
move the sanctions on Nord Stream 2 about six i think it was it was at a may or june of 2021
so from that point of view i mean the germans who've basically been fighting a rearguard
action trying to defend Nord Stream 2 ever since the annexation of crime area sorry the year after
so 2015 when they made the agreement to build Nord Stream 2 must have looked like well we've
held on despite all that american pressure we've been vindicated we've got our pipeline we won't
be dependent on that unreliable supply coming through ukraine for very much longer and i could
see that putin could have thought the germans aren't going to give up on this just at the point when
they've got what they've been secured what they've invested spent a lot of political credibility
um on but i think he just misjudged really quite profoundly how difficult it would be
for a german government to legitimate the energy relationship with russia in the context of all
our war against ukraine i just think that that was such a shock in germany that for germany to then
carry on with the status quo now in lots of ways i think they carried on with the status quo more
than it seems but they had rhetorically to impudiate that relationship and i think perhaps he didn't
really understand that how did europe become so dependent on russian oil and natural gas and given
your knowledge of history and the world wars in the 20th century based on oil
and coal underpinning the first industrial economies led by the uk and and and germany
is this going to be the beginning of a phase of deindustrialization because of what's happening
in europe i mean i i think the answer from um germany's point of view which i think is the
the crucial european country where this russian energy relationship is um concern that in the age
of oil that russia whether it was russia or whether it was the soviet union whether it's back to
russia again is the most obvious
oil relationship for germany to have if you think of it as there being three big blocks the americas
the middle east and russia just geography alone would align germany in russia's direction
and then if you think about it um historically the periods of aberration
until what's happened in the last year were the period when hitler went from the nazi
soviet pact to outright conquest and then the period between well the first 15 years or so of
the cold war when west germany wasn't buying oil from the soviet union so in one sense you could
put the question the other way around is like let's explain why those ones were the way that they
were if you look at it then in terms of post war history so why did that period of the
early cold war come to an end the beginning of the answer for west germany is the serious crisis
because aden hara the conrad aden hara the west german chancellor at the time he was utterly
appalled by what eisen hara did he went off to paris to see the french prime minister guy
moley he was there i believe when eden rang moley to tell him that they were going to have to
pull out and aden hara said europe will be your revenge
meaning the creation of the european economic community but in practical terms is they began
which had already been started by italian oil company further discussions with the soviet
regime about buying oil from the the the soviet union now the americans put sufficient pressure
on west germany to make that really difficult again use of extraterritorial pressure of
extraterritorial sanctions so actually west germany was quite late of the european countries
or put it this way it wasn't the first of the european countries to either get soviet oil
or later to make gas agreements but once the taboo in cold war terms are being lifted which
it really was by the johnson administration in the united states then i think west germany went
back to what is the more geographically obvious thing for it to do which is to have a energy
relationship with what was then the the soviet union the the big problem for germany in the
post cold war world was really this ukrain issue in this sense germany and russia were in the same
place about this because they the germans didn't want to be dependent for their energy supply on a
ukrainian economically christian ridden country for a lot of the time in the post independence period
where at times of difficulty there was siphoning off of the gas coming through the pipelines
in terms of the conflicts about pricing between russia and ukraine and and that germany would take
an energy security hit for the nature of the russia ukraine relationship far better logically
from its point of view to have a pipeline that went under the Baltic sea or two pipelines that
went under the Baltic sea and bypassed russia so bypass ukraine and allowed for direct russia
relationship but but now that's ancient history so now they're dependent on middle eastern
lng and stuff from all over the world but now the middle east is in crisis too so that adds
further risk to future energy imports for for europe now completely i mean you you can see that this
this nightmare in terms of like which poison do you pick here continues to you have three european
countries in the space of the last three months that have signed long term 20 year plus 27 year
plus i think in each case lng agreements with katar the dutch the italians and the french
and katar as we know is the at least as important sponsor in a way of of hamas as iran
is and that would be if there is a if there's an equivalent of the arab oil embargo on the
us and the netherlands back in 19 october 73 to march 74 it would be katar embargoing the sale of
liquid natural gas to european countries including britain with who've with with which it's had
long-term contracts for quite a while if that were to happen i mean that would be
a cataclysmic event for the world economy and for europe yeah and this goes back to the question
that we came up that you asked and i don't think i answered about the prospects for
deindustrialization essentially in germany and i think that that is real i mean maybe
deindustrialization is you know too hyperbolic but we can see that the german industrial economy
benefited very much from cheap relatively cheap pipeline gas from russia take that away
germany has to import significantly more expensive liquid natural gas from a starting
place in which it had no liquid natural gas ports let alone any literally long-term liquid
natural gas contracts it had to be bought in the in the spot market you can see all kinds of
industrial production that was heavily gas dependent closed down during the course of
last winter that's one of the reasons why european countries got through last winter
without more problems where gas supply is concerned because there was you know demand
destruction in the industrial sector particularly in germany if you then were to have katar being
willing to use a gas weapon against european countries after they've already taken it from
russia because we should remember it wasn't european countries that stopped buying pipeline gas
from Nord Stream 1 it was russia that effectively embargoed the sale of that gas is katar politically
and diplomatically friendly with iran i mean i think that that's that's not an entirely
straightforward relationship either what is true is is that unlike the arab other arab states
they have shared gas interests with iran though those two countries have massive amounts of natural
gas yeah i mean it's because they're basically it's like one big gas field with a katar side and a
iranian side to it so where where does the uk your country stand in all this your well past peak
in your domestic energy production but like the usa you're also a financial and a military hub
so is the multipolar world the united states the uk and then a few satellites that that need our
military and energy support or where does the uk stand in all of this well i think one of the
things that's really interesting if you look at long history uh and look for the patterns like
over time um is britain withdrew from east of syria so it ended as i said earlier
it's imperial presence um a military presence in the middle east um in 1971 announced that in january
of 1968 it did the buddhist navy did have some presence around the persian gulf by the end of
the decade but nothing like the scale of the americans um then we have the period from late
70s through the 80s into the into the 90s uh of um domestic oil production being quite high
via the uh north sea and then since i think it's 2004 um buddhants basically become a net energy
importer again so we're quite some time now we're nearly two decades into britain being back to
being a net energy importer and what you can see in the 2010s under the david camberans
government is that a reorientation back to the middle east you might even say that britain
has come back east of syria again 2015 announced there'd be a new naval base in like borrain
clearly um cultivating um relations with the united arab emirates which is an important
investor uh in the uk and i think that the finance is i think it was actually another agreement
with the united arab emirates just like a couple of weeks ago a new investment um agreement sort
of tied to energy transition too but the gulf that the britain is going back to where it's been
because it's gone back into the middle east because it's still got that historical relationship
particularly with those with those smaller um gulf states because it's become much more dependent
back on that part of the world post north sea oil so when i talk to you helen it's like a positive
feedback dynamic that i don't have fewer questions i have more questions um let me ask you a couple
really hard questions about the middle east so if israel pursues the brass ring moment of
evicting palestinian populations from gaza and the west bank possibly
is it possible that arab governments collectively will have to respond to that and what would be
the implications i think that arab governments would have to like respond to that um but i think
that that very fact and the fact that the israelis need to find a way of dealing with or they have
to have some kind of plan for what happens in gaza once the military action is over i mean that they
can't alienate arab states like that and cause them that kind of um difficulty i mean i think in
this respect we really need to like understand just like what a colossal problem is well now
faces after what has happened because the status quo any version of the status quo of the the
previous day before the 7th of um october is completely gone i mean they're basically under
netanaryu treated hamas as uh a quasi partner even though it goes far as saying for isolating the
gaza problem from israel and then relying on the technology of the wall and the iron dome to deal
with any potential security threat from hamas so let hamas rule um gaza let it be the case that
because they're hamas you can't engage with a question about a palestinian state we defend
ourselves with technology and it's all come crashing like down around them but when all said
and done whenever they do militarily somebody's going to have to take responsibility for gaza
for them because i cannot believe that they're going to go back in there either and expel the
entire population because the united states won't let them do that um or thing that they can rule it
directly themselves they need arab help in order to do that some by some means or another
okay this is a crazy question to ask uh and i know you're not a religious scholar um a political
scholar but how much do end time prophecies around various religious groups play into
this situation specifically israel's claim to rebuild the third temple and muslim and evangelical
christians and mormons saying that such event would trigger the return of christ i've heard this
all pined in the recent week i mean i actually am interest very interested in religious questions
but i mean i i don't even know really begin to begin to know how to answer that um question i mean
all i would say is this is that i think that one of the conceptual failures let's call it that um
of the way in which the israeli government under net and r u dealt with hamas was an inability to see
its millenarian fundamentally millenarian tendencies uh and that millenarian what is that
meaning like the the end times okay yeah justify any kind of like destruction in order to bring
like the new world right um about and i i i think that they didn't understand that aspect
they turned a blind eye to that aspect of hamas
so how how are let's let's bring it down to a a fine point here with everything going on
china russia the us debts hamas israel energy depletion we haven't talked much about climate
change um but as geopolitical tension increases across these different power nodes globally
i think energy insecurity for a number of nations will increasingly uh be um politically very
important do you think that this is going to push nations towards green energy aspirations
or uh in contrast to our resurgence of coal use or maybe we're going to have to learn to cope with
a lower energy lifestyle which we've seen some previews with uh last year in in europe uh what
do you what do you think about all that i think that there's no doubt you can see this clearly
in europe that energy insecurity driven by geopolitics increased the desire to speed up
the energy transition but nothing that happened in europe last year in that respect changed the
difficulties facing the energy transition indeed you could argue and i would argue that they increased
the difficulties because they made the monetary and financial environment in which it has to happen
harder than was previously the case because they intensified what were already the growing pressures
on energy um inflation so
you can try and speed things up but desires say isn't going isn't going to do that i find it hard to see
a world over the next five years let's say certainly five to ten years where there isn't
going to be a politics of reduced energy consumption i think the politicians in western countries will
try very very hard to avoid that they will keep looking for fixes that aren't really there to deal
with these problems to you know kick the can down the road some more but um
there are just a whole set and i think we would agree about this of systemic energy
difficulties across the different energy sources they interact with each other in
quite dysfunctional um ways and there is of some kind going to be some kind of reckoning with that
i don't know i i i know enough to understand that making predictions about when those dynamics are
going to play themselves out all the form in which they're going to take it is is is very very difficult
um because there are so many contingencies particularly actually on the on the on the
geopolitical side that can derail what seem to be passive development at any any any one time
and it's a it's a strange and this is why i think it's hard to think about because on the one hand
it's it is systemic but on the other hand it is vulnerable to contingent events
well it's been forestalled by debt writ large um around the world um i i want to be respectful
of of your evening um well let me ask you a few more questions um you're an energy scholar and a
historian uh given everything you just outlined for me what would be a couple of uh unofficial
unofficial pieces of advice you would have to the leaders on Downing Street or in in your
country ahead of um probably um reduced energy use you said earlier the political uh um football
of energy and using less in the uk is probably in not too distant future do you have any thoughts
of recommendations i mean the the thing that frustrates me um in terms of what i see in in
britain and i wouldn't go any further than that in this respect is that i don't see much evidence the
politicians think about energy across the board yeah i think they have bits of energy policy
here and there some of it perhaps better thought out than others but i don't think
that they see the ways in which all these different problems interact with each other
and all the way in which that they interact with the monetary environment in a way i think they've
got better understanding the geopolitics perhaps in the last year to some extent um anyway i think
that is it possible that they could could they be educated uh or is this systemic story that
you and i are painting almost like impossible for an elected official to integrate
i think this is a really interesting question because i think in the past the politicians
have actually understood this quite well in western countries so i think that energy blindness to
use your language now has got a history to it it's not just a like static conceptual failure
it's things happen at some point in let's say we're gonna this you know 80s 90s whenever
it whenever uh it is some i think um understanding that was sort of passed generationally down at
least top-level politicians and officials that say in civil servants like in britain
somewhere got lost that is my i don't have a uh i really worked out history of that but
i have a strong sense that that general picture that i just said there um is um true so in principle
i can't see any reason why today's politicians today's officials can't understand the kind of
things in which we've been talking about indeed quite the contrary i mean i'd just say look at
myself you know 10 10 years ago when i started things so you know this is literally 10 2013
i couldn't be gone so i've had this conversation that we've been having now for like the best part
like of two hours most of this is like self education over a decade because i understood
enough back in 2013 to think i really really should try to understand this because i think it's
going to shape the world in which we all live for some time to come now i see no reason that i
can educate myself to do that i take it from your story you've done that at some point too
that other people who in positions of power can't do this as well well the differences they are playing
whack-a-mole every day and they have 15 minute uh time spans let me ask you this so you're an
energy scholar uh and a teacher i was a professor but only a teacher really how much time do you
spend uh helen every week reading uh or listening to podcasts or educating yourself on on the world
or the world's history i mean i try to yeah i i try to spend quite a reasonable amount of time
each um week uh i'm also like uh very busy uh as an academic uh i teach quite a lot i enjoy
teaching um quite a lot so some weeks that i do better than others and sometimes like a few months
will go by and then i'll see something and think god i should have understood that like at least
six weeks ago and i've missed something like quite significant and and then you here dive into it to
and then i dive into it and try it yeah and then so i i'm i learn a lot on the run to be honest i mean
that's part of the nature of the world in which we live me too so so like me you are an analyst
that sees all this unfolding but we're kind of observing it like we're watching a movie and we're
explaining it but we're also living it helen um so how do you personally cope with learning about
the energy geopolitical financial crisis that we're facing and then living and this is your life
and our life that that we're a part of that how do you compartmentalize or how do you manage that
that's a good question i um there are times and to be honest it's usually like at night
when i just think this is this is a world of like such such danger uh it's quite terrifying
um my day mind is generally a lot better at coping and that was because you're surrounded by bright
smiling curious young humans and uh nice buildings and lots of books and food and such night mind
yeah but i i mean i'm a quite a fan of lord of the rings me too and um i say to myself and i say
i say this to my niece sometimes that i like that bit when gandalf's trying to explain to
frodo why when frodo says i wish it hadn't happened in my time and gandalf says basically so do i so
does everyone who gets to live in such a time but we don't get to choose when we um live we just
get to choose what to do with our time we just get to choose what to do with our time and i think
that is probably kind of the way that i do try and live in um this respect and i find for myself
i'm not saying this would be true for everybody that i find that trying to live open-eyed and trying
to cultivate inner resilience that that is better for me than living with denial well i think that
is true for many of us and many of the people listening to this podcast um and building on that
do you have recommendations for those listening who agree with your overview and synthesis uh
and kind of foresight of how things might if you squint uh your your picture will hold together in
coming decades do you have advice uh for listeners i mean i'm always very uh cautious about um
advice i mean because i just kind of think um it's hard enough for me to like get to
grit with advice in myself um i mean i think that you know the the the qualities that um are needed
for the times in which we live well the the quality perhaps is resilience and then we have to cultivate
that in our cells and sometimes that is going to mean changing um that i think particularly like
in western countries those of us who've been incredibly privileged in so many um
ways certainly those of us who live absolute lives in western countries because obviously there are
people um who don't the more that we can understand i think the the economic and the geopolitical
contingency of the material lives that we have then the easier it is psychologically to to deal with
um to deal with what is coming and that i think it though when it goes back you know
i think it does matter how we choose to how we choose to live in these times i don't think
there's any reason to say that because it's hard and there's so many um difficulties and
dangers ahead that that doesn't mean that we can't live our lives well
and you're a teacher and i don't know how much uh in those two classes you're currently teaching
you get to the depth of what the conversation we just had um but clearly your students are aware
of what's going on in the middle east and russia um and ukraine so what do you what advice do you
give your students um at the end of the semester and and what advice would you give to young humans
listening to this episode i mean i don't tend to like advise um the students i have in the way
that the Cambridge system like works i have about 25 students who i have a very direct
responsibility for like beyond um teaching um very interested in their lives and i try to engage
with them about that i have a strong sense that it really matters what is passed from like one
generation to the next i'm very conscious of what my inheritances have been in that um respect
and i'm interested i suppose as much in trying to give something back to them in the way in which
i think something was like given to me and that they then might like pass on um to i mean i do
think i probably encourage them to to try to historicize the moment and to try to uh understand
that um human beings have they've lived through some much harder times than even the ones that we
get far harder and that they've survived and that the human spirit has like survived through
that i mean i think about europe through the the black death
century and that there are all kinds of good things in the future we may well not live to see
in this um respect but it's never if you look at human history just a story of permanent disaster
from which that there is no escape and i'm not saying that because i want to minimize any of
the catastrophes in the first part of the 20th century which quite quite um the contrary um
but we don't have to well our own lives are concerned i don't think we don't have to be fatalistic
yep i agree let me ask you this it's my belief um that there's around 240 million college students
in the world and i think humans in grad school particularly and postdocs are an incredible
and underutilized natural resource um that we can have help tackling the systemic overview that
that you and i have discussed um but within the current academy which is kind of part of the energy
hungry superorganism and linear and business as usual i don't think the creativity is being
directed towards its best use so in your field um political economy political science uh energy
with an energy lens can you offer a few big questions that uh postdocs uh and such around
the world listening to this program could be working on that need uh research and answers but
might not be what's conventionally chosen i mean i think there's one here i really would
pick and uh for political economy and that is the relationship between monetary history and energy
history okay i mean i spent some time in um in disorder trying to think about that in relationship
to the end of dollar gold convertibility and in relation to the 2008 crash but the nature of
the book meant that i was just scratching like at the surface i actually had an idea of trying
to do something more systematically about uh this myself including trying to think about the
relationship between the the 1929 crash the end of the the gold standard the interwar gold standard
and changes in the energy world particularly the um return of the soviet union as a as an oil
export and i think there's there may be something um in that but i think that that gets as well at
a question that i think that is really important beyond political economy and in some ways it goes
to the heart of like the way in which economics is done academically which is this presumption
that actually we understand the economic world via a monetary lens rather than via an energy lens
and i think that once you bring the energy lens into political economy a lot of things start to look
quite different and so i think um a project which looked at the relationship between monetary
history and energy history through the entirety of the 20th century and maybe even going back to the
origins of the of the gold standard in the in the in the 1870s would be very would be very revealing
and would have some significance beyond just the actual history in terms of trying to bring a more
well trying to you know move the dial away from a monetary focus to an energy focus and understanding
the economic world okay thank you a couple closing questions helen what do you care most about in the
world uh that's that is um that is a non-academic question yeah because it presumes a quite high
level of self-awareness that one really knows what one does um care um about uh i mean in a
personal sense i i'm i'm passionate about the pursuit of knowledge that's i'm very intellectually
curious that drives quite a lot of um of what i do um i'm also um very interested in
cultural and spiritual questions i don't think of this uh in terms of being focused on political
economy i don't think of that as being at odds with a more spiritual way of thinking about
the world i'd rather try and think both materially and um spiritually i mean beyond myself i'd go
back in a way to the answer that i gave you know like earlier i mean i care very deeply about what
is passed between the generations i feel very that inwardly quite strongly uh in terms of my own
personal history but in tools also the fact that you know i've been working in a university as a
educator for nearly three decades um now and that i find that it's very uh well it's just
rewarding to i was going to say emotionally but that's not actually sufficient it's rewarding to
me as a human being to do that and it's very important to me that i continue to do that
i fully agree uh i feel the same way and that is uh why i continue to do this podcast because
i think education is the single no regret strategy given what we face um to to uh pass the baton to
the next generation as you say um if you uh and you i know you listen to my podcast so you know
what question i'm i'm about to ask if you had a magic wand and there was no personal recourse to
your decision what is one thing you would do to improve human and planetary futures
i mean i thought about this quite hard and in one sense the easy answer i think given we're
talking about energy would be to say the success of fusion so something that would that that would
basically mean the human beings didn't have to think about energy in the same way that they could
take it like for for granted but they want to start to think about that i thought well actually
nobody's got any idea what it would mean to be a human being under conditions in which
energy could just be like taken for granted maybe that just because for a couple of centuries
certainly that energy is being fossil fuel energy drove such conflict between states that if we had
an abundant energy didn't have to think about it maybe we would just do other find other ways of
doing bad things because we wouldn't be constrained by energy so i kind of a little bit more would go
with the uh making us all changing or having higher levels of self-awareness a consciousness thing
rather than the materials first thing uh more aware of our own um shared humanity more aware
less selfish um consciousness more aware of our relationship to the uh to to the to the planet
and i don't think obviously that's a fix in um any sense whatsoever um but i think that the
world would be would be a better place that's a good wish
um to be continued my friend thank you for your scholarship and your teaching and we'll be in touch
thank you thanks very much night if you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the great simplification
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit the great simplification
dot com for more information on future releases
