Welcome to another episode of The Great Simplification. Today, I'm very pleased
to welcome my friend and self-described renegade economist Kate Rayworth. Kate
is known for her book, Donate Economics, Seven Ways to Think Like a 21st Century
Economist, and the related lab that she co-founded, Donate Economics Action Lab,
which is putting into practice the planetary boundaries and human
sufficiency in the doughnut around the world. She's also a senior associate at
Oxford University's Environmental Change Institute, as well as a professor of
practice at Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences. She's an incredible
communicator, and I think her work on doughnut economics is painting a picture
that people can understand, that we are part of a broader system that we're
influencing, and the current economic rules and institutions are not
only creating environmental overshoot, but they're really not doing a great
job for the humans. This was an incredible conversation. I hope to have Kate
back on various reality roundtables. She's doing very important work. Please
welcome Kate Rayworth.
Kate, great to see you.
It's great to be here.
How are you?
I'm well.
You are very busy, I imagine.
Yeah, I think everyone's busy, right? We can all make busy, but I'm well, and
I'm really looking forward to this conversation, obviously.
Thank you for all the important work you're doing. Your book, Doughnut
Economics, and your ongoing work with Doughnut Economic Action Lab are
influencing and inspiring a lot of people, so thank you. Let me ask you a
question. Many of us that worked in finance and economics had kind of a
aha moment where we left the dark side. For me, it was 20 years ago on
Wall Street reading Herman Daley's book, but you're a classically trained
economist, now an ecological economist. What were some of your aha moments
that caused you to pause and like, wait a minute, do you have any acute
stories or memories?
So I studied economics at university in the 1990s. I had the, what's the
opposite of an aha moment? It's like, oh, no, moment, that kind of, oh, no,
moment when, you know, I've come to study economics because I care about the
environment. There's no paper on the environment at all. There was nothing.
It was like one week in public economics, you know, a company paused
chemical gloop in the river, that kind of, that was it. When we talked about
inequality, it always would begin with taking initial income distribution as
given. Would this Pareto change, improve things? And I was like, why, why
do we take income, things as given? Why don't we start with asserting human
rights? So I had quite a lot of, oh, no, this isn't turning out to be the tool
kit. I was really hoping it would be, which is why when I left university, I
didn't want to call myself an economist. I actually walked away from it for
many, many decades. But then make, like many other people, I had those aha
moments that started bringing me back. So one of the first ones was seeing the
planetary boundaries diagram. I have it actually right here. It's, it was seeing
it into my brain. I came back from maternity leave. And somebody showed me
this. And it was a massive, oh, that's the beginning of 21st century
economics. Because like you, I had just read Herman Daley's book, Beyond
Growth. That made my brain flip. And when I saw this picture in 2010, I was
thinking, well, the, the, Joanne Rockstone, Will Steffen and the planetary
boundary scientists, they have quantified that biosphere around the economy
that Herman Daley drew. He conceptualized it. They quantified it. And we are
game. We are on. Here we go. And that's why I drew a circle within a circle and
created the donor. That was a massive aha moment for me. Somebody else then
mentioned a couple of years later, well, of course, the work of Danela Meadows
thinking in systems, I'm like, that sounds interesting. What's that? Then when
I read thinking in systems, it was a massive aha. There is no turning back
from this. And why wasn't I taught economics in systems thinking? Why
weren't we taught to think of the economy as a complex adaptive system in
feedback loops? So it was a real deep frustration with what I'd been taught
and, and just a thrill of finding these ideas. And it was this collective
series of aha's that made me think, I want to make these ideas dance on the
same page. That's what led me to read, to write donor economics. I want to see
what happens when you bring Eleanor Ostrom's comments theory together with
Danela Meadows thinking in systems together with Herman Daley's ecological
economics together with feminist economics. What do we get next? So it was
definitely these aha moments that brought me back.
Why don't we teach thinking in systems and, and these planetary boundaries and
some of the things you just mentioned to undergrads in college?
Because the mainstream economic textbook and thinking and the ideology
behind it is a self contained self affirming system that has worked very
well nicely. Thank you for decades and carries on being taught and students
keep enrolling for economics. And I think there's a real inertia of
self questioning when inside the discipline. And why disrupt something
that has apparently been working? I mean, to me, the most radical act in
economics would be to draw Herman Daley's circle of the biosphere around
every single model of the economy. Why don't we do that? Because that's what
changes everything. And I think there's it changes the professor's
professionalism, it changes who is the expert here, it changes the
foundations of analysis. So it causes a massive disruption in the
hierarchies that have been built up around which are the best journals,
which are the best frameworks, what's taken as given, I mean, supply and
demand curves, they haven't been peer reviewed, the exponential growth
curve for an economy that was never peer reviewed. But it's just taken as a
foundational assumption now. So it's much harder to move away from that
system because everything and if we knew paradigms, well, has it been
peer reviewed? So I think that's why we see the build up of new economic
thinking often outside major economics departments because the new
thinking is coming from elsewhere rather than within. But what thrills me is
that students in high school, whether they're, you know, 14 year olds or
whether they're 18 year olds or whether they're undergraduates or
master students, they know that the ideas that will serve them to be
economists, household managers, right? Planetary scale, household managers
of the future, they know that the ideas that will serve them are not the ones
that are contained only in those textbooks, they are coming to these
new ideas.
So I taught for eight years a class called Reality 101. And in my
experience, the students that had never had an economics class, like
immediately got the content in my class. But it was the ones that had had an
economics class that there was this like mental speed bump they had to get
over on the assumptions and other things. It was very interesting to
observe.
Yeah, and there's a great quote from Cain, he said something like, it's not
the new ideas that are difficult. It's getting the old ones out of our heads
that have been ramified into the corner of our minds. How do we escape
paradigms? So that to me is why I care most about, let's call it Econ 101, I
care most about the first course that any student encounters, often
professors, when they're pushing back against what I'm doing, they say, Oh,
you know, you're just talking about Econ 101. I mean, it gets far more
sophisticated than this. I would argue it doesn't, they don't suddenly bring
the planet in when you're when you're a master student or something. But the
very first encounter we have with what is the economy, what is the range of
its scope? What are the foundational metrics? Is it price in the market? What
are the foundational institutions that we care about? These profoundly shape our
worldviews and pictures profoundly shape our worldviews. That's what I've
really learned, the power of pictures. And so if you want to dislodge a model, I
think the best way is to propose a new model, right, Buckminster Fuller, right?
You change things by making the old model obsolete, propose something new. So
that's why the work I've done is really focused on proposing new pictures,
because the power of our visual sight, going into our visual cortex, it really
shapes what we see and what we don't see, what's central, what's peripheral. So
that's to me, the most important economics course to change.
Well, let's let's get into that. Your very popular book, Donut Economics,
highlighted the outer core, or the outer ring, which is the planetary boundaries
that we don't want to exceed. And then the inner ring was the human needs for
well being, the things that we don't want to go below. And in it, talking about
visuals and orthodox economics, you outlined a list of old economic thinking
like 20th century and new 21st century economics. And maybe you could either
visually or we could put up one of your graphics, just give a kind of a brief
summary of the, I think you had seven points.
Yeah. So first of all, let me say that it was really important to me what I was
aiming to do in that book was to set out ways of thinking, right? It's principles
of thinking that will then be adapted over time between different countries that
will be relevant differently in Malawi or Sweden, but also that'll change over
time as suddenly AI appears or as crises hit. So I wasn't trying to say these are
other policies that we should implement, but rather, what are some of the ways of
thinking that will equip us to go well? And I'm sure there's many more. But yeah,
here's seven. And I'm just for the fun of it with you. I'm going to see if I can
show them quickly visually. This is going to be kind of like a doughnut economics
circus big tent. So let's see if I can do this. So seven ways to think the first
one, change the goal. The goal of 20th century economics was endless growth,
right? There we go. Endless growth curve. It was just implicitly underlying
everything that we said we were aiming for, success of the economy. No, that is
not a sufficient statement of what success looks like. And we know that
endless growth actually takes us into a lot of problems. So we need, here we go,
the doughnut that you just described, a goal that says, leave no one falling
short in the hole, but don't overshoot Earth's limits. Get everybody over the
social foundation inside the ecological ceiling. We want to meet the needs of all
people within the means of the living planet. It's a goal that brings together
human rights and ecological integrity. And I say, okay, that's the starting point
on day one. Bang, this is where we begin. What kind of economic system will
actually take us there? So number one, change the goal. Two, see the big picture,
right? If that's the compass, what's the map? The map of economics. All mainstream
economics courses start with this little diagram, supply and demand. Now, that's a
big act to put supply and demand on the screen on day one. It means we put the
market at the center of our vision. It means we make price, the metric of
concern, and everything that falls outside the price contract gets called an
externality. That's a big framing choice of the death of the living world. Oh, it's
an environmental externality. That is not nearly a big enough picture. There are
no externalities, as Herman Daley and I would say. Your model is just not big
enough. So I drew a diagram. Here's my embedded economy diagram. Here you go.
Let's see if we can show this. So this brings together ecological economics. It
brings together complexity. It brings together feminist economics and
common thinking. The economy is embedded in society, is embedded in the living
world. It is a subsystem and utterly dependent upon it. But also the economy
is made up not just of the market in the state, that very 20th century boxing
match, the household, the space of unpaid caring work, typically done by women, and
the commons and an Ostrom space where we co-create goods and services of value. If
we start with this big picture of the economy and recognize that all economic
activity has to operate within the planetary boundaries and we can use
these different forms of provisioning, to me this is just so much a richer
starting point for all macroeconomic modeling. So number two, change, get
the big picture. Number three, nurture human nature. Who is humanity? How do we
tell ourselves the story of who we are in this picture? The portrait of
humanity. In 20th century economics, this guy, here we are, he's framed. This is
a rational economic man. I decided to draw him to make him visible. He would be
a man standing alone, no dependence. He's got money in his hand, he's got ego in
his heart, he's got calculator in his head, and he'd have nature at his feet. He
hates work, he loves luxury, he knows the price of everything. The real problem
with this depiction is that the more the students told, oh yes, this model is a
sufficient model of us. Actually, we start to mimic him. Students say over time
they more value competition and self-interest over altruism and
collaboration because they start to mimic the model. So who we tell ourselves we
are, shapes who we become. Instead of this rational economic man, we need to
recognize we are first the most social of all mammals. We are social, we are
adaptable, we are heuristic, we care about other's opinions, we follow the
crowd, we are learning. So we have to start with the reality of humanity, which
we learned from cognitive behavior, psychology, from sociology, a much richer
picture of humanity. Now before, we've got to get savvy with systems. So instead
of assuming the economy is in equilibrium, like that supply and demand curve
showed us, recognize that it's almost probably never going to be there. It's a
complex adaptive system. For this, my favorite shape, little donut, springs into
a complex adaptive system of interlinked dynamics, reinforcing feedback, balancing
feedback, tipping points, delay, resilience, redundancy. That's the world of
D'Nelamedo's. So think of it as a complex adaptive system that will ever be
evolving. We can't control it. There's no levers to pull. The best we can hope for
is to steward that system. So how do we want to steward that system? We want to
steward it away from being deeply divisive. We've inherited a divisive
economy that captures value and opportunity in the hands of a few. Here's
the rise of the 1%. We need to turn it, steward that system into a much more
distributive economy. There we go. A system that shares value and opportunity
with all who co-create it. How can we make a distributive economy? So from
divisive to distributive, second big dynamic that we can steward in this
complex adaptive system is from linear and degenerative, stick it in the pipe
of production, make staff throw it away. That's what pushes us over plentary
boundaries into a circular or cyclical regenerative economy where we use
resources again and again from a collectively, carefully, creatively
and slowly. So from degenerative to regenerative, from divisive to
distributive. And then this takes us to the seventh principle that what is the
future of economic growth? What does the future look like? And I'm coming
back to where we began. The presumption was economies would just keep growing
forever. This says, well, maybe actually we need to be agnostic about growth
because what we really want are regenerative economies and distributive
economies. And there might come some point, indeed, they probably have already
come to it, especially in high-income economies where they need to grow up,
right? Nothing in nature succeeds by growing forever. It goes through a
growth phase and then it grows up and matures. What would it mean to create
economies that actually mature? Because if we don't do that, we're going to get
that. We're going to induce collapse, which is something very close to your
heart and focus and thoughts, right? So how can we not break? How can we bend?
How can we bend this system so that actually matures and grows up? So those
are the seven ways to think. And let me just say again, that's just seven. Those
are the ones that became really clear and obvious to me. I bet there's more.
And I offer people to keep adding to them.
Bravo.
That was fun.
I might have to make this entire interview a best of clip. That was very
impressive. Thank you so much for your work. While you were doing that, I
wondered if you hadn't chose being an economist, you could have been like a
stand-up comedian. And this stuff is not funny, though. That's the problem,
right? You have such a good delivery and are clearly very knowledgeable and
passionate. But these are really serious topics that we need to pass the baton
to our youth and people all around the world. And yeah, it feels good because
we're on the right side of the ledger of humanity and the biosphere. But we're
in a very tough moment. And what you just described, I just fantasize about
leaders when Danela Meadows was working on these things in the 70s, had we
adopted some of this thinking then, but we were in the thralls of massive
energy surplus. The thing that I would add to your list is economics has
focused on cost, not value. And energy for what we pay for, just the cost of
extraction, gives orders of magnitude more value to the human enterprise than
its cost. That's a big flag in economic theory.
I think for me, what comes very clearly from your work is if I was to go back
and add to what I wrote about a little bit, but more that the fundamental
currency of our economies, if we really want to get down to currency and
evaluation, energy is the second law of thermodynamics. It's the fundamental
currency of life. And so we would do a lot, we would do really well to pay a lot
more attention to energy. Exactly as you just said, it's treated in economics as
a cost and it's, well, it's been very low. But actually to understand energy and
materiality, and I mean materials, the actual real materials of the world and
the relationship between energy use and material use and its boundedness and
its relationship between that and the delicate balance of the ecosystems,
the planetary boundaries, the life support systems of Earth, to understand
the interrelatedness of those things, coming back to a point Satish Kumar
from makes, how can you claim to be an economist if you don't yet understand
ecology, the living world, the systems on which we depend, the cycles on which we
depend, the materials at hand, it's a deeply physical and energy based system.
I've been using this new chart, I'll send it to you after we're done a little
triangle that shows politics, money and technology as describing society. But
then you blow up the screen and that's just a little triangle on the top and
underneath it is this huge energy like flame. And that's underpinning all that.
And then you blow it up even further and underneath that is the biosphere and
the ecosystem services of Earth that support all of that. So I mean, what is
the response from standard economists at your school at Oxford or around the
world? Are they ignoring this message from donut economics or are they
ridiculing it or I mean it just seems like so much obvious common sense. Or
do they secretly agree with you but the incentive structures of status and
tenure and jobs preclude them from publicly agreeing with you?
So when my book first came out in 2017, there was a lot of ignore. That's the
first line of defense, isn't it right? If something's threatening, either
ignore or kill it sort of. And so there's also some ridicule. Or the first
comeback was this isn't economics. Now, oh, no, no, you've put your values in
here. You see by starting with the donut by starting with human rights and
ecological, you started with your values, which astounded me. Maybe wait, when
you start with supply and demand of the market, do you think you're starting
with no values? Do you not realize that everything is starting with a set of
values of what we choose to show, what we choose to measure and what we choose
to call success. But I have to say there are of course there are, well, the
ecological economists started using it immediately because it brought a visual
to what they and the inheritors of Herman Daley's work have been doing for
decades. Feminist economists, urban studies. So outside of economics
departments, many, many other people started using it business schools
because business happens in the world in the materiality of climate impacts and
labor, labor issues. So it made sense to them. And increasingly, there are
people teaching economics in mainstream departments who more and more, I mean, I
only find out about it when I find out about it, right? You only know what you
know, hear of, who get in touch and say, I'm introducing this into my macro
economics class. Partly, I think, because there's a generation of students
coming through who put up their hand and say, what about planetary boundaries?
What about the donut? The demand is coming from the students. That's more
and more where I see that it's come into economics departments because the
student body are born in, you know, the climate strikers are now at
university. And I see that in the group of students I teach myself. And so
they're coming with a much more political economy expectation of their
education and they're expecting to be taught tools that will actually
equip them with the crisis that they've been born into. So they are pushing
that agenda in a really positive way. But I, instead of trying to hammer on
the door of economics departments that are shut, I've never done that. I go
where the energy is, where the interest is, because there's lots of it. And it's
in other departments that are grounded in real world challenges. Like I said,
like urban design, urban studies, architects, doctors actually, doctors
who recognize human health and planetary health are deeply into woven. They're
bringing it into their degrees. So I'm just going with that energy. And I
believe economics, it's a question to economics. Are you, is economics
going to catch up and embed itself in the real world as other disciplines
are doing? And then it will start bringing this in as it is already
creeping in.
Personally, I don't think economics will ever voluntarily give up the throne. I
think we'll have to have a crisis. And then new ideas that are laying around
will replace the the brittle and outdated 20th century models. Perhaps yours
would be one of them. But I don't think they're going to say, Yeah, you know
what, Kate's right. That's just not the way of human status and metabolism. I
don't think
I agree. And that but what I do know is they're going to be crises and
they're coming and more and more that these crises come that and I think it's
in part why the donut framework. Oh, yeah, there we are. This speaks to food
prices and energy and climate impacts. And it it holds that space. But as you
just in passing quoted Milton Friedman, right, when when crises come, people
turn to the ideas that are lying around at the time. And I like to say, Well, why
just leave them lying around? Let's have them up and running. And that's why I
co founded donut economic Action Lab. Because when my book came out, what
thrilled me was that I was approached by people who say, I like the ideas. And I
want to do this. Some of them were teachers in school, I'm teaching this to
the kids now it's not the syllabus, but this is what they should be learning.
Some of them were city councillors, city mayors, state legislators, we want to
put this into practice where we are. So we work with them to start seeding this
possibility. And what does it look like when they actually try and start putting
these ideas into practice so that as crises come, we can say like as of today,
I can say there are 70 city and local state district governments around the
world who've already chosen to start working with this model to bring about
the transition that they know they want to create this seeds and grounds proof of
practice of a concept so that as crisis hit, it's it's got that credibility, it's
got that critical mass of actual practical use.
Yeah, so my podcast and my work is still mostly about educational, but you're
actually taking doughnut economics, the book, the concepts and putting them into
practice in your lab. You just mentioned 70 communities, cities around the world
like, how are they putting them into practice? Can you give some example or
progress updates or interesting stories?
So I can give you an example and that those 70 are of local governments.
There's a whole other group of community organizations starting it up, but local
governments. So the way it, having watched it from it began in April 2020 in the
height of the COVID crisis, Amsterdam, we created a city portrait for them
downscaling the doughnut to the city. What would it mean for this city to aim to
live in the doughnut? And they launched it in the midst of COVID because they said,
well, we're in emergency, we're in a crisis right now. But as we emerge from
crisis, they will be funding, the economy will be opening up again. It's that
question, which direction are we going to go in, right? Don't waste the
opportunity for crisis to change your direction. They introduced it at the
heart of their policy to become a circular city. So they said, they had a
vision to create 100% circular by 2050, 50% circular by 2030. And they
recognize that circularity doesn't just mean changing the flow of materials,
it's not merely materials, it has deep implications for livelihoods, for
distribution, for people's access to transport and food and clothing. So they
wanted to bring the social in, and that's why they saw the doughnut really help
bring together the ecological and social in terms of a bigger vision of a
circularity policy. And that was a good example of a place that already has a
vision for transformation, put it together with their vision to get rid of all
fossil fuel transport in the city by 2030. So they're really transforming
some big systems here. The doughnut serves as a visual clear compass that
brings it all together. And so often that's the way I see it happening. It's
not as if, you know, city mayor sees the doughnut says, oh, that's an amazing
idea. Now what shall we do? It's going to be seen by people in places who
already have this sense of we need to transition, we need to transform our
systems, our energy, our transport, our housing, our food systems. They come
across the doughnut. This really helps bring together these ideas in a clear
way that we can communicate. And it's like a big sale on our ship. It's very
compelling vision. And also we're joining others doing it. I've just come back
from Cunobl in France, where the city have one of the most recent cities to
say, yep, we're adopting the doughnut. So they they downscale it to the
national level, I mean, to the city level. And they actually collect the
metrics. What would it mean for everybody here to thrive? And is our local
ecology thriving? Do we have thriving nature in the city? Are we coming back
with implantary boundaries? And what's our impact on people worldwide through
global supply chains? And what kind of metrics could we collect? So that this
replaces, for example, saying, I'm making the stat up. But for example, they
might say, oh, you know, good knobs, GDP is increased by 1.3% over the last
year. I mean, is that is that good or bad? Or what? How will I know anything
from that? But if I'm measuring the metrics of a place in real terms, in
terms of people's lives, in terms of the ecological health and its impact in
the world, it's, it's a real story and a much more detailed story about what's
happening here. So they've introduced it. They're like many cities transforming
their transport systems, getting reducing cars, bringing in public transit, and
much more cycling. They've introduced a tax on property, actually, because they
said we have huge inequality in our city, we need to reduce the inequalities. So
this is a quite an elected local government with pretty progressive
mandate that are saying, yeah, this helps us go in that direction. And just in
terms of the kinds of actions that I see when I go to cities like Karnob, like
Barcelona, like Copenhagen, what recurs to me again and again is a beautiful
phrase that the environmental journalist George Mombio once wrote. He wrote
about the UK. He said, look, what we have here is private luxury and public
squalor. And what we need is public luxury and private
sufficiency. And when I go to places like these cities, I see, ah, yeah, this is
what public luxury looks like, fantastic public parks, incredible mobility, low
cost, fast, clean, efficient transport, good quality social housing.
And we have private sufficiency. And in France, there's a word that's really
gaining currency, sobriety. If you say sobriety in English, people think, oh,
you're not going to drink alcohol anymore. It's got that very literal meaning.
But sobriety in France means a dignified sense of I have enough. This is
sufficient. My material needs are met. My mind and my intellectual life and my
cultural and common's life is flourishing. But sobriety, it's a, it's a,
it's really interesting to see the way this is gaining traction. In Sweden, they
have a term lagom, which means I have plenty and it's enough. And we need
language like this in more and more cultures to be able to express that
sense of private sufficiency and public luxury. And that's where we should be
seeking abundance. So again and again, I see cities that are actually starting to
put this into practice. That's the vision that they're starting to bring about.
I love it. I have so many questions. So here's, here's the challenge that I see.
Last week, I was in Germany and I spoke to a large audience of climate, energy,
tech investors with the basic messages, we're not going to solve climate change
and help the environment by growing the economy by electric cars and things like
that. And I expected it to not go well, but it went really well. And
like this is a Dinella Meadows thing. You can't understand our situation unless
you look at the whole system. And the people in the room, I told them they
were wearing three hats. One was their hat as the managers of the Sovereign Wealth Fund of
Norway or Fidelity or whatever, where they have to generate returns for their investors. The other
hat was their father, mother, sister, parents, whatever, they want to do the right thing for
their family. And then the third thing is they want to do the right thing for the world as a
citizen of the world. The challenges is that our prices and our incentives and our cultural
aspirations are having them focus on that first hat, where there is not a common plan of action
where all three of those hats can align. And I would imagine that if we had better prices
on non-renewable inputs, if we had a complementary metric to GDP, because I think GDP does
still have some uses, but if there was a well-being metric attached to it for context,
and then suddenly all of your book and all of your seven points would scale massively. But until
that happens, the incentives and the prices that basically we just pay for the cost of extraction,
not the cost of creation or pollution on our main goods, are not going to allow communities and
cities and nations to embrace this writ large. What are your thoughts on that?
So I love those three hats. I think many people are realizing over time that those
second and third hats, I want to be a good parent and I want to be a good citizen of the world,
these are coming much, much closer together. So I have 14-year-old twins. If I imagine what will
the world be like when they are 80 or 90, then I believe there's nothing I can do to protect them
that doesn't actually involve protecting the world because we utterly depend upon a thriving world.
So if you want to be a good parent, you need to care for the whole world and system. As Jeanine
Beniaz always beautifully says, you know, a species and a platter or an animal can't be around for
10,000 generations, so it takes care of the place that will take care of its offspring,
and that's the best we can do. I completely agree that the incentives for the manager of a, well,
Norway's sovereign wealth fund, there's a lot of realigning to do that. But if any major corporate
designed company, the incentives are way off. So just to come directly to your point about prices,
yes, the price incentives are way out. I would fix it not only through changing prices, but
this will also change prices through changing regulations. So I really believe, you know,
I don't think you're advocating, you know, set the right price and the quantity will fix itself.
Like, I really like what Amsterdam are doing. They're just saying, in 2020, they said,
in 10 years time, in 2030, there will be no fossil fuel vehicles in the city, no boats, no cars.
So guys get, you've got a long, loud legal message. It's very clear this is the transformation that's
happening. So nobody changed the price on that day, but they changed all the signals. And of course,
that has knock on effects of changing all the future expected price. So we need to put in
place regulations that just remove life-destroying chemistry and introduce only life-friendly
chemistry that just remove fossil fuels from the system. And so that we put in that long,
loud legal message that the system will start to adapt. But I also want to come back to the
point you say that the managers are not facing the right incentives. We can change the prices
that they face, the incentives around them. We can also change the deep design of the
organizations they work for. And one more piece of puppet show. This to me is a really key one.
And in fact, you know, if I could go back and rewrite a section of joint economics,
this is one thing that I would bring up much more clearly. And it comes from the work of
Marjorie Kelly, who's a next generation enterprise designer working for the Democracy
Collaborative in the US. Marjorie's book that I read, Regenerative Ownership, she, or owning
our future, it's called, she said, you know, you need to look at the deep design of an enterprise.
So here's the five deep design traits, right? What is the purpose of this enterprise?
Why does it even exist? What is it in service of in the world? How is it networked with its
employees, its suppliers, its customers, its industry allies? What relationships does it
hold? Does it see everybody else as a competitor or the allies in transformation? How is it
governed? Who's at the table who has voice and decision making? What are the metrics?
How is it owned by shareholders, by a family for 300 years, by venture capital, by the workers,
by the state, because how its own is going to profoundly shape how it's financed,
where that finance is coming from, and what therefore it's expecting or extracting or demanding?
And so is it, is the governance ownership and finance going to be in line with
maximizing returns to the owners, which is a very 20th century corporate design,
or is it actually going to be in line with serving the purpose, which might be sequestering carbon,
building community, creating health? So to me, if I was looking around that room,
I would say, yeah, you're wearing a hat of the manager of the fund and strapped to your body
is a structural design that is informing what you can and can't do, what doesn't,
doesn't have materiality in your decision making, so in addition to prices. And how can we change
these deep designs of institutions? So at Donatee Economic Section Lab, we're working with companies
that many companies come to us and say, oh, we want to do business in the donut. We say, fine,
we don't want to talk about the design of your products. I'm sure they're very nice. We don't
want to talk about the design of that. We want to talk about the design of your company, because
this is ultimately going to determine whether or not your company can become regenerative
and distributive of the value it creates, sharing that value with all those through the supply chain
rather than maximizing returns to the owners, the shareholders, or not, whether it's stuck in an old
pattern. Because what we find when we talk to companies, I'll give you one example. I was at
a circular economy conference last summer and somebody came up to me and she said, you know,
I, she worked for a major clothing company. She said, I'm head of regenerative clothing,
and I've been asked to, or the sustainability, I've been asked to come up with a line of regenerative
clothing for our company to signal we're part of this revolution. But I'm being told I have to
generate 15% profit returns or profit margins on it from the get go, the standard. There's absolutely
no room for this transformation. She said, it's impossible. I cannot do it. So these companies
want the regenerative label, the regenerative, but they want the bottom line because of the
way they're designed and owned and financed. We need to change that deep design.
So, okay, I'm with you on that, except our entire edifice is supported by the
one-time endowment of the carbon pulse. So I don't know in donut economics and the planetary
boundaries, it seems like we're avoiding exceeding nitrogen, CO2, you know, biodiversity limits,
and that these communities are responding because they, they don't want to exceed those and they're
making like Grenoble and those other places you talked about. How much of it is in response to
not publicly aware yet, but anticipated depletion of these energy helpers that we get annually the
equivalent of 500 billion human laborers worth of energy that we're just pulling from the ground?
Because as a corporation that wants to make regenerative clothing and needs to make 15%
a year, if you get these cheap fossil helpers, that's going to help you meet your bottom line
a lot easier. So how do we manage that? How does that fit into the story here?
Well, as you said, this one of carbon pulse, it's, it's got a pulse away, right? Whether it's
through peak or whether the evident impacts in the world we need to let go of it and that's the
heart of your work, what happens next. I agree that, so going back to the way economics is taught,
we are not taught economics saying, here you are on any course in the early 21st century,
by the way, you're studying economics at the end of a one off massive carbon pulse,
which has created abnormal temporary conditions, one of which the most important of which is
because of the availability of cheap energy, it's given us phenomenal uplift of growth.
And we've come to think that was normal and we, right, we need to be aware that that was
historic and that's not the future. So how do we move away from that? That's why I think it's
important to question growth, but I want to come back and question the design of the company,
because the way these companies are designed, they're designed on the presumption of growth
and therefore the, the, you know, the planet may be, the planet may be going to hand the
handcuff, but I want my 15% and that's still deeply written into the mindset, you know,
this coming out of the financial community, right? I want my high returns that, and that hasn't
modified at all in terms of the reality of what can actually be regenerated on a planet that
isn't depending on the extraordinary free cheap labor of fossil fuel, but actually comes back
within the regenerative capacity of renewable energies. To me, that's the, that, that's your,
that's your question. Are we, are we going to get this before it breaks us? Will we get this and
learn to bend? And for me, part of the bending is bending in the design of institutions. So we
create companies that don't depend upon endless growth. They understand that they may grow until
they're mature in size and scale, but then they can thrive and they're not owned in ways that
continually expect to extract surplus profit because it's not going to come. It needs to be
reinvested in the enterprise, which is invested in regenerating the world.
You first need to understand it before you can do it. So this is very important, I think. One of my
first podcast guests was Danella Meadows, husband, Dennis Meadows, and when asked what are some of
the pathways forward, he's like one of the prerequisites is to extend the time horizons
of institutions from quarterly or yearly to five years or 10 years or 20 years.
So there's something that some friends of mine are working on called the long-term stock exchange,
which is to duly list current companies on this long-term stock exchange, which makes decisions
for all three hats that I mentioned earlier simultaneously, because otherwise we're just
in this short term have to get the 15% now. We can't look at the impact on the planet and
depletion and these other things. So maybe that's one of the pathways.
Yeah. So I'm going to come back here. Whenever I hear an innovation like that, I come back here
and I think, which bit of this deep design of the enterprise or its environment are you there for
adapting? So if you've got the long-term stock exchange, is that going to influence how,
how is that going to influence how the company's governed? Are you putting, for example, you could
have, if it's a shareholder and company, you could have shares, you know, different voting
rights for shares that are held over decades or that you're committed to hold for many decades,
so that you give more voting to the long-term view than to the short-term view. Other companies like
Faith and Nature, a shampoo and beauty company, they recently put, literally one of their 11
directors has become nature. They've put nature on the board because they said, we kept asking,
what would nature do? Well, let's stop asking this as a sort of hypothetical question. Let's
put nature on the board. So nature is represented by an environmental lawyer who says in bringing
naturally a long-term view because nature wants to be the infinite game and thrive forever.
So what would nature vote for us to do on the board? So all sorts of changes that go on between
how the company's owned and governed, bringing in innovations like that, I think this is,
this is really where the future of enterprise design lies and what it depends upon, because if we
don't bring that longer-term and wider thinking in terms of nature's interest, the supply chain's
interest, the workers' interest, rather than it being dominated and owned by the interests of
finance, then we're just stuck in a model that's just in service to finance and not in service to
life. And to me, that's essentially what fascinates me with your work is this ultimate question of
what does it look like to design finance that's in service to life, that actually finance that could
contribute to be and be part of a regenerative system? Because the financial system we've created
is exponential and extractive and it's like the antithesis of a living system.
I fully agree. And the default trajectory is that the superorganism will eat the doughnut
unless things change. So the doughnut is your best known diagram, but you flashed one up earlier,
which I think is equally important, is the embedded economy that replaces the circular flow of goods
diagram. And in there, you had the household and the commons. And could you unpack that a little bit?
I mean, I assume the household, you're talking about the care economy. And could you expand on the
importance of that and why we need to include that in our metrics, et cetera, going forward?
Yeah. So the importance of, so economy and society in the living world, the importance for me of
dividing the economy up was because the very 20th century economic debate and the kind of the
debate between Milton Friedman and or Hayek and Keynes was very much about the relationship and
the roles of the market and the state. And if you focus in, it's fascinating, but if you focus
only on that, you get this very 20th century ideological boxing match, you know, you're a
free market, let's say for a capitalist or your state loving socialist. And in those were the
only two choices. Those are your only two choices, mate. It still goes on today. I mean, I find
extraordinary, particularly in the US, I find if you critique the market, oh, oh, oh, so you're
a communist? Like, is that it? So that's why I like to bring in new framing and not use that
language, just speaking in a different space. So the market and the state, of course, that's
what shows up in GDP. That's the market output of the economy. But the way I think of these four
sectors is they are four different ways, really useful ways, each of them, that we provision for
our needs and wants. So we can provision for our needs and wants through market based exchange,
through price based market. Adam Smith was onto something, right? The market is an amazing mechanism
with a lot of feedback loops through the price signal, sending messages to buyers and sellers
who never need to meet, who through that mechanism provide things that they want to supply and buy.
A couple of caveats, it only serves those who can pay the rest it ignores, and it only values
what's priced the rest it exploits. So big caveats, which is one of the reasons why we
obviously need the state, the state provisions, public services, public goods for all,
whether it's because it's a natural monopoly or because it's a human right. So we need that.
But this still leaves us in the kind of market state dichotomy in marketed goods.
Many other of our needs and wants are produced and provided through care, through unpaid caring work
in the household, where we all begin every day. It's the domain of the cooking, washing, cleaning,
sweeping, raising the kids, teaching them to be good members of society. None of which is included
in GDP. None of which, and yet which makes life work and it makes life worth it. And then the
Commons, which Ellen Ostrom bought from political science into economics and said, well, how people
collaborate not through markets and not through the state, but as a community, they come together
and co-create goods and services that they value collectively. And this can work very, very well.
Garrett Hardin said in the late 60s, oh, the Commons, it's a tragedy. And Ellen Ostrom
come along and says, well, you rift and sort of presume that the Commons is a tragedy. I actually
went and visited some, you know, they actually work really well, rice farmers in Nepal or fishermen
in Maine, and they actually managed to create rules that they follow together, collective
discussions, there are punishments for breaking the rules. There are all sorts of codes in place
that make the Commons work. So I think all economics should begin, you know, in a classroom
with 14 year olds, teach them these ideas and then just say, go out in the street, go out in the
street, just look around you. You'll see the market, you'll see the state, you'll see household care,
you'll see the Commons, you'll realize we're immersed in it all, all of the time. And therefore,
each one of us is a producer and a consumer. We play a role in markets. We're a citizen and a
resident or your parents may be a public servant, they may be a doctor or a teacher or a bureaucrat.
We're all immersed in households. What are you doing in a household and what's the
politics of household care? Who's doing that work? And we're all commoners, we're part of a club,
part of society. And we suddenly see a much fuller economic view of ourselves. And then you can start
talking about power, because there's a power relationship across every one of these lines,
the power between the market and the household. I know in the US, I understand that women have
like how many weeks maternity leave before they have to come back for work? You know,
it's just like weeks, whereas in Denmark, it's parental leave a year between both parents.
Very different negotiations of that market household relationship, but power between the
market and the state. Ronald Reagan famously told us to roll back the state, get out of the way.
Margaret Thatcher did the same. And I think we're seeing a lot of the consequences of this kind
of market fundamentalism, market crushing out the Commons, market society. Often people say we
live in a market society. And then are we now marketizing our relationship with the living
one? That's one of my concerns about bringing a market based economic language of natural
capital accounting or ecosystem valuation to the living world. But there's there's relationships,
power relationships across all of these lines. And last thing I'll say on this diagram, one of
the most interesting things is when you think about economic provisioning that happens across
these, so the state and the Commons, the state commons partnerships, how can the state be a
good partner to the Commons? How can the state support the household with childcare centers,
for example? How can the market and the Commons, you can have platform cooperativism, right? So
you can have a Commons platform and then people can run small market based enterprises on that
Commons. So some of the most interesting economic innovations in our economies are happening at
the intersections of these. And if you don't start by seeing them all of them, you'll miss it.
And you'll miss out that space of innovation. So yeah, this is this is a kind of base map.
If the donor is the compass, the embedded economy diagram is the base map. And it's,
it's a real tribute to Herman Daley, it says, whenever you see a diagram of economy,
you got to draw the living world around it and say, this is a closed system. And this is an
open subsystem, deal with it, create finance and create economic systems that actually
thrive within the dynamics of the living world.
Are you teaching right now, or are you full time with Donut Economics Action Lab and etc?
I do teach a little bit in one course in Oxford, but I threw Donut Economics Action Lab through
teaching in Oxford. So I actually, no, let me, let me rewind that. Two days after Herman Daley died,
I was giving a lecture on a kind of critiques of, you know, mainstream economics and new
economics. And some students rushed up to me afterwards and they just said,
why aren't all first year economic students taught these ideas? And there was this kind of
real frustration. And I just felt it was, it was because Herman Daley had just died and just this
damn, the baton has really been passed to this generation now. So I just thought,
why the heck isn't it not? So I live in Oxford, I haven't to live in Oxford, I moved here 20
years ago to work for Oxfam and here I am. So my local university, Oxford University,
and I, I teach there. And I thought, right, I'm going to put on a course that's open to all students
who come to the city of Oxford, where the Oxford University, Oxford Brooks University,
there are two universities here, to study economics in any kind. And it's free and it's on and it was
at night and it was student organized and it was fantastic. And we had 200 students do the whole
thing throughout eight weeks. Now, the reason I did it here in Oxford was to develop the materials
that I now want to turn into a course that we can share online with everybody. So part, and this
is my work at Donut Economics Action Lab. How do we, you know, the real question of Donut Economics
Action Lab is how can we put these ideas in the comments? I've now put all the ideas of Donut
Economics in the comments and we share them and we've turned them into tools for cities and tools
for communities and tools for business. We ask only as commoners, we ask that people share back
their learning and their innovation, because that's what means we collectively learn. But part of this
is the future that we plan is to provide more training, provide more courses, and provide the
materials for those courses so that other teachers can then say, great slide deck, thank you very
much. And now I'm going to go and teach that so that it spreads and scales. To me, always the
question is, how do we help these ideas spread and scale at the speed that these times demand? And
how do you do that with an openness of sharing, but also an integrity? Making sure the ideas don't
get greenwashed along the way. And so it's continually balancing that openness and integrity.
And that's why we're in Action Lab, actually. It's all about putting ideas into action and it's a lab
because the way we are aiming to do it, we're learning along the way as well how to design these
commons well so that they retain integrity, but that they can spread as fast as possible.
And I invite anybody listening to this to come and check out what we're doing at
DonutEconomics.org. You can see our platform, you can join, you can browse, you can use the tools.
Please be a good commenter if you use the tools, share back because we know that the peer-to-peer
inspiration, when a mayor says, I'm using this tool in our city, that's just massive inspiration and
has, you know, has directly traceable impacts on other mayors and councillors elsewhere who then
get the inspiration, but also somehow get the permission. It's time to move. Let's go. They're
going. Amsterdam's going, Copenhagen, Brussels, Barcelona, Grenoble. It's time to go. Epo in
Malaysia, South Hanna Bay in South Africa. We're on the move. If I had taken your class, if I had
been one of those 200 when I was 18 years old, it would have completely transformed my entire life.
Well, I think if I had taken Reality 101 with you and in many students, it would transform many,
many lives. And I think these are the foundational courses that a lot of students,
again, as I said, born into climate crisis, born into an era of awareness of global North South,
Black Lives Matter and born into a much critical, much more critical awareness of the inequities
thrown up by the systems we've created. They are looking for these tools that will help them
transform the future and at the very least steer through the future that they know crisis is coming
and we need resilience. So yes, let's spread these ideas, you know, through podcast and through
online courses to make them available as possible. I get no greater thrill than when a teacher writes
to me on Twitter and says, I'm using these ideas and I'm teaching them in my class and it's like,
go, let's go. This is big team work. And we create a big team when we share and feedback and that
lovely feeling of, I mean, I'm part of a really big team and I don't even know the names of all
my teammates, but we're doing this together. Well, you're part of the right team. That's even more
important on behalf of nature and the future. If I can help you in any way on that, obviously,
we're doing this podcast, but let's continue talking offline because I think what you're
doing is so important. You just mentioned inequalities. I know that wealth inequality is
something that you often talk about. It seems that income and wealth inequality are incompatible with
what you envision to be a successful doughnut economy. Do you think that ecologically and
biophysically responsible societies need to go hand in hand with more materially equitable
societies? Yes, definitely. I mean, here's the doughnut. Here's the overshooting and shortfall
doughnut. So all the red in the middle is the extent to which people worldwide are falling
short on essential needs and the outside is the extent to which we're overshooting planetary
boundaries. Actually, it's been updated and the 2022 data would show even more red here. We're
overshooting even more. So the scale of inequality in the world is just gobsmacking.
The richest 1% of people own half of the world's wealth. I can't actually, in my head,
hold that as the scale of inequalities that has. There's no way we can meet the needs of all people
within the means of planetary boundaries in such an inequality because we need a massive redistribution
of resources and access to resource for all these people who literally don't have food,
health, education, housing, transport. We need to see the most economic growth and the most
well-being growth in the lowest income countries. That's where I absolutely believe that economies,
if we measure them in traditional way, GDP, they will grow. Malawi people there live on
an average $1,500 per person per year, massive human shortfall. We need to see that growth.
And the only way that that's going to be possible with the planetary limits is for those who have
very large material footprints now, which are very heavily coupled with high incomes,
to come back with influential boundaries. So creating a far more equitable world globally
and also within nations is an essential part of making it even feasible to think about coming
with influential boundaries. So yes, they have to be brought together. And many people I know
when they talk about the concept of a regenerative economy would say, well, a far more equitably
distributed economy is part of that. A regenerative system cannot thrive and continue if it's deeply
unequal. And I would agree. The reason I, in my book, and in these seven principles, I pulled
them out. I said, I want to just distinguish between or highlight that as well as from degenerative
to regenerative, from divisive to distributive, because I came working at Oxfam for a decade.
I came very much from a social justice background. And it's really important that the redistributional
intention or the predistributional intention is very, very clear. And I think sometimes when
some people hear regenerative and they think, oh, that's just environmental or just ecological,
it's really important to say, hang on, we're rebalancing both the ecological imbalances and
the social imbalances, and they have to happen together. So yes, crucial. And then it goes back
to that lovely phrase from George Monbiot, public luxury, it's accessible to all and
private sufficiency. That is very much a redistributional agenda that would achieve that.
I think we evolved with material equality because we didn't have any energy surplus. And now this
energy carbon pulse has created this just series of multiple scale power laws. Let me ask you this.
Do we need to change the prices and the cultural aspirations before such a wealth transfer would
take place? Because if we keep the same GDP as our goal, prices are at the cost of extraction,
not their real value, and we do a simultaneous wealth transfer within countries and between
countries to the global south, wouldn't that in itself actually accelerate some of the exceedings
of the planetary boundaries? So I think instead of thinking in terms of prices, I was thinking in
terms of the actual, that's why I prefer to think in terms of the regulation of saying we are going
to eliminate the use of fossil fuels here, whether it's the car or transforming, insulating our homes
and moving away from fossil fuel to renewable energy, so that we just bring down that intensive
use of fossil fuels and make available the remaining carbon budget to other countries that
have massively underused theirs. So let me ask a follow-up question there.
There's a lot of built infrastructure and momentum and sunk cost in the global north.
Is it possibly more likely that a culture, a community, a region to truly live like
donut economics, minimum human needs and don't exceed planetary boundaries in the global south,
in areas that don't have all this infrastructure and sunk cost of expectations and institutions?
Would it be easier to start this in Kenya or somewhere? I'm just asking.
Yeah, so, and I think it's a really, really valid question. I think there are two things
pulling in different directions. There is not the sunk cost, there's not the sunk infrastructural
structure that's been put in place. You haven't got the intensive road-based culture that, say,
North America has been locked into. In the same way that they've jumped from, you know,
no phones to mobile phones, from no banking to e-banking, they've jumped all those institutions
in between. So yes, when there's no infrastructural in place, you can jump to a far better solution
and that must be why there's the global north and the world makes available resources to invest
in renewable energy so they jump into renewable energy solutions. So on the one hand, you've got
the lack of inherited infrastructure as a barrier. But of course, the other side of is it,
high income countries have so much wealth and resources and technology and skilled people.
So they've got the accumulation of wealth in resources that they can either convert or they
can use that skill and the institutional structures that enable that to happen. So the idea of saying,
you know, oh, this is much easier for Kenya or Malawi, they're on incredibly low incomes and
it would only be easier if we have the transfers that need to happen from the global north to the
global south due to historic responsibilities for climate and other ecological resource use
that should be happening. I mean, I think of countries in kind of three clusters
heading towards the donut, there are the low income countries that like the ones we've just
been mentioning that need to meet the needs of all people for the first time without overshooting
planetary boundaries in the way that countries before them have done. And that's never been done
before. There's the middle income nations like China and Iran and Mexico and Russia that need to
meet people's needs for the first time while already coming back within planetary boundaries.
That's never been done before either. And then there's the high income nations that are in massive,
all high income nations are overshooting planetary boundaries. If I showed you their
national donuts, they're like big red overshoot. So first of all, next time you catch or I catch
anybody here or find ourselves saying developed countries, advanced nations like, hang on,
what are you talking about? Because there's absolutely nothing advanced or developed about
overshooting planetary boundaries. So we should be reframing our language. But these nations need to
reduce and come back within planetary boundaries, not just on carbon, big one,
but also on water use, land use, material use, all of those planetary boundaries calming back
within while finally meeting people's needs for the first time, which they definitely have the
resources to do. And that is an unprecedented pathway too. So every nation is on a pathway of
transformation. None of it's been done before. Some have the advantage of wealth. Some have
the advantage of not being locked in to existing infrastructure and some I think many of the emerging
economies, they're in the middle of those big infrastructural investments. And this is the
critical time to get it right. And of course, I think one of the dangers is the fossil fuel industry
when they find themselves being closed in the global north, the real risk is that they then
go and sell their wares to the lower income countries to get them locked in. And how do we
avoid them getting that lock in instead moving to the renewable energy future that will actually
power them and enable them not to get locked into endless growth. They need to grow now,
but not get locked into institutions that drive them to endlessly.
So what is the correct term developed world that's creating global ecocide or the global north? I mean,
what is the acceptable term? Do you come up with something?
Yeah, I use just very factual language of high income, middle income and low income,
because I'm just describing their income levels. But I think we really need new language because
the more that we find ourselves saying, you know, even if people say, well, developed nations,
but you know what I mean by that, it still just keeps creating this idea that that's the aspiration
and others should get there. And I find it very powerful when I show national donut diagrams
to countries like Norway, you mentioned Norway, but people are whole Norway up in Norway, wonderful
life, high income, great quality of air, and you can swim in the harbor, what's not to like.
Norway has a massive ecological overshoot like all high income nations. And when you show them,
these images, and that high income countries are very far from living the donut Costa Rica is much
closer than any other nation. There's a real jaw drop moment, actually. And I've seen it visibly
on the face of officials of nations who who used to being considered the top of the ranking. And
actually, it really repositions. And there's a humility that kicks in that there's that uh-huh,
or maybe it's an oh dear, or gosh, look at us moment, that we need of humility and ambition of we too
need to deeply transform. And last century's economic theories were not designed to solve this.
So we really shouldn't be expecting them to deliver on this. We need new theories, new textbooks,
new courses, new ideas, new policies to get us there. I just saw a graph this morning, which is
another sort of aha that Norway is probably the most successful nation in the world on scaling
electric vehicles. But their oil use is going up. So the addition of electric vehicles replacing
internal combustion vehicles has not reduced their their oil consumption.
Is it the domestic oil consumption? Because I know they're massive oil
producer and selling oil to others, but even domestic oil consumption?
The domestic consumption. Yeah, I'll send you the chart. So here's a question, Kate.
Um, and this gets to the competition versus cooperation, uh, game theory dynamics of the
world. But if a country or a city or a region chose to let let's we're going to live in the
donut, we're going to follow this from an energy surplus, power, money, potential,
optionality on doing things in the world, they will be temporarily at least outcompeted
by those nations that continue to maximize profits because those profits can be spent
on things that either militarily or technologically will cause that that first few nations or
communities to be outcompeted, not in the long run, because in the long run, it's a tortoise and
hare sort of thing. And the tortoise we know ends up winning the race. But in the short run,
they'll be outcompeted. Isn't that an inherent like, uh, blockage to wide scale, um, adherence of
of these ideas? What do you think about that? Yeah, really important point. So let me start
at the level of the city. When cities actually start aiming to do this, I think they actually,
they might not have, you know, grow, grow, grow the city. And many city policymakers say,
that's not our goal. That's not what we judge a success for our city to get bigger,
to bring in more and more big companies to expand, have more and more housing.
People are creating cities that are great places to live where you can move quickly, where the
air is clean, where there are good schools for kids, where there's nature,
where you feel you won't be hit by a heat wave in the summer. These, these are all qualities of
living in the doughnut, where there's a strong community, there's public luxury. This brings
people in. I mean, these city connoble is an example. People are moving to connoble. It's
seen as a, actually that's a really desirable place to live. So the city scale, I think actually
it's a signal, especially for industries where people can work remotely and, and parents as
they can have their parental hat and their work hat. And I can actually be around for my kids and
I can reconnect and I want to raise kids here. It brings crowds of people in. Now when you go to
the national level. We need those bold, those bold civic leaders to go in this direction
to then act as pilots of success living this way. Yes. Yes. And I think that, and I'm not
surprised that it's cities starting. Cities are more sites of experiment and courage to, to start
moving. And I think nations are going, I'm hoping and I'm expecting nations are starting to look
at what's happening in cities and saying, actually, this is, this is the seeds of proof of concept and
can we start doing this national? But this point you just raised, I think is a really big one.
And I, when we, when we say, okay, we need to move away from growth dependency, the question becomes
how our economy is currently structurally dependent upon endless growth. And there are
at least eight ways, right? There's four financial ways companies pursue maximum returns for their
shareholders, that drives growth, commercial banks create money as interest bearing debt,
that drives growth. When, if the economy is not growing, but companies are still chasing labor
productivity, that creates unemployment. So you need growth to absorb the unemployment.
On the other side, social lock ins, right, people still after 100 years of propaganda,
thank you very much, Edward Bernays for succeeding, right? Convincing us that the way we will improve
ourselves is to buy something more. So there's that kind of consumerism.
Having a growing economy helps avoid the ultimate redistribution question. And so it avoids actually
having to tackle redistribution. But one of them really important social lock into growth, and it's
kind of geopolitical lock into growth, as you just mentioned, I look at the G20 photo that's
taken every year. And I think well, no leader wants their country to lose their place in that G20
family photo. But if one of those nations amongst them said, we're no longer going to pursue growth,
we're going to pursue a resilient national economy, well, there is, particularly in the
current atmosphere in the world, there is the geopolitical view, political military question
of geopolitical power and military power, and resilience against threats. And I think
Europe, I mean, the European countries coming together and creating a region is one very good
example of how countries, individual countries can overcome that by saying, well, we together,
we are stronger, we stand so that we don't individually all have to keep growing, we keep
no the size of us together. But I but to me, this is one of the very most challenging lock ins to
to structural dependency on growth. And I don't think the solution is an economic question. I
think it's a political international relations question. And just as much as I would love
these ideas to be taught in economics departments, I think every student studying macro economics
should absolutely be encountering a macro economics course in post growth thinking.
I think all schools of government should be introducing their students to questions of
how can we create, think about geopolitical power and power dynamics and relations and
international relations in a post growth context, because you've just pointed out one of the most
critical collective action problems we have. Why are schools of government not grappling
with this head on? I think they're too much influenced by schools of economics that again,
thanks to that one time power pulse from fossil fuels, assume that growth is the norm. And so we
do international relations in the context of assuming growth is the norm for all nations. I
think it's time to move on. I think I on one of our one on one calls, I think I told you this story,
but in the last 10 or 15 years when I'm talking to high level government people around the world,
almost all of them were either themselves or directly flanked by a PhD in economics or finance,
like everyone. And it's like they're the gatekeeper to the politician. So it makes these things
hard. And there's like a glass ceiling of what can be discussed at those levels.
Except you were highlighted last month at a beyond growth conference, which the head of the EU
Commission president started out. That must have been a proud moment for you to highlight such an
amazing thing at the European Commission. Yes. Yes. So the group of MEPs in Europe organized
the beyond growth conference in the European Parliament. And it was opened by a Sivanda
Lyon and she it was it was impressive to see her there. I say it was really important to see her
there. And to see her saying, I think she said, you know, fossil fuel based growth is in the past.
And it's got yeah, she didn't say just growth. No, she said fossil fuel based growth. Yeah.
It's still a win. Yeah. But the fact that she came to a conference and stood on a platform where
it said very large letters behind a beyond growth, that's that's very different from 10 years ago.
And it was really important that that conference happened. And many excellent post growth thinkers
across Europe, D growth, post growth, donate economics, well being economies were there and
talking about what does it mean and indeed not just Europe from around the world, really starting
to dig into what does it mean in terms of the metrics in terms of the macroeconomic policies
in terms of the labor transition in terms of business design, showing that there is a whole
other form of economic thinking emerging and ready to be taken far more seriously. So I think
it was very, very important that that happened in the European Parliament. And again, I was delighted
to be presenting the ideas of donate economics there and talking about using these metrics because
I could point to so many pretty major cities in Europe, Brussels, the city capital region of
Brussels itself, Barcelona, where am I trying to say Amsterdam, Copenhagen, Tommelila in Sweden,
and more and more, Bad Nauheim in Germany, some pretty big European cities are saying, yeah,
this we are choosing this the donut framework as our own new metric. So again, it's from the city
and regional level that it I know it brings it currency and credibility and recognition
within European Commission. And actually, there's been within the European Commission,
there's a group of civil servants within there who for the last at least three years from just
before COVID, they created a group called Donut for EU. And they within different European Commission
and European Union institutions started saying we want to bring this language. And for me, it's a win.
I don't you know, you don't need to see the diagram of the donut, you don't need to hear the word
donut whenever I hear a policymaker saying, we are aiming for well being or living well within
planetary boundaries or limits or within the means of the planet. To me, the word within
is a radical word, because you again, you're hearing it the economy within
the biosphere. So every time I hear a policymaker speak to a vision of well being within
the planet, you think, hallelujah, we are into a new paradigm with that one little word,
we're in a new space. So one of my addictions is unfortunately buying URLs that I might someday
use. And one of them I bought 10 years ago was livewithin.org. I keep renewing it. I haven't had
time. Speaking of time, how the hell do you manage all this? You were like the degrowth
energizer bunny. I mean, do you have, do you come up with all these graphical tools yourself?
Or do you have like a professional PR toolmaker? Or are these your ideas?
Are you saying did I pay somebody to make these bits of cardboard for me?
Well, no, I meant the ideas. Like I want a graphical tool.
So, okay, so when donut economics came out, the thrilling thing for me was the number of people,
as I said, who came up and said, love the ideas, and I want to do this. I'm a town counselor,
I'm a teacher, I'm a startup founder, I'm a community organizer. So that's why I set up
together with a team, donut economics action lab. We are a remote team. There are 12 of us
working across different countries. And together we are creating these tools. So
we knew right from the beginning that cities would say, what would it mean to do the donut city?
So we created a tool, came up with a kind of conceptual framework that we make as a canvas,
meaning it's something you can put on the table. You can literally, you know, put things on it,
make it very visual, very tactile, very unknown, no equations in sight. We don't need equations for
this. It's a worldview reframing activity. And we do it in person. And you can do it online. So
everything we do, because we're a remote organization, it really helps us think remotely. And we
make all of our tools available on Miro and online, so that we can run web, for example,
the government of Bhutan got in touch. And they said, you know what, the concept of gross
national happiness, which guides us, it's actually got a lot in common with the donut. We want to
see what happens when we work together with the two concepts. And we ran some webinars for 100
civil servants of Bhutan online to share these tools with them. So I'm working with a team of
12 people. And I have to say one of the best things for me going from working alone when my book came
out. And all, you know, the interest that was coming, it was almost bouncing off me because
there was nothing I personally could do with it. But now there's a team. I say, you're a mayor and
you don't want to talk about cities. Let me introduce you to my colleague, Leonora. She's
our city's lead. You want to talk about business? You want to talk to Eric Sahan. You want to talk
about communities? Meet Rob. Talk about education. Meet Carolina. We've got this wonderful team of
people who are running with each of these and bringing practitioners together in a community
and conversation of peer learning groups. So it's a thrill for me in setting up an organization and
a team with my co-founder Carlotta Sand setting up this team to say, how can we make this work
distributive? Just like this ball, right? At the beginning, it was all coming at me. And this is
just like, I can't cope with all this. But let's distribute it across our team, but also across
the community. Of course, I'm working too hard and running too much, like many, many people and
personally, you think this is at risk of running me down and the times are urgent and the crisis
is now. And because of the crises that are hitting in the world, more and more people are suddenly
waking up and looking around for those ideas that are lying around. So how do we make sure that
they're really visible, really accessible? And yes, these are very serious issues, but how can we
make them irresistible? Because the last thing you want is people to say, you know what, this is
too complex, too overwhelming. I find it depressing and overwhelming. I'm just going to switch off
from it. I want people to say, that looks energizing, inspiring. I want to be part of it.
And then to lean in. And that's why I aim to make it playful. Well, actually, I just also like having
fun. Hell, let's have fun while we're on this team, right? It's got to be the most fun place to work.
It's got to be the funnest project to do, rather than just extracting from the world. Let's repair
the world and have fun while we do it. So it's the team at Donut Economics Action App and the
community of over 10,000 people who've joined our website and our platform. And it's just, I get
energy from every time somebody comes and says, oh, yeah, I'm using this in my town. I'm teaching
this in my classroom. I've used this in my class. It's just amazingly energizing because we can see
all the challenges in the world. And yet time and time again, you see people, the opposite is
happening. And it's not publicly visible all the time, but it's rising, it's bubbling, it's rising.
And I'm just going to lean all my energy I have into helping keep that rising.
Well, congratulations. With just 12 people, you are punching way above your weight on the impact
of sharing these stories with other people. By the way, last week I was traveling and I saw signs
there is already a national doughnut day, which in the United States people actually just eat
doughnuts. So I'm very happy there will be an international doughnut day with our planetary
boundaries. One final question before I get to the closing questions. So you were at this
Beyond Growth Conference. You and I have talked about this before. I often state that degrowth
is what we should do because of global inequality and because of resource and climate limits.
But the metabolism of the system won't allow that. So we will hit a wall and then
bend, hopefully not break. So degrowth is what we should do, but post growth is what we're going
to have to do. So the way I see it is there's two tasks here. One is to describe and flesh out
and advocate for what a sustainable, desirable society might look like with the governance and
the commons and the care economy and everything you've stated. And then how do we get from here
to there, which is a related but distinctly separate question. Do you have any thoughts on
that dichotomy? So definitely spelling out the vision of where we want to get to. And I really
appreciated that you said that earlier on. I said, you know, it's easier said than done. You said,
yeah, but it's really important to say it so we have a vision of it. And that is where I've placed
my energy. And, you know, again, in this big teamwork, that's the role I focused on playing of
how can the donor acts as a vision of where we want to get to. And it's an aspirational positive
vision. And then setting out some of the fundamental diagrams and the principles that would be part of
an economy that's got there. And then there's a question of, okay, if we do keep going, if we fail
to turn and keep accelerating at the wall, will we bend or break? I would say that I think the
degrowth community, as I understand it, they would say, when you say, can we bend, not break?
I mean, they would say, degrowth is the aim to bend. That's what people in the degrowth community
mean by a just reduction of consumption and production of less necessary things to come back
within planetary boundaries in a democratic way. That that is a beautiful vision of a bend.
But I hear you're saying, well, if we don't bend in time, then we're going to hit
crises. And it's going to be through shocks and through subsystems collapsing, that we're going
to be forced into a post growth future. Just one reflection I'll have on that. And I'm not saying
having set out how to get there. I do think we need a positive vision of what we're still aiming
for. I think really key to that is looking at going back to one of the structural dependencies
on growth and how do we remove them? Doing that work now gives us the best chance
to survive an era in which growth doesn't come. And that's why I think it's really an ethical
obligation on economists to look at this, you know, the radical uncertainty of the future
and the existential challenges of what happens if the growth based thinking gets it wrong,
I think puts a huge ethical obligation on looking at alternative futures.
But if I come back and think, well, what if we find out that we're going to, you know, if we
break, we don't bend well, we will find we're actually spending much of the century continually
outside of planetary boundaries and people falling short. And the more that we stay out here,
the more that these crises are going to hit, the more the shocks are going to hit us.
And the first time I asked myself, okay, what if it turns out that
much of the 21st century is going to be lived outside of these boundaries and continue to be so,
does that change the goal? I still, it didn't make me move away fundamentally from saying that the
goal is still to come back to the donor. The goal still to be as resilient as we can is to
create systems that provision essentially for people's needs and do everything we can to combat,
you know, every inch here matters. Every inch matters the closer we come to coming back within
those boundaries. So it didn't dislodge for me the value of this way of thinking. And I would
love it to be dislodged. And I can I just add a comment here, which is the donut may have come
after, you know, kind of our common future, the Brentland Commission and that definition of
sustainability. And then we get footprints in the long comes the donut. And I'm very aware it
stands in a line of thinking. And, and whenever I teach it, I always say to students, and then what
next? This is a, it's not a fight. It's not an endpoint. It's a, it's a point a long away. Our
thinking is evolving. More people are coming saying, I want to create something more biocentric,
more nature centered. What would that look like? So I look forward also to the day that the donut
framework has been superseded, because we've moved beyond it, because there's a generation
rising who instead of seeing the donut, wow, I've been waiting my whole life to see that,
like a 50 year old might say that, yes, I've always thought like this, 20 year old, you show them
the donut and they go, yeah, yeah, I get it. Come on. And go further. They're born into that
expectation. It's quite thrilling to see that. What are they going to create? What's coming next?
Well, you've, you've done such important work on the Overton window of just thinking about
how a new economy might be. I almost think that, and we've talked about this before, that
I'm trying to work on something called advanced policy, which is those things we're going to
need to do in the future that are politically and socially too strange and forward to be
accepted today. But if there was like a donut break glass in case of emergency blueprint that
all governments, you know, city, county, national had like a rule of principles and then what to do
once we're in this situation, but based on some of the core seven things that you laid out,
I think that might be kind of interesting. I like that. Yeah, yeah. Because I think at the,
first rule is please break the glass now and use the donut now. Don't leave it.
Don't leave it sitting in the cabinet until the crisis hits, right?
Well, at its core, and you mentioned Eleanor Ostrom a couple times, at its core, I think we
face a crisis of governance because our governments were not created or the institutions for this
sort of a world and we're just stuck in our ways looking at old forms of governance and
institutional thinking. So I mean, I think education is the first central point and this is great.
So I have some closing questions, Kate, that I ask all my guests if you have a few more minutes.
So more broadly beyond your books, your teaching and the Donut Economics Action Lab,
you've thought about since the 90s when you had your aha moment and you left the dark side as it
were these issues as a career choice. Do you have any advice just to the listeners or watchers of
this program at this time of global poly crisis? If you are embedded in a worldview that sees growth
as the goal, really deeply ask yourself a question that and move to, okay, my biggest piece of advice
is to tap into what we deeply know in our own bodies, right? In our own bodies, we know that health
doesn't lie in growth. I mean, when kids are small, yeah, that's a great sign of health. And then
there comes a point where you don't want them to grow anymore. It comes to thriving and health lies
in balance in our bodies. We really get that I need enough food and not too much. I need enough
temperature and warmth and not too much. I need enough water, oxygen, stress on my body, enough
and not too much salt, whatever you want to add, that my bodily health lies in balance. And if
something inside my body tries to grow unstoppably, we call that cancer and we move in and we stop it
as soon as we can. We deeply understand that and each one of our own bodies is a complex adaptive
system. So each one of us is a miniature living ecosystem planetary experiment. If we can take
therefore what we deeply know, not just metaphorically, but really deeply from the human body to the
planetary body and say what makes sense for human health, makes sense for planetary health,
and how then do I live when I tap into that thinking? And how do I eat and travel and
invest and divest and protest and volunteer? And how do I protect the health of my body
as part of the health of the whole planet back to how does the parent look off their child
by looking off the world? It's deeply interconnected. That I think when we tap into that we give
ourselves the best metaphorical opportunity to understand the much greater living system of
which we are part. Sobriety and lagom. Yes. So how would you change that advice to a young
human 17, 18, 19 year olds who are sitting in your Oxford class? Do you change your recommendations
for a young person? Well, so these these many of these young people, as I said, they grew up
climate striking. Their teenage years were spent marching for a stable climate. They've come from
a very different place. And I would say to them have the courage of your age. And I mean your youth.
You know, I've been in places where a young person came up to me after a talk and she said,
I really wanted to ask a question, but I'm only 17. And I said, wait, you should have put up your
hand and say, I am 17. And this is my question because actually your youth is part of your
power and your saliency in this room and your presence and your long term view to which we all
owe you a long term answer. So hold on to that clarity of the demands of youth and carry it
through into the classroom and question why you're being taught models that smell deeply dated to you.
Because the biggest change that I've seen coming through, like we're saying in academic economics,
was when the students demanded it's coming from below, it's coming up and believe that systems
get transformed, you know, find out about the history of the civil rights movement and
Gandhi and the decolonization movement and the suffragettes and the women's rights movements
and always remember that it's been the rebels and the disruptors who were so deeply inconvenient at
the time and often maligned. They are now celebrated on the classroom walls as the heroes of the age.
And so those who protest and disrupt and disturb the system, you are doing key work of transforming
this. And I would say those young people get involved because we know, you know, psychologists
tell us and people feel, if the people feel an anxiety or a stress of the context, it's when
you get involved and you start actually channeling your energy into being part of it and working with
others and collaborating with others who think like you, that you feel energized and empowered
in this situation rather than depressed and overwhelmed in the same situation. The situation
around us is the same. How do we change it by changing how we engage with it?
Well, I feel energized and inspired whenever you and I talk. So I agree with you that finding
like-minded people that share your ideals and visions of the future is one of the biggest
pieces of advice I give to young people. And there's a 17-year-old in all of us, isn't there?
For sure. But I can't imagine being 17 today. I was just a complete child when I was 17 relative
to the 17-year-olds that were my students learning about ecology and complex adaptive systems.
You know, the world is caught up to this story, Kate.
Can I just say then, when COVID lockdown happened, my kids were 11, my teenagers, and
we had to homeschool them. So I was like, oh, homeschooling. I thought, well, I know what I'm
going to homeschool them first. I'm going to teach them system thinking. Because I had once
argued, I'd presented the seven ways to think like a 21st century economist with a very mainstream
professor, economics professor in the Netherlands. And he said, system thinking is far too difficult
for undergraduates to understand. So I thought, OK, let's take this on. So I taught it to my
11-year-olds. We sat down with a big white board. I drew some, here's a reinforcing feedback. Here's
a balancing feedback. And we drew some basic feedback loops about COVID. And then I just
handed over the pens and they went wild with it. And they drew from people playing the guitar in
the back garden to pressure on nurses, to pressure and accountability of the government.
And they just brought everything in. But my daughter, she was jumping up and down with
excitement. She's like, now I can express what I want to say. You know, born systems thinkers,
now we've given you the tools and language. You can, because you could see these feedback loops
in the world. So it's also an incredibly exciting time to be educated if you're equipped with some
of the ideas that are going to actually help us go forward. That's why I just, I find it exciting.
Hand over these tools to young people. Now, what are they going to see? What are they going to do?
What will they envision that we can't see? Because we're, you know, I'm 52. There are so
many possibilities that I just can't see. So I love that feeling of the generational handover
as well. Let's see what the next generation do with this. I think we, as a culture, massively
underestimate teenagers. And I really loved teaching 18 and 19 year olds, Reality 101.
But I actually think it has to start earlier, 12, 13, 14, 15 on these things. Because this is a
huge resource. That's just being taught outdated trivia relative to what the world's going to need.
So what do you care, a personal question, what do you care most about in the world, Kate?
So I am deeply inspired by Janine Benius, the bio-memory thinker. She's one of my heroes. And
it's, you hear Janine talk about life, life's capacity to create conditions conducive to life.
That fills me with awe. I'm not a religious person, but if I'm filled with awe of a miracle,
of a marvel, it is the regenerative capacities of life on this planet. And the systems that
keep reproducing conditions conducive to life. That is what I care about most as a living being
on this planet. And that's why I care about economics, the art of household management,
being in service to planetary household and creating an economy that is in service to
continuing to produce conditions conducive to life.
Other than when we first said hello, the biggest moment of joy in the last three hours for me was
I saw a red fox across the road from me on my bike ride this morning. And yeah, the planet is
an amazing thing. Even in its depleted state on the biosphere relative to a century ago,
it is still a wonderful, amazing place, the only place in the known universe to harbor life,
let alone complex life. So last couple of questions, what specific issue are you most
concerned about in the coming 10 years or so in the world?
I'm going to say, well, two things. One, we know more crises are coming. We know more ecological
impacts. We know more food price crisis will come when for harvests fail, when there are floods.
One of my big concerns is how, coming back to the point of governance, how will we govern
ourselves in those moments? How will we respond? Will we revert to ration economic man and hoard,
and will powers extract as much as they can? This is a great moment to make your 15% folks.
Will we respond like that? Or will we move towards Eleanor Ostrom's description of the
Commons where we actually recognize that if any of us are going to get through it, because we're
all going to aim to get through it, and we're going to collaborate. So to me, it's that concern of
what is the groundwork that we put in now so that as those crises hit nations, will they shut
their borders or will they collaborate? What happens over COVID vaccine? What happens during
food price crisis? How do nations respond to one another? That's the concern. And then the really
bigger, longer-term question of a deeper understanding. Well, for me, it's finance. I
really, I still haven't done it. So I want more conversations with you. How do we take finance
that was designed to endlessly accumulate? That's what financial capital has got into its
current DNA. How do you repurpose that utterly human-created design? It's a human construct.
How do we redesign that? So it's compatible with life on a planet that aims to continually
produce conditions conducive to life. That's my, so it's not my, that's not my worry. That's
my big curiosity. That's the, that's the next step of this that I want to much more deeply
understand. Because until we redesign finance, not just tweak it, not just tweak it, but really
redesign finance, we are not going to be creating systems, economic systems that actually belong
on this planet. I agree. And I have ideas to be continued on that. So if you could wave a magic
wand and there was no personal recourse to your decision, what is one thing you would do to
improve human and planetary futures? Magic wand. I would wave a wand that would help every person
on the, I mean, every person on the planet would realize, feel, recognize that we human beings
are an utterly interdependent and dependent part of the web of life. If we got that, if we really
got that and understood our dependence upon the whole earth's living systems, that to me is the
deepest change that would then follow through. I mean, of course, you're going to run into the
design or institutions and that, but if we all deeply got that, and the next generation rising
has that, to me, that's the best, the best implant that we can put into our hearts and minds
that would help us redesign systems so that we actually belong again on planet earth, that one.
You're not the first person to suggest that we need a change in consciousness with a large amount
of people in order to get to these change in aspirations and, and the doughnut. And it is
happening, I think. It's happening slowly. But I'm amazed versus two years ago how many people
are expressing these ideas, perhaps in no small part to your work. Awesome. So this was our first
public conversation. I know your work. If you were to come back in the future for round two,
is there one particular topic that you are passionate about that's relevant to our futures
that you would like to take a deep dive on? Any ideas? It's going to be finance. I'm going to
be asking questions. Deep dive into, okay, how does this even begin to look? What is the structural
design of finance? I mean, I always ask, well, I often say, isn't it weird that a squirrel gathers
nuts in the autumn and buries them? When the squirrel comes back in January, it doesn't expect to find
15% more nuts, right? So why do we expect to put money into something and expect to come back and
get you 15%? So how could we redesign finance? What are the lock-ins to the current financial
system we have? Is it possible for a new financial system to emerge alongside the existing one?
What would have to change in people's own aspirations and sobriety and largom
to put their finance in something? What would be the offer? All of that.
I have started a new thing you might not know of, but once a month we have a reality round table
with three or four former guests on a topic. Maybe to have you and Steve Keane and Josh Farley
or John Erickson to talk about this question would be really good. That'd be great. I'm in.
Thank you so much for your time and all your work and to be continued, my friend.
And thank you, Nate, for this podcast because you're bringing so many voices together in
one place that I know it's a hugely valuable resource for many, many people. So thank you
for this hosting, very generously hosting other people's ideas. I really salute you for that.
Thanks, Kate. If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
