Joining me today is Kim Stanley Robinson, a very well-known science fiction author.
I've long thought that we need to better communicate science to the general public,
but in a way that uses art and literature to be able to change the mental landscapes
of an individual human mind. Stan has been publishing science fiction novels for almost
40 years now. He's a leading figure in climate fiction writing. Stan incorporates strong influences
of ecological, cultural, and political themes and features scientists as the heroes in his work.
Many of you have heard or read his most recent novel, Ministry for the Future,
which has been highly praised for the illumination of possible near-term climate impacts
and how imagining such an issue might change our responses to what we face. How can we incorporate
fiction into our set of tools to bring more people into awareness of the pressing system dynamics that
underpin global human events? This was a very interesting conversation. I hope you enjoyed it.
Please welcome Kim Stanley Robinson.
Hello, Stan. Hey there, Nate. Great to see you.
Yes, good to see you too. So you, let's dive right into it. I've long known of your name,
because I've read some of your books long ago, but you've kind of been thrust into a broader
spotlight because of our cultural awareness of climate change and your recent very popular book
Ministry for the Future, which kind of took a view in the future of accelerating climate damage
to society. You've long been an environmentalist. How did you decide that fiction writing was the
way that you wanted to get involved and contribute to these issues?
Well, for me, the fiction writing came first. So the environmentalism came later. I was a
reader as a kid. I grew up in a suburbia in Southern California. I was a beach kid. I did love the
beach with all my heart, but I didn't think of it as anything but getting out of suburbia into
something more fun. And then I was an English major. I loved all literature, but the novel sort
of takes precedence in my reading life and in the world at large these days when it comes to
literature, maybe not compared to screenplays. Anyway, I got into science fiction because it
seemed like the best way of conveying the way my reality felt, which was Southern California
turning from orange grows into city extremely rapidly. And so science fiction struck a chord
with me and I wrote it. That's my start. And then I started going to this year in Nevada when I was
an undergraduate in college and that mountain consciousness was pretty all-encompassing. It
reoriented my lowland life to be always thinking about the mountains, my love of the mountains.
What did that mean? What were the threats involved? And I began to notice that California in general
is what you could seriously call a terraformed space. The waters distributed by unnatural means.
It's an irrigated landscape. It's now urban, but also ag. It made me pay attention. And then
by that time the environmental movement was really an active thing in the world,
pointing out the dangers that even preceded our awareness of climate change. And then climate
change was just the, how can you say it, the exponential growth of an environmental consciousness.
And it began to invade my science fiction. Anytime I set a story in the next 100 years or two or
almost anywhere, the climate and the environment were prominent players in the story. So that's how
it came about for me. And what's been your experience? Have you found your works, your books to be
effective in educating or swaying people? No, not until the ministry for the future.
I can say that my books were considered, oh, well, you know, that's Stan, he's our Boy Scout,
he's our nature guy. Science fiction community likes to be ecumenical and welcoming to
all kinds of viewpoints. And in the great world of the science fiction community,
it's a melting pot where no matter what your politics or your interests, you can be taken in
with open arms. So that was the attitude towards me. And in the larger world, I had my readers.
But and truthfully, I mean, to be more serious about it, as time passed, it became obvious that I was
a leading proponent of climate fiction, which was near future science fiction,
paying attention to the over determining reality of climate change. So in other words,
all nearest future science fiction had to turn into climate fiction to be at all realistic or
relevant. And so it wasn't just the ministry for the future itself, like from zero to 60. But
in a growing sense of where I was in the cultural conversation, and New York 2140 was a big step
in that way with its sea level rise and its climate finance, ministry still nevertheless has
joined the or how can I say it, it's it's blown up my life, but it's joined the world
conversation in a way that none of my books ever have before. So I wonder if you had written that
exact same book 20 years ago, if it would have been far, you know, equally well written, if it
would have been far less well received, just because the public awareness of climate still
wasn't the way it is now where we have events and things that people recognize are out of the normal.
I think that can be a that's almost certainly true. Yes. And we have a small thought experiment
that shows how true it is. I published 40 signs of rain in I think 2004. And I want to say that 40
signs of rain is not as good at novel as ministry for the future. It's it's confined to Washington,
DC to the National Science Foundation. It's an attempt to go local. But because the local was
Washington, DC, that was its supposed international aspect, you know, capital of the world and all
that. But National Science Foundation is not a powerful agency. It was a bit of a joke on my
part. I I struggled to convey Washington, DC, and the federal bureaucracy in a novel. And
my struggles were, I think, evident on the page. But it was also 2004. And this was just an odd
thing to be interested in then. And I must say Al Gore's in In Can Me In Truth came out almost
the same week as my novel. And it did have an impact. So that was partly Al Gore, partly movie,
partly a better demonstration of the severity of the problem than my novel. Nevertheless,
if I had if the if the book I had put out then had been ministry, it wouldn't have gotten the
same attention that it got in 2020.
Just a brief personal question. Did you win like writing awards in your high school English
classes? And were you always like going home and writing short stories and stuff? Or is this
something that evolved into a passion and skill over time?
In high school, I loved Shakespeare and poetry and detective novels. And there weren't any prizes
to be had, except for one, my English teacher, Mrs Catherine Lee, a sweetheart, a complete anglophile,
an elderly woman who seemed of a previous age to us, because I'm talking the late 60s here.
And she was probably had her, her looks and her mind formed in the 1930s. So she's probably
was quite a bit younger than I am now, but we considered her to be ancient. But she was lovely.
She paid attention. She liked it that I like literature. We were like the two literature
lovers in the entirety of Orange County, as far as we could tell. And so she was fond of me.
It's amazing how high school memories like that are imprinted on our amygdala.
My high school English teacher Rita Mack, I specifically can see the pen writing blah,
boring in red ink on some of my papers. So more broadly, with writing and fiction, etc.,
how important do you think art is, broadly speaking, versus science in our current kind
of poly crisis situation? It's a good question and a hard one. And I'm not
good at answering it because I'm kind of inside my own bubble looking out into the world from a
particular perspective. I'd say it's the sciences that are making all the stuff that keep us alive
and telling us how the world works. And this is the science dominated world or science created
world. But then the science at its straightest, where it's really being honest with itself and
with everything else, and notice I'm personifying it, is modest in this way. It says we're learning
about the world. We're creating some power over the world. We're not going to tell you what to do
with it. That's the job of everybody else. And so they give over, many scientists will just say,
look, this is society's job or this is the work for philosophy. And so there the arts and humanities
come in. What do we do with our new powers? How do we get along with each other? These are not
scientific questions. These are humanities questions. And so the arts can come in to tell the story
and to create a sense of meaning. And so that is important. It's vaguer and it's also like a
giant echo chamber that we're all inside where everybody's yammering all at once. So in other
words, it's quite incoherent. But it is important. Well, I would argue that art is more important,
but it has to be informed by the correct system science. And a lot of our, like you said,
everyone's kind of yammering in the same chamber. A core message in ministry of the future is that
civilization has to trust in science. But I wonder what version of science, because economic,
which in my opinion is not a science, is overlaid on top of climate science and gives in my opinion
quite inappropriate roadmaps of the future. In effect, there are no integrated assessment models
that show a decline in growth from today to the year 2100. What do you think of that?
Well, I'm with you on that. I think economics is a quantified ethics or a power politics disguised
as a science. So it's an instrument of power to run some numbers and say, we'll do this because of
these reasons, because it makes economic sense. I would divide it, it is a social science and it
uses scientific tools. It could be more useful than it is. If you think of it as being something like
geometry where there are theorems, but the theorems are decided based on axioms, then economics needs
to go back to the axioms. What are we doing it for? If it's for human welfare and also the welfare
of the rest of the biosphere over the long haul, then those axioms would drive the economic
calculations and we would get different rubrics than profit or shareholder value, which are
ridiculous rubrics, gross domestic product, ridiculous. And even this word you use growth,
when it's used in economics, its meanings are peculiar and various and unhelpful. We need
the poorest people on the planet to live at adequacy, so that's some kind of growth. We don't
need the richest people on the planet to get richer, which I have consistently since the 1980s,
but especially during the pandemic, where something like 70% of the quantitative easing value
created in the pandemic to keep the economy going was captured by the top 2% of wealthy people.
Well, not only that, I often ask what is the carbon footprint of quantitative easing,
something that people don't ask that question. True. Well, this is an economics question that
gets delinked from physical systems questions like you ask, and so economics is ridiculous in
that sense also. It's not rating biosphere impacts, those were used to be negative externalities,
they weren't even included at all. Now they're attempting to include them, but things like the
discount rate or the various wiggles that currently enacted, which is to say legal and powerful
economic systems, they are still very poorly aligned to people and planet. So it is something
that I talk about, and the fact the discussion of it in Ministry for the Future is one of the
reasons that the book has struck people's imagination, that economics could be changed,
that it could be aimed better, that it could be recalibrated, and that it could be
something like the carbon coin, which I would say is a kind of a symbol for power and money being
redirected to the public good and to biosphere health. Well, people were encouraged by that,
they were interested, they were thinking, oh, you know, it's possible to change.
That was one of my few criticisms or not criticisms, but points of interest in ministry
that you wrote about a pro-social, pro-environmental behavior that sequesters carbon would be rewarded
with a carbon coin. But I wondered, in such a society, if you do things and you're rewarded
with a carbon coin, then don't you in turn just go and spend it on other things that create or
contain indirect carbon? Yes, I think that's valid, and it is a problem. I guess I've been
thinking about this since you've communicated with me before this and pondering it, and I guess
I would say the book is a little cautious in that it tries to propose methods we could use
right now that are not completely shocking, that they're legal. You could imagine them getting
passed by central banks and legislatures, and so it's Keynesian. Keynesianism is not radical,
nor is it particularly biosphere friendly. It is a standard economic system where the government
actually stimulates the economy in times of distress, like a depression, and that stimulus is
indeed what you're talking about. More carbon ultimately will be burned. If carbon burning
is fundamental to the system working, then by keeping it healthy, you're burning more carbon.
Yes, but the carbon coin, if it's an adjusted right, then you bring down a ton of CO2 from the
atmosphere. Hopefully the creation of the, what can I say, the needs and the wants, the necessities
and the toys will be more clean energy created than they were before, so the decarbonization effort
would extend to decarbonizing our energy systems, our transport systems. All of those would receive
carbon coins, and slowly but surely, even though you might have a quite active and productive
society and civilization and economic system, it at least would be decarbonized.
It wouldn't solve the other problems, and because there's no single solution here, and indeed my
novel talks a lot about biosphere corridors, wildlife corridors. What now is being called the
30 by 30 plans, they weren't even quite being discussed when I wrote the book in 2019, and yet
now they're the law of the land because of this Montreal Treaty and because of the Ocean Treaty.
Well, this is astonishing rapid progress on that front, and that's different than,
that's different than economics, that's land use. It has an economic aspect to it, but again,
it's part of, it's not exactly decarbonization, except it does draw down carbon if you leave
wild land alone, but it's more having to do with biosphere health and having the wild animals
not go extinct, so it is a big project. Let me extend that a little bit.
I would argue that decarbonization, the way it's being promoted now is going to lead to a
rematerialization, especially in the global south, and negative impacts on global ecologies in the
countries where there's going to be massive copper and lithium and cobalt mining, etc.
So I wonder if you extend the metaphor of the carbon coin in your book to be an ecology coin,
things that are not only optimized for climate, but that are optimized for biosphere health,
writ large, much wider boundary. I wonder if that would, I mean, part of the problem here
is we're trying to optimize so many variables at once, but what do you think about that to
extend it to a broader ecology coin? Well, I've certainly heard about this since my book came out
in ways that are super interesting. There were people who are studying the fact that you can
tell what's alive in a, in a biome, in a watershed by taking a water sample out of its streams and
testing for DNA, and those tests have gotten so good and fine-tuned that you can tell everything
that is alive in that watershed, and then you get a credit for it. Wait, you can just do a DNA test
and it shows the species that live in that watershed? Yes. I didn't know that. Well, it's the ETH,
the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, is doing some work on this, and I can put you in
contact with the people who are both studying that, and also could that be turned into a form
of credit for the people living in that watershed? So this would be what you were describing, a kind
of biosphere coin, that you would get renumerated or you would get, instead of destroying your
watershed, extracting things and selling it for profit in the old economy, you would begin to be
able to make your living by taking care of your watershed and keeping a whole lot of creatures
alive in it, which you can prove they're alive by this water test of the DNA. Well, it's new and
interesting. I'm totally in favor, long term, of something like that, and all these discussions,
I think there's two questions. Where do we want to go, and what's sustainable, and how do we get
there from here? And those are two different questions, but if we could have people making a
living by doing things that are healthy for the ecology, isn't that a much better use of a Keynesian
stimulus than just supporting people to buy flat screen TVs and take junket trips or whatever it
is, just the consumption as usual? That's the cultural shift that I think could happen, would
be a fantasy to happen, but I'm hopeful for in coming decades. Seems to me that what you're
talking about is also that it's not economic, but it's more experiential or philosophical,
or even a religious sensibility. In other words, what's life for? And many of us, and the way that
you live your life, to a certain extent the way I live my life, although I'm a very conventional
suburban guy still, but it's more interesting to do things than it is to watch things being done.
This, of course, is a stab to the heart of our current cultural imaginary of
social media and watching things on screens, a whole generational problem of your smart
form, your laptop screen, your big wall TV, watching things. And then other people do them,
and you watch them. This is so sapping of human spirit. It's so passive and observational.
It's like a half-life. It's like a Philip K. Dick half-life. And many people
live it because they haven't figured out that even just taking a walk down the lane to the
local store would be more interesting than what they were doing, or throwing pebbles at a bottle
on top of a fence top would be more interesting than these incredibly complicated computer games
being played on a flat screen. The third dimension, bodily life in the real world,
this is all more interesting than our artificial created advertising culture. So when people will
get that, how people will get that, whether that becomes a general sensibility, I don't know.
To me, it's as obvious as walking outdoors to other people, obviously not so much. So I don't
know exactly how to make that turn. One thing I'll say is that my books are always about people
doing stuff outdoors in the world. And maybe that's why my Washington DC novel was such a
trial for me and for its readers. There were too many meetings and offices.
Didn't you write one of your recent books fully while you were outside? I think I heard that
somewhere. Oh, that's true for my last books since I finished that DC trilogy. I'm starting
with Galileo's Dream, or even the last book of my DC trilogy. But for sure, Galileo's Dream
in every book since, so that's about seven or eight books now I've written entirely outdoors.
Now I'm in California, and in the winter I bundle up, in the summer I put a mister on. It can be
cold, it can be hot. I have a tarp overhead, so the rain just falls around me when there is rain.
And I work outdoors no matter what, very stubbornly, because it turned my writing into a little outdoor
adventure. And it saved my brain. I was a burned out case at that point, and now I'm very energized.
That's awesome. So you are a very busy person, Stan. This podcast has been scheduled for four
months. After we hang up later, are you going to go outside and write? Are you writing a novel now?
I'm not writing a novel now, and I'm antsy and feeling unhappy about it.
But the Ministry for the Future has kind of eaten my life, and I'm currently like the cardboard cut
out of the minister. I do a lot of events like this. And it's okay. I'm going to write a non-fiction
book about Antarctica. So I'm quite excited about that. Have you been there? I have. I've been twice.
So the first time was in 1995, and then I went again in 2016. I loved it. It was a big adventure.
A little strand of memoir will be in this book, just like in my Sierra book, where it was a big
strand. But in my Sierra book, I've been going to the Sierras for 50 years, and I've only gone
twice. So that strand will be small. But there'll be history, geology, and a little bit more about
this future plan of slowing the glaciers down so that we save sea level.
So in ministry, you incorporate chapters from mostly unspecified, non-human, non-living perspectives.
Why did you decide to incorporate these different perspectives, and what was your thought process
while writing them and trying to get into the mindset of these creatures or entities?
Well, thank you for that. I really enjoyed doing ministry as a kind of a miscellany, an anthology
of different styles, and genres, and modes, and character types. So this is actor network theory
out of Brunelatur, that our lives include very important contributions by creatures that aren't
human. The animals in your life, the microbiota inside your gut, these are actors in your
mentation and your life. And to write about that is a thing that literature ought to be doing
that it hasn't done enough of, because it's somewhat of a new perception. So I was thoroughly enjoying
that, and Anglo-Saxon literature can fit into one thick volume, all that we have left of it,
and about a third of that volume is riddles. So I enjoyed having riddles of, oh, well,
I am the thing that is always in control, but I never do anything. And so these riddle modes
were fun for me. I also very much enjoyed the eyewitness account, which I began to understand
as a new genre of its own that is not like fiction proper. The eyewitness account, you're usually
being interviewed, it's like 10 years later, you don't dramatize the scene, you go really fast,
and you judge what happened, what it meant to you and your life, what it meant to the world.
So the eyewitness account is interesting, and there are bundles of them. There are books of all
the things that women saw on their way on the Oregon Trail, or all of the things that happened
in Germany in April of 1945, or the French Revolution, etc., etc. It's a mode of history,
and when I realized I could do that for my future in ministry, it freed me up. And so it's not just
a photon or a carbon atom, or the sun that I have speaking in the first person, it's also individual
humans that you never learn their name, they never come back again, but they tell you something
interesting that they saw and did, and that for me was the key that turned the lock. I was happy.
So Stan, I recently did a podcast with climate modeling expert, Erica Thompson,
where we discussed the idea that models in general can go way beyond computer
programings, including the form of novels. So do you feel like the books that you write are a sort
of mental model of the potential futures that you see that allow a human, even if they don't
know the science or haven't taken a science course, it helps them construct a mental model?
Yes, absolutely. I often compare it to modeling exercises, but then what you would want is to
take the whole spread of science fiction stories and say each one is one run through from the
initial conditions to a different outcome, like in any modeling exercise scenarios, it's good to
compare them to scenario building. And the thing I would say that the novel brings to it, that the
others don't have, and there are things the others have that novels don't. But what novels bring,
some people call thick texture. And I think it's also just a time involvement and a giving of,
a generous giving of time on the part of the reader who has to imagine those sentences on the page
into some kind of internal lived experience. That takes effort, that takes hours. And when you're
done, you feel like you've kind of lived it. If the novel has worked well, you feel like you've
been there, done that, it's a time travel, it's telepathy, it's quite a magical thing, but it's
all in the reader's head. And so it's a modeling exercise with some heft to it, because you've
been there for a while and you've kind of lived it. So you've often spoken about narratives,
especially speculative fiction as a powerful tool to envision
positive change in the world. However, and despite its transformative intentions,
a lot of clarify climate fiction so far has been dystopian. And there has been science showing
that dystopia tends to reinforce the resignation to negative events, climate catastrophe, etc.
What are your thoughts on that? I think that's right. And I think it's a really serious problem.
I have become anti dystopian as a utopian science fiction writer. I've always had to acknowledge
that these are two sides of a coin. Utopia dystopia, things could get better, things could get worse.
It's dialectical, they both have their value in imagining. They're like the modeling exercises
we just talked about, and you'd need negative models to convince you don't go that way. So
dystopia has always had its use. Susan famously 1984 is a classic case of people saying they didn't
want to go to the land of big brother and false information, which maybe we've ended up at anyway.
But back to dystopias, there are now a kind of a comfort food. People read them or watch them on
TV in order to feel like superior, like, well, things may be bad for me, but at least they're
not that bad. And so you come away from them comforted. Is that why the the evening news at
6pm, they always lead with all these bad things happening in the world and my mom is obsessed
with watching the six o'clock news and it's all terrible? Because people, it makes them feel better
about their current situation? Yes, I worry about that. But also, if it bleeds, it leads. When it's
TV news, you need something that you can look at. So it can't be facts, it can't be a report,
it has to be visual and you have to have been able to capture it at that moment. So it's always
the aftermath of a crime, red lights, police tape, and a reporter outside going, oh, how horrible,
look how horrible this is. And it's simply a desire for visible drama, something that they
can get on tape within the within the day of what had happened or else it isn't new. So they're
struck by a structural problem of the you can't get visible evidence of the important things
that happened that day. So they're stuck with trivia. So the nexus of art and science on
environmental catastrophe and risk to the future is a really fine line, isn't it? Because we have to
create mental models in people's minds about the science of what is possible, but not so dystopian
that they just check out there's got to be avenues for personal and cultural response.
I think it's it's like what you say. And I think it's I call it a tightrope walk.
You have to convince people to walk the tightrope with you of not falling off on either side.
If you pay if you point out the danger that we're in, which is severe and existential,
you know, breaking planetary boundaries, causing a runaway, hot house, earth.
This is a mass extinction event. This is bad as it could get. So on the other hand,
powers of people of society of science in theory, if we got to act together,
a kind of a golden age of certainly the we have the tools and capacities to solve these problems
and get into a good space. And so that's the other side of the of the tightrope falling
off is say, oh, well, that's going to be okay. What gets called cruel optimism, where you just
shrug and say, look, the experts will take care of this. I'm living my life. I don't need to worry
about this. And indeed, you don't need to worry either way. If the world is going to hell in a
handbasket, then there's nothing you can do about it. If the world is headed towards utopia,
then you don't need to do anything about it. So the tightrope walk is very, it's very narrow.
It really is a tightrope that you have to stay a balanced on it and say the situation is dangerous.
There are things we can do and must do. And that's the line you have to hold to.
In your book, Ministry for the Future, one of the beginning premises was that millions of people
in the subcontinent of India died because of higher wet bulb combination of temperature and
humidity. How much of that wet bulb India framing was science fiction? And how much of it is what
you, Kim Stanley Robinson, actually believe about the future? Well, I'm terrified that it could happen.
That is one of the main reasons I wrote Ministry for the Future was reading about the wet bulb 35
limit of human endurance, which I read about in about 2017. And it wasn't that it was a new fact,
it was that the scientific and medical communities had kind of combined. People in the climate
community had been saying temperatures could get this high and people in the medical community
were pointing out that would kill a person if you weren't in air conditioning, because we're not good
at, we need to sweat off excess heat as bodily creatures. And that works in dry heat. In wet
heat, it works far less well. And at wet bulb 35, which is, as you said, an index of heat and
humidity in combination, then you die within several hours, whether or not you are in the
shade or not, whether you have a fan on you or not, because sweating stops working at wet bulb
35 in a way that you overheat internally. And hyperthermia will kill you just as fast as hypothermia.
This was news to me. And when I read it, I thought the idea that humans could adapt to anything
is a false one that, and this was a thought that was out there in the culture that, oh, humans
are so adaptable. We'll just adapt to higher temperatures. Why are people so worried? This
is sort of the view of what was called for a while the eco modernists, that essentially we're
adaptable, we can solve any problems, quit worrying so much about the carbon burn and a global average
temperature rise of four degrees Celsius. Big deal. Well, that turned out to be wrong. That's
flatly wrong. And they don't say that anymore. And that's partly because of ministry for the future.
I just put it out there that the news, the real news is that will kill us. And and vast swaths
of the world, including the American Southeast and the Midwest, like I know where you live,
the one of the hottest wet bulb temperatures ever recorded was right outside Chicago
in the early 1990s. And it was one of those flukes that happened. But it goes to show that
anywhere because it was so humid. Yeah, it was humid heat. It was like a wet bulb 32 or even wet
bulb 34 for a couple hours. And well, a functioning electricity system will allow you to get shelter
in air conditioning, you can save your life. But when the grid goes down and you don't have air
conditioning, then you'd be doomed. And that's sort of why I put it in India. That's a place
that's going to be very susceptible to these temperatures. It's got a weaker power grid
that fails often. And that was that combination was what I wanted to
indicate could be deadly soon. And so this isn't a real fear that I think a lot of people have,
if they're paying attention, it's we are having heat waves, people are dying in them.
I was in a wet bulb 31 in India last April, and I was interested because of having written my book,
maybe interest is too weak of a word. I was highly apprehensive and it turned out it was no worse
than a than a day in in Washington DC. You know, Washington DC during a hot summer's day steamy
heat, it will it will cook you up quickly. And this day was no worse than that because it wasn't
wet bulb 35. But we could get to that soon. So you know, this is a case of starting with dystopia,
of starting a novel with something happening so horrible that it gets the world's attention.
What I'm hoping is that since we know it can happen, we'll act before we have the disaster.
Yeah, I have a lot of thoughts on that. But that would be like a whole other podcast because I think
there's a systems challenge that we have and climate is but one of the risks that we face.
And it's downstream of our culture optimizing for profits tethered to energy tethered to carbon.
And so I personally don't think we are going to we will see foresee unless something radical happens.
But I think to see is pretty baked in the cake and that's going to be bad enough. But we're going
to have many other dystopian aspects to our future than just climate. So let me ask you
a hard question maybe. What I'm really interested to see how you will respond
is science fiction, not just your writing, but science fiction writ large, inherently techno
optimistic, colonizing space and these things to me seem energy and ecology blind from a
biophysical perspective. So I suppose books about an Earth Trek future where humans are using 80%
less material throughput and it's a tougher material existence, but perhaps greater spiritual
pursuits. That sort of book wouldn't actually be in the sci fi genre, it would be in something else.
But do you have any thoughts on that? No, that would be a science fiction story and it's a good
one. I'm going to make a simple cut and say science fiction is any story you set in the future.
So UN demographers, stock forecasters, everybody that pitches their story into the future and says
this is going to happen, they don't know that. The future is unknowable. So they're doing a
science fiction story often it's disguised as nonfiction or as futureology or business prediction.
It's often a scam because anybody who claims to know what the future is bringing is making a
false claim. So you have to be suspicious of it. And one thing science fiction does, it says, look,
this is a fiction. I'm making this up, but it's interesting anyway. And so if you put a story
out like yours, this is a good sign. It's a form of utopian science fiction. Things could be better
for these reasons. And that's the kind of science fiction I write all the time. I would agree with
you the dream of space I've written about this often. And I talk about the solar system as our
planetary neighborhood and actually amenable to human visitation in person, which would be more
or less interesting, depending not that interesting, like going to Antarctica, useful, interesting,
but not transformative. The dream of going to the stars is a fantasy, a false dream that's
impossible. I wrote about this in Aurora. It made myself very unpopular with the people who write
space fiction. Because I said, look, it's a great story space, like Middle Earth is a great story
space, but it's not real. We're not going there. It's too far away. Humans co-evolved with Earth.
We are stuck with Earth. That is not a bad thing. That is just part of being part of a planet.
Planetary consciousness is very important. And you no more should complain about that than you would
complain that you don't live on the inside of the sun or you're not an angel or you're not an ant
or something. You're a human on planet Earth and you're a planetary creature. There's an
interesting side case to be made that Mars, if we were to be in a good balance with Earth biosphere
and a stable civilization, Mars could become an interesting scientific station, blah, blah. That's
a separate and side issue, a kind of a random case. You can't see the same thing about Venus,
for instance, or the surface of Jupiter. But Mars, you could land on it. You could live on it.
You could set up a little space station there. A few people could live on it.
A few people. Like Antarctica today, the best analogy for Mars is Antarctica,
which we're there and nobody cares. And to me, it's Stephen, a very smart and famous people.
Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, among them kind of say, we're screwing up Earth. Climate's
going to be bad. We need to colonize outer space and head to Mars. And that makes just zero sense
to me because on the worst thermonuclear runaway climate scenario, Earth is still going to be
a paradise next to Mars. I agree with you completely. That is a case that has to be made. And the
thing about people like Hawking's, the thing about people like Elon Musk is they're smart.
They aren't that smart. They aren't wise. They aren't philosophers. And they are not ecologists.
Very often physicists will assume that ecology is just physics in action and that they've got it
all sussed out because they know the rules of physics and they can do rocketry. But you can't
do plant biology just knowing rocketry. It's more complex. It's more interconnected. It's a
more complex science. And many physicists will arrogantly say that because I know the laws of
physics, I know everything, but they don't know how Mars works. They haven't studied biology enough
to understand their own ignorance. So how smart are you if you don't know how ignorant you are?
Homo sapiens, we have not yet lived up to our moniker. I think we've been more clever man
than wise man. Let's hope. Homo Faber, humans, the makers. That's to me the best name. We do
make things and it's a real skill. So do you think in your writing you've often advocated for
a rewilding of Earth? I assume you're aware of E. L. Wilson's notion of half Earth as one of the
key solutions to the future. Is this possible? Are there any signs that we could eventually do
this in coming decades? Yes, I think there is. I love E. L. Wilson and his biofilia. He's a very
important public intellectual and philosopher, recently deceased, but I honor his memory and he
will be remembered like Ben Franklin or William James as an important American thinker. And half
Earth was crucial when it came out, but I thought it was quite utopian. And now we already have 30
by 30. All the nations on Earth have agreed to keep 30% of their lands wild by the year 2030.
China forced that deal through, which is super interesting. And now we have the same thing
for the oceans just completed after 10 years of negotiation. These are super hopeful signs
that are under reported in the news because people don't get it because they are indeed
living inside their social media and their laptops. So if you spent time outdoors, you
would realize that if 30% of the Earth's surface was left to the wild creatures and they became
healthy by that. And I'm told by the woman who runs the 30 by 30 program in California, which is
a formal state program, that we're at 24%. And that everybody in that pursuit talks about 30 by 30,
then 50 by 50, which would be the half Earth project by the year 2050. And yes, humans can indeed
do their agriculture and compress into the cities, which young people want to anyway, you wouldn't
have to force the issue. Organize our management of the landscapes in ways that don't mean pure
wilderness like humans never get to go here. That would be unusual in the extreme. But land use that
opens up the land to the wild animals and they get to live their lives unencumbered by us.
And then we live on the other 50% in ways that are intelligently managed in biosphere sense. So
we're helping also even on the land that we're on. Well, this is the plan. It's maybe the most
important part of the plan going forward, although you want to have a way to pay for it, etc.
But I hope that can happen. Even if it were to happen, though, it really isn't 30 or 50,
because the 30 or 50 assumes that everything else in the biosphere is constant. And we know that the
climate and other biogeochemical feedbacks are going to accelerate. So that 30% of ecosystems,
what it supports today, 20, 30 years from now, climate will have an impact on it, obviously.
Yeah, it's true. And I think you're just pointing out realities here that everybody ought to know.
For that reason, there are some wildlife ecologists and conservation biologists talking
about making sure these corridors established for the wild creatures have room for them,
the migrate northward in the northern hemisphere, to get away from the heat. And you mentioned the
inevitability, almost, of us creating a two degree Celsius rise in average temperature.
That's looking very, very likely, as you know, that's why you said it. So I'm saying that means
we're going to have to suck down a lot of CO2 out of the atmosphere. That's going to be a project.
Regenerative agriculture, reforestation, and even mechanical vacuum cleaners sucking it out of the
air, everything is going to have to be applied to get us back down to, I don't know, 350 parts per
million. It makes sense. I mean, there's a reason Bill McKibben chose it as the name of his organization.
We could do it if we don't have a runaway that blows out our abilities to do it.
Well, we could do it. Stan, I don't think you've watched much of my material because you're so
busy and we just recently met. But one of my recent framings is I call it Mordor or the Great
Simplification. The Great Simplification is when we can no longer kick the can financially,
and the amount of financial claims we've created crashed down in a snapping rubber band to our
biophysical reality, which means a smaller economy and smaller emissions going forward.
On the other hand, if we are able to do more carbon finance trickery and quantitative easing
number nine or whatever, we'll continue to grow the gross amount of energy that the world uses,
which results in GDP. But the net amount of energy that goes to hospitals and science fiction books
and Disneyland and shopping centers, that is going to be more and more directed towards the
energy and mining sector itself. They're going to need to use more to get the lower quality
resources and the mechanical vacuum cleaners and things like that, that take care of our
environmental waste. So a much larger percentage of GDP will go to energy and environmental
remediation. So in that scenario, the rest of the economy gets priced out a little bit.
If we're going to get down to 350, if that were to be a cultural objective, which I
am skeptical on, we would have to give up a lot of other things in order to make that the primary
focus. Yes?
Maybe. I take your point. It makes sense. I am interested in the people who are talking about
things like regenerative agriculture, that we could both grow our food and capture more carbon
in the soil that we grow our food in. So we have more biosphere health,
as much food, and more CO2 sucked out of the atmosphere all at once. I'm always looking to
these multiple goods where we need food, but we also need less CO2 in the atmosphere if we can
do both at once, which is a technique. And agriculture is a science and a technique that
people spend a whole lot of time studying. Right now, in the fields of America, especially
corn and soy, the carbon in the soil by weight is down to about 1%. And it could be that with some
changes to agricultural methods, we could begin to draw down. And it tops out pretty quickly.
You can't get more than 3% or 4% of carbon by weight in the soil before you have kind of
topped out that soil. It's not an infinite bank, but it's so much soil.
So just hypothetically, if we went from 1% carbon by weight in the soil to 3% globally,
just hypothetically, what would that do to drawing down the carbon roughly? Do you have
any idea? Well, it's incredible. And yet it's apparently true that that is enough carbon to
that's as much carbon as we've burned out into the atmosphere since the industrial revolution
began. Really? So yes, it's an enormous sink. Now, I mean, I'm told this by people who are
studying it, I am still a science fiction writer, I'm a reporter, but I'm telling you,
there are people who say this. Well, I'm actually a lot more sanguine about regenerative agriculture
than the mechanized vacuum cleaners. So if you have any world expert on regenerative agriculture,
you could introduce me to and I can take a deep dive on that publicly on a podcast. I would welcome
that. What are your thoughts on... I can do that. I've just run into those people. I am going to
write that down. Okay, awesome. Thank you. What are your thoughts on geoengineering? Will we eventually
be faced with the obvious, oh my God, look at what's happening with climate and we'll have
to try it? Are you morally against it? Are you hopeful of some of the science there or what do
you think? I think it might be a break glass in case of emergency type operation. I am not morally
against it. We've already geoengineered this earth to within an inch of its life. That's
called climate change and biosphere collapse. Civilization has been geoengineering all along.
Right to the beginning of burning down Australia when humans first arrived there, etc. So it's an
old practice. Now, if we needed to do it because people were dying all over the tropics because of
wet bulb 35 temperatures happening all the time, then this thing people talk about of casting dust
into the atmosphere and imitating a penitubo type volcanic eruption, dropping worldwide
temperatures for a degree or two for five years after which the dust falls back to the ground.
I think the real issues there are governance issues. How do we decide to do it? How do we get
public buy-in and it doesn't look like some weird Dr. Strange-Levian type experiment with the earth
itself? We've already been experimenting with the earth itself in ridiculously bad ways and a lot
of times in ignorance of what we were doing. So this would be being done on purpose in full
knowledge of what we were doing. I think we should study it. I think we should discuss the governance
of it. There are also more, what can I say, less alarming versions of geoengineering. For instance,
if you slow down the glaciers in Antarctica, you can call that geoengineering, but there are no
negative side effects that I know of. Then there are people talking about the whales that when we
killed off 95% of the whales on this planet, we wrecked the ocean's bio pump, which is also a
nice carbon drawdown mechanism, and that replacing the whales. Since you can't just replace whales,
you can replace whale poop, which is a chemical formulation, a kind of living bio excrement
of whales dropped into the ocean would create the same biospheric conditions that existed
before we wrecked it. So this would also be geoengineering in a peculiar way and is being
discussed. So the topic is huge and I don't want to go into all of the rabbit holes involved there,
but I certainly think that it's something that people should be able to talk about it
without a sense of shock and awe or, oh my God, there are some things man was not meant to know
type mentality. I mean, we're far past that. We are in an emergency situation and certain
emergency gestures may become necessary that we don't get a runaway into a hot house earth, which
could happen. Do you ever get the sense or just this like deja vu weird sense looking at the news
and looking around the world that we are living a science fiction novel reality that none of you
writers could have imagined 20 or 30 years ago. Every day, there's just crazy stuff happening
left right and center. And it's almost like the Twilight Zone. This is like a real Twilight
Zone meets reality TV our lives. Well, yes, I've been saying this for about 25 years. We are in a
science fiction novel that we are all co authoring together. And what I mean is the future is crashing
us that that there's the great acceleration has accelerated yet again, and everything's happening
faster than we can come to grips with. And that's what a science fiction novel is trying to capture
is that feeling. So for sure. But what you would want, although Twilight Zone was a great show,
you would want something more like I don't know Ursula K. Le Guin's The Dispissed, which which
actually is very troubled and filled with revolutions and conflict. So it's not like you're
going to dodge revolutions and conflict here because we're in the midst of it. It's a very
melodramatic science fiction novel that we're caught in the middle of and we just have to try
to write it towards utopia. I actually posted on Twitter a month ago that I my entire life is
filled with nonfiction and I needed some fiction recommendations and I had 1000 replies. And Ursula
K. Le Guin's Dispissed was like among the most popular ones. So I just bought it. I have it
outside. I've not read it. That's good. So are all those books behind you? Are those all science
fiction books? No, that's a non this is a nonfiction shelf. I keep John Muir. This is accidental,
but I have a full shelf of John Muir and then a full shelf of California nonfiction and the top
shelf is Antarctica. I see a really long shelf of Antarctica. That might be the 90% of Antarctica
in literature right there. So just out of curiosity, how many hours a week do you spend reading?
Oh, well, a lot. I read nonfiction by day and I I treat it instrumentally. I almost strip
mind my nonfiction to get what I need for my fiction. So I read nonfiction all day and but
I'm writing also, I reckon it must add up to a couple three hours of reading per day of nonfiction.
And then every night when I go to bed, I read fiction for about a half hour or an hour.
Depends on how long I can stay awake. But I'm always reading a novel and when I finish one,
I start another one. And I love it. I love reading fiction. Reading nonfiction, I don't love,
but it's important. It's part of my work. It's good literary hygiene that you've described two
hours of nonfiction half hour of fiction before bed. Yeah, yeah. And I let and I must say,
read a novel when you go to bed and you'll be absorbed you'll fall asleep in a different world.
You'll live that life. It will be the best part of your day or let's put it this way,
you'll look forward to it every day. Oh, good. Now I get to dive into like right now I'm reading
the ragged, trousered philanthropists, a British working class novel from about 1904,
very funky, very serious, very sad, very intense working class life when you were in
the precarity, precarity really means it when you're going to die if you lose your job
and your family too. And then I'm also reading Freddie the Pig and the baseball team from Mars,
a children's book that I read when I was a child. Obviously, it had a big impact on me since I still
play softball and I still write about Mars. And then sort of lighten the load. I usually just read
one novel at a time to tell you the truth. I think that's the best way you join that world.
But in this case, I'm kind of lightening the load of the ragged trouser philanthropists.
Well, lightening the load is is part of the, you know, the recipe to remain sane in these times,
because you and I in the stories we're trying to share with society, this stuff can get toxic
reading and learning. Like you said, a few years ago, you learned about wet bulb 35. I just learned
about that two years ago. And you just add these things. And the human physiology and our genome
didn't evolve to handle this much toxic information about our world. So we need antidotes. I have
dogs and I live in a forest, but I also like fiction reading as well.
Well, I think that what I read about you before we got on this podcast, that this that you figured
it out, that you're living on the land, you're paying attention to a particular piece of land,
and you've got other animals, companion species, that you're taking care of and helping and they're
helping and teaching you things to you as an animal, that this is what everybody, if everybody
had it figured out to that extent. And even you can you can you can live a life in an apartment
in Manhattan that includes these things if you've got it figured out in the first place. So it's
really a matter of understanding what we are and then adapting living your life to accommodate what
we really are, which is animals and social primates and all the things that we obviously are.
The more you embrace that and live it rather than sitting on your butt looking at screens all day
every day, that will drive you mad. And so we live in a culture that's slightly mad.
I agree. Thank you for that. I'm not sure I have it all figured out and I do still need to read
the equivalent of Freddie the pig at night. So key question here, climate and to a lesser extent
biodiversity and PFAS and endocrine disruptors and all these other things are becoming more aware
and teenage humans are coming into learning about the world and learning all this stuff.
And I've taught a college course for eight of the last 10 years. In my experience, there's a lot
of scary material at the, you know, I don't know how many tens of thousands of climate courses there
are in high school and college, but worldwide. And there's scary material. This is what's
happening in the climate. These are the scenarios. This is what's going to happen in the 21st century.
But there's kind of too narrow a solution set just at the end of the semester as well. We
switch to renewables, you drive an EV or we end capitalism. But do you think that we're approaching
a time when there could be more systemic story and recommendations to young people that involves
behavior change from within like being happy with social natural human capital rather than
financial status? You know, what are your thoughts on this? Are we are we approaching young people
with the right message on on all these systemic crises?
I don't know. It's a good question. It speaks to what Raymond Williams called a structure of feeling
that a civilization has a structure of feeling that is cultural. It's not biological. And it
and it changes over time at different historical moments. I think actually of the the list that
you made ending capitalism, if young people are being talked to about that, that would be crucial.
I don't think they are. They live in capitalist realism where they're going to be told
typically nothing can ever change. This is the system you have to plug into it. The system is
unchangeable. And that's not true. The system is changeable and has to change because biosphere
reality is forcing change. So may they might be aware that change is coming fast and it isn't
planned and it's going to be incomprehensible. I see a lot of climate dread, a lot of anxiety
the young people, a sense that well, we're doomed but ready. And no matter what we do,
we're just on a downhill slide into chaos and disorder, which is not an inaccurate assessment
of the way things feel for sure. And you can't change the feeling just by pushing a button or
saying some magic words. You actually have to change the political economy that you're in
to one that's more life positive. So ending capitalism would be one big,
I mean, geez, when you say it, it's just so radical. I would say now reforming capitalism
extremely rapidly to getting to something that is more like cooperatives. It is post capitalism
in its first step. That would be a big step and we aren't really there but we're trembling on the
brink. I think also there was a world order working in the neoliberal times, say the 1990s,
that isn't working anymore because it doesn't take into account the biosphere or what we really
are as creatures. And yet there's now 8 billion of us. So the old system isn't working. The new
system hasn't yet been invented. This is often talked about the in between the interagnum between
one system and the other. It feels frightening because you can't, despite me being a science
fiction writer, what I can say from that is you can't see the future. You can't predict the future.
There's too many factors and it's changing too fast. So I mean there's reason for everybody to
feel anxiety and climate dread but what you can do and say to the young people is solutions are
out there. Let's make the solutions happen. Let's work together on the solutions. You'll be one
little brick and a giant wall but the wall is possible. We can build that wall and you put
your brick into place and you'll be part of that historical wave, that movement that changed
this generation is tasked with a really heavy task to dodge a mass extinction event
that previous generations started mostly by accident. Well, tough assignment and people
will be freaking out the entire time and even fighting against you the entire time. So it couldn't
be weirder, harder and all you can do is try to call out for solidarity, put your shoulder to the
wheel and fight the good fight anyway. So do you ever speak to younger audiences in addition
to your activist message that you just described? What sort of advice do you give to teenage humans
who are old enough to intellectually understand this stuff but not yet sucked into the consumptive
vortex of modern society? Do you have personal advice to young teenage or early 20 humans?
Yes, I talk to all the schools in Davis on a regular basis because I have teacher friends who
asked me to come by and in Davis it's easy and then I talk to college students all over the world
in literally the case and they're young enough that they're forming their ideologies, they're
figuring out their ways in life, they're thinking about what they're going to do with their lives
and they're very active and open-minded. That's the crowd to talk to I think and it's a privilege
to talk to them, I try to learn from them and listen to them as much as I can and what I just say
to them is no matter what you're interested in and you can follow your interests, follow your
nose, I'm interested in art, I'm interested in engineering, I'm interested in plant biology and
why bugs eat plants and why plants are protected from bugs, whatever you're interested in,
it's a climate change project now. You can be anything, a sculptor or an accountant,
someone measuring things and engineering for sure, well it's going to be climate change work,
there will be work for you that's good work and here's how I try to encourage them.
When I was in younger middle age there was a joke, the one who dies with the most toys wins,
it was a bumper sticker and it was making fun of and expressing the meaningless cynicism of
middle-class American society circa 1990, it was an 80s thing, a 90s thing, people were worried,
the capitalist wheel of birth and death, you work all your life then you die, nothing matters,
I mean what's the point here, so this is what the bumper sticker was making a joke about,
whoever dies with the most toys wins, obviously stupid, absurd, a lack of meaning and this was
the problem. Well now I can say to young people, your life has meaning, we are in a crisis,
everything you do can actually fight for the people of the future, it's a cause and so life
has meaning, it may be a rather scary and desperate meaning but it's better than no meaning at all,
which was the previous problem that's completely gone away, so sometimes I try to cheer them up,
you know you're lucky to have climate change because otherwise you'd be in an existential
despair because capitalist reality is totally stupid and you've got to get past that.
Yeah two comments there, first I remember seeing that bumper sticker, I didn't know it was a joke,
I thought people actually believed that, I didn't know and secondly yeah, I've heard this from a
lot of my students and colleagues, we have a lack of meaning in our culture right now,
you know kind of the theology of past religions and then the theology of economic growth
are waning and what is it all for, what is our purpose and what other purpose can there be
in my opinion than the viability of the ecosystems on our planet for the long term,
to me it all comes back to that and climate's a piece of that but it's not the only piece.
It's not the only piece, yeah, so you're living in Wisconsin and it's a Wisconsin guy,
Aldo Leopold, what's good is what's good for the land, well this is a very powerful statement,
very powerful, it's a philosophy, it's a religion and when he said the land I think he means all
the living things that make up the land of course, it's easily understood and it's incredibly
powerful as an ethos but also as a decider, you can say well what's good, I mean you've got your
opinion, I've got my opinion, you can't determine it but what's good is what's good for the land
because that's what'll be passed on to the other animals and to the generations to come so
the Leopoldian land ethic as it's called in ethics and philosophy classes and ecology classes,
this is a very, very high statement of how you can, in a single phrase, you can make up a new
religion that makes sense. I love that, you know in my job now I'm non-ideological because I'm
trying to unite many different groups of humans towards a common, you know, path that's going to
face all of us so I'm apolitical but if I do have an ideology it's what you just said,
it's that I deeply care about the ecosystems and other species and irrespective of everything else
that I write and speak about, at the end of the day that is something that I have no shame to tell
at the rooftops to any political group or age group or that's what really matters
during our times right now. I'll just throw that back at you unintendedly, what do you care most
about in the world? I mean you're a very accomplished author and activist but like at the end of the
day what I think I could probably guess but I'll ask you anyways because I ask all my guests what
do you care most about in the world Stan? Well I'm just like everybody else, the answers are
immediate and instinctive, I care about my family, my friends, my community, I care about animals in
a way that I didn't when I was younger. I just recently went to India for the first time and what
I noted immediately was they live their lives with animals still as part of daily town life
in a way that's incredibly beautiful and inspiring but maybe I'll turn it back and I just want to say
that um an ideology is the imaginary relationship to the real situation and therefore everybody has
one and has to have one. If you don't have one that would be a mental disability quite severe
so we all have that imaginative relationship to the real conditions of existence which is what an
ideology is so you have one too and that translates to a politics which you have one too. It can be
ecumenical, it can be directed to a particular kind of point that tries to transcend stupid
partisan divides in the current mediated American landscape or older visions of left
and right etc etc etc. Sure those are deserved to be transcended in some kind of biophilia,
some kind of land ethic, we'll do this for the good of our land in the local area, all the
creatures on it including the humans and that will be you know that's a little vague, it's more like
a religion than a politics but it can go to a politics. Yeah there we go, we are looking at
biophilia by Edward O. Wilson, Edward Wilson, beautiful concept. Yeah I have almost all his books
and I agree with what you said earlier. Um what uh well actually I wonder if I have uh
uh well he oh yeah here I have this book um The Superorganism by Yeo Wilson uh I wrote an
academic paper about the superorganism um which I'll send to you so um in all of your travels
and your lectures to young people and and your work what things have you noticed or experienced
in the last couple years since ministry came out that really give you hope and motivation
about coming decades despite all the craziness in the Twilight Zone-esque uh sci-fi world we're living
in? Well it's a little um technical but it's true I've been encouraged by the 30 by 30 movements and
the COP 15 the biosphere um treaty in Montreal that the Chinese hosted with the Canadians
last year astonishing the ocean treaty just signed astonishing these are big victories
and even though they're just promises that nation states make to each other in other words they can
be broken by other people later on those promises matter because it's a putting forth of uh statements
of intent and that these things are important I learned that there's a network for greening
the financial system that is uh owned and operated by and and joined by about 90 of the biggest
central banks on earth including the super big ones out of the G7 and the G20 although central
banks are trying to green the financial system such that there is- That sounds like an oxymoron to me.
Well but but that that's uh that would be bad if it was an oxymoron you want to correct that um the
money needs to be spent which is to say human labor needs to be expended and you have to be
able to make your living doing good biosphere work rather than bad biosphere. Oh so this gets
back to the ecology coin we talked about earlier something like that. Yeah yeah and and uh you
can look it up the network for greening the financial system has a website it has a white
paper with nine suggestions they they're pretty technical like two of them I don't even understand
but what they're really saying is that money itself is a political act the and the fact that
everybody believes in money and you can go down and stick a piece of plastic into a slot and then
someone will give you a cup of coffee so that's that kind of belief is very deep and cooperative
belief in money if money itself was greened at the roots and is being made up at its very start
by central banks and this is fiat money in other words the US dollar being spent on green projects
first and then circulating in the general economy of that itself might drive a lot of
restoration actions and might allow us to dodge the mass extinction of it. I will I will look into
that I think I at least partially agree with that but with a big old asterisk stand which is
as long as we have GDP as our global cultural goal we will burn more energy and consume more
stuff and if we get more efficient we're just going to burn more so if we have a an overlay in
there of green of where the money goes into something green first I have to think about
how that would work. No and no I take your point and both of the things you said are right GDP is
wrong it is a rubric an index and a way of measuring human civilization that is flatly wrong
and destructive and so growth of which is usually a shorthand for growth of GDP that's a growth of
destruction and is like a cancer so human development index gross national happiness this is a
Bhutanese thing other indexes that rate the human economic efforts by a different set of standards
these are crucial that's a crucial part of the work. So if you could wave a magic wand and there
was no personal recourse to your actions what is one thing that you would do to improve human
and planetary futures and as a science fiction author I imagine you have dozens of such ideas.
I don't know I I mean it all it sounds so instrumentalist or technical and maybe I
should put it at the level of the structure of feeling like you've been talking about a different
attitude towards life. I mean some of it is absolutely simplistic if people would spend
more time outdoors it would reorient their sense of reality in fundamental ways that changes the
view of everything. We spend too much time indoors we live in boxes looking at boxes this is silly
stuff and it's distorting our sense of what's real and what's important so I mean that's a
little simple you could also go technical like I have been in most of this talk if fiat money was
created with a good green spending of it first off the bat then many other things would be better
30 by 30 if I could if I could instantly say that 50 percent of the earth and the ocean were left
to the other animals and that we concentrated our activities on 50 percent of the earth and 50
percent of the oceans if I could wave that magic wand and here's the thing people are already waving
it the 30 by 30 thing is profound when I first read the Yale Wilson book half earth I thought
beautiful idea will never happen and here 20 years later it's happening well I'm stunned and
now here it's worth following for a second why is that happening I think everybody
at the level of decision making and policy and also all well-meaning citizens who understand
that their lives depend on science and what they're scared for their lives they run to a scientist
which is to say their doctor they looked at the evidence they've taken it in they've realized
we're in a biosphere emergency and that civilization will crash if the biosphere crashes and we've only
got 10 or 15 years to cope with it but it's better than having only one week to cope with it
which we couldn't do and it's better than having 500 years to cope with it because we wouldn't pay
attention so we're in an emergency and people are acting like it but it's an actionable
emergency space in other words we've got this 10 or 15 years and I think the good things are
happening because there are so many people who actually know this now and they are doing something
about it. So last just personal question how many hours a day you live in California so
that's different than Wisconsin but how many hours a day do you actually spend outside
and how is that different from 10 or 15 years ago? Well because I moved my writing life outdoors
and my recreational life which is you know an hour of throwing frisbee golf at a running pace
with my friend and going for a walk with my wife I'm calculating here as I talk
and you can well you can't see it in this morning light my poor skin is taking a hit from all this
outdoorsness I should use sunscreen it's probably I'm outdoors about eight hours a day. Awesome
and is that an increase from 15 20 years ago? Yeah but that's a simple structural change I
started writing outdoors rather than indoors and so that's five hours a day. Yeah awesome
Stan this has been great thank you so much for your mental neuronal connections that end up creating
new mental imagery and connections in other humans it's an art and a skill and a gift
and I hope I hope you have a great next novel in mind and we'll have another conversation.
Well thank you Nate it's been a pleasure and I might not have another novel for a long time
but it's okay I am I'm doing other things I've had an awfully long writing career and so if I get
a few years off to kind of reorganize my poor brain that's probably a good thing too so
I'll be having fun yeah thanks Stan
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification please subscribe
to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com for more information
on future releases
