Greetings. Welcome to episode 100. What? 100 episodes. This time flew by. This has been the most challenging and the most rewarding thing I have ever done hosting this podcast, challenging because we're covering a lot of issues, not just one. And invariably these issues infringe on people's understanding or belief or ideology.
And it's difficult to host a multi-topic podcast. Rewarding because I feel less alone, I feel motivated by the hundreds of thousands of humans around the world that are wanting to learn more about this story.
And that ultimately is the work, is we're trying to help more people normalize conversations about how everything fits together in a system science sense. It is threatening, it is daunting, it is scary, some of the information that we're presenting.
But I'm not selling fear. I'm trying to sell understanding. Actually, I'm not trying to sell anything at all. All of our content is free. We've turned all monetization off on social media.
We, of course, would accept and do need donations, tax deductible to the Institute for the Study of Energy in our Future. But it is my belief that anyone in the world that has internet could access this for free.
There's a lot planned going forward. I do want to have more podcasts dealing with responses as opposed to just the problems. As things get more threatening, I'm hoping that I don't fly too close to the sun and get burned.
But I'm all in on passing the baton to more humans working on this. I have asked for Episode 100, a friend of mine who works in a related space, to interview me. Without further ado, here is Episode 100 of the Great Simplification.
Today's guest is Nate Hagins.
Nate is the director of the Institute for the Study of Energy in our Future, an organization that works with many others to assemble roadmaps and off-ramps for how human societies can adapt to lower throughput lifestyles.
Nate holds a master's degree in finance from the University of Chicago and a PhD in natural resources from the University of Vermont.
He also happens to be the host of this podcast, The Great Simplification, except not today, because we are turning the tables and I am interviewing him. So please welcome Nate Hagins.
Hi, Nate. Great to see you.
Hey, Kate. Thank you so much for being here.
Well, it's a big pleasure and this is the 100th episode of the podcast and I'm very honored that you asked me to turn the tables and interview you.
And I just want to say that I think you very generously create this space and interview many people and give them space to put out their view, their knowledge, their experience of the world. So it's my pleasure to do that in reverse for you.
Yeah, it's not anything I really ever planned on doing and fortunately I have a lot of friends like you that have a lot of knowledge and wisdom to share. So here we are 100 episodes in and thank you for being the hostess.
My pleasure. So how are we going to go? I'm going to kick off in a way that you often start.
I'm going to ask you to give me lots of one minute messages, just like the top line of the way you think. And then we can dive in deep to things, okay? You ready?
I want to share one thing.
Mm-hmm.
Yesterday, my girlfriend's daughter brought me this little screaming goat.
And I'm thinking if there's really difficult questions, because I'm kind of nervous right now on the tables being turned, I might just differ and do the screaming goat.
Because, you know, when I prepare for these podcasts, I've gotten used to it where I do, Lizzie, my curator prepares me for the scientist or whoever it is and gives me an arc of a conversation and I kind of prepare and then I just sit back and I ask you questions, right?
But now you're asking me questions, so I'm a little nervous.
Well, thank you for saying that and thank you for putting yourself in this situation and experiencing from what it's like from the other side. And I think it's going to go well.
So...
Let's do it.
Let's do it. So let's jump in. I'm going to ask you just some big concepts that you use regularly in your work. Just give us a one minute summary of that message, okay?
Tell me about energy blindness.
Energy blindness is the fact that our society misunderstands energy in its role in our current living and our expectations.
There are four aspects. One is that energy underpins everything in nature and everything in human systems. We need energy for everything.
Number two, that we don't realize the scale of how much energy we use effectively four to five hundred billion human workers equivalent of fossil energy.
The third is that this stuff is depleting very rapidly and culturally we're treating it as if it were interest, but it's actually a principal, a bank account that is being drawn down millions of times faster
than it was built up. And the fourth aspect of energy blindness is that when we burn all this energy to give us the modern conveniences and transport and consumption, there is a pollution and a waste that comes with that.
And I think our cultural stories don't include any of that. And yet so much of our future and our expectations and institutions and culture depend on energy. So we're energy blind.
And I've sometimes heard you say that energy is the currency of life, yes?
Yes, in nature, those organisms and ecosystems that have surplus energy have had advantages. So there's lots of things important in life, but if you don't have energy, you can't move or eat or do anything.
So energy is the currency of life and it always will be.
I fully agree on that. And so then if energy is the currency of life, tell us about the carbon pulse.
Well, the carbon pulse is began when humans started to discover first coal, then oil, then natural gas and farm under the earth instead of on top of the earth.
And if you look at a 300,000 year aerial view of our species, this little sliver of time where we're drawing down this ancient carbon and propelling our civilization using it can look like a pulse, like an EKG pulse that starts from nothing,
goes to a high amount and then goes back to nothing. And we're all living in the middle of that, probably near the peak of that. And that is another thing that's not included in our cultural conversations is, you know, on a 500 year time
scale, we're a couple hundred years into the carbon pulse and what will the downslope of the carbon pulse look like. So I think this is an ecological deep time framing of the human cultural situation that is so prevalent in our lives, but we
don't talk about it.
Okay. And that's exactly what we're going to talk about today. So if we are somewhere near the peak of this carbon pulse, what's the story with the economic super organism? What is that?
So there are super organisms in nature like termite mound or an ant colony where all of the individual organisms collaborate and towards a larger unspoken goal. So the human super organism is not an actual biological entity,
but what it ends up being de facto an economic super organism that humans in this culture self organize as families as small businesses as corporations all the way up to nation states and the whole world to maximize profits.
That is our marching orders by our culture. And those profits are tethered to energy. There's a 99% correlation between GDP, our economic output and energy consumption and 100% correlation to material consumption.
And that energy is over 80% still tethered to fossil carbon. So what we're doing is rushing forward trying to optimize profits and GDP. And we've built all of our institutions and expectations around that without any other plan.
And what's happened is the momentum of that system, the momentum of that way of doing things is stronger than the individual wisdom and restraint that people within it try to imbue on the organism itself.
In other words, we're in a runaway train shoveling more fuel into it and there is no conductor. There's not a politician or a billionaire that can say, wait a minute, this is the wrong objective. We need to change it.
So the super organism is this metabolic system that is out of control and all it wants is more the lowest cost energy and other material things to power growth.
Okay, we're going to come back to this runaway train with no conductor later. What do you mean when you talk about the Mordor economy?
You know, J.R. Tolkien was so prescient in so many things. There's so many one liners from the Lord of the Rings and the Hobbit that are so apropos to our current civilization.
So our economy is based on energy, materials and productivity from technology and a lot of our productivity has come from just adding more fossil energy every single year because it's so potent.
So some of our productivity has come from just more energy. And so the Mordor economy is instead of tightening our belts, instead of having ecological civilization, the default is that we will continue to have rule changes
and go and borrow more money and invent technology that might give us some energy, but it takes a lot of energy and materials to create.
And so what will happen is we will grow our gross, our GDP, which is our gross energy, but the amount of energy and materials and environmental impact that that will have will take up an increasing amount of the whole.
So in 1999, we hit a seven century low of how much energy it took to generate GDP for the rest of society. It was around 5%. Now we're over 10%. We're using 10 or more percent of our energy just to get the energy and refine it and deliver it to the rest of society.
As we go higher to 15% or 20%, we gradually become more and more of a mining economy, aka Mordor economy. And as you're well aware, the pollution impacts not only climate but biodiversity and sperm count drop and insect loss and deforestation and all of that will increasingly take a toll on the human system.
And we're going to have to use more energy and materials to remediate what's happening there. So in short, a Mordor economy is currently the default path. And depending on your boundary of analysis, many people could rightly argue the Mordor economy is already here.
But what it basically means is that we optimize growth over ecology and our entire system becomes one of mining and consumption.
And just to go into the stats you just gave there. So you're saying some years ago it was at a low like in a positive way that we were using around 5% of the energy used was to get access to energy and now that's gone up to 10% and you spoke as if that's inevitably going to rise.
I'm sure some people are thinking, but isn't that possible to bring it back down again with new technologies with nuclear fusion or other kinds of breakthroughs in energy technologies that this we could bring it back down there and even lower? What's your view on that?
Yes, well that would be the argument that some are using on artificial intelligence that it will rapidly find new ways of using our resources more efficiently or develop new technologies like nuclear fusion.
And if those are done cheap enough, then you're right, maybe we do go back to a period where 7% of our GDP is energy creation and delivery and refining.
But first of all, that's on the come. That's not the direction we're heading. Second of all, if that were to happen, we would still probably have a growing economy and this gets into the issue of Jebens paradox.
As the economy is growing, more efficiency and better technology doesn't result in lower energy use. It results in higher energy use globally and so the ecology side of the Mordor economy equation would be even more dramatic if that were to happen.
But yeah, there are a lot of things out there that are being developed, but it's the net energy of them that I worry about. And this is one of the, what I've referred to in the past is the tragedy of the energy investing commons is suddenly, especially with Ukraine and Russia and now war in the Middle East.
People are recognizing, holy crap, energy is really important. Let's do this or that technology to get more energy. But the actual energy and materials spent to procure that energy for society ends up being a lot larger than what has been 50 years ago when this whole civilization was kind of built forward on really cheap oil, gas and coal.
Okay. And since you just started mentioning some geopolitics in the world, can you just briefly explain what's meant when you and others in conversation on this podcast have talked about the metacrisis?
I'm suppressing the impulse to ask you what you think.
No, no, no, no, Nate, we've turned the table.
No, I know that. I'm just telling you, I'm suppressing the impulse.
Great. Thank you.
You keep going.
Yeah. Well, the metacrisis, I mean, there's a lot of terms out there, the polycrisis, the metacrisis, I used to say the human predicament. It's when all these things are intertwining and coalescing and in an interconnected way, creating a really large capital letter problem.
There's the environmental crisis, there's the poverty, inequality, global south issues, there's debt, there are biological existential risks from bio weapons and CRISPR and AI and things like that.
Just the ecological planetary boundaries issues alone is a metacrisis unto itself.
And I mean, I'm sure we may talk about this, but one of the things I've learned from doing this podcast is there's so many bright people working on a part of the metacrisis,
but they don't see the other parts because it's too big and they're like experts on their parts.
But any one of these seven crises is huge on its own.
And so that's kind of what I've tried to do is connect how they fit together, but it's a big challenge as you're well aware.
Okay, so I've got two more of these concepts that you often use.
Oh, okay, we're still on the speed round, okay.
Yeah, we're still on the speed round, mate.
Okay, four horsemen, who are these horsemen?
You sometimes talk about the four horsemen I think of the 2020s, so explain.
Yeah, I'm increasingly talking about that because it feels incredibly relevant, more relevant than other topics.
So the four horsemen are briefly financial overshoot, which is when we've had economic problems in the past.
Instead of tightening our belt, we actually do the opposite and we widen the spigot of credit creation and central bank guarantees and stimulus checks.
And so the whole world is between 350 and 400% debt to GDP.
And all of these financial claims on reality will require energy and materials to be manifested.
So we keep creating more and more monetary what people think they own claims on a ecological and energetic reality that is going to shrink in the future.
And so this disconnect I refer to as a bend or break moment is coming soon.
So that's the first horseman is the financial recalibration.
The second is the move from a unipolar, the United States effectively world to a multipolar world, China, Russia, Europe, the various BRICS plus nations.
How the resource pie, how the monetary representations of who has access to what and 13,000 plus nuclear warheads.
How we navigate that 21st century, early 21st century game of risk in a peaceful, cohesive, non disruptive way is one of the horsemen.
The third is the complexity of our six continent just in time supply chain of medical pharmaceutical inputs and spark plugs made in South Korea only that get delivered to the United States.
Food is delivered 1500 miles to the average dinner plate in the United States.
We have an incredibly efficient but non resilient system for delivering basic goods and services to people around the world that is predicated on cheap oil, global peace and credit.
And then the fourth is the fourth horseman is the social contract and the trust and collaboration and interaction with citizens where you live.
And I don't know enough about British politics, but in the United States next year we have an election and I think no matter who wins a third of the country is going to be ballistic and upset and distrusting.
And with AI and polarization and just the general stress of society, how do we keep the social contracts?
So I personally think that any, and this is why I think this is important Cape, any social change towards the better in the long run.
Like we need to put price on carbon because we're burning more than the biosphere can take and we're burning it millions of times faster than it was sequestered and we should save some for our grandchildren as one example.
Any major wealth distribution, any social programs that make the future better off any issue that people are concerned with that radically changes our economic system will then first have to navigate these four horsemen.
And that is kind of the focus of my work is no matter where we're going we have to navigate these four horsemen first.
And so that ultimately my work surrounds how do we prepare and respond for those sorts of economic social speed bumps.
Got it.
Right.
So we're going to come back to them.
I have one more thing for you on this speed round.
Okay.
And it is, of course, the mothership concept, the great simplification.
What is it, Nate?
You know, I struggled with thinking about the name of this podcast.
That one had a triple entendre.
One was that for many people listening to this show in the global north, a simplification of their lives could actually be great.
We don't need all this energy and pecuniary trappings to live a good meaningful life.
So simplifying is a good thing.
Another is I have so many complex topics in the news and I try to simplify them in a way that people can understand.
But the main choice of word is an academic interpolation of Joseph Tater's work that he wrote a book called The Collapse of Complex Civilization.
And what humans do is we solve problems.
And as the system gets bigger, we solve more problems.
When we solve problems, we need more energy to throw at the technology or the supply chains or whatever it is we're solving.
And so what we've done on the upslope is we have incredibly complexified our lives.
And all this has happened every single year other than 2020, 2009 financial crisis, a few years in the 1970s energy crisis, World War and a Great Depression.
Any of those, all the last 150 years we've had more energy added to the human system than the year before.
And we just naturally assume that this will continue.
So the great simplification is when we are unable to continue to add energy to solve our problems, the inverse will happen.
A simplification where we have to do more with less technology becomes really important, efficiency becomes important, and we're going to have to live more locally.
And the word great is because I think it will be one of the greatest events ever faced in modern history, this simplification.
What does it mean in the vernacular?
I think one of the next three recessions will be a depression economically.
And the reason for that is had we simplified 50 years ago, then it wouldn't have been so bad.
But now we've got all these financial claims that we've created.
So the first step off will be a doozy.
A what?
A doozy.
I don't know if that's a British term.
Really?
You don't know what that means?
Doozy.
D-O-O-Z-Y means a big one.
A big one.
A big one.
Okay, it'll be a big one.
Okay.
Okay.
Great.
Okay.
Well, that is a big one.
I mean, these concepts you...
We're probably going to have to edit that out.
These concepts are big.
So we're just going to take a break and I just want you to appreciate my studio here.
Have you seen what I've done here?
Yeah.
That is...
Do you like that?
I only see you usually from the narrow window.
And now I see that you've got a great simplification podcast studio, London Style.
Thank you so much.
I've always been impressed by your creation of visual aids.
Did you do that just for this show?
Of course I did that just for this show.
Oh, my gosh.
I borrowed it from my neighbors and some little paper lanterns from somebody else.
And yeah, just, you know, had to inhabit the studio.
So it's great.
I like it.
Well, for the record, you so could do this.
I know you're very, very busy with Donut and Deal and everything, but you would be excellent at this.
Well, you're very kind.
Actually, a podcast is high in my sights.
I really think this method of exploration of ideas, of conversation is where so many people learn
and have time, whether you're doing the washing up or the ironing or taking kids to school
or, right, certainly for many adults, I know this is the only place I get to listen
and get ideas rather than reading.
But I think conversation between people is a fantastic way of all of us opening our minds,
which is, I think, why this podcast has become so popular and the way you host it.
So, so you've given us the big concepts, right, of a great simplification.
Now, let's just step back.
How did you get into all this then?
You didn't start out doing this work.
Take us back to what you were doing before you were doing this.
I want to hear the start of that journey and what triggering events have led you to be sitting here.
How far back?
You're going to have to choose that.
Take us to the place where we'll be like, you were doing what?
When I was three years old, I was sitting on my mom's lap in the front seat of the car
scanning the horizon for animals, and I would always want to go for a ride in the car
because I wanted to see what animals we could see either on the road or on the horizon.
And my mom said that by the time I was six, she had taken me to more zoos
than probably any other six-year-old in the United States.
So that's the foundation of it, is I had a deep love for animals in the natural world when I was a child.
And can I just jump in and say that's just a beautiful connection between deep love for nature, dependence on energy, right?
Fossil energy to connect with zoos.
It's this wonderful, complex story that you've inhabited right from the beginning.
Yeah, I didn't think about the energy part.
You're absolutely right.
I lived in Southern Oregon when I was in grade school,
and every day after school, I would rush home and get my dog,
and we would just go for hours in the foothills and look for salamanders and climb trees.
Well, he wouldn't, but that was my formative thinking where you let your mind wander
and you're just in nature.
I mean, to have a childhood like that and the formative impression that that has on your mind and your soul
is really a privilege because I don't think that many people have that freedom and access today.
But I think that was my rosebud to use a citizen cane term,
which is those free hours every day in the foothills of the Siski Mountains in Southern Oregon.
Then I got hijacked by status-seeking and trying to make more money to get a better car
and a better apartment and the American cultural dream in the 80s.
I went and got my masters at the University of Chicago, and I went to work on Wall Street
and I managed money for billionaires effectively.
I had to cold call people, but I wasn't allowed to call anyone if they were worth less than $100 million.
I'm serious. This was 1993.
Those were my clients, and over time, I realized that these people were no happier
than the clerks processing their trades, making $25,000 a year.
One of them started to trade, invest, speculate in oil.
I started to learn a lot about oil, and I realized, oh my God, it's going to peak and decline in my lifetime.
Oh my God, it's incredibly powerful.
I never heard the word energy mention my entire master's program in finance.
What? We don't pay for any of the pollution and the externalities.
Those aren't included in the prices.
I became so obsessed with learning about ecology and energy that eventually I wasn't doing my job real well
because I was obsessed on learning all this other stuff that I quit.
I gave my clients their money back.
I had a backpack full of books and a golden retriever, and I went to British Columbia in Alaska
and hiked and thought and read for six months.
Then I came back and Herman Daly introduced me to Josh Farley, who you know.
Josh and John Erickson were my PhD advisors along with Robert Costanza at University of Vermont.
That broadened out my awareness.
It's not just energy. It's not just oil.
It's human behavior.
It's aggregate anthropological momentum of the human superorganism.
I became really intellectually curious about how all this stuff fit together.
I became a contributor on the oil drum and eventually co-ran the oil drum,
which was an interesting model because we had over 30 PhDs
that were volunteering their time for the greater social good to share information.
It was a neat little cafe sandbox of intellectual collaboration for a while.
Then I got really freaked out about the debt versus energy thing in like 10 years ago.
I approached Homeland Security looking at how we would buttress our supply chains
if there was a Minsky moment where we realized we weren't able to service our debt.
So more Minsky than the housing market?
Yeah. Minsky with a capital M.
Do you want to just explain because some people might not know what Minsky moment means?
A Minsky moment is where you can no longer solve a credit crisis by adding more credit.
It's the moment where everyone recognizes what's happening and there's an exodus
and you can't solve the thing by adding more credit because there's no trust there.
Right now, the markets are approaching new highs and people are still dancing
because the credit spigot is still on, but they're dancing closer to the doors in talking with them.
But anyways, getting back to your question, which I'm giving way too long winded of an answer,
I then started realizing that the people in middle age between 25 and 60 have no bandwidth
because their status and identity were attached to the jobs and the positions they were in.
In this story, the great simplification, which wasn't fully formed back then,
was too abstract and threatening to their current work.
And so I did a barbell approach where I started to teach reality 101 to young people
and I talked to retired politicians above 70 years old who had time to learn about these things.
And then two years ago, just about now, I started this podcast and I've learned a ton
and I'll echo what you just said a few minutes ago that I have a pretty strong opinion
about how the world works and where we're headed, but I also know that no one can know everything
and there's so many things that I learned from all of my conversations.
And so I'm just trying to connect this tapestry of how things fit together,
but not only facts, also the humanity of people and how everyone on this program that I've hosted
really cares about the future and not a lot of us have answers on what to do,
but I think there's this emergence of this intellectual, heart-led understanding
and hope for a better future that there's something building there that I think is potentially important.
Right. And then on that journey from, say, working with those multi-millionaires to now,
just to keep you could name one big cognitive shift that you've made,
one big emotional change that you've made in your life and practical changes about where and how you live.
A big cognitive change. The cognitive change is the superorganism is incredibly powerful
and 15 years ago, I wouldn't have imagined that on the dawn of 2024,
we would still have this amount of debt and this amount of energy.
The cognitive change is that this superorganism has got gold-plated scales and is very difficult to stop.
So I've cognitively come to respect that, though at the same time, the more it grows and expands,
the worse the biosphere and other species are generally.
Emotionally, well, I've grieved for the future that our society tells us is coming long ago.
So my expectations are lower than the average person.
So emotionally, I've come to terms with that.
But emotionally, there's a bifurcation, Kate.
On the one hand, the stuff that I carry is increasingly feels like a lodestone
because I'm trying to stay on top of neuroscience and oil depletion and debt and biodiversity loss
and endocrine disruptors and each one of those categories is kind of fricking depressing.
And when you aggregate them all, humans didn't evolve to carry that amount of stress about the future
with them every day.
And the antidote to that, as you might know, because we were just together last month, two months ago,
is being with people like you and other colleagues that are working on this is like a balm
because I don't feel so alone and I don't feel the burden as much
because other people are living through thinking the same things.
So emotionally, that's kind of the battle.
And before you go on for one, actually, I just want to jump in there and say I recognize that as well,
the value of connecting with others and just to recognize that through the work I do with Donut Economics Action Lab,
what I've discovered is there are just so many people who share this but will never be on a podcast
or their name will never be known or will never get publicly recognized,
but in their communities, in their classrooms, in their town halls, they are leading and doing this and holding this as well.
And I get huge energy and solidarity from that as well,
that there's so many people who actually in their own way are holding the recognition that the complexity
and what has to change in starting to try and make it happen.
The third one was how have you changed where you live and how you live?
I live on the border of Minnesota and Wisconsin.
I think it's a reasonably good place for the future, low population density.
People are kind of generally Scandinavian socialists here.
They help their neighbors.
It's close to the Mississippi River.
All the people I know and love are in the United States.
I mean, my family are in the United States.
For the longest time, my girlfriend and I grew maybe 30 or 40% of our own food
and we have horses and hazelnuts and apple trees and we were selling garlic to the local farmers market
because we grew thousands of bulbs.
But when I started this work, like in earnest a couple years ago, all that kind of changed
because I was very fricking busy.
So I'm trying to advocate that people simplify and my own life is suddenly complexified
and I struggle with that because I don't have time to do the weeding and the wood chopping
and the planting and the things that I was doing myself four years ago.
The other thing is one of the things I really recognize as a roadblock to sustainability
and living differently is our connection to social media and computers and instant stimulation technology
and I rail against that, especially with my 19-year-old students.
And yet I'm being pulled right back into it myself kind of unavoidably as an externality of this work
and I joke that I'm using the devil's tools to do Gaia's work
and there has to be kind of a middle of the fairway response there
but that's something that I'm struggling with in what I'm doing.
I could live in a 10 by 10 shack on the property here and use very little resources and live on the land
but then I wouldn't be hosting a podcast and passing the baton to other humans
who are trying to make a difference on our collective issues.
So it will probably perpetually be a challenge that I'm sure you also deal with.
Yeah, so a couple of things.
So when you say I don't have the time and I always think time is the ultimate constraint of our energy budget
because in a way what you're saying is I don't have the time to use my own energy, my own bodily energy
to chop wood and to plant food and to do all the other things as well
because using my own energy, doing a great simplification requires more of my time budget.
So of course we're always talking about energy.
Everything is always about energy because it's the currency behind everything else we're doing
but I'm really struck with the way energy keeps coming up, of course, in the story that you're telling.
I want to ask you one thing that I find challenging.
You're one of many people I know in the UK as well.
I know quite a few people working in the climate movement or environmental movement
and I live in the city of Oxford or they might live in London
and then there comes a moment when they lead the city and they go rural and they buy land
and they buy high land and they start growing food
and as a city dweller I think like is this prepping
and what challenges me is that we can't all buy that land
and there's not right Mark Twain buy land, they don't make it any more well.
There isn't enough for everyone to take that route so I kind of stand firmly in the city
and think well we have to make it work here too because most of us are here
so I'd just love to hear your little bit of a challenge there
and we just want to hear your response to that.
We can't all go rural and buy land and grow our own food.
I don't own the land I'm on and I totally agree with you
and this gets to a larger issue of the messaging
and the help of this podcast to various people around the world.
Everyone is in a different situation, there's not one size fits all
and that is something I struggle with.
As far as land, I just love living really and I always have.
I just hated New York City, I had to get out of there, it was sucking my soul.
As far as prepping, this gets back to the economic concept of comparative advantage.
I've learned that like one unit, one family, they can't do everything
and so I like to think of pro-social prepping that the first and most important thing there isn't land,
it's community and getting to know others and sharing responsibility
and you grow this and I'll process this or whatever
because there isn't enough time for every family to do all the things.
But yeah, the rural versus urban, I don't know the answer to that.
I think cities have ecological footprints, orders of magnitude larger than their physical proximity
and I don't know how that's all going to work out but I hear your challenge there
and I feel so privileged and lucky to live on the land and have animals, horses, chickens, geese, no geese, ducks,
guinea fowl and dogs and cats.
I don't have children but I do have animals.
I like the concept of pro-social prepping because that's something we can all do everywhere
and David Sloan Wilson will be the first to say we should all be doing pro-social prepping all the time
because we're going to need it.
That is one technology, one connection that we are all going to need whatever.
Totally agree.
Yeah, so you've told us the story of how you got your journey to here.
So let's hear your view on humanity's journey from here.
Okay, so I want to come back to the super organism concept and I've heard you in some of your franklies
or in some conversations with people.
It sounds like the super organism and by the way, as you know, I asked on Twitter,
hey, I'm turning the table and it's anybody and I got Godney questions
and people brought so many questions and thank you to everybody who brought in questions.
I'm not going to bring in as many of them as I can, but quite a few questions were around this.
So do you think that the super organism is beyond control?
It's just going to roll.
You recently interviewed Robert Sapolsky who said, you know, we are hardwired to get it wrong.
Well, are we hardwired to get it wrong?
So are we hardwired to get it wrong?
So the super organism is a source of finance and the structures and the supply chains
that all that contribute to this super organism.
Do you believe it's just locked in, inevitable that this is beyond our control?
Because that's a pretty strong conclusion to come to.
Wiring from our successful ancestors.
That can be soft or hard, depending on culture and the circumstances.
I love my conversation with Robert until the free will part.
And granted, I'm not an expert on that.
But the way that I see it is there are ecological and biological laws that are unfolding.
One is the maximum power principle, which is organisms and ecosystems in nature self-organized
so as to degrade basically an energy gradient or an amount of energy surplus.
And we as a civilization have been doing that.
And sometimes I think that we had to come to this point of finding fossil carbon
and building this monstrosity of a Rube Goldberg machine nature-eating mousetrap
in order to really have this gut check as a culture, as a species,
on a deep time perspective of where we are, where we're headed,
what we know, how we can do it to actually change the default path that we've created.
And I'm uncertain about what's going to happen,
but there are certain things I'm quite confident in.
Growth will end.
That is a certainty.
What's uncertain is how long in the future that will be
and what sort of a drop that will be and what happens afterward.
So the super organism is in control.
Just look at the prime minister in your country.
And the president of my country are both ostensibly climate aware,
yet they're approving new leases in Alaska and in the North Sea
because of the momentum of the system demands that we have that energy.
So I just don't know that any group of humans, as powerful even as they might be,
could stop this system until it stops of its own momentum,
which is that debt gets too big or there's a war that cascades everything down
or any number of things that would actually stop it of its own accord.
Other than that, I think we will...
Well, since 2015, the Paris Accord,
all the industrialized nations, perhaps with the exception of the US,
accept that climate is happening and it's because of emissions.
Yet since that time, we've grown our coal capacity by over 200 gigawatts globally.
So all the scaling of renewable energy and everything that's happening
that is ostensibly good for climate in the local region where it is,
hasn't done a thing to slow emissions globally.
So from an ecological climate CO2 biosphere perspective,
the superorganism is still completely in control.
And so what I'm trying to think about is what are the things we can do now
to anticipate and change the initial conditions of the moment
when the superorganism of its own weight and momentum and metabolism starts to splinter.
And I think that's coming in the not too distant future.
I don't know that I answered your question.
This is... I mean, I do interviews all the time, like I'm on someone else's podcast,
but to have you interview me on my podcast, it's a little strange, but...
Did that make sense to you, Kate?
Yeah, it did. And so I want to ask...
I mean, there's so many things coming up for me.
So you said, you know, we've done nothing at all to slow the growth of global emissions.
And I want to say, wait, well, we don't know the counterfactual.
What we know, we haven't stopped them from growing.
But perhaps, I mean, for all the civic...
If we hadn't done these things, then emissions would have been 10% higher than they are now.
OK, right.
So that means that there is resistance, there is intention to transform,
and it's having some impact, which, of course, for people who are dedicating their lives
or their weekends to resistance to transformation,
that's really important to know that we can actually make a dent on this thing.
We can start to shift it and we can believe that we can...
If we mobilize the right way and a lot of things come into line, we can move this.
I mean, I just want to offer some counters.
Yes, OK, the US and the UK still opening up licenses for new oil.
And yet other countries, Colombia, signing up to the fossil fuel nonproliferation treaty.
Other countries committing to move away from it massively investing in renewables.
So there are other countries that are doing differently.
So there's evidence that is not every political leader is locked into only going this direction.
And of course, we need that evidence and the hope of possibility that change can be made.
Boy, so lots of things to say here.
First of all, our entire civilization is based on carbon.
And so if we stop burning coal and natural gas and oil,
indirectly all the things in Walmart and Home Depot and whatever the shops are in London,
all of those have indirect carbon in there.
And I am a proponent that...
I'm not a degrowth proponent.
I think degrowth is what we should do,
but it's not going to happen because of the super organism dynamic.
Post growth is what we're going to have to prepare for.
And so I just think that every scrap of cheap fossil energy
when economic times get tough will probably be sought after.
I mean, India right now is...
And China, China has the most renewable energy,
but they also have the most coal and they're scaling coal dramatically.
But my larger point is this and something I really struggle with, Kate,
is I'm trying to act as a witness and a translator of what's going on,
both in my own analysis and in the people that I interview.
That is different than being a cheerleader and a spokesperson and an activist.
So I really struggle with this podcast at times on being accurate or being helpful.
And I really do think that a lot of the discussions in the climate and degrowth space
are energy blind and they don't realize the critical importance
that oil and other energy has to every aspect of our society
and that if we were to do the right thing ecologically
and really crimp our use of hydrocarbons,
that would entail a massive collapse in the state of our world
unless it happened gradually and it was planned for.
And I'm trying to tell the truth but also be inspiring and helpful to people
and sometimes that's hard.
So much to say in response.
I recognize that you may struggle with am I being a witness
and am I being helpful because of course I'm sure you're very aware
that your voice and your opinion also has influence.
It's not just from the outside.
So you might say I'm not an activist but the position you hold
and the forecast that you see has influence upon the world
and so in a way it's an action, it's playing into it.
But I want to pick up on...
I mean you're the person from whom I know the phrase
will we bend or break?
Now that tells me that there's an option there
that this isn't just we're going to roll it out, we're just going to use it all.
There is a choice and there's a possibility that we could bend
and we have left it late as you've said but that we can bend
and I see your podcast as informing us so that we can be as informed as we can.
How do we now bend rather than we're just watching this thing slide towards break?
Yeah, so the bend versus break initiated with my work with Homeland Security
on the financial recalibration because when that happens
and things cascade, it could be really bad
and of course nuclear war or all kinds of other things could precipitate that.
I actually am hopeful that humans will navigate what's coming
and that we will bend as opposed to break
but bending isn't just turning off coal and natural gas and installing solar panels
the ask is much, much deeper than that.
I'm agnostic on whether renewables globally
and as you know you've watched my stuff.
There's no such thing as renewable energy.
The ball of gas in the sky is renewable and the wind is renewable
but these components that we build to harvest the sun and the wind
will have to be rebuilt every 20 or 30 years.
Very little of the components that go into them are being recycled
so without this giant amount of energy surplus that we take for granted
how will we build those things 20 years from now, 40 years from now, 60 years from now?
So the answers are we're going to have to use less
but we're not going to choose to use less as a society.
As individuals and communities maybe we can choose to use less ahead of time
psychologically becoming more resilient by consuming less
prepares an individual for a simplified future.
And then I think the social capital of having conversations about this
in communities wherever you live in the world
looking two or three steps ahead and trying to ignore the siren song of
AI and cooler gadgets and markets are near all-time highs
and we've always had problems before and technology solved it
and look at what's really happening at the ground level.
I do think humans will have some emergent practices
and new things that I can't even offer to you right now.
I just see it in a lot of places that these conversations are happening.
I lost the core of your question there.
So we're on bend or break I was really struck and I was glad to hear you say
I'm hopeful that we can bend and it's going to take a lot more.
Let me make a clarification on something earlier.
I chose the word simplification because I think we're headed for a smaller
less global less material society.
I did not use the word collapse.
First of all collapse is binary.
It's yes collapse or no collapse.
Simplification is more of a spectrum.
Second of all the great simplification is already here.
It's just not evenly distributed.
I mean there are many places in the world that are already suffering
a post-economic peak.
For instance I had a young woman from Lebanon on the podcast.
Lebanon's economy is down 50% from three years ago.
That is a simplification and I'm sure people following the news
all different places in the world are experiencing natural resource problems
and economic problems and currency problems.
So I don't think collapse is inevitable.
I think a simplification is inevitable.
But I guess it depends on how you define the terms.
Right and just to come back I heard you say several times over many episodes
degrowth is what we should do.
Post-growth is what we probably will do.
Can I just clarify because people mean very different things when they use this language.
Do you mean by degrowth do you mean a planned...
I mean this is what when I listen to leading thinkers in the degrowth movement
like Jason Hickel and Yorgos Callis they would say
degrowth means a planned reduction in material and energy use
of the less necessary consumption and production.
So do you mean we should plan to reduce
but you don't think that we will do it
and therefore we'll get post-growth which would be a forced reduction.
Would that be a way of putting it?
Yes.
A little more I'll add to that.
From an ecological deep time ethical perspective
degrowth is what we should do.
If you had a benevolent pro-social alien philosopher looking at Earth
our consumption is massively unsustainable
so to protect the biosphere for future generations of ours and other species
we should use a lot less
and we should be living within our means.
I don't think that will happen.
Can I just interrupt you that moment and say like
here's a doughnut they made earlier it's the same thing right?
An alien looking at this would say
humans sort yourselves out
come back within planetary boundaries
by reducing your energy and material through flow
meet the needs of the poorest people in the world
and to me this is a visual of very similar to that same message
of planned reduction that meets the needs of all.
So we're agreeing so degrowth and doughnut
and yourself on that would say yes this is what we should do.
That's the should.
Okay, continue.
Well on the doughnut
what I would say is that
human behavior, individual and aggregate
that the inner part of the doughnut
will not want to stay within boundaries
it will want to expand
and so the inner part of the doughnut
will want to be greater than its planetary boundaries
and that's what we face of sorts.
So I think the doughnut to use your work and your example
is a great carrot for an Overton window
of where we need to go
but what I mean about degrowth not happening
is I don't think there is a way politically
for a country or a world
to consciously with a plan degrow
because there would be riots
and craziness and financial market collapses
and nuclear war and actually if it were
if we did have the authoritarian means
to degrow voluntarily
I think it would trigger the four horsemen
in quite bad ways.
What we can do.
Wouldn't the continued pursuit of growth
I've also heard you say like the continued pursuit of growth
is likely to trigger those very same things.
Yes and here we are Kate, that's correct
but that's not immediate
and there are chances that we might design some new technology
if AI were suddenly to imbue wisdom
into its algorithms as well as intelligence
I'm not holding my breath
but there are possible ways that we could
invent mushrooms that sequester carbon
and that we change our GDP
to include things that are of ecosystem service benefits
or things that I can't imagine
but my larger point is that degrowth
we can change the initial conditions
which is why a lot of my friends are in the degrowth movement
because we ultimately have to start thinking about
how to organize our own lives and that's of society
by using less material and resources.
I just think it not only won't happen voluntarily
but it is incredibly dangerous where it to happen
suddenly and voluntarily.
But to me this is the home turf towards bend
like if we're going to bend, not break
we have to, whether it's in the name of degrowth
or other movements that we need to move in this direction
you said you're hopeful that we can bend
so I want to take our conversation in that direction
can we go there?
What would it take in different areas
if I can bring some different areas
so first of all I want to ask you
do you think that civil disobedience
and nonviolent direct action that we've seen
rising up around the world in different movements
do you think that is a way that people can play a role
in helping to make something happen
that the system will start to bend?
So let me clarify something
bend versus break could be society as a whole
in the past I've largely used it
to refer to the financial overshoot that we have
that when we issue new money
that money is just digital or electronic
or paper claims on a physical reality
we spend it on building out our physical reality
at the same time there's a liability
if we owe this money in the future
so we're building our physical structure higher
and eventually there's going to be this
wily coyote moment where those claims
can't be fulfilled by our underlying reality
and so when I refer to bend versus break
it's that moment
but you also could say we're at a social contract
bend or break moment
and you also very correctly could say
we're at a planetary boundaries bend or break moment
so there's lots of different bend versus breaks
so as far as civil disobedience
I'm of two minds with that
a lot of the people that are out there
with just stop oil and other civil disobedience
have the same value systems that I do
so in that sense I fully support
what they're doing and their intent
but from the perspective of the four horsemen
which is my systems ecology vantage point
I have two problems with that
one is there could be a triggering of
a disruption that could be the cure is worse than the disease
and the second is that for all of these things
that we care about
we're looking at a non-systemic solution
like let's make natural gas and propane stoves
in the northeast make those illegal
or let's shut down all the coal plants
so those two things would be good for climate change
for the people that care about climate change
but everyone else is looking at that
and saying why are we doing that
that doesn't make sense from our economic
our current cultural values standpoint
so we're solving things by using our lens
of the problem without looking at the whole system
and so I think we need to have an extension
of the degrowth conversation is
how do we live and plan for a less connected
global society where our aspirations
are something more than consumption
and dopamine etc
and I know that's embedded in the degrowth
of scholarship in places
and it's embedded in your work on the donut
so I'm I just I guess I'm too focused on
the systemic risk aspect to be a big fan
of civil disobedience
but we can't go on a march saying
make everything right again
right and that's why I'm at a crossroads
in this work Kate because other than
individual preparation and designing
ben not break policies for governments
I don't know what the the movement is
that would be popular and this is a big
challenge with this podcast is there are
so many different demographics that follow
this show there are energy experts and
there are psychologists and there's
degrowthers and there's a lot of climate
people that follow this and it's hard to
look at everything beyond the one thing
that you care about and so what ends up
happening is events in the world are
getting dicier and worse and so I'm
expanding this conversation but it ends
up offending people that are in one area
of their focus and it's really hard
this could be a much more popular and
maybe helpful podcast if I just focused
on one thing and you know bellowed my
heart and soul out on that one thing
and attracted those viewers in the world
that were knowledgeable and cared about
that one thing but the one thing is the
system it's how all this stuff fits
together and I do not know what the
answers are in fact I don't even use the
word answers or solutions I use responses
and in coming months I'm going to have
franklies on responses to government
for philanthropy for communities and
for individuals and these are just
guesses because I've spent 20 years
trying to understand the problem and
that qualifies me to say well no I
don't think that'll work because of X
but I don't know what to do Kate.
Yeah have you ever had anyone on the
podcast who speaks from experience of
leading and immersed in civil disobedience?
Well yesterday I interviewed Bill
McKibbin who has a very long success
track record of building movements as
far as civil disobedience no I have not.
Maybe that could be a cool one for the
future because I personally you know I
take my kids to their school right when
they were changing going to secondary
school and you go in the classroom see
these schools and like who's on the wall
Emily and Pankhurst, Suffragette, Scandi,
Martin Luther King it's like all these
heroes are on the wall and we know that
every one of them in their day were so
troublesome so annoying so disruptive
and yet we celebrate them now for what
they did to change this big system so I
deeply believe in the power of civil
disobedience and nonviolent direct action
to at least try at least to seek to
persuade presidents and prime ministers
not to open up that oil field and to
and to transform so all these different
pieces of pressure but anyway I would
love to hear you interviewed.
At a deep level this podcast and if I
keep it going in the future is a form
of civil disobedience because the
things that I will be saying are going
to be threatening to the status quo.
Okay okay keep listening.
But I will take your advice and if you
could recommend someone for me to
interview I will do that.
Oh sure I can.
So I'm going to lean us into okay what
if we we could bend right I'm talking
about a system as a whole now it could
it could it could bend if we align
enough things or it will break so I
want us to lean into the possibility
of bend now and I'm just going to ask
you from different sectoral points of
view just kind of going back to short
first take answers okay so the finance
system okay from here what would we
need to do if we were to bend finance
as it has been created and I'm just
going to recognize that it's entirely
human construct it's entirely invented
so we can reconstruct it but we are
where we are right now what do you think
could be done to make it start to move
towards bend other than what what I see
seeing coming is is a great big snapping
sound and that's the simplification.
So on on each of these topics there is
a what to do now what to do at the
moment of a crisis and what to do like
that's more sustainable in 30 or 40 years
30 or 40 years from now the financial
system should be smaller leverage that
got us into this weapons of financial
mass destruction should not be allowed
the currency should be tethered to
something real like land or energy
production but for us to do that now
given the gargantuan you know 100
trillion a day and currency swaps and
things like that you can't get there
what needs to be done to avoid break is
if we go back to a 2009 moment when we
were on the cusp of all the banks in the
world failing and they came through
with tarp and the bazookas of central
banks and government guarantees which
many of which are still 14 years later
in operation if that were to happen
again I think there should be a bend
not break strategies within central
banks and governments to maintain
transaction capacity and there's going
to have to be haircuts they're going to
have to be haircuts at banks people
won't be able to have own everything
that they think they own which is
itself an information hazard to talk
about on a podcast but this is not this
is popular in in earth sciences but in
the broader public sphere this isn't
that popular of a podcast all sorts of
things there that governments can
respond to the things that will make the
financial system more stable would break
the financial system right now this is
the problem we should have a carbon tax
the carbon tax would prick the bubble
of our debt fueled central bank led
orgy of consumption so I think
gradually if we were to put a small tax
on currency transactions gradually if
we had money creation that was tethered
to ecological services or pro-social
outcomes that's some aspect of what we
had kind of like a local currency but
at a national level have this I'm just
totally thinking out loud right now
have it have it generated in a way that
you can pay some portion of your taxes
in this parallel currency but that
parallel currency gets issued for doing
things aligned with the donut for
instance that minimizes our consumption
and keeps us within planetary boundaries
the that kind of makes sense in an
intermediate term in the short term
though here's the thing is the things
that would solve our financial overshoot
we're doing the exact opposite we're
doing more of those things that make the
bubble bigger which gets back to the
minsky thing so I think the way to
prepare for that is to prepare
individuals communities supply chains
businesses for disruption so that
they're not so beholden to a sudden
disruption in a material inputs from
across the world etc a reshoring of
basic needs and if that reshoring is
effective then the break scenario becomes
less likely I wish the Belgian
currency theorist Bernard Lietar was still
alive because I would have loved to hear
you have him on this podcast he just
recently died right he was on my list to
he died a few years ago yeah he was I
think the way he talked about the design
of money and the need for an ecosystem of
monies and currencies massively influenced
me and I would have just loved to hear
him contribute to the kind of designs
you were starting to come up with there
somebody who comes to my mind often with
this podcast is Stephanie Kelton one of
the leading theorists known in relation
to modern monetary theory and I would
just love to hear lots of people on
Twitter said I want to hear Nate talk
about modern monetary theory does he know
about it what does he think about it and
I really really hope you'll have her on
this podcast and you may profoundly
disagree but I think you'd really
respectfully listen and try and figure
out where's the overlap in your world
views or you may really agree but what
would be your take on modern monetary
theory right now I will answer that but
I'll preface it with this it is a
challenge and this is why I do the
franklies because a lot of my guests
first of all I invite people on that A
have some some credible expertise
on a thing and B that it's relevant to
the great simplification and C that
they're good people but what ends up
happening is a lot of times I agree
with my guests a lot on issue number
one and issue number two I totally
disagree with them but I can't spend
the whole I'm not a debater I don't
like want to stomp on their words and
try to disagree with people at every
point that I disagree with them so I've
learned and I've gotten better at this
over time I let the guest do 80 or 90
percent of the talking and then on my
franklies I kind of bookend it with
with my world view but it's it's
challenging and if you end up being a
host I'm sure you're so gracious and
diplomatic that that'll be not a problem
for you but I'm actually happy with that
because I'm kind of a talker my girlfriend
says it's my best skill as I just talk
so naturally I didn't naturally I have a
podcast but I've I have become a better
listener and who knows I may be really
wrong about some of these things and my
guests are absolutely right and that's
why the the universe of ideas and this
is in a sorts peer review in real time
of of talking and there's no way it can
be perfect but I do I am learning and
there are there are huge issues of
complexity that are present Stephanie
Kelton I've heard wonderful things about
her I have friends that know her I will
ask her to be on the show MMT I think of
as follows modern monetary theory
describes the money creation process
better than conventional financial theory
and it is true that a sovereign nation
doesn't really need to worry about their
debt because they can issue currency at
will and so I think the the the water
works of describing treasury debt
taxes money creation by MMT are correct
however MMT makes the same fatal flaw
as neoclassical economics on how it
treats energy productivity and
resources and when we create money we
are in balance in the world in the
monetary world but we're out of balance
both ecologically and specifically with
respect to the carbon pulse energy and
materials and when we create new money
we're not creating new copper or trees
or oil so I think the problem with MMT
is we end up at the same place with the
great simplification is we have
governments those governments that can
print their own money and that's another
thing that gets into the inequalities
and global disruptions because of using
the dollar as the reserve currency of
the world there's a lot of countries
that are tethered to the dollar and they
can't create their own dollars but we
can but I think we end up in the same
place is that we're creating too many
monetary claims versus an underlying
energy and material reality and that's
going to result in inflation and
eventually in the lack of trust in
other countries have towards a currency
as evidenced by the recent slight
downgrade in the US credit rating by
Moody's so is that a short enough
overview yeah that was that was just
the right length and it makes me all
the more look forward to hearing you and
Stephanie talk and I don't know what the
outcome would be but I think you know I
really appreciate talking about the
difference between the podcast where you
give space to the person you're
interviewing and I'm experiencing it
right now there's lots and lots of things
coming up I know I can imagine you would
see you're doing a great job because you
probably would want to be pushing back
on a lot of the things I'm saying it's
hard right because you push back on
everything it would be a four-hour
conversation there we go and you think
okay I'll let that go I'll let that go
but I'm gonna follow this thread so I
understand that and but here's the other
thing Kate is you and I are close friends
so we could go back and forth and
respectfully disagree with each other
and learn but some of these guests I've
never met before and I had one and for
me to say come on are you serious to
someone I just met that's just not my
golden retriever Midwest upbringing
it's really helpful to hear you articulate
the reason for the franklies around on
right on the side and that that's a very
nice like your little kind of release
valve on the side but yeah I was going
to say I wonder if you could sometimes
invite people who you've already
interviewed or you've got to know and
you and just have a session we say we
respectfully disagree let's celebrate
that isn't that interesting I respect
you but I really disagree with your view
on that I just wish there was more
debate in the world that just said hey
let's celebrate we respectfully disagree
let's listen and find the edges of our
own understanding without trying to
win this we're all trying to move
forward so anyway just a thought I think
you could you could bring some of those
into the podcast in the future I'm going
to keep us moving so we're leaning into
the possibility of Bend and I'm looking
forward to the episode that you do in the
future with Stephanie Kelton because I
think and I think a lot of people would
love to hear that do you know her I do
Stephanie you've got to come on this
podcast okay okay we're going to move to
education and you teach and are well
aware of the power of teaching and that
moment where students are in brought into
a world view so I want to know from you
if we are going to Bend at the systemic
level what do you think needs to change
in the world of education in terms of
the concepts that are taught in terms of
the kind of skills that the students
are taught what it means to be well
educated for the 21st century and you
can answer this across any discipline
you choose or even beyond academia but
what needs to change in the way we
educate this generation
almost everything needs to change and
just to clarify I stopped teaching three
years ago because I was I was just too
busy with other things but I did teach
for eight years and I miss it it was the
most rewarding thing I've ever done and
per my message I left you I'm happy to
guess lecture your your class in the
future
I'm actually trying to construct a
roundtable maybe you would like to be
part of it
Jean-Marc Giancovici and Simon Michaud
and Sandra Faber who's a
physicist and ask them how do we need
to change it the academy what are the
questions that we should be asking
postdocs and graduate students for their
research ahead of the great
simplification I think there's so many
aspects of the education system that
are tethered to the super organism and
energy and systems blind that we
really need to change
probably all levels of education I think
we need to start teaching ecology and
systems to grade schoolers
because it by the time they get to
college age my my students they
haven't learned a lot of of these
basics
what are colleges now we were
supposed to back in the day have a
liberal education so that everyone
understood a little bit about how the
world work but over time
they've morphed into came done with
high school now to get a higher paying
job I have to get this degree it's less
about learning as it is to get a rubber
stamp of I got this degree now I can
make 25% more money
and I think we're going to need more
education on
how to human how to
be a human
which includes your psychological
spiritual emotional physical
well-being
we don't teach that at all that's going
to be central in this world of
deteriorating mental health
how do we have skills that are
actually going to apply to
the future that we're headed towards
and how do you understand
the systems ecology of the world
sure math
is important
but you know the
ecology and history and brain
science and anthropology
and just
I mean
the topics I cover in my course reality
101 that should be kind of
a 101
for all freshmen to understand
the world we face
so
and to go right back to where we began
with energy blindness I guess
you'd say there's got to be an energy
what eyes wide open
education that everybody should
learn to
see sense and be aware
of
deep dependence upon the flows of energy in the
world because it's if it's the currency of life
we better get with it
yeah
I mean
one of the complaints
my students complained to
me and to the dean that at the end
of the semester I taught them all kinds
of things about how the world worked and how
messed up it was but I didn't
give an answer
and they were paid
to learn and have the answer
but I didn't have an answer and he was very upset
about that
I don't think there are answers
but we have to empower young
people with
not a rose tinted
but an actual view of our reality
to
in a way that we pass the baton to them
in an encouraging and empowering way
to do things
but I do think it's a disservice
to
shovel the uncomfortable aspects under the
carpet and ignore them because they're too
young and they can't handle that
I don't subscribe to that
and just picking up on that question of
you didn't give an answer
I mean I've heard you say before
also in relation to this podcast
and in relation to
the world view you bring forward
it's more, I said
I experience it more as a
this is what I see
this is the context I see
I'm trying to explain the system
that I see that we're in
but you sit much more there
and here's how I think we should solve it
is that a fair description
of the place in this ecosystem
of making things visible
and the solution to sit
Yes, but if you squint
and look forward
it's kind of obvious
what the direction of the things
we're going to need to do and a lot of the things
are in your work
on the donut
we're going to need to live
instead of just as individual
lone wolves we're going to have to
expand our interaction
with others social capital is
critically important
and we're going to have to
probably have less
material consumption
and how to prepare for that ahead of time
and prepare for that in your communities
I mean how we get from here
to there could happen multiple
different ways
next week I have
a round table on poverty
and I think
there's great inequality
in the world between countries
but there's even larger inequality
in countries including my country
and your country
and I think that's going to be a huge
story in the next decade
is the amount of
haves
the amount of have nots
is going to increase a lot
we're going to have wider and deeper poverty
and of course we'll try to
overcome that
with stimulus and social
programs but eventually there will be limits
to that so how do we
where does college fit in
with that? Is it even the best
choice
for an 18 year old
headed into this world
but yeah you're right I'm more
trying to describe our situation
in a politically neutral
science tethered way
and pass that
baton to as many humans that
will listen
which is another issue Kate
this podcast is not for everyone
I could
with more funding
broadcast it so that I paid
for social media views and got
a lot more people to watch it
and this is not a message
for everyone that is
I want to force on people
it's kind of a low bandwidth
bat signal that I'm sending out to the world
and those people that resonate
with it
those are my sort of people
and I want to be as honest as I can
be in what I think
with them there's a completely
different set of messaging
that needs to happen
for the general public, for students
for community leaders, for Hollywood
for governments
and that's more than I can handle
at the moment but messaging
is very important
and I'm just trying to be
authentic and describe
what I see now
and maybe I should do more thought
in crafting
discrete pathways
that are helpful to people
and of course there are people
among students and community leaders
and Hollywood and political leaders
who are your listeners of this podcast
and maybe they are also
taking it and translating it
or making it accessible to their communities
in ways that only they
from within that community know
how that will fly
that actually is my deepest hope
is that I don't know
how these conversations
are changing the actions and behaviors
and emergence of others
I do have another call, a second call next week
with an executive at HBO
that wants to do a series
on the great simplification
writ large, like a six part series
and we're kind of talking
about what that might look like
so yeah, the time now
is for this cultural conversation
and it's not just climate
and it's not just
politics, it's
a large
systems, human
species level
conversation
and
you and I are part of that
conversation and it's evolving
and I'm going to break around
to ways that we could lean
into the possibility of Bend
okay, you've shared what you'd say
about changing education, what about changing
and this is massively broad
but what about changing
policy making
just think of policy makers
in
a country, I'm going to start with a country
in the global north
they're involved in
industry or sector
that is material and energy intensive
and they came to you and said
how can I start
changing to help Bend
what can I
think differently, do different tools, language
world view
I know this is a massive question
what can you see that could start
helping if there was
if we believe that this couldn't fail then critical
mass could actually build amongst policy makers
what would you want to see a critical mass
of building
it is a massive question
in fact every question you've
asked me could be its own one hour
podcast
I've included that
policies that actually could
be implemented right now
are only at the margin
the conversation that needs to happen
is so, so much bigger
on what we're going to have to do in the next decade
so I coined the phrase
advanced policy which is those things
that we will have to do
but that are politically and
socially unacceptable now
and so the biggest thing
is to educate
the current leaders and future leaders
as possible about how
these pieces fit together
and
build constituency and research
and work on what
they will have to do
when we go into energy
security and rationing
and
the early stages of the simplification
in the global north now that's
a different answer for corporations
and businesses
that would have more to do with
I mean here's the thing
we
so revere efficiency today
but
efficiency makes things less resilient
and
on the downslope once the economy
starts to decline
efficiency
the Jevons paradox will become a Jevons
dividend because if we
get 5% more
efficiency in how we use energy
that means whatever our
decline is is 5% less
so
the challenge now is
to look two or three steps ahead
on what are the technologies
that society are going to need
in the next 10 or 20 years
and start
looking at that instead
of what consumers are demanding now
but how do you do that
I mean it's really hard
because your market is what
people are buying today
so I come back to
education
and systems
are the no regret strategies
and I mean you're doing fantastic
work with deal
and donut on the ground
in cities
I just don't see that we're going to
get off of
fossil carbon because of ammonia
and cement and
concrete and fertilizers and all the
other things
but to prepare for less
and less intricate global
supply chains
is something to be considered
I've talked to a lot of politicians
and this is like too big
of a thing for them to bite off
so
but I think it
five years ago this sounded crazy
and now they're nodding their heads
starting to listen
is there anything that you think
people are already doing
right
towards
bending
at least that's in motion
at least that's building mass
well I think psychologically
there are millions
or tens of millions of people
that are already
the walking worried that
know that our culture is approaching
an inflection point
and so they're
supportive
they're doing things
more locally
they're meeting their neighbors
they're maybe growing a little food
I mean this is without understanding
climate change or oil depletion
or debt overshoot or anything
they're just
responding
from the cultural signals
I mean you're probably a better person
to ask that question
look at all the on the ground
I think that the biggest thing
is that we're starting to talk
about this in lots
of different places
and that talking kind of breaks the seal
of creativity
and working together
and different
different projects
it's just that little flame
is so tiny relative
to the media and
the cultural conversation
and the Super Bowl
and the advertising on TV
that you need to buy
this extra little thing
for your house and you'll be happy
so I think
many of us are growing up
and waking up
to our reality
and
I think that itself is a good thing
and needs to continue to scale
by the way
this is
this is
a darker conversation
than I anticipated
is it not
it feels like I'm kind of a curmudgeon
here
I'm not trying to put you in a curmudgeon corner
I'm inviting you
to talk about the possibility of bend
yeah well
but that's where you okay
that's interesting that's where you are today
yeah it's where I am today
but I mean I also
who am I
Kate to tell
people how I think
that what they should do
I also
feel like
I do understand how the system
fits together and I've spent a lot of time
on biophysical economics
but that doesn't qualify me to be some
advice person
for people's lives
I know the general direction
because I'm still
trying to figure out what to do in my own life
okay
I'm just going to pick up
there something I was going to bring later
who might
be an advice person
and I hear you saying
I'm witnessing I'm just saying what I'm seeing
but I don't want to be giving advice
but I'm going to come back to
I want to come into the place of the difference between
the podcast and the franklies
and you've explained a little bit
quite clearly actually the difference
and the reason for both and that makes sense
to me
but your franklies are sometimes very strong
like very strong opinion
and you might not be giving advice
but the strength in which
with which you give your opinion
influences people
and it shapes
many people's
perception of what is or isn't possible
so it has a big effect in the world
and I just want to
lean into that a little bit more
to ask you
to hold that
this is my opinion
and you know that you've got a big audience
this is my opinion and sometimes
for many people it can feel very dark
like well we're just going to keep using the oil
whereas so many people are
mobilizing in every way they can
to move us off that
and to move us into not renewables
but solar based energies
it feels very
heavy
to hear you say
keep using it up
and I just want to ask you how you hold
knowing that it is influential
and it might not be advocacy and advising
but it has impact on
people's sense of what's possible
I do have a strong opinion
of the global macro
economy
and I actually don't think that
the tragedy is we're going to use
more oil
per se I think it's
the economy unwinding
to prepare for
and we are going to use less oil
because we won't be able to afford it
I think that's the default path
the franklies
if I had my druthers
I would do one a day
and I have hundreds of topics
that I would like to
opine on
and it's interesting Kate
something really strange has happened
since I started doing these franklies
I go for like a bike ride
or a walk
and I organize things in my head
and I come back right here
and I turn the camera on and I just riff
and 9 times out of 10 that's the final thing
and sometimes I say something
and my staff is like no you can't say that
you need to redo it
but I've gotten better at speaking
in like 15 minute
extemp summaries
but I can no longer write
I've lost the ability to
dense those thoughts into
you know
1500 word essay
and so this
it's like working out certain muscles
I've been talking on this
podcast and these franklies
but I think the franklies
at their core
are a systems integration
of multiple topics
that I've spent 20 years thinking
about and researching
and talking to other experts
and so it's where the disciplines
overlap
and merge is where the discovery
and interesting things are
okay
here's a question you invited me to ask
which I appreciate
where might you be wrong
I asked you to ask me that
yeah you did
I think I want to start asking that of all my guests
you absolutely should
I think that's a great idea
um
when I ran
the oil drum and now that
I run this podcast I get emails
from so many people
that are all so
unbelievably sure about
their world view
and I think it's part of the human condition
especially with
middle-aged and older men
that they have this
unbelievable certitude
of their world view and their opinion
and I think that is part of the human condition
and I'm a middle-aged
older man and therefore
I have to recognizing that
handicap my certitude by some amount
I feel
confident about these things
but I know that humans are
oftentimes delusional
and don't actually see
things that they can't see
so I'm sure that I'm wrong
about many many
things in what I'm talking
about at the
margin because I'm trying to stay on top
of neuroscience and plastics
and oil depletion and things
are moving so fast that I can't
stay up
on the core things I really don't think
I'm wrong because I've
looked at them so many times
humans are biological
organisms were
mammals were primates were
predators were related to
all other things
that are alive on the planet
and we're a product of our evolutionary
past and that has a bearing on our behaviors
I don't think
I'm wrong about that energy is
the currency of life and how much
net energy we have access to
dictates what's possible
in the human sphere and this
energy that we've been using
is depleting
and we've been
alive during a part where it was
growing not depleting
and so we're
immune to the imagination of
what can happen afterward I don't know
what's going to happen afterward
but I can infer it
and most importantly
the natural world
is being
severely impacted by the human
endeavor and
this is kind of a shifting baseline
sort of thing we don't see it
every day every day looks much like
yesterday but over decades and over
centuries it is absolutely
deteriorating
relative to the way it was
I don't think I'm wrong
about those larger
arcs
but I definitely could be wrong about some
things for instance what is the role of
technology
what is the role of governance
what is the role of cultural evolution
I don't think I'm
really wrong about those things because
I'm not deterministic in what they will
be
I am
still learning Kate
aren't we all
and since you talked about
your own identity
in this I'm just going to come in on that
here's me a white British woman sitting at
Oxford in the United Kingdom
and there's you
white presenting North American man
in the US
what do you think
that there may be
things that people like you and I can't
see that are trends in the world
that matter in the world
just some reflections on what
other people dissimilar
from us might know or be able
to see or sense that we can't see
now that's a kind of tricky question
tell me what you can see that you can't see
but you get where I'm going
fortunately I have a lot of friends
internationally many of them
have been guests in this show and I hope to do
more international
guests in next year
that this
everyone has a different
perspective and what they care about
is different and I think we need to hear
a lot more
voices on how people
process this and how they respond
to it this is one
of my biggest challenges right now there's
38% of the listeners of this
show are in the United States
which means 62%
are in other countries
I live in the
United States my social connections
are largely here when I talk
about bend versus break
and the great simplification
ostensibly I mean for this
country because we are
totally unprepared for what's coming
and yet there are people
in Kenya and Ethiopia
and Lebanon
and Ukraine listening
and watching this podcast I know
because they email me
and the message for them might be totally
different than the message for people
living in Minneapolis or Topeka, Kansas
and so I
really struggle with that
and I want to stay on
target of how does this
system science fit together
of our predicament
and what are the behavioral policy
economic
and biological ways out of it
but I also want to
like you said I want to highlight
the voices that can
see things about this that
a biophysical economist could not
and I'll need help
on finding those voices
but I hear you
on that
Yeah and just reflecting that
for my own economics education
economics was founded on the
worldviews of
people from the global north with land
and so they saw some things
and they missed a heck of a lot of things
and in my own
rethinking of economics
it's been when you go to other people
from the global south from women's voices
from working class backgrounds
people who come from elsewhere
where those economists where they just bring
that 360 degree completely other perspective
and as you said earlier
like none of us can know
everything none of us can see everything
it takes that ecosystem
of using experience to help
fill in the gaps
of our own understanding
our ability to empathize or learn
about other places so
here's to ecosystems of knowledge
and podcasts right back to the value of a podcast
just so many different voices
I can definitely think
of people you could invite on
who would bring much more of that perspective
and I'm sure many of your listeners can too
so
can you move us towards the classic closing questions
okay the questions that you
ask people every week
and make sense to ask them to you
are you ready
yes
okay
what would be
a practical response to the metacrisis
that would be most effective
for people to take
Nate that's a really big question
do you ask people that
just like straight off the bat
do you feel how massive that is
well this is why I do that
is because
everyone has a factual
expertise Helen Thompson
was on last week talking about
money and energy
and geopolitics
and she gets asked those personal things
and I frankly don't know what she thinks
about the great simplification
other than she specifically
predicts energy
security problems
in the next five years
so I like to
I mean my belief is
we're headed for a time
when we need to have
the head, the heart and the hands
acting in unison
and so much of the podcast
sphere is about the head
you know analyzing things
so I
append these questions
at the end of the interviews
to get at the heart
of the human that is on the show
nice
because I think our humanity
and
our honesty and our care
and who we are as individuals
is going to be as
or even more important than the facts
we know about the world
so that's why I asked those
and I'm thinking about mixing them up
a little because it's been a hundred episodes
but
we do get really interesting
answers
what do we do about the metacrisis
it depends where you are
I think the I mean I have a hundred
pieces of advice
but the main one
is
try to not go through
this
as an individual
find a group of like-minded people
on your values
find a group of like-minded people
on
doing things
meeting the future halfway in your community
or in your company
or in your neighborhood
and find a group of people that
you like to have fun with
and do things that are unrelated to the metacrisis
and feed your soul
those groups, those three groups
end up being the same group of five or six
or seven friends or maybe they're different
but finding
the dining car on this
runaway train
with like-minded people
is an important thing to do
one of my problems is
I eat, sleep and breathe
the metacrisis, my girlfriend now
I have a rule that if I'm on the phone call
with
a group of people
Daniel or
DJ White or Rex Weiler
or Art Berman
I have to leave the house
she's tired of hearing about this stuff
and I don't blame her
so
try to have balance as well
and I think
there's a lot of things that are out of our control
so that means
try to control one or two things
about your future
and I try to do that
and I think ultimately
where we are as a culture
what
really needs to change is a culture
which is to
recognize that most of this consumption
is
not making us healthy
or happy
and that once basic needs
are met the best things in life
are mostly free
and for a lot of people the basic needs aren't being met
if we look at the macro things
of what our society needs to do
we can start
to attempt to try to change those things
in our own life and you see how
difficult it is
to reduce the
siren song
of immediate gratification
with either food or entertainment
or novelty or stimulus
and do the longer term
thing like reading a book
or planting something or tending a garden
and so
if we really want to live more sustainably
as a culture I think that
starts within
and that's a struggle for me
that I'm going through all the time
so
I'm sure people have heard me talk a lot
about what I recommend
and I'll have more stuff but that's a
short response
Okay and specifically what recommendations
for young humans
who are becoming aware of this
and may have stumbled across
this podcast had it recommended
by a teacher by a friend
suddenly burst into this
awareness
of this world that was probably not centered
to their education and here they are
Do you use the word young humans or were you just mimicking me?
You use the word young humans
What do you say young people?
Young people but you know let's go with young humans
Okay
Young humans
keep learning
find
like-minded people to travel
like I just said
find
things that you're really interested
in and care about
learn skills
that would be useful
imagine the great simplification
happening
in your community
what would you want to be
involved in and responsible for
and partake in and start
thinking about that
The world will probably be
worse than many of us
expect but probably a lot
better than many of us fear
and don't let fear
dominate your life
I'm trying to
with this podcast
give a broad arc of
what's happening and
if you just happen upon a podcast
without knowing all the back
story leading up to it
it can be a little overwhelming
and my best advice for that is
listen to it or process it
with a group of other people
or a friend
and talk about it
talk about these things
get out in nature and get off your phone
as much as possible
those will be some of the pieces of advice
Nice
How can listeners reshape the way
they think
in order to best face the future
I don't think we can change
human behavior not on a dime
I think we can shift
we can create
we can use our cognitive skills
to
create speed bumps
in the future for the ghost
of dopamine past and our emotional
proclivities
I think we can change how we think
via
awareness
and meditation
and having a little Kate or a little Nate
on our shoulder chiming in
and observing and commenting
on what we're doing
and
try to find people that
disagree with you and steal man
their arguments and then
come back to
what you originally thought
and you might have a deeper appreciation
of the topic
and keep thinking in systems
on how things
fit together
but don't all only think
I mean thinking is part of the problem
that we're always just thinking
we have to also live
in the moment
We are now heading home woods
Are you ready?
What do you care about most?
What do you think I care about most?
What are you asking you?
I care about the natural world
and other species
that have no voice in our economic system
or on
the bend or break scenario
and
this
still is the only planet
that we are certain
has life and complex life
in the whole universe
and this
slowly unfolding
you know
metacrisis
has a large
back-ended cost
on the natural world
and I care mostly about that
I care about a lot of things which is
part of the cross
that I bear with this work
but I care about other species
insects, birds, mammals
trees, forests
at the end of the day
that's what I care about most
And especially dogs
Yeah
I care about dogs a lot
I've seen you with dogs, I've seen dogs passing in the street
and you just like
a whole other Nate comes out
everything else has swept away
there's a doggy on the pavement
we're going to put the dogs aside a moment
come back
what is one thing you worry about
for the next 10 years?
Well of course I would answer that
every day
but I think the thing that
worries me the most
is what I care about the most
is the natural world
and I think
we are approaching this
cultural awakening moment
of concern
for the biosphere and climate
and oceans and other species
and it's growing in the media
and I think that could be
upended by
energy scarcity, energy poverty
and economic problems
and a rightward shift politically around the world
and that all of this
burgeoning
environmental awareness
is going to go to the
back burner
in our cultural focus
and it will become more dangerous
to outwardly
talk about these things
relative to today
that's one of the things that I worry about
not only because
I have a podcast about nature
and systems but because
now is the time that that needs
to be prominent in our decisions
because ultimately
what's best for nature
and ecosystems is also
best for humans in the long run.
Indeed.
What is one thing you have hope
about over the next 10 years?
I have hope
in conversations like this
and I told you this in Sweden
is there are so many
pro-social
smart people
that are starting to get it
and starting to put things together
and starting to ask how do I change things
at my university, at my company
I've been giving presentations to
corporations
that want to understand
how this affects their business
so we have arrived at
how all these things fit together
and it's really politically
and socially difficult
to say these things out loud
but it's starting
and that gives me hope
is these conversations are becoming
less BS and
more
tethered to reality
that's a little scary but it's also hopeful
that we're going to have
an emergent response to some of these
events on the horizon.
If you could
wave a magic wand
with no personal recourse
to do one thing to improve the
future
what would you wave it at?
So the reason I
phrased that question that way
is waving a magic wand with no personal
recourse
is different than being a president
or a prime minister
because a president and a prime minister
could have a
dictum or a policy
but they're still beholden to their
constituents who voted them
and could vote them out.
A magic wand
presumably is do whatever
you want
and it doesn't matter what other people think.
You could go for dictator too but I quite like
the magic wand alternative.
I would
change
how people
change the lens
with which they view
their own lives and their existence to a
wider boundary one
and view that everything is connected
and that we're part of
this long
evolving
social biological
experiment that brought us
to this moment and to care
beyond
their own tiny sphere
into caring about other people
other generations and ecosystems
and I think a lot more things
would be possible if we expanded
the lens
of where we
measure our own boundaries of the self.
If you had, I'm going to give you six months
just
open up a little
window in the fabric of
time and you just get this
pocket of six months to dive
into one topic and explore it
however you want, what are you going to dive into?
The human brain
and how to
quiet down
the dopamine consumption
treadmill that we're on
and to heal
and come from a place of
equanimity
and view
the purpose of
one's life and one's work
towards the betterment of the future
rather than
individual
dopamine cascades
and social status
and monetary piles of digits
and
really what would that take
from a neuroscience
slash cultural
slash sociological perspective
to heal more humans
and
involve them in a
purpose for the greater good
given the challenges we face.
Is there any question I haven't asked you
that you're now thinking, oh, I really wish there was
this question in the podcast that she'd asked me
because I actually want to answer that.
No, this is
this has been great.
I'm going to carry on with this.
It feels
like it's
something that I was supposed to do
which is my kind of Midwest
you know
golden retriever
sort of personality interviewing
scientists and activists
on what we face
and then peppering in the franklies
to give kind of a
goofy color commentary on some
aspect.
I hope it continues
to scale and that
it's inspiring
others to have these
conversations at their dinner table
at their town meeting or at their
their companies
and
if it happens
and there's an episode 200
I may invite you back to
interview me again. Boy, what a world
will be at that point.
Fantastic, thank you very much
and again, of course, this is my show this week
so thank you very much, Nate
Hagans. It's been fantastic having you
as a guest on The Great
Simplification.
That's all for this week and now
we go to the theme music.
Thanks a lot, Kate.
If you enjoyed
or learned from this episode of The Great
Simplification, please subscribe
to us on your favorite podcast platform
and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information
on future releases.
