The most resilient parasite is not a bacteria, it's not a virus, it is a thought, and it
shapes everything.
He is an expert on the topic of happiness.
Google made him the head of Google X, the return of a mobile browser.
I know people will hate me when I say this, dating is an entirely an economics problem.
When you don't know what you're looking for, then you're advertising wrong.
How do you find out what you're looking for though?
If you want to find love, it's very straightforward.
In the last line in your book, you say, please find the compassion in your heart to want
happiness for my wonderful son, Ali.
Why did you bring that up?
We were having an easy conversation.
I wrote Soul for Happy at a time where Ali had just left our world and he helped me really,
really figure things out.
We think that this brain is supposed to be there to make us successful.
Your brain is supposed to make you happy.
I feel that the top three reasons for unhappiness in the world are...
Without further ado, I'm Stephen Bartlett, and this is The Diary of a CEO.
I hope nobody's listening, but if you are, then please keep this to yourself.
The Return of Mo Gouda
Oh man, no pressure.
I mean, I don't really know what to say.
Our first conversation, as you'll know, as I've said many times to my audience, is still
to this day my favorite podcast episode of all time for so many reasons.
It had everything that I've ever wanted from a conversation.
It had the personal story delivered in a way with immense honesty and vulnerability and
wisdom.
I learnt so much from that conversation, and of all the conversations I've had, whenever
I'm asked wherever I go, I said that that conversation is the conversation that's had
the most profound impact on the real fundamentals of my life than any other.
The words that you said then still show up at pivotal moments in my life when I'm feeling
a certain way or I'm letting something get the best of me, and it's really, really liberated
me of so many things.
So when I heard you were back in London, I had to have another conversation with you.
It's an honour.
Honestly, thanks for asking.
I have to ask, since we spoke, what's changed in your life?
And how does your life look now?
Ever-changing, interestingly.
I'm on, you know, 2020 was my year of silence and space.
2021 was my year of flow.
And then at the beginning of 2022, I asked myself, what will this year be about?
I take a theme for every year because it's sort of an interesting way to guide your life
in terms of where you want to go.
I don't like targets.
It's too businessy when it comes to your own connection to yourself.
And 2022, I decided it will also be a year of flow, but I called it the year of joy
in flow, which is really interesting.
So to me, believe it or not, as I worked through the years on empowering more of my
feminine side and, you know, creativity, paradoxical thinking, flow, all of those
sometimes appearingly not so disciplined traits are hyper feminine and they're very
valuable in terms of enjoying life, but also seeing the full reality of life, if you want.
I did very well in 2020 with my approach to flow.
I went wherever life wanted me to go, but I was still the same mo, you know, very
targeted, very focused, very able to get the maximum out of everything.
Around that, of course, there has been a lot of interesting repercussions of our
conversation that basically allowed me to write more, to connect more.
I tend to be very personal when it comes to my presence on social media.
So got in touch with so many wonderful people.
And I think that's created waves of flow, if you want, in my life, whereby by end of
April, I packed everything up that I had in Dubai, put it in a tiny little storage
space. I've always been a minimalist anyway, so it wasn't much.
And now I have no idea where I'm going from here, completely in flow.
What does that mean?
You have no idea where you're going from here.
I'm in London because of my book publication until end of the month.
And then.
We'll find out.
There's something quite curious about that, because I think we tend to believe
that we need stability or a home or, I don't know, those home
comforts to make ourselves happy.
So I think about sometimes in my life where I, where I was a freelancer,
kind of like drifting through the world, I could do it for a short period of time.
But in the long term, I ultimately craved that sense of home again.
So I think we need both, right?
I think we need the balance.
I think the story that most of us don't realize is that every one of us
wants an adventure and every one of us wants stability.
Every one of us wants, at the point in time, a long term committed,
wonderful, connected relationship and a little and at other times,
once the parties and the fun and, you know, Russian experience and so on.
And I think context is a big part of what we miss as humans,
that through life, context changes.
OK, and I've been on an interesting journey because, of course,
you can imagine, I have always been extreme in whichever stage
I had been in my life when I, when I became, you know, a business executive.
I was a very serious business executive, you know, the 12, 14 hour days,
the, you know, the constant hopping around the world and so on and so forth.
And when I became an author, I became a very serious author.
You know, I started to really, really spend a lot of hours
not writing and, you know, documenting my, my thoughts.
And I write two or three books at the same time.
When you're extreme in those things, you tend to be quite a bit
blinded, if you want, by the pace, by the detail you're swamped into it.
And it does take does take challenging yourself, if you want,
to get to a point where you say, perhaps, perhaps this was wonderful
for my last seven years of my life, but perhaps, you know, context has changed.
Perhaps I need to explore another part of my life to reach that point
where I feel complete.
And was there something that some kind of signal that life gave you
that said it's time to pack up and flow?
What was that?
For most of us who rush really fast in life, we don't even recognize what we feel.
We don't even even recognize what our hearts, what our souls,
what our bodies are signaling to us.
And and I think there has been a very strong longing in my life
to live that idea of, I call it half monk,
which, you know, it's interesting.
Again, the way we stack life is quite strange.
So you you you we work really, really, really hard for the first 30 or 40 years
of our lives, and then we retire when we can't really enjoy life.
You know, it's like when you retire, you're basically taking your stick
and going to whatever Florida or whatever.
When it's actually the way life should be, is that you probably should
take the 10 years of retirement, divide them across the 40 years
and perhaps take three months off every year.
If if we were to redesign life, you know, it would be wonderful
to work seven months of every year and take three or nine months of every year
and take three months off.
Similarly, you know, if you look even at the spiritual path
of some some of the most renowned monks in the world,
you go through a certain path through life and then you stop completely
and then you call become a monk, you know, for for for a for a while.
And then, you know, you may come back to life or become something else.
And I decided there would be an interesting ambition to
to to investigate the possibility of maybe 50 percent of your life
as a monk and 50 percent as a modern day warrior, as I call it.
Right. And I took the number 50 because that's how mathematicians will work.
I'll start from the midpoint and then, you know, irritate around it.
Maybe I'll end at 60 or whatever.
OK. And it's actually interestingly possible.
It's interestingly possible to spend 50 percent of your days
in in monklike activities, which would be connection, reflection,
you know, some some stillness and silence, some service to the world
and 50 percent completely engaged in, you know, writing, writing,
I consider is a service, but, you know, like business and business
conversations and, you know, coaching and whatever it is else that I do,
being stuck in traffic and so on and so forth. OK.
And it was a stupid ambition, but then it started to become a lot more
viable in my mind that actually I could do that 50 percent of every day,
50 percent of every week, 50 percent of every year
could actually be spent that way.
And then and the thing you need to to make that happen is to step out
of the mainstream of your steady life. OK.
So I had a wonderful conversation with my manager, Munir, who,
you know, really wants our success and the success of the mission.
But that sometimes makes him push me very hard to add stuff in my calendar.
And I said, can you allow me the life of a creative?
So can you cram my Tuesdays and Wednesdays to the point where I start hating you
but then leave my rest of the week free with one day
that is negotiable between us. OK.
And that basically is even better than 50 50.
So in those two days, I'm completely a modern day warrior,
completely engaged in, you know, whatever the modern world wants from me.
But then that allows me the rest of the week, if you want,
to do the other things that may allow me to find and reflect and maybe
maybe figure something out that is so much better for the days where I get
engaged. Right. So if my if my work is to spread some ideas,
then silence to find those ideas is actually useful for it.
And so that was the feeling you said.
What what what was the the signal, the feeling has been there for quite a bit
of time. And then when the landlord said, hey, by the way,
want the apartment back, I was like, great, let's do this.
Let's leave the mainstream. OK.
Let's go somewhere and see where that takes us.
See where where serendipity will will show us.
I think that's an interesting place to be. Are you single?
I am single and not single.
I think I know how that that may get a lot of people judging me.
So I again, in an interesting way,
found that my current lifestyle does not qualify me,
if you want, for a committed relationship.
OK. But that a committed relationship is one specific definition
of relationships that I think our world has stuck to for a period of time
that evolved. OK. There are multiple, multiple,
multiple definitions of relationships today.
I think if you if you look back 20 years, 30 years at most,
you'd realize that that singular traditional model
excluded all same sex relationships, all bisexual relationships,
all this and all of that. It also included it also excluded
relationships that were not till death do us part and so on and so forth.
I found and I say that with.
Worry that people will judge me.
I found that what I'm doing is more important to me at the moment
than a traditional committed relationship.
OK. Simply because I feel that an hour spent
with one person could also be an hour that I spend helping a thousand people.
OK. And even though that hour for me
is definitely enriching and fulfilling and so on and so forth,
it becomes sometimes
the commitment associated with it doesn't make it an hour.
Normally makes it several hours, makes it a big chunk of your life
that I lived for 27 years and loved.
And I would say it's the absolute best way to live all together, right?
But it's definitely not something that from a current phase of my life
where the focus of where I want to put my chips, if you want,
my hours of my life is where I want to be.
And so I end up when in very, very connected, very deep,
very wonderful and loving relationships
that are super honest, but not lasting.
You know, if my life will take me from here to somewhere else,
I will not consider sticking around here as a prerequisite to find
or, you know, being a prerequisite to find a relationship
more important than my journey of finding where I need to be.
I learned that interestingly when I spoke to my dear friend, Matthew Ricard
on Slow Mo. So Matthew is probably one of the most renowned monks in the world.
He was a PhD in molecular biology, if I remember.
And he quit his life and went and became a monk.
And he had 60,000 hours of lifetime meditation,
which reconfigured his brain in a way that that was publicly
a very, very interesting science study.
He was called the happiest man in the world because of that.
And I asked him and I said, why, Matthew, why, why would you leave your life
and your girlfriend and your, you know, your he was French living in Paris
and your PhD and go and become a monk?
And he he said it would be very unfair
to have someone in my life expect me to be there all the time.
When what I wanted was my pilgrimages and to be next to my teachers
and my time of isolation and my alone time in my hermitage and so on and so forth.
He basically said it's not a promise I can make if I make it, I would be lying.
And I think that probably was a very enlightening moment for me
because there are many things I give up on in my life that would make my life richer.
But they're perhaps not on my path, at least not for the time being.
Is this a do you view that as a phase in your life?
Would you view that as definitely everything is a phase in your life?
Definitely, definitely.
I think that's the changing context.
Steve is probably the biggest failure of humanity.
The changing context is we have a tendency
because we are designed as survival machines to want things to remain exactly the same.
If it's comfortable, if it's safe, let's keep it.
I want my same coffee machine every day because I know that machine.
I know it's really where I can make amazing coffee with it.
And so, of course, when it's time to pack things,
I need it to hug that machine and say, OK, baby, I'm not going to see you for a few months.
But the truth is there are many places all over the world
that will make an amazing coffee, too, right?
That attachment is one of the biggest reasons for unhappiness in life.
It's the idea of I want my glass of water.
I don't want a glass of water.
I want my mug.
I want my glass of water.
I want my streets.
I want my commute every day.
I want my job security and so on and so forth, which is beautiful.
And by the way, every single one of us needs to live that for a phase of our life
for a season, if you want.
OK.
But the failure to recognize the changing seasons
sometimes results in a narrowness of our life that makes us stick to one path.
When we spoke about you, you started as a CEO of a marketing
very successful business, and now you're a podcast host,
you're an author, you're on Dragonsden and so on and so forth.
That's a recognition within you that this phase
has served its purpose and there is something else I need to do with my life.
And by the way, you could go back to that same phase, right?
You could become a CEO again at a point in time.
And it's that seasonal view of life.
And a big part of flow, you know, where I'm trying to live my life now
is to recognize those seasons, is to say, look,
I had an amazing, amazing woman for 27 years, right?
And I had a family.
I have been there.
I have done that.
I've enjoyed it tremendously.
It enriched my life, but it left gaps behind that need to be fulfilled
or completed with other phases and other seasons.
And I think the game here is to be able to allow yourself
to rather than plan and say my safety, my security, my everything
to allow yourself to sit back and say, where is what's life saying?
Is life hinting that I should be in London?
I can be in London.
Let me be in London.
Right? Let's see.
Maybe at the end of that season, nothing's going to happen.
You're going to go like, oh, it was just very good coffee
and a conversation with Steven, right?
And and it could be that, you know, oh, my God, it was the best coffee
of my life and the best conversation I ever had, right?
And and I think that wisdom, if you want,
it depends on if you're spiritual or not.
If if you believe that there is a part to you that is not physical,
call it consciousness or call it a soul, if you're spiritual.
That part is senses, things that are a little bit beyond the limitations
of the physical day, it might sense, you know, a need for the rest of being
someone else somewhere that may benefit from my presence in London
or maybe a need in within me to get a little bit of rain,
which I hadn't seen for a while.
I don't know, right?
And if the way the way that other part of you communicates to you
is through intuition, it cannot plant a text message in your head
and say, by the way, by the four teens, you need to be in London.
It just gets you gives you that feeling of something is missing from here
and something needs to be attended to there.
Do you want to investigate?
And I found from the spiritual teachers and happiness teachers
and actually business teachers that I worked with in my life
that those who are able who are able to go like, let me find out.
OK, let me find out.
Let me check this out.
Normally, stumble upon some of the biggest changes to our lives,
all of us, not just their lives.
And, you know, and it's it's quite interesting because
if you really look back at your life, really,
most of the events that actually shaped you,
that actually changed your lives were not planned at all.
You know, there probably were always those surprises
and often were the surprises you didn't want. OK.
And then somehow you go through with them and you end up in a place
that suddenly you recognize and go like, ah,
that's why I've been walking for the last 14 days.
And by the way, the game in my view, I say life is a quest.
It's not a journey. OK.
And the difference between a journey and a quest
is when you're on a journey, you've sort of plotted your path.
OK, I'm going to take that flight.
I'm going to go to this place.
I'm going to stay in that hotel.
It's a journey. Right.
And it will eventually end up in a destination. Right.
A quest is very different.
A quest is Christopher Columbus taking a crew on a ship
and in the middle of the, you know, fog,
not knowing where the new world really is. OK.
That's a quest.
You know, you don't really know where the destination is.
You're basically taking a couple of steps forward
and then stopping and then looking at the fog
and then assessing and then reflecting and then saying,
maybe I should take a step left and then you take one step left.
And then you say, OK, how does it feel now?
Do I want to go forward again or do I want to go one step back?
And by the way, there's absolutely nothing wrong
with taking two steps forward, assessing going to the left.
And then saying, left wasn't what I was supposed to do.
I'll go back and take a step to the right and see what happens.
But like Christopher Columbus, you you set off on your quest.
I'm sure as Christopher Columbus did for a reason,
you wouldn't load up the ship and put all those men on the ship
and get a boat.
And there has to be some kind of inspiration
or some kind of reason why you set off.
That's the question I want to ask, but I was also compelled by
you said you were in the relationship for twenty eight years
and eventually there's something missing.
Yeah, there's always there is always something missing.
What was what was missing?
So let's talk about the big picture first,
because I think people need to understand that there's nothing
wrong with having anything missing.
OK, but we are a very complex being
that is made up of so many emotions and so many reflections
and so many traumas and so many stories and backgrounds and desires.
And we live in a very, very, very, very unsimplifiable world.
OK, and yet we try to simplify it rather than try to enjoy it fully.
OK, when you when they tell you sweet and sour chicken in a Chinese restaurant,
it's not just a little bit of sweet and a little bit of sour.
There is a ton of flavor happening within all of this.
OK, there is there are layers of complexity
that creates a life that's worth living.
And for all for every one of us, it's that attachment.
It's the attachment of but I like this.
I don't want to change this that deprives us of all of the other flavors, right?
Nibel and I, I believe Nibel made me my my ex-wife.
She we met when she was 18 in university.
We fell in love madly.
We got married the day she finished university.
You know, we spent 22 years together with our beautiful children.
And then life changed context.
The context changed.
Ali left our world, my son.
And when Ali left our world, I hit the pedals and went double speed.
When Ali left our left our world, Nibel, on the other hand, looked at her life
and said, for the first time, I can now focus on me.
My my children left one went to university in Canada, and Ali left the world
to his next journey.
And, you know, simply she she looked at herself and said, OK, it's my time.
I'm not going to define my life by you anymore.
I can't travel the world with you because of your passion
and your mission and what you've now assigned yourself as the new task.
I'm going to find what I want to do with my life.
And I think that's wonderful.
If you if you ask me, that's definitely what everyone should do.
Now, with that contradiction, we became further and further apart.
Remember, love and relationships are not ever taken for granted.
I always say this openly.
I fell in love with Nibel six times.
OK, I fell in love with that cute girl that I met in university.
Then I fell in love again when she became my wife, because when you're
your girlfriend and your wife, you're two different people.
And by the way, I was her boyfriend and her husband.
These are two different people, too.
And now suddenly we're left with those boyfriend, girlfriend gone
and the husband and wife looking at each other and saying, where's my sweetheart?
Right. And then suddenly, you know, most people would get into that stage
in one of those constant changes and and say, hey, you know, I don't like this.
I want my sweetheart back, you know, it's an attachment.
Or you can go like, OK, the sweetheart is gone, but oh, my God, this one is so cute.
Right. And when when you actually see it that way, you fall in love again
with a totally different person.
And then again and then again, I believe I counted six times.
OK. And then eventually, when we wanted to to have our different
focuses in life, I would call that falling in love again, but slightly differently
because you see that the thing that we mess in life is we define love.
Love is too big, if you ask me, as a concept to fit within romance.
OK, we've we've narrowed love down to that story that Hollywood told us,
which is love is just romance.
OK, it's a it's a romantic relationship between two people.
It has intimacy in it and it has to be this and that.
And they have to live that way. OK.
The truth is, no, I believe there are 20 ways two partners can enjoy
and benefit from the company of each other and grow together,
two of which are sex and intimacy.
And we've defined love
per as per sex and intimacy. OK.
So if she if she's not your woman, as in as in your sleeping together,
does that end the love in any way? OK.
You know, as a matter of fact, if if it ends the love,
then it was never love if you really think about it.
And so we we define our our relationships that way.
And I think that's a recipe for disappointment,
because in reality, every every relationship will always go through those changes.
There will be times where sex won't be great and there will be other times
when your spiritual connection is at its best.
And, you know, it really is entirely around again, the layers and the flavors
and how you can choose each one of those and embrace it and grow it
and and and make it a prominent and live it as much as you can with that person.
And yeah, if if one of them ends,
my feeling is that the rest should not end, the rest should grow.
You more than anyone now, after those 20 plus years of being
in a committed relationship will understand the value of that committed relationship
and the place that it would I'm presuming add value to your life now.
But I guess there's an equation you're doing about what you would
what would come at the expense of that.
And it sounds like from my perspective,
the thing that would come at the expense of that is your mission,
your freedom, which you are also spending some time to really indulge in.
No, I'm as I think I think we all make those choices all the time.
It just suddenly becomes quite contentious when it's about love and relationship.
OK, but you know what?
You know, I left an apartment that I enjoyed
because I needed to do something else, right?
I am here in London, where when I could be in Silicon Valley, for example,
because they wanted me to talk about innovation there,
because I need to be in London because I want my next book to succeed, right?
So so we we all make those, you know, choices all the time.
And and life, sadly, is a question of compromise,
because, you know, you you you often say that the best of both worlds doesn't happen.
You can't you cannot have best of both worlds.
You can you can either say I'm living fully as my number one priority to achieve a
and I'll achieve as much as I can of B, as long as it doesn't contradict A.
Or you can say I'll go for B and, you know, I'll sacrifice a bit of A for that.
Right. And and it's interesting because most people,
especially the romantics, will say, how can you sacrifice love?
You know, love is the most important.
No, a billion happy is more important than love,
in all honesty, for me, in my to my personal love.
OK, because in my capacity to to feel love for a billion people,
OK, and and actually try and dedicate my life to as many as I can reach with that.
I tend to believe that's that prioritizing my own comforts and my own life
and my own settlement, if you want, being settled is selfish, to be honest.
It's it's a different phase.
It hopefully will happen in two, three years time, but it's not the phase now.
It's not the right time for it at all. OK.
And yes, I wish I could get get get A and B.
And maybe I'll stumble upon that wonderful woman
that is completely aligned and, you know, spends that that my trips with me
and, you know, supports this.
And if I do, that's amazing.
But if I don't, what would I prioritize?
It's life is a question of choices.
You could be doing anything with your time, you know, you're you're clearly
someone that is being very intentional about the use of your time
and making sure that every hour of your time is allocated towards
what you want, whether that is playing video games, whether it is writing a book.
So why did you choose to write a book called That Little Voice in Your Head?
I feel that the top three reasons for unhappiness in the world
without competition beyond that, like they are by far bigger than all of the others are
ego, lack of self-love.
And actually, in order, it would be lack of self-love, ego and that little voice
in your head. OK.
And the little voice in your head, as I as I say at the beginning of the book,
that I would dare say that there has never been a moment in your life
where any event had the power to make you unhappy
until you turned it into a thought. OK.
So so anything could happen.
It's the story you tell yourself about it that makes you unhappy.
It's not the event. It's the story. Right.
And so if my if I'm true to my commitment to try and make the world happier,
then I need to talk about those three topics in three different books
if you if you want, or maybe some content of some form.
But but that's not the point.
The point is what's tagged, what's what struck me and really, really puzzled me
was that I realized when I wrote Scary Smart
and, you know, Scary Smart was entirely about technology
and where technology is going and so on.
I realized that we humans have the ultimate technology in our heads,
a brain that is so sophisticated, so capable of doing things that are
really, really beyond the capacity of any supercomputer still today.
And yet we know how to use our smartphones and our devices
better than we know how to use that brain.
Most people get trained on how to use Excel,
but they never really get trained on how to streamline the thoughts in their head.
OK. And and that appeared to me to be a very interesting
engineering problem.
And so the idea was to create that analogy between neuroscience and computer science.
So the book in my mind was if I can show people that those brains,
the neuroscience of them is is actually similar, very analogous
to computer science and the devices you have in your hand,
because people already know how to use those devices,
then that knowledge would allow them to use the brain as good as they use the devices.
The basics here, which is the title of the first chapter of your book.
And it feels like the first chapter really kind of introduces some of the
inspiration behind why you wrote the book.
You talk a lot about your wife and the illusions that you live under.
What are the illusions that you you live under?
Or you lived under?
Again, let's think about the bigger picture first.
Everything that we have, you haven't visited and investigated
and arrived at a competent, confident
conviction that this is your own view.
Is probably an illusion, OK, which is quite striking
because for a man like me, who spends a lot of his time reflecting,
we're surrounded, we're submerged in illusions.
OK, everything from the value of, you know, a branded bag
all the way to, you know, what the TV is telling us,
what the government is supposed to do and all of that stuff.
Unless you've reflected on it and said, OK, I'm being told this,
I'm, you know, behaving this way, which might be contradicting
what I've been told, but I'm feeling that way, which might be a third contradiction.
And where is my reality?
It's safe to assume that this was an illusion.
So a big part of that little voice in your head is an admission
of all of the mistakes I made using that machine in my life.
Or not all, but many, not even many, but many mistakes
that I've made using this machine, not all of them.
There are many more mistakes.
One, I think the biggest of them was a conviction in my early years
that my kids were a burden.
My family was a responsibility, OK, which does happen when they come
to life when you're very young.
I mean, I had Ali when I was 25.
I was just turned 26 and and and you know, I got married when I was 25.
So basically you start to feel responsible.
You start to prioritize work.
You start to go out in that treadmill, you know, the hedonic treadmill
and just run, run, run, run, run, run, OK.
And the pressure that you that you put on yourself when you do that
makes you start to think, OK, they are the reason why I'm working so hard.
They are the reason why I'm stressed. OK.
When in reality, if you had asked them, they would have said,
Papa, just come play with us, right?
We don't want more than what we have.
It's me losing context and running like crazy that made me think that way.
And the basics of the challenges we have with our brains
is that we believe what our brains tell us. OK.
So when my brain tell me they are the the the burden, they are the challenge.
My whole being responds to that.
My whole being starts to behave that way. OK.
And and I think what the reality that we miss when we do those things
becomes what you have seen in that.
If you if you like the movie Inception,
you know, when she when his wife had that
thought, you know, we're waiting for a train or train, you know,
basically that kept playing in her head over and over and over
that convinced her that this is not the real world, that they are in a dream
and that the way to go out of it is to die.
That actually led her to committing suicide.
And and and, you know, big opening of the movie that my favorite movie line
of all time is what is the most resilient parasite.
OK. And the most resilient parasite is not a bacteria.
It's not a virus.
It is a thought that you implant deep in your brain
and believe in it over and over and over through your life.
And it shapes everything, shapes everything.
Interestingly, without you even knowing why you're doing what you're doing
is because because of that thought, because of that belief,
because of that ideology and people do the weirdest things.
I have a very, very dear friend who's a brilliant engineer,
brilliant engineer who had that thought in his head.
He's now in his early 60s, but that's if I tell my ideas to a businessman,
he's going to steal it.
So every startup he ever attempted, he wanted to be the engineer and the CEO.
OK. And as a result, everything he started failed,
even though the ideas and the engineering, the the rigor was incredible.
But he just couldn't get that idea out of his mind.
And you can go all the way to people who have ideas that lead to wars
or to destruction or to terrorist acts or whatever.
It's just one idea seeded deep enough in our head
that really leads us to become who we are and digging out that idea and finding it.
That's the basic.
The basic is to find those thoughts and how you can deal with them
so that you eradicate them so that you can actually live through to who you are,
not the thoughts that have been implanted in your brain.
And how does one go about even knowing
where to start that search for those sort of limiting or imprisoning thoughts
that have become the satellite navigation of our lives?
It is it's a moment of truth.
It's a moment of honesty.
You know, I think you started with that very.
I can't believe I spoke about that about the very personal question
about my relationship choices, right?
But that's a moment of truth.
It's not that I don't want someone in my life,
but it's that if that's someone contradicts priority A,
then priority A is actually what I stand for, right?
And you get those by comparing what you're thinking.
To what you actually do and what you actually feel.
And it's a very interesting exercise if you're coherent in something.
If you say I am vegan, for example, OK,
if if you identify yourself as vegan,
but you crave eating animal protein
and you feel that you're pressured, then you're not a vegan.
OK, you could be a striving vegan.
You're trying to be vegan.
You could be an ideologist vegan.
You want you believe in the ideology of veganism,
but you're not don't call yourself I am a vegan.
OK, you can then change that thought and say, I want to be vegan.
OK, that's a different thought than I am vegan.
And you can apply that to everything, to every part of your life.
I am in that partnership.
I love her and I want to stay with her forever.
But I'm looking at every other woman and I feel that I am in jail.
OK, great. Have that conversation with yourself.
Have that conversation with yourself
because what you're feeling is contradicting.
What you're doing is contradicting what you're thinking.
So much of my life is filled with contradicting.
Absolutely.
What does that say?
So I'm thinking about, you know, I say that I want to be in a committed relationship,
but then I what I do is work all the time
and want to work all the time and choose work all the time.
So what does that mean?
What does that mean?
You can tell me on camera.
I'm not going to cry.
It is. It's it's really it is look, you're not alone.
All of us are and it's not one topic.
It's on every topic. OK.
So so there are, as I always talk about, there are three compartments in our brains.
OK, one compartment is what I call compartment one,
which are things that are true and we know are true. OK.
The other is compartment three, which are things that are that are not true
and we know they're not true.
OK, and the majority of what's happening inside us
is what I call compartment two, which are things that are undecided.
We either don't know them or we know that they're not aligned,
but we can live with them for now. We don't prioritize them.
What matters is not solving them.
What matters is marking them as compartment two.
If you mark them as compartment two in your head, you go like, OK, hold on.
This topic is unresolved.
It's not within my priority today, but I need to come back to that topic
just as just like my choice of relationships. Right.
You know, it takes a long time and a lot of experimenting
after my separation with my with my wife to try and get to a point
where I actually know that I'm going to put in the time
and investigate where I am in life.
During throughout that time, I acknowledge to myself and I say,
this is compartment two. I don't know what I want. I don't.
Right. And the point is so many of those exist.
If you live assuming that it's compartment one, you're completely messed up.
Right. Because your actions are not matching your your your feelings
and your feelings are not matching your thoughts.
OK, you're not you're not complete.
You're not full. You're not settled.
You know, we, you know, that that idea of equilibrium.
Most people, the easiest way to imagine it
visually is to imagine a pendulum. Right.
If your life is in equilibrium, it's in total balance.
That total balance is the point at which
minimal effort is needed to live.
If you're in balance, you're not struggling.
OK, just like the pendulum, the pendulum, when it's at
at its equilibrium point, you literally need zero force
to keep it in the equilibrium point forever.
You don't have to apply any force to it.
You want to push it a little bit to the right.
You have to apply a force and keep that force for as long as you
you wanted to stay within that place.
And that's what we do with our lives all the time, that our nature,
our balance, our equilibrium is not exactly how we're living.
And so we're constantly applying effort, constantly trying to be in a place
that is not our natural place to be.
We want to be there, so we apply the effort.
Is there anything wrong with that?
Absolutely not, because life is cyclical. OK.
And life is all compromises as we start.
But the trick is to say, when I am in that place,
I am aware that this place is not my natural tendency.
And I am OK with that because that place gives me a B and C.
There is a utility to that place.
At the same time, I want to tell myself openly
that I'm heading from that place to that point of equilibrium.
Could that could be by saying, in the next seven years,
I'm not going to do anything about it, but in seven years time,
I'm going to start to head in that equilibrium.
Or you could say, I'm going to take a step every day
and for the next seven years, whichever way you want.
And or you, by the way, or you can also tell yourself, I don't care.
I know it's not my equilibrium, but I'm going to do it anyway,
because that's what I believe in.
I think that's very much at the state I'm in.
If you ask me, I'd like to be in, you know,
50 percent of the year doing absolutely nothing, OK,
with someone I absolutely love with a very simple life.
But that's not my life every day.
And I know that to be true, and I will do it for a while to go.
You know, because I have, I have assigned myself something
that I believe requires that effort.
OK, the other thing that humans do, most of us,
is we leave a lot of pendulums out of equilibrium.
So so it's actually quite easy to tell yourself, look,
my number one pendulum is my work.
OK, I'm going to put that in equilibrium.
Then my second, you know,
pendulum in importance is relationship or reverse them if you want.
The third is my impact.
The fourth is my friendships.
The fifth is my health and so on.
And then the game is if you want your work to actually benefit,
put the others in equilibrium, OK, or acknowledge to yourself
that they're not, but don't complain about it.
Don't feel bad about it. OK.
And if you do that, you manage to then simply focus yourself
on the one that is your most priority.
And then life is in an interesting way, linear that way in physics.
It's basically it's instead of the parallel processing
of trying to fix all of them at the same time.
You're simply saying, I'm going to process them in series.
I'm going to fix this work element pendulum first.
And when it's done, I'll fix the next one.
And then when it's done, I'll fix the next one.
And it's a constant journey.
So you're not alone.
I'm exactly like you constantly, constantly searching
and constantly reflecting and investigating and finding that equilibrium.
Just going back to something you said there about what you'd probably want.
Is it a case that you don't believe you could live a life
where you have priority of your mission, one one billion happy?
And a partner who is is not impeding on the mission?
No, absolutely not. I believe it's 100 percent possible.
Just not met the person yet. Absolutely. OK.
OK. The economics of love and romance are quite shocking.
Most people don't understand how that works.
You know, if you have if you have one requirement in the if you have zero
requirements in the person that you need in your life,
walk out of your door.
The first person that you meet is that person, right?
Because you have zero of anything that this person is is OK for you.
If you have one requirement and and say one of every ten people
in the world has that requirement, OK, bring that. Yeah.
Yeah, or something deeper, you know, let's start, you know, I am straight.
So I need a woman, OK, that by definition removes 50 percent of the population.
Yeah. OK.
I am, you know, I need a certain age bracket in my life that by by by itself
removes maybe 70 percent of the remaining population and so on.
So every layer that you add to your requirements,
sadly, follows the n squared problem. OK.
So the n squared problem is if you're looking for a person with one criteria
and one in every 10 persons have that.
If you add another layer of criteria, it's not one in 20.
It's one in 100.
If you add a third criteria, it's one in a thousand.
If you add a third or fourth criteria, it's one in 10,000.
Right. So it's it's constantly 10 to the power of. Right.
Now, if if you take anything that you want, I'm I'm looking for someone,
for example, supportive of my mission and free to travel.
Whatever that is, if if that person is, you know, is described by six criteria,
you're now talking about one in 100,000.
Do they exist? Absolutely.
Absolutely. 100 percent.
Do I have the time to spend looking for one in 100,000?
I don't. I do.
But it's not my priority.
Do you understand? And we do that with everything in life.
You you invest in your six pack.
I invest in my little belly, right?
Why? Because for you, the ability to prioritize the six pack at your age
with your current, you know, lifestyle and so on is actually
taking a certain amount of investment from you that's justifiable by the ROI.
OK. For me, if I wanted to achieve your six pack,
I'd probably take double the time, maybe double the effort, right?
And at the same time, I would require a lifetime that has a lifestyle
that has a consistency in it, that I may not be able to to achieve now.
And you look at it and you go like, damn you, Steve, I want a six pack.
But then at the same time, I tell myself, but damn, you know,
you're traveling everywhere and you're really, really, really being true to yourself.
That's fine. It's a reasonable compromise.
So the question just to be very specific, everything exists.
But the probabilities of them happening, if I'm the luckiest
person on earth, OK, I would walk out of here and she's the first person I meet,
right? But if you count that and say, no, reasonable probability,
you will say you'd have to encounter 50,000 encounters for that person to show up.
If you're unlucky, not unlucky and not lucky, right?
Suddenly, it starts to become interesting.
You tell yourself, and I know this sounds really weird for the romantics.
By the way, I am completely a love, you know, junkie.
But but there is a reality to life that sometimes gets you to prioritize things
differently. It's really interesting, because I've never had anybody describe it
in like a mathematical way before.
Yeah, so there is mathematics underlying everything.
I mean, think about that idea of one in a hundred thousand, right?
The mathematics of that, it's true.
When you see the mathematics, it doesn't mean that you have to act in a way
that's not human, but it just allows you to understand how the system is working
so that you can fit in.
So the example I gave is if you're into Shelby Cobra's, right?
If you want to sell that one car among a million other cars on a site,
that million other that car will have very little chance of being found on a
general site. But for the fans of a Shelby Cobra, if you go to a show
of Shelby Cobra's, everyone there, 100 percent of the people there are interested
in it. OK, so the interesting bit is that you can actually increase your
probability of being found quite a lot if you're true to yourself.
If you start to advertise yourself exactly who you as who you are and mix
with the people that you believe are the people that you want to be with, right?
That's the changes the probability drastically.
That's so very, very true.
That's very, very true.
Kind of goes back to what I was saying when I did your podcast about my hairdresser,
who was dripping head to toe in material possessions, jewelry.
He's advertising himself to a certain audience that he doesn't actually want
to attract. And if he is successful in that advertisement,
he'd attract something that makes him unhappy and gives him shitty relationships.
So you get exactly what you advertise.
And that's the interesting thing.
You know, if a young lady wants to to find a committed partner,
but goes to the pub every Friday evening or the or the club every Friday evening
to find that partner, you know, dressed in a certain way, acting in a certain way,
she's going to get the person because people are, you know,
we don't see beyond what you're advertising.
So if that's what you're advertising, the person who's interested in this will show up, right?
If you're into tango dancing and you show and you go to a tango class,
the people there will be interested in tango.
And those people will be the ones that you want to create that relationship with.
And yeah, of course, there are not a million people in the city that are interested in tango,
but a hundred percent of the people that are in that class are.
So I guess you get what your advertisement attracts to be careful, what you advertise.
Absolutely. And to advertise correctly,
the one thing you need most is to know actually who you are.
What are you as a product?
Right. Most people don't know that.
Absolutely. They don't know who they are.
Absolutely. You don't you don't know what who you are.
It's multiple rates, multiple, multiple layers of confusion.
You don't know who you are.
You don't love who you are.
You know or love who you are, but you're advertising differently
because you think others are more interesting, OK?
Or by the way, you don't know what you want.
So one of the most eyeopening, one of the chapters.
So I'm writing all of this in a book called Finding Love.
One of the most interesting chapters is all the models of love, OK?
And it's so eyeopening today.
Someone in my generation only believed that the only way to be with someone
is to have a traditional relationship.
Look at all of the models that are available in today's world, you know,
all the way from hookups to a lifetime commitment.
Everything's available, you know.
And and and when you when you when you don't know what you're looking for,
then you're advertising wrong.
How do you find out what you're looking for, though?
Again, it's the triangle.
What is what am I thinking?
What am I feeling?
And what am I doing? OK?
So openly, some of us will say, especially if you say, say, for example,
you're a woman in her thirties, OK?
And you want a child, you want a child, you feel it in you.
But you're so, you know, so when you look at the triangle,
what you feel is I want a child.
But your actions are you're dating people without talking about the topic.
OK. And then what you're thinking is maybe
if I if I tell them I want a child, they will not want to be with me,
which is quite interesting because, yes, if they don't want to be with you
when you don't want a child, you don't want to be with them either.
Right. And and and accordingly, there is a contradiction.
If you want a child, you want to advertise to the world openly to say
when you meet someone before you get too involved,
you say, what's your position on the topic?
Isn't it so funny that our strategy tends to be the total opposite?
It's false advertising till we get them
because the false advertisement is going to get more people.
And then once we've got them, switch up gradually.
Well, I don't even know if it's a conscious decision to switch up gradually,
but it's an inevitable inevitability.
You can't act for years.
So eventually, once we've got them on the false advertisement
of who we think they wanted us to be, then we'll change.
And that's when all the conflict and relationships happen is when
absolutely you realize this is not what you wanted at all.
Yeah. And you've attracted your.
You attracted the wrong person and you're stuck by acting.
Yeah. But the more the more interesting part of this is
we were prioritizing for the wrong target.
So remember, if you really sit with yourself and you say,
what do I want from a relationship?
I want a committed partner that wants to have a family with me.
If you if you come to that choice,
you would behave very differently, but interestingly,
you have this other conflicting thing of I want reassurance that I'm
interested, interesting and people are still, you know, men are still attracted to me.
So I'm going to go out dating others who are not just to make sure that when I
find this guy, I'll be, I'll be, you know, still, still ready to grab.
Right. That doesn't make any sense at all, because by the way,
the ones that you're attracting are not a resembling
sample to what you're actually looking for.
And I know it sounds really weird when you talk about those things in mathematics
and probabilities and sets and subsets and so on.
But believe it or not, it's entirely.
And I know people will hate me when I say this.
Dating is an entirely an economics problem.
It is economics, economics, meaning
that in my days when I met Nibel, she was one of 14
friends I knew, OK, economics were very straightforward.
Of the 14, Nibel was the one that matched my soul.
Most she was the most beautiful woman on the planet for those 14 and everyone else.
And so I said, I'm after this one, right?
Today, from a supply and demand point of view, you're talking about 14 million
people at any point in time that are in a market that is so complex,
it's like the Nasdaq market, OK?
Literally, products are on the market instantly all the time.
And the game is a game of economics.
Sadly, the more supply there is, the less the value of a product.
Right? So if you simply said to yourself, you know,
this camera is now going to be we're going to make 14 million copies
of it because it's easier for the factory to make 14 million copies than to make
4,000, every one of those copies to manage to sell 14 has to go down in price.
OK, because otherwise people only people who can afford the 4,000 would buy
and then you'll be left with the other 10.
And that's what's happening in the dating and romance market is that there is so
much supply out there that nobody values that relationship anymore.
Everyone is like, OK, I'll try anyway.
You know, it's going to what is it going to take a couple of dates?
But then that's not what happened.
You go on a couple of dates and then it's a nice case and then you stay a little
longer and then you're right.
And all of that basically you realize that you've spent seven months of your
life to figure out that this person is not interested in children.
For example, if we take that example.
So what does that mean in real terms for say that I was single and I was looking,
right? I'm someone, you know what I'm like.
I'm someone that's deeply interested in ideas and thoughts and, you know,
self-development and all of these things.
You know what I'm interested in.
We've talked long enough for you to have at least a gauge of that.
Where would I go?
Is it a place?
And where would I not go?
It could be. I mean, if you want to find love, do what you love.
Yeah, very straightforward.
If you're into reflection and personal development,
go to personal development conferences, sit with personal development.
People like me, I'll buy you coffee anytime, you know.
And or, or, or, you know, go to a retreat, for example,
the people that will go to the retreat will be the type of person that you're
looking for. I gave that advice to one of my dear friends and colleagues.
When I worked at Google, she was part of Google in Poland.
And I told her that I said, if you want to find love, do what you love.
So she went and asked herself, what do I love?
I love tango went and started that, you know, attended the tango class,
ended up marrying the the the instructor, right?
It's simply you want someone that matches you.
Go to the places where those things happen.
Those places could be physical places.
They could be online. OK, they could be serendipitous
because you're searching for those things.
But just know what you stand for.
I'm, you know, not a party animal.
I'm never going to find my match in a party.
So so do I go to parties? No, I don't really.
I mean, I go sometimes when there is a reason to go.
But otherwise, no, that's not how I spend my time.
Quick one, we bring in eight people a month to watch these conversations live
here in the studio when we're here in the UK and when we're in LA.
If you want to be one of those people, all you've got to do is hit subscribe.
You asked me a question about money, and then you said, you know,
what does money mean to me?
And then when I asked you, you said you think you've come to learn
that you think money is one of your illusions.
What did you mean by that?
Money is an illusion at every, every level.
Money doesn't exist.
You and I know that anyone who understands fractional reserve
and how money is printed and generated money does not even exist.
You walk into a bank and you ask for a 50,000 pounds loan for a car.
And they literally write the numbers five, zero, zero, zero, zero in a spreadsheet
and money comes out of nowhere that money never existed before you borrowed it.
OK, and will only exist when you work your backside off to pay it back.
Right. And interestingly, that in that illusion was created to make our
lives easier, and then it ended up making our life a lot more difficult.
Now, why?
Because most of us are so chasing the revenue side of money without
a full understanding of the cost side of money.
Let me try to explain for you to get a job in London that pays
you 100,000 pounds just for simplification of the mathematics.
You have to live in London, which costs you 70,000 pounds.
For example, I don't know London very well, but let's say these are the numbers.
But on top of the 70,000 pounds, it also causes costs you stress, your stress.
It also costs you being far away from your mom if your mom lives elsewhere.
It costs you, you know, your time, which is your most valuable resource.
The only thing you really have in your life is your time, and it costs you
so many other things, right?
And so most people don't understand the cost benefit relationship to start.
Now, you take that and then you add a Louis Vuitton bag or a fancy car.
And suddenly your money is not even going as far as it could, because you
could get yourself a bag that is beautiful and everything for 100 pounds.
But then you choose to buy one for several thousand pounds, and then you
have to work harder, which makes you may pay more costs and that and the cycle
becomes even more vicious, right?
You continue further than that.
And you start to say, so I save some of that, some of my money in the future,
but your savings are suffering inflation.
So you save a thousand pounds, they become 900, they become 800.
When in reality, by the way, you've saved the thousand pounds, when you could
have borrowed them by entering some numbers in a spreadsheet.
The entire recipe around that story is wrong.
Everything around money is not what we believe it is, which basically makes
it an illusion.
Now, the biggest part of that illusion, believe it or not, is, and I know you
have money in the bank, is that you have nothing.
I don't know if you realize that.
Most people don't understand that if I have 100 pounds in the bank, I literally
have nothing.
I have nothing.
The bank has my 100 pounds and the bank can decide whatever they want to do if
they wanted to take it away from me.
Okay.
And it is only my money when I choose to buy an iPhone or something with it.
For that one instant, that money is mine.
And then once I get the iPhone, it's not mine anymore.
I now have the iPhone, right?
You basically assign that money that is never yours.
It's the banks until the minute you spend it to spending it on things that most
of us don't ever, ever interact with.
I mean, look at your own home, anyone listening to us and how many things you
have in that home that you've not ever used ever.
You know, you, you saw that pair of shoes in the window and you were like, oh,
my God, I have to have them spent several hundred pounds on them or several
tens of pounds on them and then ended up taking them home, never, ever putting
them on, right?
Now, all of that waste along the way, the cost of earning the money, the things
that you spend it on, the actual value of the thing, the things that you spend
it on, basically tells you that there is one truth to money, which is I have
basic needs, I have basic needs and my basic needs are to be reasonably
covered, reasonably fed, reasonably safe and so on and so forth.
And in, in, in, in the Islamic culture, we call this risk, which is different
than income.
Risk is not what, how much money you earn.
It's the good that that money brings you.
It's, did you eat a meal today?
That is actually what you're looking for in life.
It's not the money that gets you the meal.
Okay.
What you're looking for is the meal.
Could you actually buy something for your daughter today?
The thing is what you're looking for.
It's not, it's not the money that got the thing.
And if you start to chase that, something very different happens, right?
Some, suddenly you start to ask yourself, hmm, is buying that thing worth the 17
hours of work I'm going to put in them, right?
Is it, which of those, which would I prefer if I gave you the two choices and
said, buy this bag or spend 17 hours with your friends.
If you see it that way, you may make very different decisions.
It leaves us with the very big other illusion, which is, but money is safety.
Moe, you know, it's not like I want money because I want more fancy things.
I just want to feel safe because the world is unpredictable.
Sadly, when the world is unpredictable, money's not going to save you.
Okay.
And I think my story's been very, very, very big.
I open, I had enough money.
I, you know, I had enough connections and enough influence.
And I, you know, failed to protect my child's life when it was time for him to go.
Right.
I, you know, I think we know many stories of someone that maybe falls and
breaks your back.
What will your money do for you?
Safety is a much bigger thing than just a little bit of money in the bank.
And by the way, safety is an attitude, is an idea to tell yourself, when I need it,
I will make it.
When I need it, I will have it.
Perhaps the answer is I don't need so much of it anyway.
And I think, you know, again, like everything in life, you, you want to, to have
the skill of making money.
Money is, is power, you know, again, when you were speaking on slow mo, you basically
said, I love the idea of being able to build this setup for the podcast of spending on
my show and so on.
That's wonderful.
Okay.
Money is power, but it's power as long as you own it and it doesn't own you.
The minute money owns you and lack of it starts to distract you and looking at how
much your, your other friend has and he has a little more than you, you know, hurts your
ego.
Once it gets into that realm, then money works against you.
It doesn't work for you.
Do you think it's a noble cause that when I answered that question and I said, for me,
money is basically the fuel of my mission.
It enables me to, I said, I put on my, my Diary of a Sea Alive tour, it cost me about
600,000 pounds to book these 10 venues, to book the London Playdian for three nights,
to book this massive choir of, you know, 40 people, to book this big musical.
There was about a hundred of us, a hundred people I had to book and pay for to put on
that show.
At the end of the show, I break even, but without the, that tour, you know, reaches almost
20,000 people, it's the most thrilling, fulfilling, biggest honor that I've ever had to be able
to do that in front of all of those people and to share that message, which is very much
in line with my mission.
And I look at money and say, if I, if I didn't have the money, it would have been much,
much harder, not impossible, but much, much, much harder to do that.
Absolutely.
So do you feel like that is a noble relationship with money?
Look, we agree on this. Nothing is good or bad, nothing is right or wrong.
Everything is both right and wrong and everything is, can be both good and bad.
It depends on what you want to do with it.
And one of the messages I constantly tell everyone in the world is absolutely become
successful, become powerful, become rich, because the biggest problem with our world
is that the most successful, most powerful and the richest are the worst of us.
Okay. And I don't generalize and say that's the truth, but it's actually easier to make
money if you break some rules than if it, then it is, if you're ethical.
And so as a result of that, a good chunk of the big money in the world is not super ethical.
Right. And if, if I have more money, I can fuel my one billion happy mission.
And that's a good thing for the world.
That's by the way, owning money, not letting it own you. Right.
So if I, if I can get to the point where I make it and actually give it to one billion happy,
then that's amazing. If I get to the point where I make it and then suddenly go like,
oh, let's wait a little bit, grow it a tiny bit and then give it to one billion happy,
then I'm not doing the right thing. Having said that, you know, of course,
you know how I admire you and respect you. This is your zoom lens of the world. Okay.
For someone else, four pounds, some sticky paper and a couple of scissors and spending an hour
with her daughter doing something beautiful. Okay. Is as impactful, maybe even more impactful than
the entire show, because that one daughter with the sticky paper and scissors might end up becoming
one of the most pronounced artists in the world, prominent enough to change the world with four,
four pounds, scissors and a piece of paper. Right. Now we, we somehow, especially those of us like
you and I, who, who had experiences in life where they put effort and the effort rewarded them. Okay.
We think that we are the ones that are changing the world or making a difference or no, we're not.
Okay. The reality is we need, we need to understand that again, I, you know, I admire you and I know
you'll, you'll not feel upset, but half of what you know is wrong. Half of what I know is wrong.
Absolutely. Right. And it's, it's just an attempt. It's just an attempt with, you know,
whether that attempt, Steve is, is, is an attempt because of money or is it, it's an attempt
because you just spend time with your driver talking about something or, you know, you were
telling the story, all of those things. I think the game is I'm going to do the best that I can
to acquire the resources that I'm good at acquiring to direct them in the investments that I have
accessible to me. Okay. If, if you are a cashier, you know, at a supermarket and you're making enough
money to spend wonderful time with your daughter to, you know, to, to do a bit of art, then that in
itself is a form of contribution that changes the world. And you'll never know that one daughter
might cure cancer. It's interesting. I was, I was bouncing around in my head back and forward
about like, about the role that a lot of my, I don't know, maybe my traumas and securities are
playing in driving my decision making around these things. Obviously, putting on a big show,
you have lots of people there that are clapping for you. There's lots of admiration. It's very like,
it's very massaging of the ego. So one might say to themselves, well, I'm serving the world when,
in fact, it's more of a selfish thing. And you're like, you know what I mean? It's that, that constant
battle I find in my life where the greatest service that I do to others is also woven in there with
loads of like, absolutely insecurities. So even this podcast, like, I'm sure the people listening,
enjoy listening, I'm sure they get a tremendous amount of value from it. But there is still
this guy in me that is so desperate to be number one and to win, right? And it's almost, I'm almost
at peace with the conflicting forces because I know, I think as we sit here, the podcast is
number one in the Apple store, pretty sure of that. And I know it wouldn't have been and it
wouldn't have reached as many people if I wasn't someone who was desperate to be the best.
But I also know that this is, that pursuit of being the best is also quite an ugly one,
because it comes, means you end up sacrificing a bunch of things in the pursuit of being the best
that might make you more fulfilled. So it's this weird, it's this weird balancing act of
contradiction and confusion and not really knowing why, why I'm doing what I'm doing at like the
real fundamental level. You can broadcast what people want you to hear. Oh, I'm doing it because
I want to help others. But I actually know that there's, it's a recipe, a concoction of many
conflicting forces and pretty much all my success has been this sort of recipe of conflicting forces.
Well, I mean, what I admire most about you is you're able to see and say this, okay? If you're,
you know, if you've achieved total enlightenment, you'll be gone, okay? None of us is ever there.
The challenge is this. Some people are completely egocentric and not even aware.
Yeah. Okay. Some people are struggling, okay? And some people are, you know, doing the best they
can, understanding, as I say, that in compartment two, there is something and they're okay with it,
okay? And the trick is you're always trying to move a little bit higher. And that higher,
you know, and that little voice in your head, I follow that model. And it sounds simple,
but it's actually quite interesting. I call it be learned do, right? Be learned do is
most of us in our life, we look at problems and we say, here's the solution, right? That's,
we're mostly almost anchored in doing. Doing again is a very masculine trait, okay?
Interestingly, a lot of doing is as harmful as it is, as it is beneficial.
You know, the good doing is a doing that is informed by a form of being and by a certain
level of skill that comes from learning. Okay? So when I, what I normally try to follow in the
entire manual to your brain is to say, okay, for everything that we will find, we will have to be,
then learned and do, okay? So you're very good. One of the people I respect most about that idea
of being, you look at yourself and you say, oh, I am doing that because of that insecurity that
happened when I was this. That's an amazing achievement in itself. That's a third of the way,
right? I know what's what I need to work on. And I think it's the challenging third of the way,
believe it or not, because we humans are very good at solving the problems when they're defined.
If you make it your priority, you're going to learn the skill. Everyone is capable of doing
that. Again, I speak a lot about neuroplasticity and how learning works. But once you've learned,
once you've realized what it is, is that you need to work on, you're going to learn the skill and
then you're going to start practicing and doing it the right way. The challenge is when you don't
know what you're working on. Now I'll say this openly. What you're doing to the world with your
awareness that part of it is ego driven, of course, part of what I do is ego driven. I tell the whole
world that I'm an engineer. Being an engineer is an ego. Why do I tell the whole world that there
is a utility to that ego? The utility is, by the way, guys, if you want to read my work or listen
to my analysis, it's going to appear a little over engineered, even when I talk about something as
beautiful as love and relationships. It will have that engineering element to it, which is not entirely
myself, by the way. It's just the way I present myself to the world, because others don't present
themselves that way. So I'm differentiating. Yeah, I wish I didn't have to use that ego.
You may wish that you stood on stage and didn't feel the rush of people clapping and saying,
well done, you're amazing. But by the way, if you're delivering to thousands and hundreds of
thousands of people on your podcast, great, you're so much better than those who are not.
And now the fact that you have your awareness makes you even better than those who are,
but are not aware of their parts that they need to work on.
Yeah, it's challenging. I was bouncing around in my head on that, because if I cared a ton about
the clapping part, I probably would be trying to convince everybody that I'm perfect a bit more
than I do. It's just an interesting battle of ego. But I also think that, I think I said this
on your podcast, is it's okay to be a contradiction. And I think in all facets of my life, when I look
at my decisions, what I want, what I say, what I do, and there's so many interwoven contradictions,
and it's so remarkable that the contradictions often lead me to success in the things that
I'm aiming for. It's not making sense. I think the whole idea is that we're all contradictions.
The only difference is you're aware. Yeah. Do you realize that? So the thing, I think you
should be the example for everyone to recognize that we're all contradictions. It's everyone,
every single one listening to us. Life is a contradiction. This is why one of my favorite
feminine qualities is the ability to embrace paradoxes. And the reality is, the only way you
can almost like at a quantum level, solve life better, is if you're able to embrace two extremes
and say, both are true, and I'm going to include both of them in my lifestyle, both of them in my
decision making, because both of them are me. It goes back to your point about the equilibrium
as well, that the reason why the pendulum sits in the middle is because it's at balance with
two opposing forces. Gravity has balanced it on that particular point, but when you apply one
force to either side, it will swing into a direction. Maybe balance is being a perfect
contradiction. Absolutely. Balance is always a contradiction. Balance is that ability to take
all of those forces. Now, you have to imagine, I separated them into six forces and said your
health, six pendulums, that your health is one and your love is one and this is one,
but the reality is you're one pendulum. So many forces are applying from so many directions.
And the contradiction is not just, if I work harder, I'll make more money or less money.
If I work harder, I will also be a little more stressed. If I work harder, my relationships
will be affected. And each of those, eventually you're ending up in one place that is very,
very complex. We're a very complex being as a human and we're dealing with an even more complex
life. And the thing is we need to take it easy on ourselves and say, yeah, yeah, yeah, I'll figure
out my relationship bit in a while. I now need to figure out my one billion mission and a little
more or I need to figure out this more or I need to do that more. And it's okay to say it's never
perfect. It's absolutely never perfect. The game is if I told myself, no, no, hold on. I've done the
thinking and this situation is my perfect situation. I'm doomed because I'm basically telling myself,
keep that pendulum in this place and defend it with your life. Okay. Put all of the effort in the
world when that pendulum is in the wrong place. It's not in balance. In your book as well,
that little voice in your head, you describe how like all thoughts aren't really made equally and
that there's different sort of categories of thoughts and some of them like observation are
closer to the truth than others. What are the different categories of thoughts that we have in
our head? The first challenge with thought is that we create our thoughts from the wrong ingredients.
So if I gave you bad vegetables and told you to make the best salad recipe on the planet,
it's still going to taste bad. And the reality is we have only one proper ingredient
that we should allow into our brain so that we create proper accurate thoughts. And that
that one ingredient is actual observation. Okay. Observation is I look at this glass and I say
this glass is 37% full. Okay. That is an observation. Yeah, you can, we can debate in physics if it is
or if it isn't and so on. But in, you know, the typical way we look at life, this is 37% full.
Right. My brain would then tell me, if I used that information, I may ask someone in the team
and say, guys, can I please another have another a little bit more water? My brain would then tell
me, no, no, hold on, it's tapered. Okay. It is not, you know, the same from the top as it is
in the from the bottom. No, you've calculated wrong. No, you're getting old and your mathematics
are not accurate anymore. You're, you know, you can go into so many different inputs into your
thoughts that would debate that fact that it is more empty than it is full. Okay. You take that
and you find you can find them in categories. One of them is conditioning. Believe it or not,
one of the most frequently used sources for creating your thoughts is not what's happening
in the world at all. It's your conditioning and your conditioning creates thoughts within you
that are not, not at all a reality. I speak about any experience where I was dating a
Buddhist girl who was very calm and wonderful in every possible way. And, you know, two of our
best friends were a couple and they had a big fight before coming to our place. And so anyway,
the, the girl basically said, no, I need to talk to you about something and, you know,
want to ask your view. And she sat next to me, very, very, very good friends, all the four of
us for a very long time. And so she hugged me. She sat on, you know, put her head on my shoulder
and cried. Okay. My girlfriend came in and said, excuse my English. She said, take your hands off
my man, you be. Okay. And, you know, I was like, whoa, she's one of the calmest people I know.
What happened here? And what happened was she had been cheated on before. Right. By the best,
by her best girlfriend and, you know, a friend of the person she was dating at the time.
And the input into her head that said, this girl was sort of doing something inappropriate with
me was coming from the fact that she had that conditioning in her. It wasn't the event itself,
the event was highly exaggerated by the conditioning. So we're unable to find that when we, when we
look at our, at the makeup of our thoughts. The second, I, and the third are recycled emotions
and recycled thoughts. Okay. So we recycle so much of what our parents told us. Recycling
of a memory or the recycling of a thought, you know, your, your friend tells you, Hey,
by the way, all men are cheats. And you recycle that thought. Okay. All men are cheats. All men
are cheats. And then, you know, you end up making decisions based on that. The fourth, and I think
the most, the biggest challenge we have in the modern world is the mainstream media, basically,
the, the, the, the large advertising media story that we're told that is a ton of input,
whether it's movies, it's social media, it's, you know, tweets or, or reels or, or, or if,
or if it's the BBC or channel for playing the news. And the, the, the reality of what we're
getting is we're getting a highly biased section of life. Why? Because of the human
nature, which is around negativity bias, humans are only paying attention most of the time to
the negative side of life. Those all, all of those outlets are constantly using that negativity
bias to broadcast to you. Well, it's actually not the full truth, but the negative side of the truth.
So, you know, the, the channel will not talk about a child that went out with his mother and
played on the swings. They'll talk about a child that fell in a well and we have that disaster.
And, and, you know, a social media person, I always say, you're a balanced one, but a social
media influencer will always show this, the pictures that appear to be more than what they're
living and there will be filters and so on. And that negativity that you feel as a result
is not a reflection of the actual truth of life. It's a reflection of the subset of knowledge that
you get from life. Now, what does that mean? I mean, I'm trying to say, if I give you your phone
and your phone has a perfect phone app on it, if you type the wrong number, you're going to call
the wrong person. Nothing wrong with the phone, nothing wrong with the app. Okay. In your brain,
if you put in the wrong data all the time, if you allow all of that negativity coming from the media
and the news, if you allow the conditioning to be part of your, of your decision making criteria,
the recycled thoughts and emotions, then you're eventually going to end up calling the wrong
action. Okay. And I think the reality is that at that very fundamental level, unless you start to
really iron out all of the wrong inputs, there is very little possibility that you're actually
going to get to the accurate output. You were talking about all these types and categories
of thoughts and all of these inputs. One of the inputs is the mainstream media. Some of the
inputs come from, I guess, our conditioning and experiences. And when you talked about the glass
and your observation that the glass is 37% full, how do you know that that's not your conditioning
speaking? How do you know that that's not the influence of the mainstream media? How do you
know that there's not a second layer that's running over your, what you're seeing called your
perception that is influencing that. I'm trying to figure out for people listening how they can
distinguish between a thought that is truth and observation and worth pursuing and incredible
and one that is conditioned or your spot on. Okay. This is 37% full is my brain's calculation.
Let's use a simpler example. You have an argument with your partner. The next morning you wake up
and say, doesn't love me or she doesn't love me anymore. Right. The argument is what you observed
that there was a bit of attention that those specific words were said. That's observation.
Right. Observation is literally like narration of the situation. That's it. And if you can stick
down, you can take yourself all the way down to narration, you're done. Okay. I observe that you're
sitting cross hand, you know, crossing your arms. That's an observation. My brain could take that
observation and say he's bored. He's protective. He is angry with me. We've been talking too much,
whatever. Okay. I can translate it into a million things in my head. None of them is true.
The only truth is Steven's sitting in front of me and he's crossing his arms. If I accept
that to be the truth, then my brain suggests those other things. I can then ask and I say,
have we been talking too long, Steve? Do you want, should we take a break? Can we do this?
Can we do that? Right. And then you would say something and that would be my next observation.
I can include that in my analysis as another fact. Okay. Without those facts, sadly, what
happens to us in life is that we're completely absorbed and consumed by stories that we've built.
The story is this is 37% full. That's a story. Believe it or not, even so though it appears to
be very accurate, it's a story that includes, hey, by the way, Moe, you're good in geography.
You've done your mathematics really well. You've looked at those two. It looks as if you,
and you know, it's a big story. And I would tend to tell myself, hey, it's 37. If I complimented
this with, you know, I think it's 37. It could be a little more or a little less. That's a much
better observation. Right. If I tell myself the story and believe it and start acting upon it,
then I'm in a very deep trouble because, because basically my input into my brain
is leading me to confusion, certain confusion, because I'm not using the truth.
It's that kind of like requirement of having like a looseness of our beliefs as well, isn't it?
That just the, that old adage of strong, strong beliefs, but held loosely, whatever it's,
that phrase is, I think is the most beautiful thing ever. Yeah. Because what are your beliefs?
The beliefs are built within context. Again, I write about this. You know, there was a proverb
in Egypt that was developed in the times of poverty and famine. People couldn't have enough. And it
was a difficult time. And it basically said, as far as your, extend your legs as far as your
blanket goes. Okay. Interesting. When you know, it's basically within context, it invites people
to say, Hey, within your, live within your resources, live within your means. It's not an easy time.
You take that and take it out of context. And it's widely, widely used in Egypt.
You put it out of context and it becomes, you know, a bit of complacence. It's like,
don't try to buy a bigger blanket. Just live within your blanket. Okay. And that's a very,
very, very different view of looking at something that was meant to be correct.
And if you take, when I talk about conditioning, you have so many of those in you.
So many, something that your mom said at the point in time, something that your,
you know, teacher said at the point in time, something that you did and your friends in
school reacted in a way that you didn't want and so on. And all of that is embedded within us.
How do I get rid of it? Again, it's very simple. It's that contradiction.
It's a very simple contradiction of something is not in balance. I say that I want a Rolls-Royce,
but I actually go, you know, go to the Rolls-Royce and then feel that maybe people will think this
way about me, maybe, you know, it's going to cost me that much, maybe, right? And, and, and suddenly
you go like, okay, so I'm not in balance. Because what I think we're talking about here is like
really self-awareness. It's becoming really. But also self-reflection, self-introspection.
And that's, that's what I was going to say is I think for most of my life, because of my conditioning,
I'm essentially this puppet to my conditioning with all these pieces of string hanging off my
limbs. And self-awareness is the process of gradually cutting one of these strings at a time
and taking back more control of why I'm doing what I do in my behavior. So that like journaling
or producing content, that, that introspection and self-reflection is, has been the cutting of
these strings one by one, or you could view it as the, like the turning on of lights in a room.
So you can kind of navigate better the world. But until you do that, the lights really are off.
And I think that's kind of central term to what we were discussing about how to distinguish conditioning,
media influence from truth and your own thoughts.
Quick one, as you might know, Crafted are one of the sponsors of this podcast and Crafted are a
jewelry brand and they make really meaningful pieces of jewelry. The really wonderful thing
about Crafted jewelry is it's super affordable. It looks amazing. The pieces hold tremendous meaning
and they are really well made. I think I've worn this piece for almost a year. It hasn't broken,
hasn't changed color because it's really, really good quality and it costs roughly
50 quid. People will be surprised when they hear that. They'd probably assume that all of my
jewelry is like solid gold and costs thousands and thousands of pounds. But what's the point
when you can achieve the exact same effect from a piece of jewelry that's high quality and costs
50 quid? That's why by Crafted. The other thing that you mentioned in your, in your book, that
little voice in your head is this concept of neuroplasticity. It says it on the back of the
book. It says, retrain your brain for maximum happiness. This concept that we can retrain
our brain physiologically seems like nonsense. I can't change my arm. So when someone, you know,
asserts that you can actually change your brain. You can change your arm. I can change my arm?
Of course. What, tattoo? No, you work out. That's true. When you work out, you're building
muscles in your arms and that same exact process is exactly what happens inside our brains and
it's called neuroplasticity. The only difference is that you don't see it. You don't see it visibly.
You can see your muscles growing because that's the function that they need, you know, they need
to grow to perform. But in your brain, what actually happens again, like computers, it's almost as if
you loaded a new piece of software, a new piece of operating system on your brain, literally for
every one of us listening, everyone listening to us right now, at the end of this conversation,
their brain will be wired differently than when it started. Every single instance of anything that
you do literally rewires the hardware itself, the neurons that fire together, wire together.
Okay. So imagine the old days of the switchboard. Okay. And, you know, Steve wants to call his mom,
so you, you know, crank your phone and the operator says, you know, hi, how can I help you? And you
say, can you please connect me to that number? And she would literally take a wire and patch
you and your mom's phones together. Okay. After a while, the operator constantly, every time you
call you want to, you ask for your mom. So the operator goes like, why am I even wasting my time
on this? Let me just patch that wire to his mom all the time. Okay. So that's exactly what happens
in our brains. If you, if you perform a single, a certain function, your brain starts to build
networks that make that function easier to perform in the future. If you do it one time,
it becomes a little easier. If you do it 20 times, it becomes permanent. Okay. And there are, there
are tons of studies. If you, if you take a simple task like tapping your finger on the table, okay,
and you're requested to do that, say 20 times every hour, after a few days, you'll find that you're
so much better at tapping your finger on the table, and you can do it much faster and you can do it
consistently and you can do it in the background. Gamers know that for certain. Okay. The problem
with neuroplasticity is if you tell your brain to wire for tapping your finger, it will. If you
tell it to wire for solving complex mathematical equations, it may take a little longer, but it
will. If you tell it to wire for hating people, it will become very good at hating. If you tell it
to wire for fearing the end of the world because of what the media is telling you, it's going to
become very good at fearing the world. I know some of these people. I know, absolutely. And you
don't want them in your life. The challenge of our modern world is that we think that this brain
is supposed to be there to make us successful. Yeah. Okay. First of all, it's not the primary
function of the brain. The primary function of the brain is to make you safe. Okay. And then
the secondary function that we push human as humans to, that brain to do is to invent iPhones and
create podcasts and have amazing things. Right. That's a secondary function. But believe it or
not, before that secondary function, your, your brain is supposed to make you happy because happy
is the ultimate form for you to perform in life. If you're not happy, you're not as effective as
you could be at achieving survival. Think about it. If you're grumpy all the time at work,
people don't like you. You're not focused. No one wants to help you. You're wasting most of your
time, your brain cycles, you know, thinking about the negative. And so you're not innovative or
creative and so on and so forth. It degrades your performance. Happy is a better place for
you to be at work because it will make your customers want to do business with you. It will
make your colleagues want to, you know, to help you out. It will make your boss welcome you in
their team and so on and so forth. We are social animals by definition. And we want to have that
in our life. And the easiest way to connect and to open up and to discover the world is to be in a
happy place. That's a primary function of your brain. It's hard for some people, you know,
because we can all think of someone in our lives who has certain wiring, very stubborn wiring,
that almost seems impossible to unwire. And I think we all have that ourselves as well,
certain wiring in our brains where something happens and our reaction to that thing might be,
you know, to catastrophize. It's the end of the world. That's like a, it feels like it's a
certain set of wiring where trigger and then the brain goes through the circuitry and it goes
catastrophe panic. Yeah. And the answer to that I found was to actually guide that person or yourself,
if that's yourself, to the opposite of your wiring. So if my wiring is to look at everything and see
what's wrong with it, I should deliberately force my brain to look for what's right with it. So,
you know, I, when I was, when I was coming here, it was very busy in the morning. And so I came
late, if you remember, and my brain's immediate reaction is, Oh, what's going to happen? I'm
going to be late for Steve, right? That's the immediate reaction of a brain because something
is wrong. So it looks for what's wrong. I could also say, and what is good about that? What is
good about being a little late? You know, he's been recording for the last few days. So it may
give him a little bit of extra time. Do you want to know the truth? I was so happy you were late
because I was late. Right. So I was doing upstairs reading that I was reading the book and I was
thinking, I just hope he's like 15 minutes late. And then I'm like, I really, he's not coming at
perfect. So I carried on going and carrying on going and carrying on going. And I just finished
as you arrived. Yeah. So it's perfect. You see, that, that is the truth. That's the truth that
your brain tries to deny you from seeing. And interestingly, you can't train your brain. So,
so basically what you can do is for every thought, for every negative thought that your brain gives
you, task it with the task of giving you a positive one or two positive ones, nine, I say, nine.
Yeah. Because in reality, if you look at life around you, more than 90% of life is okay for
your brain to contribute more than that as negative is not fair. Right. So if literally if your brain
says, Hey, by the way, this studio is a little warm. What else is about this to do? My friend,
Steve is there. The lighting is perfect. The crew is amazing. You know, the coffee is not that bad.
You guys got me honey. I can go on for hours. Right. And the idea is by training your brain
to look for that. What are you actually doing? You're firing the neurons together.
Gratitude. And exactly your, your, your book basically says it is the answer. The answer is
when you find gratitude, what that gratitude journal that you keep that you kept for years
every day, what was it telling you? It was training your brain to look for what's right.
That your brain every night that you did it was like, okay, it seems he's going to be asking to
call his mom a lot more often. It seems he's going to be asking for good things a lot more often.
I might as well observe them. I might as well find them. And so yes, you said some people are
impossible to rewire. They're impossible to rewire. If they've been practicing a certain
wiring for 21 years, it's not going to take 21 seconds to rewire anyone, including me and you.
It will take 21 days, let's say, for your brain to recognize I need different wire.
And it will take maybe 21 months for your brain to say, and I don't need the old wiring anymore.
And the game here is, can you actually keep doing that? Can you keep tapping your finger
in a way that trains your brain that this is the wiring that you need?
Like, can I keep going to the gym and working on my guns?
Believe it or not, the research will tell you that a big part of being athletic is wiring
of your brain, not your muscles. For your brain to be able to say, I will go, even if I feel a
little tired, I will go, even if I feel a little busy, I will go and I will do the right exercises,
even if the last push is a little painful. A lot of people will hear that and go, what's
the evidence for this? What's the evidence for neuroplasticity? Is there science? Oh,
there is a ton of science behind neuroplasticity. Anything from between neuroplasticity and
neurogenesis is when neuroplasticity is to rewire the connections between the neurons.
And neurogenesis is to actually create new neurons when, if you're hit with a ball,
for example, and part of your brain is damaged, how we can recreate that, right? If you have a stroke
and how you recreate that. And ample evidence, one of the very famous stories is Matthew Ricard,
when we spoke about him in the beginning. Matthew's brain looks different than the average human
brain. His insula is much bigger in relative comparison. His prefrontal cortex is bigger.
And it fires more often. It's simply because of the constant neuroplasticity of,
I need you to meditate. I need you to stay quiet. I need you. I mean, some of Matthew's journeys
would last four years in isolation. You would meditate for four years?
Be in isolation in hermitage for four years. And so at that level, your brain starts to do
very different things. And by the way, that's not unusual. Many farmers around the world
live in isolation for a very long time. Believe it or not, you and I, when we spend a long time
on airplanes, I chose a long time ago to not watch a lot of stuff. I maybe watch one movie,
but not the entire trip. The other bits of silence, that's actually a form of meditation.
And my absolute wonderful friend, Jamie Nelson, the photographer, if you know him,
he photographs indigenous tribes. And the way he does it is he would go and spend a few months
outside their premises, their village, if you want, in silence. Camping out there,
he doesn't speak their language. He's just sitting there waiting for them to accept him.
And then he would start to communicate to them in sign language because he doesn't speak their
language. And he's one of the wisest people I know. And I said, how did you become this wise?
He never studied any of those things. And the reality is, is because he's in constant reflection
and meditation. He's sitting out there. And he's spending hours and days in reflection and meditation,
right? Because you're sitting alone. All of those things are our habits. And all of us have the
chance to do it. You could be on the tube for a commute of 40 minutes a day. And you could be in
that commute cursing life. And that's a very good 40 minute exercise to work and another 40
minute going back. Or you could be spending the 40 minutes in gratitude. You could be first for,
you know, for spending the 40 minutes listening to music, could be doing whatever
what you will do for 40 minutes a day will rewire your brain.
It really is like a paradigm shifting thought that our brains are in this constant
growth and evolution. But when we look at, as you said, my muscles are,
my muscles are changing state size, growing more fibers to achieve their objective in a
different way. And of course, my brain is as well. And when you think about that, it's really
liberating because you realize that you're not stuck with who you are. Absolutely not.
It's my friend, Ro, she's, she's got a podcast as well. She, um, one of the smartest people I've
ever met. And she, she worked in my company for many years and she got a brain tumor. And
she showed me the scan of her brain. They found this golf ball in the middle of her brain.
And they removed it. And she showed me those brain scans. And then just months later,
the hole is gone. And her brain has regrown that part. And there's no longer a hole in her brain.
And that was one of those moments when I go, Oh my God, the brain, like,
like everything around us is a living organism that is shaping and evolving based on the
inputs and what's happening to it. So let's choose what, which parts of it are we going to
grow? I think that's the whole point. And we grow it with our actions and our thoughts.
Repetitive actions, thoughts and memories, believe it or not, one of the interesting
things is if you take a memory in the past and you think about it over and over and over,
it's as if you're hap, it's happening over and over. And you're growing the neurons that are
needed or you're growing the connections between the neurons that are needed to trigger that memory.
Think happy memories. Okay. If you sit next to your partner and focus on one thing that they
do and go like, they say, do this, they do this, they do this, they do this and forget
that they do a hundred other things that you love and appreciate,
your neuroplasticity is making you completely obsessed about that one thing.
And you can only see that one thing. And eventually, you know, some of my friends
after a breakup, I go like, what happened then? They'll say one thing.
It's like just, they obsess about it over and over because your brain is growing to say,
he needs to think about this, right? I'm going to make it easier to think about this.
I'm going to make it faster, more accessible. And you'll see it more often, like the red cars.
You know, the whole thing about when you, if you buy like a red car, if you buy like a green car,
then every car you see will appear to be green. If you buy a Range Rover, every car you see is a
Range Rover. Well, this other thing that's really intriguing topic from our last conversation that
you mentioned and you mentioned in your new book is this idea of masculinity and femininity.
I don't really hear many people talking about this. Yeah. Believe it or not, my, my publisher
really was asking, should we include this? It's a contested topic that we want to,
but I think it's very important for people to understand. We've mixed up again, a few definitions.
Like I said, we mix love and romance, for example, with mixed biology, with gender identity,
with sexual preferences, with the reality of what the feminine and the masculine is.
The feminine and the masculine in my definition are approaches to life. Okay.
Some basic, basically, some people will want to hold their mug this way and others will want to
hold it that way. It's an approach to life. No way is right and no way is wrong. Okay.
Some of us will want to go through life with creativity and playfulness and,
and, you know, intuition. And some of us will want to go with analysis and discipline and
linear thinking. It's an approach to life. Neither is right and neither is wrong.
There is a high correlation between those who are, I archetypically feminine, if you want,
between certain of those qualities, certain, some of those qualities. And, you know, those who are
masculine. Again, there is a correlation with some other qualities. So you'd find that a person
who's masculine, whether that's a man or a woman, straight or gay, it doesn't matter if, if a person
acts in their masculine, they'll tend to be a little more forceful if you think about it. You
know, we, the masculine, one of the masculine qualities is strength. Okay. Strength is a,
is a quality, whether it's strength in mental strength or physical strength. You want to,
you want to use your strengths to move things. Okay. If you're dependent on your masculine side
or more associating with your masculine side, you're going to show that. And as I said, statistically
correlated, those who have male body parts tend to use that a little more. Reasoning doesn't matter.
The problem with our world at the global level and the problem at us, about us as individuals
is we've decided that some of those properties or qualities are more valuable to our world than
others. Okay. If, if you live in a capitalist world and the capitalist world is entirely about
let's produce more, let's make more, let's, you know, do more, we're going to have to borrow more
from the doing qualities, which are mostly masculine. Okay. This leads to a world where
there is a lot of doing with little being, which basically means it's a world where we do a lot
of what we haven't really properly thought about with what, what is not really informed
by the realities of who we are being, being that beautiful. Some of the feminine is being
the feminine is the masculine does. There is a difference between them. And if you continue
to do without actually asking yourself that awareness question of what should I do? You end
up doing things like building technologies that make our life slightly better and destroy the
planet in the process. Why? Because you haven't really internalized some of the most beautiful
feminine qualities of intuition, of creative thinking to look for alternatives, of sensuality
to actually sense what is actually happening in the world as a result of your doing of inclusion,
you know, to connect to the rest of being to understand that this is not just about us,
it's also about the bees and the, and the bears and everyone else and so on. So that world that
we've created being hypermasculine is I think the biggest mistake humanity's ever done. And I think
humanity's paying for that mistake and will pay more in the future. The savior is for us to stop
doing this and to start waking up and saying, hold on, hold on, we need a lot of being before you
continue to do. So interesting. It's particularly tricky to understand for men, of course, because
men, I mean, there'll be a lot of men again, you know, listening to this podcast now that hear
the idea that they need to embrace their feminine, that go, oh gosh, no, it will scare them, it will
it will appear to hurt their identity, their sense of self, it'll make them feel weaker,
maybe it'll make them feel like they have, they lack purpose if they're not that masculine,
because a lot of, a lot of us as men, a lot of our sense of purpose comes from being
competitive, from winning, from being strong, apparently, that's how it feels anyway.
But what is masculine? I mean, if masculine is to protect, for example, because we have the strength
or the masculine has the strength, can that protection happen without empathy?
How can you protect if you don't have empathy? You need the feminine empathy to be able to protect.
If the masculine is to solve a problem, can you solve the problem without actually identifying
the problem? You need intuition and sensuality, and right, if the masculine is about safety and
survival, how can you do that without living, without beauty, without, you know, art, all of
that is in the feminine. Your comment is right, by the way, but it is not because of any difference
between the masculine and the feminine. Men will, will feel less comfortable with this,
because women have been sadly pushed to live in their masculine, to survive in this hyper masculine
world. I will tell you honestly, and I say that with 100% honesty, you know, honesty of that view,
I thought to myself that I was intelligent. Until four and a half years ago, I started to
empower my feminine. And I promise you, I'm 10 times more intelligent. I was in my left brain
doing all of the analysis, thinking I'm a smart person. But I was doing all of the analysis,
all of the wrong inputs. The feminine gives you the inputs. The feminine gives you the,
the picture of the reality, the, the inclusion, the big, the big view of life. You can't see that
with your narrow-minded, linear brain. And I think the reality is that men who are most successful
ever in changing the world, believe it or not, are more in their masculine, feminine than their
masculine. Anyone has that, has ever changed the world, has been more in their feminine than
your masculine. The example I gave when we spoke about this Steve Jobs. Most people think that
Steve Jobs was an amazing successful CEO because he was pushy. He was, you know, a bit obnoxious
actually sometimes. Not at all. The reason Steve Jobs was Steve Jobs is because of his feminine
qualities, his appreciation of beauty, his appreciation of his creativity, his art, his
appreciation of color and shape, his empathy to his user's needs. All of these are what made
Steve Jobs that amazing visionary that he was. Obnoxious, by the way, pulled it back a little
bit. Gandhi, even though sometimes Gandhi is contested, but Gandhi's success is not in saving
his nation through the masculine qualities. If it was the masculine qualities, he would have
rallied a billion people to kill the Brits. No, he went into a peaceful, nonviolent, an empathy,
an attempt to make things work through communication. All of these are feminine qualities.
And somehow we forget in our narrow-minded, hypermasculine world, because we've narrowed
everything to dollar signs. So productivity and profit and all of that is dollar signs.
And so if that's the target, yes, doing more, producing more, selling more is a good way to
go. But the reality is anyone who's ever made the world better, not richer, did it by living in
their feminine first. How does one tap into their feminine side? Because I think it's important to
also say, because these words have been associated with genders for so long, but a woman or someone
that's trans can also be too much in their masculine side and vice versa. A man or someone
that's trans would identify as whatever gender can also be too much in their feminine side.
But so how does someone tap in more to their feminine self? Is there an activity? Is it just
a choice we make? So I think it first requires an exercise of awareness. And actually,
in that little voice in your head, in that chapter specifically, I have quite a few
awareness exercises. Those awareness exercises start by recognizing what's the feminine.
And that's a beautiful exercise, a beautiful exercise that you can actually experience if you
invited a couple of friends over that are feminine in their actions most of the time,
and a couple of friends that are masculine in their actions all of the time,
and allocated proper time for each of them to solve a problem. And observe the behavior. You
will find incredible differences between the masculine side, man or woman, it doesn't matter,
which will jump in and say, okay, we're going to carry this and then take it 10 steps away from
here and then we're going to do this and lift it on the shelf right away. When the feminine will say
things like, I feel that this might be a little heavier for John than it is for Jack. And I sense
that if we can collaborate around it as one being, we can do this slightly different. Sometimes they'll
say things like, why do we have to do this at all? Isn't there a bigger world where maybe we could
just keep it here? And by that observation, you'll start to identify the qualities.
That's number one. Number two is what I call the appreciation exercise. The appreciation
exercise is to flip roles. It's to sit in front of you and say, Steve, how would you solve that
problem? And then wait and then tell you, how would you solve it if you were Jackie? And that
appreciation exercise basically starts to get you to say, oh my God, there is another way,
and that other way is not really me. It's Jackie's way, but it's interesting. And then the third is
practice, practice, practice, practice. I tell you openly, I've been empowering my feminine for
the last four and a half years, now probably five years. And my biggest exercise for the last two
years has been an exercise of flow. We spoke about that at the beginning. The idea of flow
is the truth of the feminine. The feminine is life itself. It's flowing, it's gushing across
life, across the world, across territories, across times and stories. And we, if we live
in our masculine, we go like, nope, not going there. This is not my place. This is my place. I'm
going there. And I liken it always with a river, a raging whitewater river. If you put the masculine
in the boat, the masculine will take the water, the push it because they want to go there. They
want to be right there. The feminine will just hold the arm and basically say, okay,
the river is going. I just need to balance it every now and then with one strike, just to
stay on track. But it's okay to take a little longer with the river to get to where I want to be.
And that massive difference, I'm sorry to say, and I'm someone who associated with the masculine
for a very long time is stupid, honestly stupid, because suddenly somehow you realize that life
itself is talking to you through your feminine. Life itself is saying, let go. I'll do things.
Okay. I'm much more powerful, mighty wheels. I can do stuff. Just let go a little. Just flow with
me a little. And if you manage to do that, I chose flow. I think there are several other major
pillars of the feminine. One of them is inclusion, as I say. So relating to others, choose that if
you want to. One of them is temporal. The masculine is very linear. We associate with the arrow of
time where the feminine is very rhythmic. We associate with cycles. And so if you can actually
see the difference between them, that's a very interesting exercise. I think creativity and
playfulness and breaking the rules sort of, I think paradoxical thinking. To me, these are the
big five pillars. Paradoxical thinking is to be able to be humble enough to embrace that two
opposing stories are true. Two opposing facts can actually exist together.
Interesting. And the role of the masculine. Amazing. The role of the masculine energy.
So that's a beautiful question. So the problem we had with the movement of feminism,
and I say that with love and respect, is that it demonized the masculine.
Now, what needs to be demonized is overdoing the masculine. So strength is good.
That is me sometimes, by the way, I have to admit. I definitely overdo the masculine. My
girlfriend tells me as well, she goes, she'll literally say it like that though, because she's
very in touch with her feminine masculine energy, you'll say you're being too in the masculine
right now. Yeah, you know what's one of the most common things I'm told by a woman who's
uncomfortable with how her boyfriend's behaving is he's unable to be available emotionally.
Yeah, of course, we suffer from that. That's a consequence of toxic. Absolutely. So let's talk
about this concept because it's very important. There is no demonizing of a quality. Linear
thinking is a wonderful quality. If you can think about a problem linearly, that's a wonderful
quality. Overdoing it makes you stubborn. You understand it's the overdoing that's the problem.
It's strength. Wonderful. You overdo strength, you become violent. We don't want the overdoing.
And what should be demonized is overdoing that. It's overdoing anything, including, by the way,
overdoing the feminine. So if you're intuitive, it's a wonderful quality. But if you're too
much intuition, you're ignoring linear facts and analysis. If you're, let's say, paradoxical,
one of my favorites, as I always say, if you can embrace paradoxes, it's a wonderful quality.
It gives you double the amount of information to analyze if you want to do analytical thinking.
But if you overdo it, you become a little irrational. If you're disciplined as a masculine
quality or not disciplined at all, you become irrational. So overdoing something or underdoing
something is not good for any of us. What is the right amount of doing something, by the way?
It's how you are configured. So I am much more empathetic and maybe creative
and maybe playful than I am paradoxical. I am much more in linear thinking and control
than I am in flow. This is why I work on my flow, believe it or not, through neuroplasticity.
So what I'm doing with my life now for the last two years is I'm living a life of flow.
I'm allowing life to tell me what to do. And instead of my hyper-engineered mathematical
brain saying, nope, that's not the way it should be done. I've done my analysis. It's 37%. I'm going
to do this. I start to listen and say, hey, I'm going to make the decision of it's 37 or not.
In a couple of weeks' time, no harm done if I was wrong, but intuition is beautiful.
It's hard to uncondition oneself, but it goes back to this point about rewiring our brains
by repetition. And when I think about being more in my feminine energy and my feminine
qualities and characteristics, it is achieved by repetition, by opening up to that side of me
and spending more time wiring myself to in that way.
Which I think is so important. It's funny because I know there'll be a lot of people
listening to this that either don't understand or have kind of misunderstood because we're
using terms that come with like stigma. When we think of femininity or when we think of
masculinity, there's connotations with that. But it's so unbelievably true. And if people
have listened to this podcast, they'll know it's true. We had Terry Cruz on here who talked about
his masculinity and how that became incredibly harmful to him and destructive and risked his
relationships and everything that mattered to him. We had Patrice ever talk about how
early experiences that made him lean towards masculinity to help him survive,
being abused by his head teacher and watching his brothers and sisters die because of drug
addiction on the streets of France, made him turn more to that masculinity as a tool for survival.
But then that cost him so dearly because he lived out of balance to one day sat with his partner,
she said, there's something not right with you. There's something not right with you.
He resisted, he resisted, he resisted, then boom, burst into tears. And that's the moment where he
opened up. You see it, you see it and you know it. And by the way, I think in reality,
what I'm asking for is now that the world has finally accepted gender diversity and fluidity
and so on. I'm asking us not to be more categorized. I'm asking us to stop saying,
so I'm category A, category B, category D, because we've just moved from man,
woman to more categories now. I'm asking us to say that Moe is unlike anyone else in his mix
of masculinity and femininity. I'm 58 percent in certain qualities of the feminine, I'm more than
others. And you could be 42 percent in other qualities of the feminine and more than others.
And I think the idea is to say each and every one of us is an individual, each and every one of us
is a category of their own. Everyone, the only category I fit in is I'm a Moe. That's it. That's
my category. And that category includes a beautiful blend of qualities that I can use that are not
any better or any worse than anyone else. Those qualities that I blend together might be amazing
for this podcast conversation, but horrible at making pizza. I don't know. And I think the
reality is if you can become true to that reality of who you are, you'll become the best at that
that you're supposed to do in life. And without that balance, you will always, always feel incomplete.
Moe, you've written what is another legendary book on a very related but incredibly foundational
topic, which is our thoughts and that little voice in our heads. And I think if this conversation is
a flavor of the book, then it is, I think in everyone's view that's listening, a must read.
You know, it's funny that we, I talk about time being the single currency that we can allocate to
determine the outcomes of our lives, but thoughts are the... Interesting. The other thing that is
determining how we spend that currency. Yeah, I think, I think time is the rhythm of your song,
the song of your life. And thoughts really are the lyrics that you put on top of it. They are the
melody. They are, they are, as we spend a minute of our life thinking a certain thought, that minute
completely shapes how the song of your life is going to be. It's quite interesting how we ignore that.
And so maybe, maybe thoughts are the most important thing. And what this book does is it
helps us to adjust the code that runs our brains. At the last line in your book, you say
I have one last selfish request. Please find the compassion in your heart to want happiness for
my wonderful son, Ali and wise teacher. Send him a prayer, a generous wish that he is happy
wherever he is right now. He started it all and he truly was the kindest, happiest human I have
ever known. I'll keep working on mine for Ali. Why did you bring that up? We were having an easy
conversation. Yeah. So yeah, I wouldn't be here if it wasn't for what he taught me. And I wouldn't
be here if it wasn't for the example he set. And I wouldn't be here if it hadn't been for him
leaving us. And, and I, it's interesting that I told, I may have told you this once before that
I write the last sentence of every book before I write the rest of the book.
Yeah. And I, I have to say I have been
blessed with so many people that send me messages that say I love Ali. And yeah, I feel that
if it was that, only that, that I got from the work I've done, then I've lived. It's,
there is nothing worse more. And, and, and, but I'm getting so much more. I'm getting so much
purpose if you want, but I don't want to be forgetting him in that purpose. I think that's
where I stand today that I'm so driven by what I'm trying to achieve. And he's been away for
seven years, almost eight years now. So I once again need him to be part of our journey to
so yes, please send him a happy wish. The work he's done through you is truly magical.
Through you is the exact right word.
It's funny when, when we spoke about the idea of control being a masculine quality. Only when I
let go, only when I let go that life, whether with him or through him, or maybe he's the boss,
I have no idea, but what I've, what I've accomplished was so much more than what I did
when I was trying to control everything. And it's because of how he showed me to do, to do this.
As you know, we have a closing tradition on this podcast.
Oh, I should have prepared for that. Oh my God, I didn't think about this.
It doesn't matter. Sometimes, you know, a lack of preparation leads to the best
outcomes. Okay, question is,
oh, that's not encouraging, Steve.
Oh, so I really like this question. It's very fitting, I think.
The previous guest wrote for you, what is the greatest wealth in your life?
What was not the greatest wealth was all of the money, all of the cars, all of the
things. It was a waste of life, I promise you. And I know most people will say, yeah,
you say that because you had it. When you have it too, you will feel the same. It was a total
waste of life. When you wrote in your book that we come to this life with 500,000 chips, you said,
remember, you wrote 80 hour, if you live 80 years, you will have 500,000 hours of active life or
something like that. And that this is your wealth. This is what you come to the, to the world with
and you place those chips hour by hour. The thought that came to my head was I was born a millionaire.
500,000 hours is a lot of hours. But then you turn, you take that cash and you turn it to equity.
It's really interesting how you take those hours and by placing those chips,
you turn one chip into equity, into something that lasts. And the things that I know last are
experiences, knowledge, and love. And I promise you, we will never acquire anything more important
than any of those three. In an interesting order, actually, they are love, knowledge, and experiences.
So, so what we, what we, what we go through in all of our life is we do tons of things
that we think are going to acquire us, one of those three, you know, unhappiness, of course.
But, but in reality, it's so much easier to acquire those three directly. The biggest wealth you
will ever have are a set of experiences that can't be repeated, some knowledge that can be
beneficial for yourself and those around you. And the feeling of love, which I have been overwhelmed
with. I mean, I can tell you, I'm the richest man I know by far from the number of kind messages that
I get from people saying, you know, we love what you do, we appreciate your, your, your attempt to
make the world better. That love, I think, is the biggest wealth I have ever acquired. And I
always say, Ali and I am my daughter, definitely have been the biggest love of my life, for sure.
And when Ali left to take that life away, I feel that the fairness of life replaced it with the
life, with the love of hundreds of thousands of people. Which interestingly, I'm so grateful for,
but it's almost exactly barely enough to balance the love that I have for him.
And so, yeah, maybe, maybe we should spend our life acquiring more of these.
Thank you.
I had a few words to say about one of my sponsors on this podcast. For many years, people have been
asking for a coffee-flavored hul. And quite recently, hul released the iced coffee caramel
flavor of their ready-to-drink huls. And I've just become hooked on it over the last couple
of weeks. And now I'm drinking that as well as the protein. Make sure you try the new ready-to-drink
flavors. The caramel flavor is amazing. The new banana flavor as well as amazing. And obviously,
as I said, the iced coffee caramel flavor has been a real smash hit. So check it out.
Let me know what you think on social media. I see all of your tags and Instagram posts and
tweets about hul. Back to the podcast.
