In the history of mathematics, a great deal of mathematics was invented to solve problems
that arose from gambling and other games of chance.
Here's a problem that you might have even considered yourself.
Those two baseball teams are playing a best of seven series and your team is winning three
games to two.
Now assuming the teams are equally matched, what are the chances that your team wins the
series?
In 1654, the French mathematician Blaise Pascal was asked to solve a very similar problem
called the problem of points.
The general problem posed to him was this.
Those players A and B are playing a game of chance.
Each game is worth one point and whoever reaches N points first will win a prize worth D dollars.
Each game is equally likely to be won by A or B.
Currently player A has A points and player B has B points.
If the players decide to stop playing the match at this point because of rain or whatever,
then what is the fair way to split the money?
So for example, suppose A and B are flipping a fair coin.
Each time the coin lands heads, A wins a point.
Each time the coin lands tails, then B wins a point.
Whoever reaches a score of ten points wins a hundred dollars.
Currently A has nine points and B has eight points when they decide to stop playing.
What is the fair way to split the hundred dollars?
So how would you solve this?
Here are some plausible answers.
You might say, well you told me that those players were equally matched so maybe they
should split that hundred dollars fifty-fifty.
But then of course that doesn't take into account A's advantage.
A is winning nine to eight.
So then you might say, well then maybe we should split the money, split the hundred
dollars proportionately nine to eight.
Or you might look at it from the fact that player A has one game to go, player B has
two games to win.
So since player B has twice as many games to win as A, maybe A should win twice as
much money as B. Maybe that pot should be split two to one.
All these answers seem plausible but they all lead to paradoxes.
And none of them are right.
I'll give you the right answer later.
And if you figure this one out, then what if the score were seven to six instead?
How would you solve that problem?
How would the answer change?
To answer questions like this, Pascal developed the theory of probability and created Pascal's
Triangle.
Behold Pascal's Triangle.
Pascal's Triangle appears on the cover of many discrete mathematics textbooks.
The Triangle is actually known to mathematicians in China and India at least five hundred years
before Pascal.
But Pascal was the first mathematician to systematically explore its many properties
in his treatise Traité du Triangle Arithmetic written in 1655.
So let's look at Pascal's Triangle and you can immediately observe that it has ones on
the borders of the triangle.
The other thing to notice is that each entry is the sum of the two entries above it.
For example, we see that above the twenty, we have a ten and a ten, right?
What would the next row of Pascal's Triangle look like?
Well, it would have to begin and end with a one and then looking at the row above it,
we see one plus six is seven, six plus fifteen is twenty, one, fifteen plus twenty is thirty-five
and then that would create what we'd call row seven of Pascal's Triangle.
Now I'm actually going to write this triangle as a right triangle instead of the isosceles
triangle that we saw.
I do that because this will allow us to see some of its patterns more clearly.
He decides to excuse the pun, the right triangle is just the right way to draw the triangle.
Okay, so along the right triangle, you see that we have ones down the leftmost column
and if we go to the column after that, we have all the integers in a nice row, one two
in a nice, I shouldn't say in a row, in a column, right?
One, two, three, four, five, six and going on forever.
If we go to the next column, we have what are called the triangular numbers, one three
six ten fifteen.
Where do these numbers come from?
Why are they called triangular numbers?
Because you see if you were to draw triangles by successively writing dots of length one
two three four and so on, then the number of dots in the triangle would be one three
six ten fifteen and so on.
That's why they're called triangular numbers.
Here's another pattern that you may not have seen before.
If you take, if you go down that third column, you see that one plus three is four and three
plus six is nine and six plus ten is sixteen and ten plus fifteen is twenty-five.
We get perfect squares, four nine sixteen twenty-five and that goes on forever.
How about the column after that?
Well, these are numbers that can be described as sums of triangular numbers.
These are called the tetrahedral numbers because you can create them, as in this graphic, by
summing up dots that occurred in filled in triangles.
Okay, so what is Pascal's triangle really?
How do we define it?
How do we prove its patterns?
I mean, I've only shown you some patterns for a few handful of rows.
How do you know that things don't just go kablooey after that?
Okay, so here is the official definition of Pascal's triangle, right?
So for n greater than or equal to zero, and in discrete mathematics we always started
zero, the nth row of Pascal's triangle is, it's starting on the left with n choose zero,
then n choose one, and then n choose two, all the way up to n choose n.
Now let's remind ourselves what these n choose k's are.
These are the binomial coefficients.
What does n choose k count?
Among other things, it's the number of ways from a class of n students to create a committee
of size k.
That's what n choose k counts.
We have a formula for it.
So here would officially be Pascal's triangle, where the entry in row n column k is n choose
k, and when I expand those out numerically, we get our old friends, one, one, one, one,
two, one, one, three, three, one, and so on.
It's the triangle.
Now again, do you trust me?
You've only seen rows zero through six.
How do you know that it will continue to work after that?
Well, let's first explore, I'll get to that in a minute, but let's first explore some
other patterns.
For instance, we see in, if you read across any row of Pascal's triangle, it reads the
same way if you go from left to right as if you go from right to left.
So for instance, row four is one, four, six, four, one, whether you read that forwards
or backwards.
That's because four choose zero, the number on the left, is the same as four choose four,
the number on the right, both of those are equal to one.
And four choose one, and four choose three, as I go one in, those are both equal to four.
And in general, I claim that n choose k will be the same as n choose n minus k.
And let's prove that, okay?
So we don't have to just rely on a simple pattern, we'll know that it's true not just
for the first six or seven rows, but for all rows thereafter.
The algebraic proof is pretty straightforward.
We have a formula for n choose k.
So what if I replace k with n minus k?
What do we get?
We get n choose n minus k is n factorial over n minus k factorial n minus n minus k factorial,
which simplifies to n factorial over n minus k factorial k factorial, which is the same
as n choose k.
A pretty straightforward algebraic proof, but I think that there's a better proof.
It doesn't require any algebra at all.
It's called a combinatorial proof.
We just ask, what are those things counting?
That both quantities n choose k and n choose n minus k are counting the same thing.
For instance, why should four choose one be the same as four choose three?
Well four choose one counts the ways from a class of four students to ask one student
to stand up, which is the same as from a class of four students asking three of them to sit
down.
There's many ways to pick one thing out of four as to pick three things out of four.
And in general, the number of ways to choose k objects out of n, which can be done n choose
k ways, is the same as the number of ways to not choose n minus k objects out of n.
And that can be done n choose n minus k ways.
So we would know this theorem was true even if we didn't have a formula for n choose k.
How do we know that each row and column is going to begin and end with a one using our
n choose k definition?
Well simply because every row is going to start like n choose zero in the form n choose
zero and every row is going to end as n choose n and both of those we know are equal to one.
What about in between?
We've seen that every number is the sum of two numbers above it.
So the pattern that we see on Pascal's triangle is when we look in row n and the kth entry
that it's equal to the number directly above it that would be row n minus one the kth entry
plus the number just to the left of it that would be n minus one choose k minus one.
So the pattern that we're seeing here in the triangle is that n choose k seems to be
equal to n minus one choose k plus n minus one choose k minus one.
Now there are two ways of proving it.
One we could do it algebraically.
We could express those in terms of factorials and for those of you that like to add fractions
you can do it algebraically.
I'll just flash it right here.
There's a much nicer proof though.
This is my favorite kind of proof called a combinatorial proof by showing that both
sides of this identity n choose k and n minus one choose k plus n minus one choose k minus
one are counting the same problem.
You'll notice by the way that I spelled combinatorial with some of the letters highlighted.
The reason, so in fact my students sometimes call these things cool proofs.
My conjecture is that this is actually where the word cool comes from, that it just became
too cumbersome to keep saying wow that's really combinatorial.
So cool was just the natural thing to say.
But I digress.
So here's a question.
From a class of n students, how many ways can you choose a size k committee?
Now you say well Professor Benjamin we've known that since lecture two.
n choose k and I'd say you're right.
Now comes the fun part.
Take that same question and answer it on the right hand side.
Why should that answer also be n minus one choose k plus n minus one choose k minus one?
I'll tell you why.
This is a technique I sometimes refer to as weirdo analysis.
You've got this class of n students but let's suppose student n, the student sitting way
in the back of the classroom has bad breath or something.
And I ask how many of these committees do not use student n?
Okay, so from this class of n students I'm going to pick a size k committee.
If it doesn't use student n then I can choose that committee n minus one choose k ways.
Pick any k students from one to n minus one.
The next question, how many of these committees do use student n?
Must use student n?
Well here since student n must be in the committee, from the remaining n minus one students I
have to choose k minus one to join the committee.
Therefore all together there are n minus one choose k committees that don't use student
n plus n minus one choose k minus one committees that do use student n.
Which answer was right?
Answer one or answer two?
They both were right.
Our logic was impeccable both times therefore the two problems have to have the same answer.
So here are other gorgeous patterns of Pascal's Triangle.
If we sum across the rows of Pascal's Triangle what do we see?
We see that the first row sums to one, the second row sums to two.
The third row, one plus two plus one, sums to four.
The next row sums to eight, sixteen, thirty-two.
The pattern is inescapable.
These rows are summing up to powers of two.
In fact if you look at row five you see that row five is summing up to thirty-two which
is two to the fifth power.
So the nth row of Pascal's Triangle clearly appears to be adding up to two to the n.
And if you express the numbers in Pascal's Triangle according to their definition as binomial
coefficients what that fifth row is saying is that five choose zero plus five choose
one plus five choose two plus five choose three plus five choose four plus five choose
five must equal two to the fifth.
And in general n choose zero plus n choose one plus n choose two all the way up to n
choose n appears to be equal to two to the n.
By the way, saying all these sums and chooses can be a mouthful.
A notation that is used frequently in discrete mathematics is called sigma notation.
We'll only use it sparingly but you should see it.
It says to express the same theorem we say the sum of n choose k.
As k goes from zero all the way up to n that's what the sigma with the zero on the bottom
and n at the top represents.
It's the sum of n choose k as k goes from zero to n must equal two to the n.
Here's a combinatorial proof of that theorem.
So what's the question whose answer is n choose zero plus n choose one all the way up to n
choose n?
Well, here's a simple question.
From a class of n students how many ways can I create a committee of any size?
We know the number of committees of size k is n choose k and the committee size k can
be as little as zero or as high as n.
So in total we have n choose zero plus n choose one all the way up to n choose n.
Great.
What's another way of answering that question?
Another way is to say well to create a committee of any size I'm going to go through the classroom
one student at a time and I look at student one and I decide yes or no are they on that
committee or not.
Yes or no to the second student, yes or no to the third student, yes or no to the fourth
student all the way up to the nth student.
So the total number of committees since I have two choices, two choices, two choices,
n times is two to the n.
Again since we came up with two different answers to the same counting question those
answers must be the same.
You might recall from algebra that the binomial theorem was stated this way.
If you take the quantity x plus y squared you get x squared plus 2xy plus y squared.
Some people that's all the algebra they remember.
X plus y cubed is, you might remember is x cubed plus 3x squared y plus 3xy squared
plus y cubed.
You probably don't remember x plus y to the fourth is x to the 4 plus 4x cubed y plus
6x squared y squared plus 4xy cubed plus y to the fourth.
To extend the pattern backwards, x plus y to the first power is x plus y and x plus
y to the zeroth power is 1.
Now if I throw away all those x and y's and I just look at the coefficients behind them
you see we have the same coefficients that appear in Pascal's triangle 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,
2, 1, 1, 3, 3, 1 and so on.
Where do these come from?
This is the classical binomial theorem and this was recognized historically long before
Pascal.
People saw this as a fundamental identity that x plus y to the n is the sum of n choose
k, x to the k, y to the n minus k.
Even the binomial theorem has a nice combinatorial proof.
Let me give it to you here.
Suppose you have a room with x girls and y boys.
I say it in that order to be biologically correct and suppose we have n distinct pieces
of candy.
I've got a lollipop, I've got a tootsie roll, I've got a piece of licorice, whatever.
How many ways can you allocate these n different candies to the x girls and y boys and yes
some of the kids may end up empty handed, maybe one kid gets all n pieces of candy.
That's allowed by these rules.
How many ways can we allocate the candy?
The first answer is, well, each piece of candy, there are x plus y places it could go to any
boy or girl.
The first candy, there's x plus y choices, the second candy, x plus y choices, and so
on down to the last, the nth candy, x plus y choices.
Therefore we get x plus y to the n.
On the other hand, now I say I'm going to take that same problem but I'm going to first
count how many ways can you allocate the candy so that the girls get exactly k candies.
How could you do that?
Well, first you say, well, from those n pieces of candy, let's decide which k of them are
going to go to the girls.
We're going to create a girl pile of candy and a boy pile of candy.
How many ways can I choose which are the girl candies and choose k ways?
Now once I've separated them into my piles, now how many ways can I allocate the girl
candy?
Well, each piece is now going to have x choices.
So I've got k candies for the girls, each of which there are x choices, so there's x
times x times x, x to the k ways.
How many boy candies do I have?
I have, since there were k girl candies and n candies all together, there had to be n
minus k boy candies and each of those boy candies, there are y choices for where each
of those goes.
So y choices times the first, y choices for the second, y choices for the last, y to the
n minus k all together.
Therefore the number of ways of allocating the candies where the girls get exactly k
of them is n choose k, x to the k, y to the n minus k.
If I take this all together, if I sum these over all possible k from 0 to n, that gives
me the right side of my identity, which is the right side of the binomial coefficients.
Earlier we showed that the sum of n choose k as k goes from 0 to n is 2 to the n, right?
n choose 0 plus n choose 1 plus n choose 2 up to n choose n was 2 to the n.
And we had a beautiful combinatorial proof for that, but there's a really slick proof
using the binomial theorem.
In fact, it's literally as easy as 1 plus 1 equals 2.
Check it out.
Here's the binomial theorem.
If you let x equal 1 and y equal 1, then 1 plus 1 to the n is 2 to the n.
And the other side of the binomial theorem says that's the sum of n choose k, 1 to the
n minus k, so the ones disappear and I just get the sum of n choose k.
Here's another important pattern that appears in Pascal's Triangle.
We know that the nth row sums to 2 to the n.
What if I skipped along?
What if I added every other number in Pascal's Triangle?
Then what would we get?
It may not surprise you that you get exactly half the total you had before.
Instead of every other number in row n summing to 2 to the n, it sums to half of 2 to the
n or 2 to the n minus 1.
Like for instance, that's row number 6.
That says 6 choose 0 plus 6 choose 2 plus 6 choose 4 plus 6 choose 6 is equal to half
of 2 to the 6, 32.
And since the sum of the even position numbers is half, then that means the sum of the odd
position numbers must also be a half, 6 choose 1 plus 6 choose 3 plus 6 choose 5.
Putting that all together, we get the sum of the 6 choose evens equals the sum of the
6 choose odds.
If you interlace them and add them and subtract them, what you get is that the alternating
sum of 6 choose k is equal to 0.
In fact, the alternating sum is not just true for 6, but at any number n, the alternating
sum of n choose k is equal to 0.
You actually can do that one using the binomial theorem 2, whereas the earlier proof was as
easy as 1 plus 1 equals 2.
You can actually prove this one as easy as doing negative 1 plus 1 equaling 0.
I'll leave that one as an exercise for you.
You can also prove that theorem combinatorially.
Let me mention a few other really pretty patterns that appear in Pascal's Triangle.
If we sum along the columns of Pascal's Triangle, you can't sum all the way down because they
go on forever, you get infinity.
But if you sum part of the way down, you get what's called the hockey stick identity.
And I'll just illustrate it here.
Notice you have 1 plus 2 plus 3 plus 4 is equal to 10, which is the next number off
to the side.
Or here, 1 plus 3 plus 6 plus 10 gives us 20.
And this pattern exists throughout Pascal's Triangle.
You can prove that one combinatorially too.
You might want to try that one as an exercise.
Beautiful patterns in Pascal's Triangle.
Here's another one that I love.
If I asked you how many odd numbers appear in Pascal's Triangle, then the answer turns
out to always be a power of 2.
And not just any power of 2, but I just got to tell you the answer.
It's 2 to the number of 1s in the binary expansion of n.
So for instance, if I'm looking at row 83, how many odd numbers will it contain?
Well 83, when you write it in terms of powers of 2, it's 64 plus 16 plus 2 plus 1, it's
going to have this as its binary, its base 2 representation.
There are four 1s in it, and therefore row 83 will have 16 odd numbers.
If you draw a picture of where those odd numbers are, you also get a beautiful picture, also
known as Sir Pinsky's Triangle.
So let's recall from lecture 2 the following question.
If a fair coin is tossed 10 times, what is the probability of getting exactly 3 heads?
We saw earlier that the answer to that was that there were 2 to the 10 ways of flipping
the coins, and 10 choose 3 of them resulted in exactly 3 heads.
So we can answer that question just from what we know.
But now suppose I asked you the following biased question.
Suppose that our coin is biased in such a way that the probability of heads is 0.4,
and therefore the probability of tails is 0.6.
If the coin is tossed 10 times, then what's the probability that we get exactly 3 heads?
Now the probability that we see 3 heads in a row followed by 7 tails in a row is equal
to 0.4 cubed times 0.6 to the 7th, because each of those outcomes has probability 0.4
or 0.6.
And since they're independent, one coin flip doesn't affect the other, we multiply those
probabilities together.
So is that the answer?
Well not quite, because that wasn't the only way to get exactly 3 heads.
There were how many ways to get 3 heads?
10 choose 3 ways to get 3 heads.
Each of which has probability 0.4 cubed times 0.6 to the 7th.
And when we multiply that out, we get our answer of 0.215.
Problems like this are actually called binomial probabilities, and again the reason they're
called binomial is each trial, each flip of the coin has 2 outcomes, heads or tails, success
or failure.
Let's get back with the problem of points that Pascal considered.
So again, where we left off, A and B were flipping the coin, whoever reached 10 points
wins $100, currently A has 9 points and B has 8 points, how should that $100 be split?
The answer is that they should split it $75 to $25, that $100 should be split $75 to $25.
Pascal actually gave 3 reasons for this problem.
One way he did was he said, let's think of this recursively, let's reduce this to a
smaller problem.
Right now the score is 9 to 8, and let's consider the next flip.
If A wins the next flip, which he will with probability a half, then the score will be
10 to 8 and A wins the $100.
On the other hand, if B wins the next flip, also with probability a half, then the score
is 9 to 9.
And then how should you split the $100?
Well everyone in the world would agree that if the score is tied you should split that
$100 50-50.
Okay, therefore half the time A deserves $100, half the time A deserves $50, taking the average
of those two gives us $75.
Here's another way to consider that, to solve that problem.
By using what's called expected values, currently the score is 9 to 8.
Now consider the next flip.
If A wins the next flip with probability a half, then what's the chance that he wins
the game?
He wins the match 100%.
If B wins the next flip, then what are the chance that A wins the match?
Well the score will be 9 to 9, so A will have a 50% chance of winning the match from there.
So overall the probability that A wins is the average of one and a half, which is three
quarters.
So A wins the match with probability three quarters, B wins the match with probability
one quarter, since A is three times as likely to win as B, A should be paid three times
as much as B.
To get a three to one payout, A should get $75 and B should get $25.
Here's Pascal's third approach.
Consider the approach of equally likely outcomes.
Currently the score is 9 to 8.
How many more games is this match going to last?
It might take one match, it might take one game, it might take two games.
Let's insist that both of those players play their games even if A wins on the first game
that everybody has to play two games.
We have to play two games.
So then there are four possible equally likely outcomes.
Either A wins first and A wins second, or A wins the first game, then B wins the second
game, or B wins the first game, and A wins the second game, or B wins the first game,
and B wins the second game.
All of those have the same probability of happening, but A wins three of those outcomes,
B wins one of those, and therefore A should be paid in a three to one ratio just like
before and get $75 to $25.
Here's the new score.
Suppose instead that the score is 7 to 6.
A needs three games, B needs four games to win.
How many more games is this match going to last?
It's going to last at most six more games.
So let's insist that they play all six games.
Now there are two to the sixth, 64 possible equally likely outcomes, just like the flip
of a coin six times.
Among these outcomes, A is going to win the match if he can win three or four or five
or six of these games.
He wins three or more, he wins the tournament.
How many of those 64 outcomes does he do that?
By definition, six choose three plus six choose four plus six choose five plus six choose six.
From those numbers, A wins 42 of the times, B wins the other 22 of the times.
Therefore, in order to do this, Pascal invented his triangle to see that A is going to win
with those four numbers on the sixth row of Pascal's triangle, and B is going to win with
those three numbers on that row of Pascal's triangle.
That's your 42 to 22 advantage.
So A should be paid 42 64ths of the money, B should be paid 22 64ths of the money.
That amounts to $65.62 and a half cents for A and $34.37 and a half cents for B. You may
wonder how A and B should determine who gets that extra half a cent.
My guess is if they asked Pascal, he'd tell them, go flip a coin.
