Mathematics is the science of patterns, and in my opinion no branch of mathematics has
more beautiful patterns than discrete mathematics.
So finding amazing patterns is fun, it's great to find them, but it's especially satisfying
to prove that your pattern is not just a coincidence satisfied by a handful of examples, but that
it will continue to work for all examples.
In this lecture, we'll explore several proof techniques beginning with proofs by induction.
Now some students are afraid of doing proofs, but trust me, once you get the hang of them,
they can actually be a lot of fun.
Are you willing to give them a try?
Then prepare to be inducted.
Okay, here's our first proof by induction.
What is the sum of the first n odd numbers?
Usual answer is, I don't know.
Okay, well then let's look at some examples.
So 1 is 1, 1 plus 3 is 4, 1 plus 3 plus 5 is 9, 1 plus 3 plus 5 plus 7 is 16, the sum
of the first 5 odd numbers is 25.
You see the pattern, don't you?
1 squared, 2 squared, 3 squared, 4 squared, 5 squared.
By all appearances, the sum of the first n odd numbers is n squared.
So we have a conjecture.
We see a pattern.
How do we turn that pattern into a proof?
Okay, the strategy behind induction goes as follows.
Just imagine this visual experiment.
Imagine I have a infinitely long row of dominoes laid out in front of me on this table, and
the first domino has the number 1 on it, the next domino has the number 2 on it, the next
domino has the number 3 on it, and so on.
If I want to prove to you that I'm capable of knocking all those dominoes down, even
though there are infinitely many of those, I can do it in two steps.
I can convince you in two steps.
I'll convince you that I'm capable of knocking down domino number 1.
Then, if I can show you that when the k-th domino falls, so will the k-plus-first domino,
then that means that I have this chain reaction that's going to cause all the dominoes to
fall.
So let's put this now in a mathematical context.
I see a pattern that the number is 1 plus 3 plus 5, all the way up to the n-th odd number.
What would that be?
That would be 2n minus 1.
That the sum of those n numbers is equal to n squared.
So first, I convince you that I can knock down that first domino.
In other words, is the theorem true when n equals 1?
This is called our base case.
Well let's see.
When n is equal to 1, does that equal 1 squared?
You betcha.
We saw that earlier.
Next, we state our induction hypothesis, which I abbreviate with i-hop.
It should be spelled maybe differently, but I've been calling it i-hop for years.
We assume that the theorem is true for the number k.
I want to show that if the k-th domino falls, then the k-plus-first domino will have to
fall with it.
Let's assume that the theorem is true just for the number k.
By that, I mean that 1 plus 3 plus 5, all the way up to 2k minus 1, the sum of the first
k odd numbers is k squared.
Our goal is to show that it continues to be true when n is k-plus-1.
That is, if the theorem falls or follows when n is k, then that theorem or domino will fall
or follow with k-plus-1.
My goal is to show that when I sum the first k-plus-1 odd numbers, I'm going to get k-plus-1
squared.
What are the first k-plus-1 odd numbers?
They're the numbers 1, 3, 5, all the way up through not 2k minus 1, but to the next odd
number, 2k plus 1.
I want to show that that is k-plus-1 squared.
By our induction hypothesis, we already are allowed to assume that the sum of the first
k odd numbers is k squared.
When I add 2k-plus-1 to that, I'm going to get k-squared plus 2k-plus-1, but you know
that, you recognize that from the binomial theorem even, that's just k-plus-1 squared.
That's what we wanted to show, that the sum of the first k-plus-1 odd numbers is k-plus-1
squared.
Pascal's Triangle, as we've seen, is a great source of patterns.
So, for instance, if I sum down the column 1 of Pascal's Triangle, I see 1 plus 2 plus
3 plus 4 is 10.
We call that part of the hockey stick identity.
What is the number 10 in Pascal's Triangle?
It's the number 5 choose 2, which is the same as 5 times 4 divided by 2.
So what I want to show is that when I sum the numbers from 1 to n, I want to show that
I'm getting the number n-plus-1 choose 2, and n-plus-1 choose 2 is n-plus-1 times n
over 2.
So let's try and prove this theorem by induction, that the sum of the first n numbers is n times
n-plus-1 over 2.
We'll do this by induction.
So for instance, first we start with our base case.
When n is equal to 1, it says on the left we have 1, and on the right we have 1 times
1 plus 1 over 2, 1 times 2 over 2, and sure enough that equals 1.
So our theorem is true when n is equal to 1.
Now we state our induction hypothesis.
Suppose the theorem is true when n is equal to k, we know it's true when n is equal to
1.
Suppose it's true when n is equal to k, then our goal is to show that it continues to
be true when n is equal to k-plus-1.
So my goal is to show that when I sum the first k-plus-1 odd numbers, I get k-plus-1
times k-plus-2 divided by 2.
How do we do that?
Well, the sum of the first k-plus-1 numbers, that's the sum of the first k-numbers plus
the number k-plus-1, and we know by our induction hypothesis that the sum of the first k-numbers
is k times k-plus-1 over 2, so all I have to add to that is the number k-plus-1.
When I add the number k-plus-1 to it, and I notice both of those have a factor of k-plus-1
in it, I can factor the k-plus-1 out, and I get k-plus-1 times k-plus-2 divided by
2 as desired.
Most of the patterns found in Pascal's triangle can be proved by induction using Pascal's
identity, the one we've seen before, that n-plus-1 choose k is n choose k plus n choose
k minus 1.
Incidentally, although the idea of induction goes back all the way to Euclid, and it was
put to use around the 10th century to prove the binomial theorem, it was not stated as
an explicit proof technique until Pascal did so in his treatise on the triangle in 1665.
But as we've seen, there are other proof techniques available.
For instance, we've seen how to prove things combinatorially by asking a counting question
and answering it two different ways.
Another proof technique that we can sometimes use is called geometric proof, or sometimes
referred to as proof without words.
For instance, in the last identity, 1 plus 2 plus 3 up to n equals n times n plus 1 over
2, we can prove that by the following picture.
We know that the numbers 1 through n can be represented as a triangle.
If I take two of those triangles of n rows and I combine them together as in this picture,
we get a rectangle with area n times n plus 1.
So when I take two triangular numbers, I get a rectangle of area n times n plus 1, and
that gives us our theorem.
Here's another classic geometric proof that the sum of the first n odd numbers is n squared.
This proof is geometric and combinatorial.
In an n by n checkerboard, how many 1 by 1 squares are there?
Obviously, there are n squared checkers in a checkerboard.
On the other hand, as this picture shows, the number of squares in the checkerboard is
1 plus 3 in this L-shaped region, plus 5 in this L-shaped region, plus 7 in this L-shaped
region, all the way up to the last region, which will have 2n minus 1 squares in it.
Therefore, answering the same question two different ways, this picture shows that the
sum of the first n odd numbers is n squared.
Here's another property from Pascal's Triangle.
Remember the row sums?
We get the first row adds up to 1, then 2, then 4, then 8, that the numbers in the nth
row of Pascal's Triangle sum to the number 2 to the n.
Look now what happens when we, instead of summing rows in Pascal's Triangle, suppose
we're summing diagonals in Pascal's Triangle.
The first diagonal adds up to 1, the next diagonal is 1, the next one is 1 plus 1, which
is 2, then 1 plus 2 is 3, then 1 plus 3 plus 1 is 5, 1 plus 4 plus 3 is 8, 1 plus 5 plus
6 plus 1 is 13.
Look at those numbers, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13.
Those are my favorite numbers, the Fibonacci numbers.
Behold the Fibonacci numbers.
Defined by the initial conditions, f0 equals 0, f1 equals 1, and the rule that says to
create the nth Fibonacci number, you add the two previous Fibonacci numbers, that is,
you add the n minus first Fibonacci number plus the n minus second Fibonacci number.
So if we start with 0 and 1, then 0 plus 1 equals 1, that gives us our next Fibonacci
number, then 1 plus 1 is 2, 1 plus 2 is 3, 2 plus 3 is 5, 3 plus 5 is 8, and so on.
As with Pascal's Triangle, Fibonacci numbers have many, many beautiful properties.
For instance, look what happens when we sum every other Fibonacci number, okay, the second
plus the fourth plus the sixth plus the eighth, and then we stop somewhere.
So here I see that 1 plus 2 is 3, 1 plus 2 plus 5 is 8, 1 plus 2 plus 5 plus 13 is 21.
You see the pattern?
The last one, the last pattern we saw was that f1 plus f3 plus f5 plus f7 was equal
to f8.
Now is that fate, or is there something going on?
The pattern seems to suggest that f1 plus f3, if I sum the first n odd-position Fibonacci
numbers, every other Fibonacci number, all the way up to f2n minus 1, I seem to get f2
n, I get the next Fibonacci number.
So now, by the way, because Fibonacci numbers are written, they were born expressed in terms
of smaller Fibonacci numbers, their patterns can often be proved by induction like the
identity that we see here, okay?
So let's do it.
We want to show that f1 plus f3 up to f2n minus 1 is equal to f2n, okay?
So you've been inducted, tell me how to do this proof by induction.
We start with the case where n is 1, that's our base case.
When n is 1, the left side says f1, and the right side says f2, but we're in luck because
f1 and f2 are both 1, so our base case holds.
Next we state our induction hypothesis.
Suppose the theorem is true when n is equal to k, in other words, assume that the first
k odd positioned Fibonacci numbers, f1 plus f3 up to f2k minus 1 equals f2k, all right?
We label that with i-hop, although cut the think of it, maybe we should pronounce it
i-hope, all right?
Because it isn't true until we complete the induction.
To complete the induction, we're going to have to show that f1 plus f3 all the way up
to f2k plus 1 is equal to the next Fibonacci number, f2k plus 2.
How do we do that?
Well, we know that the sum of the Fibonacci numbers f1 plus f3 up to f2k minus 1 is f2k.
When I add the Fibonacci number f2k plus 1 to that, what do we have?
We have the sum of two consecutive Fibonacci numbers, f2k and f2k plus 1, which by the
nature of Fibonacci numbers, that gives us the next one, f2k plus 2 as desired.
There's another great pattern.
Let's look at the squares of Fibonacci numbers, okay?
So 1 squared is 1, 2 squared is 4, 3 squared is 9, and so on.
And suppose I were to add up the sums of the squares of these Fibonacci numbers, but I
only add part of the way and stop, like 1 plus 1 gives us 2, 1 plus 1 plus 4 gives us
6, 1 plus 1 plus 4 plus 9 gives us 15, and then the next sum is 40, and the next sum
is 104.
Now those aren't Fibonacci numbers, but I claim that the Fibonacci numbers are buried
inside of them.
Do you see it?
Do you see it?
Six happens to be 2 times 3.
15 happens to be 3 times 5.
40 is 5 times 8.
2, 3, 5, 8.
Who do we appreciate?
Fibonacci, of course, yes.
So what's the next one?
104, that's 8 times 13.
We have a lot of circumstantial evidence here.
Let's see if we can prove it by induction.
What's the general pattern?
It appears that F1 squared plus F2 squared, all the way up to Fn squared, gives us Fn
times Fn plus 1.
Let's prove that by induction.
OK, when n is equal to 1, on the left we have F1 squared, on the right we have F1 times
F2.
Both of them are equal to 1, so we're done with the base case.
Halfway done, as far as our logic is concerned.
OK, now assume the theorem is true when n is k, all right, F1 squared plus F2 squared
plus Fk squared equals Fk times Fk plus 1.
Our goal is to show that the sums of the squares of the first k plus 1 Fibonacci numbers is
Fk plus 1 times Fk plus 2.
So when I add Fk plus 1 squared to both sides of what we know, we get something that has
an Fk plus 1 in it in both terms.
I factor out the Fk plus 1, giving me Fk plus Fk plus 1 times the quantity Fk plus 1, and
Fk plus Fk plus 1 by its definition is Fk plus 2, so our induction is complete.
So with so many beautiful patterns satisfied by the Fibonacci numbers, clearly they must
be counting something.
What are they counting?
So here's a combinatorics question for you.
How many sequences of 1s and 2s add up to the number n?
And since I used the word sequences, the order is important.
Let's call the answer to this question little fn.
Not to be confused with big fn, which were the Fibonacci numbers we saw a moment ago.
The answer to this counting question I'm going to call little fn.
So for example, the number 4 can be expressed in terms of 1s and 2s in five different ways.
You see them here.
Therefore, F sub 4 is equal to 5.
Here's some more examples.
The number of ways of getting the number 1 in terms of 1s and 2s.
There's one way to add up to 1, there are two ways to add up to 2, three ways to add
up to 3, five ways to add up to 4, eight ways to add up to 5, 2, 3, 5, 8.
Do I need to elaborate?
We've got Fibonacci numbers, or at least it appears to be.
Now, why, why for instance, are there eight numbers in that last list?
Where do those eight numbers come from?
I mean, you could just see them there, right?
If you look at it, how do you get a bunch of 1s and 2s to add up to the number 5?
Well, every one of the numbers on that list either begins with a 2 followed by something
that adds up to 3, or it begins with a 1 followed by 1s and 2s that add up to 4.
How many of those begin with a 2?
Well, it's the number of ways to continue them, so they add up to 3.
There are F sub 3 ways, three ways of doing it.
How many ways can I get those green numbers to add up to 4?
Well we see that F sub 4 is 5.
The total number of numbers on that list has got to be 3 plus 5 is 8.
This pattern is going to continue.
So the number of ways to get 1s and 2s to add up to n, it begins like Fibonacci numbers.
They continue to grow like Fibonacci numbers, therefore they are the Fibonacci numbers.
With one caveat, that is the answer to the question, how many of those sequences add
up to n, isn't the nth capital F Fibonacci number.
It's actually the Fn plus first Fibonacci number.
That is to say, little f sub n, the answer to this counting problem, it is a Fibonacci
number, but it's the n plus first Fibonacci number.
The number of sequences of 1s and 2s that sum up to n.
So you could answer it either way, as little fn or big fn plus 1.
And for the record, we define f sub 0 to be 1.
So thinking of 1s and 2s that add up to n is fine, but there's a much nicer, more visual
way of thinking of these sums.
Rather than thinking of them in terms of 1s and 2s, instead, I want you to think in terms
of squares and dominoes, where a square has length 1, a domino has length 2, and little
fn is the number of ways to tile a strip of length n using squares and dominoes.
So for example, a strip of length 4 can be tiled in five different ways.
That's why we say that f4 is 5, because it can be tiled in five different ways.
For the rest of this lecture, indeed, for the rest of your lives, when you hear the
words Fibonacci number, I want you to think tiling.
I claim that practically every pattern satisfied by Fibonacci numbers has a direct combinatorial
proof using this interpretation.
Let me give you an example.
Let's look at the squares of Fibonacci numbers again, but instead of looking at the sums
of the squares of the first n of them, I'm just going to look at them two at a time.
So for instance, if I take 1 squared plus 2 squared, that's 1 plus 4, I get 5.
If I take 2 squared plus 3 squared, that's 4 plus 9, I get 13.
If I take 3 squared plus 5 squared, 9 plus 25, I get 34.
The sums of the squares of two consecutive Fibonacci numbers appears to be, always, another Fibonacci
number.
In fact, the pattern that we see is that Fn minus 1 squared plus Fn squared is equal
to F2n.
Now I actually defy you to try and prove that theorem by induction.
I don't know of an easy induction proof of this simple pattern that doesn't involve proving
something beyond what you're asked to prove here.
But with tiling, the proof is almost, almost obvious.
Let me try and explain it to you.
Here's the question.
How many ways can you tile a strip of length 2n?
Well, by definition, the number of ways of tiling a strip of length 2n, using squares
and dominoes, of course, is F sub 2n.
That's how it was defined.
Now I'm going to take that same question and I'm going to answer it two ways.
First of all, how many of those tilings are breakable in the middle?
How many of them could you separate into a tiling of n-tiles on the left and then n-tiles
on the right?
Well, there's Fn ways to tile the left half, Fn ways to tile the right half, so the number
of tilings that are breakable in the middle is Fn squared, Fn times Fn.
How many of them are not breakable in the middle?
Well for that, that means you've got a big, fat dominoes sitting in the middle, covering
cells n and n plus 1.
And now to the left of that domino, you can tile that F sub n minus 1 ways.
To the right of that domino, you can tile that F sub n minus 1 ways.
So the number of tilings that are not breakable in the middle is F sub n minus 1 squared.
Or the number of ways to tile a strip of length 2n is Fn squared plus Fn minus 1 squared,
which is, by our combinatorial logic, the same as answer 1, F sub 2n.
One of the advantages of thinking about Fibonacci numbers in this tiling interpretation is it
allows you to see beyond the first pattern that you see.
For instance, this last problem, we were tiling a board of length 2n and we were wondering
whether or not it was breakable in the middle or not.
But you know what, there was nothing special about breaking the tiling in the middle.
Suppose I broke it at some other place.
Let's say my tiling had length m plus n and I asked how many of those tilings, how many
tilings are there of length m plus n?
F sub m plus n.
How many of them are breakable just after the mth cell?
Well, that means that there are m-tiles that you have a tiling of length m to the left
and n to the right that can be tiled fm times fn ways.
How many of them are not breakable at the mth cell?
Because they have a domino covering cells m and m plus 1, that can be done fm minus 1
times fn minus 1 ways.
Remember we have this cute little addition formula for Fibonacci numbers.
It says fm plus n is fm fm plus fm minus 1, fm minus 1.
Incidentally, that theorem, that more general theorem, it's more general because if you
let m equal n, you get the theorem we just proved a minute ago, that more general theorem
can be proved by induction on n and I'll challenge you to try that.
Let's recall earlier we showed that when we summed f1 plus f3 plus f5 plus f7, we got
f8 or in the language of little fs, f0 plus f2 plus f4 plus f6 equals f7.
We showed that earlier by induction, but this can also be given a combinatorial proof.
Here's how.
Let's just look at the case for tilings of length 7.
How many tilings of length 7?
By definition, f7.
Such a tiling must either end like this, ending in a square, or like this, ending in a domino
preceded by a square, and that happens f sub 4 ways.
How many ways ended with a square, the one on top?
That was done f sub 6 ways.
How many end with a domino preceded by a domino preceded by a square?
That happens f sub 2 ways, or how many of them went domino, domino, domino, square?
There's nothing left to tile.
That can be done f0 ways, and so altogether the number of tilings is f0 plus f2 plus f4
plus f6, which is the same as f7.
Earlier we showed by induction this pattern that the sums 1 squared plus 1 squared plus
2 squared plus 3 squared plus 5 squared plus 8 squared equals 8 times 13.
Now this can be proved by combinatorial argument, but here's an even more beautiful geometric
proof.
Just take a look at the picture.
Do you see it?
You see that this picture is made up of squares whose side lengths are 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, and 8,
and therefore the areas of those squares are 1 squared and 1 squared and 2 squared and
3 squared and 5 squared and 8 squared, yet when we put all those squares together, we
get a rectangle that has area 8 by 13.
So the total area of that rectangle on the one hand, it's 1 squared plus 1 squared plus
2 squared, 3 squared, 5 squared plus 8 squared, on the other hand, it's 8 times 13.
Do you see that if you were to attach a square to that, a 13 by 13 square to that rectangle,
you would then create a new rectangle of size 13 by 21.
They say that a picture is worth 1,000 words, so just staring at this picture, you'd see
the pattern.
I'll extend that saying, a picture is worth 1,000 words and is usually better than induction.
Here's another beautiful pattern that we saw at the beginning of the lecture, the diagonal
sums.
If I sum the diagonals of Pascal's triangle, we get the Fibonacci numbers.
For example, when I summed starting at row 5, 5 choose 0 plus 4 choose 1 plus 3 choose
2, I got the Fibonacci number f sub 5.
The general sum that's being expressed here says that the sum n choose 0 plus n minus
1 choose 1 plus n minus 2 choose 2, all the way until you fall off the edge of the triangle
appears to be f sub n, the nth Fibonacci number.
A combinatorial proof of this, let me just sketch it for you, would go like this.
How many tilings do you have of length n?
Naturally, little f sub n.
What is k representing?
I claim that k represents the number of dominoes in the tiling, because if I had a tiling of
length n with exactly k dominoes, then it's going to have how many squares?
Well the total length is n, I subtract off 2k for those dominoes, so there's going to
be n minus 2k spaces for squares.
Therefore the total number of tiles, dominoes plus squares, is n minus k.
From those n minus k tiles, I have to choose k of them to be dominoes, and that can be
done n minus k choose k ways.
Without a doubt, proofs by induction are a fundamental tool in any discrete mathematicians
toolkit, and we'll see many more applications of induction throughout this course.
I prefer to use more direct proof techniques, combinatorial or geometric proofs, when possible,
because sometimes the direct technique actually has a foundation that's built on induction.
For example, I think that just about every Fibonacci identity has an elegant tiling proof.
Indeed, I wrote a book about such proofs, but the proof that Fibonacci numbers are counted
by tilings is based on induction, it has an inductive foundation.
In fact, we'll use induction in our next lecture to discover the most important formula
for Fibonacci numbers, and this will lead to an algebraic proof technique for solving
more combinatorial problems.
For instance, we know that Fibonacci numbers count tilings that use squares and dominoes.
But suppose instead I wanted to count tilings where my tiles had different lengths, not
just lengths one or two, or maybe they came in different colors, or maybe the board we
had wasn't a strip, but maybe it was like a circular bracelet.
Then how would you count that?
To answer this question and more colorful questions, stay tuned for our next lecture.
Don't touch that tile.
