The pigeonhole principle is a very simple idea, which has some surprising consequences.
The idea is that if n plus 1 objects are placed into n boxes, then some box must contain 2 or more objects.
Although the idea is obvious, it wasn't put to mathematical use until the 19th century.
For example, if you pick any 5 cards, there must be 2 cards of the same suit.
5 cards, 4 suits, 2 cards have to be of the same suit.
Extending that idea a little more, if you pick 9 cards, then there must be at least 3 cards of the same suit.
Why? Well, suppose not. Then you'd have at most 2 cards in each suit, and there are 4 suits in the deck, so that would be at most 8 cards.
And since we have 9 cards, there are going to have to be at least 3 cards of the same suit.
So, the pigeonhole principle says that if n plus 1 objects, originally described as pigeons, are placed into n boxes, little pigeonholes, then some box has at least 2 objects.
Now, occasionally I give guest lectures at summer math programs for gifted high school math students, and at one of those programs, they describe the pigeonhole principle to me a little bit differently, a little gorier.
They said, the way we learn it is if you take, if n plus 1 holes are drilled into n pigeons, then there has to be a pigeon with at least 2 holes in it.
That's what they called the pigeonhole principle.
Anyway, and more generally, the generalized pigeonhole principle, the clean version, says that if pn plus 1 or more objects are placed into n boxes, then some box has to have at least p plus 1 objects.
And the proof is, again, by contradiction.
Suppose not, then each box has at most p objects, but since the total number of, that would mean that the total number of objects is at most p times n, because you had n boxes.
And that gives you the contradiction, because you started with pn plus 1 or more objects.
So, for example, if 17 yellow pigs are placed into 5 giant holes, then since 17 over 5 is 3.4, since the average number of pigs in a hole is 3.4, some hole has to have at least 4 pigs in it.
And I call this the pigeonhole principle.
Okay.
Here's another application, a more interesting one, in my opinion.
Suppose we have a square of dimensions 2 by 2, and suppose 5 points are chosen inside that 2 by 2 square.
Anywhere you want, put those 5 points anywhere.
I claim there have to be at least 2 points in the square that are within square root of 2 of each other.
Okay.
Here's a, here's a hint.
Start by taking that 2 by 2 square and breaking it into 4 quadrants.
Okay.
So, we have 4 1 by 1 quadrants, and I'm putting 5 points in that square.
Therefore, there have to be at least 2 points that go in the same quadrant.
You've got 4 quadrants, 5 points, there have to be at least 2 points in the same quadrant.
And how far apart can 2 points in a quadrant be?
Well, in a 1 by 1 square, the farthest 2 points could be apart would be if they were separated by the beginning of the diagonal and at the end of the diagonal.
And the length of the diagonal is square root of 2, so the farthest those 2 points could be would be at most square root of 2 away.
Here's another example.
Suppose I take the numbers 1 through 10 and I arrange them in a circle in any order.
Okay.
So, there's an example here on the screen.
Then there have to be, I claim, at least 3 consecutive numbers with a sum that's greater than or equal to 17.
So, if we scanned our circle, let's see, 1 plus 10 plus 4 is 15, nope, 10 plus 4 plus 2 is 16, nope.
We go all the way over to here where we see 5 plus 8 plus 7 is 20, and that's greater than or equal to 17.
It happens another, well, it happens other places too.
I see a 9 plus 3 plus 5, that gives us 17.
Even if we go around the clasp, 6 plus 1 plus 10, that gives us 17.
So, there are plenty of examples here, but the claim is there has to be, no matter how you arrange them in a circle, there always have to be at least 3 points in a row whose sum is at least 17.
So, how would we prove that?
Well, if think of, we have in front of us 10 groups of 3, right?
In our example, there's the group that goes 1, 10, 4, the group that goes 10, 4, 2, 4, 2, 9, all the way up to the last group that would go 6, 1, 10.
Okay?
There are 10 groups of 3.
What is going to be the sum of all 10 groups?
Okay?
Well, here's what's interesting.
No matter how you've arranged those numbers, every number is going to appear in how many groups?
Every number appears in 3 groups.
So, when you're adding up all those groups, each number is going to get counted 3 times.
And so, the sum of the numbers in all 10 groups is going to have to be the sum 1 plus 2 plus 3 up through 10 times 3.
Right?
Think about that.
So, the total is going to be 3 times 55, which is 165.
The average total has to be exactly 16 and a half, and therefore, at least one group has a total of 17.
Here are some examples from number theory.
Suppose that, here's my claim.
There are two powers of 3 out there whose difference is divisible by 2009.
Okay?
So, when we're out there, we can raise 3 to some power and 3 to some other power whose difference is going to be a multiple of 2009.
All right?
Here's the proof.
I'm not even going to tell you what they are, but I'm going to convince you of the truth of that theorem.
So, consider the numbers 3 to the first power, 3 to the second power, 3 to the third, fourth, going all the way up to 3 to the 2010th power.
The last one is an enormous number.
Now, let's divide, at least theoretically, let's divide each number by 2009 and look at the remainder.
Now, what do we know about the remainder?
The remainder is always smaller than your divisor, and so the remainder, when I divide each of these numbers by 2009,
we're going to have a remainder that's some number between 0 and 2008 for each of these.
So, now I'm looking at these 2010 remainders, but they're only 2009 possible remainders, 0 through 2008.
Therefore, two of them must have the same remainder.
So, there have to be two exponents, x and y, where 3 to the x and 3 to the y have the same remainder.
Let's call that remainder r.
That means 3 to the x is 2009 times some quotient q1 plus r, and 3 to the y was 2009 times another quotient plus r, the same r.
Subtracting those two equations gives us 3 to the x minus 3 to the y equals 2009 times q1 minus q2.
It's the same, the r's cancel, you see.
Therefore, 2009 divides the quantity 3 to the x minus 3 to the y.
We don't know what the x and y are, but we know that they must exist.
Here's a related problem.
I claim that there is a positive power of 3.
I can raise 3 to some big number so that the answer will end in 001.
If I raised 5 to a huge power, I'll never end in 001, but if I take 3 to a large enough power, I can find one that's going to end in 001.
We'll start by the same argument as we had before.
If you looked at a thousand and one numbers, two of those numbers are going to have to have the same remainder when you divide them by a thousand.
If I look at 3 to the 1, 3 to the 2, all the way up to 3 to the 1001, there have to be two of them with the same remainder.
By the same argument as before, that means that a thousand divides 3 to the x minus 3 to the y, which we can write as 3 to the y times the quantity 3 to the x minus y minus 1.
Notice that the numbers a thousand and 3 to the y are relatively prime.
A thousand doesn't have any factors of 3 in it, so those numbers are relatively prime.
If a thousand divides the quantity 3 to the y and 3 to the x minus y minus 1, then by the important theorem, that means I can ignore that 3 to the y.
A thousand has to divide 3 to the x minus y minus 1, which is to say that a thousand times an integer q equals 3 to the x minus y minus 1 for some integer q.
Or straightening that out, it says 3 to the x minus y, x minus y is some positive number, is equal to a thousand q plus 1.
And if you take a thousand times any integer, that's going to end in 0, 0, 0.
And when you add 1 to it, it's going to end in 0, 0, 1.
Again, this proof doesn't tell us what the exponent is, only that it must exist.
Later, we'll learn that 3 to the 400 always ends in 0, 0, 1.
In fact, in a couple of lectures, we'll show that if A is any number that's not divisible by 2 or 5, then A to the 400 is guaranteed to end in 0, 0, 1.
As we have seen, the pigeonhole principle is often used to prove that some sort of mathematical situation is inevitable,
like a power of 3 eventually ends in 0, 0, 1, or two points in a square that have to be close together, and so on.
In contrast, our next principle, the parity principle, is often used to prove that certain outcomes are impossible.
So, first of all, what is parity?
If n is a multiple of 2, then we say that the parity of n is even.
On the other hand, if n is not a multiple of 2, like n is of the form 2q plus 1, then we say the parity of n is odd.
Simple idea. Alright, here's a simple question.
Is it possible to fill in the blanks of the numbers below? I have the numbers 1 through 9 written in front of you.
Can I insert plus signs and minus signs in between these numbers?
And every blank has to be filled in such a way as to get a total of 20.
You might give it a try, you know, can you insert plus signs and minus signs in between all those numbers,
between every pair of numbers there, consecutive numbers, we have to have a plus sign or a minus sign.
Can we do it in such a way as to get 20?
Now, if you've tried it and you've had no success, it's because it's impossible.
Here's, let me prove that it's impossible.
Since in this list, we have how many odd numbers? We have five odd numbers, and the rest are even.
If we add and subtract these odd numbers, adding odd numbers together,
if I add two odd numbers together, that gives me an even number.
If I add three odd numbers, that gives me an odd number.
If I add five odd numbers or subtract them, adding or subtracting five odd numbers, that's going to produce an odd number.
And adding and subtracting the even numbers doesn't change its parity.
Therefore, the parity of the total is going to have to be odd, and therefore, it can't be 20, or any even number for that matter.
Let me say that again because it's a generally important principle.
That is, if you add an even number to a number, then that's not going to change the number's parity.
X plus an even number has the same parity as X.
Okay, here's a more challenging problem.
In the grid below, in this four by five grid, is it possible to cover that board with these little L-shaped tiles?
Now, these L-shaped tiles here each occupy four squares, and so how many of these L-shaped tiles will I need to cover the board?
I would need, since the board has 20 squares, I would need five of these L-shaped tiles because I'm not going to let these tiles overlap.
I can't cover the same square.
Alright, so is it possible to cover up this square, this rectangular grid, this four by five grid, with five of these L-shaped tiles?
Alright, and if you've tried that, you might try, how about doing a, can you cover a six by six board, or a ten by ten board with these little L-shaped tiles?
I'm going to prove that it's impossible.
But in order to prove that, we'll need the following insight.
Let's color the rows of my board.
So I have, the top row will be, will be light squares, and then the next row will be dark squares, then light squares, then dark squares.
Okay, now if we take an L-shaped tile, and we put it anywhere on the board, look what's happening here.
There, no matter how you place it on the board, you have to cover either three dark squares and a light square, or three light squares and one dark square, right?
No matter how you position your L-shaped tile on the board, you're either going to cover exactly three dark squares, or you're going to cover exactly one dark square, right?
But now, hang on a second, we have ten dark squares to cover this board using five tiles.
With five tiles, how many dark squares are going to be covered?
Well, I'm going to be adding an odd number five times.
I'm going to be adding ones and threes five times, and there's no, and when I add the ones and threes five times, I have to end up with an odd number.
So I'm not going to be able to cover those ten dark squares using five of these tiles.
In a six by six board, a similar thing happens.
The only difference here is that with thirty-six squares, we're going to need nine of these tiles to cover the board.
And in a ten by ten board, which has a hundred squares, we're going to need twenty-five of these tiles to cover the board.
And since nine and twenty-five are odd numbers, those situations are impossible too.
All right, here's a very important application of parity, and it comes from the subject of coding theory.
If a code word consists of n, zeroes, and ones, so this is a binary word, a word consisting of zeroes and ones of length n,
then how many code words are possible?
We know from our early days of combinatorics the number of code words would be two to the n,
because for each letter you've got two choices, two choices, two choices, you do that n times.
So for example, if n is three, we have eight code words as given here.
But in coding theory, we occasionally make mistakes.
Occasionally, we enter a zero where we should have entered a one, or we enter a one instead of entering a zero,
or our computer hiccups for a second.
And if two code words are too similar, then they can be confused if a zero turns into a one or vice versa.
So how do you handle that?
The simplest way is by reducing the number of code words we can detect single digit errors.
Now, a simple way of doing this error detection is by a method known as the parity check method.
And the parity check method says, okay, I'm only going to use code words,
the only valid words that I'm going to be allowed to transmit.
Our words that have an even number of ones.
If you do that, then this will be able to detect an error if a code word has one digit incorrect.
Because if a zero turned into a one or a one turned into a zero,
then instead of having an even number of ones, you're going to have an odd number of ones.
And your coding device will look at that.
If it sees an odd number of ones, it'll say, resubmit, you didn't send me a valid code word.
Now, if you make two errors or four errors or any positive even number of errors,
it's not going to be able to detect it.
But if only one error is made, and if errors are relatively rare,
then you'll be able to detect that error.
So, for example, when n is three, the code words are going to be will be as follows.
Either it's all zeros, or it's zero one one, or one zero one, or one one zero.
In general, how many code words are possible?
In other words, how many words of length n have an even number of ones?
Well, we've actually seen this problem before, right?
How many ways from a class of n students can I create a committee that has an even size?
It's really the same problem, right?
How many code words are possible?
Half the code words are possible.
Half of two to the n, two to the n minus one code words are possible.
Can we do better than two to the n minus one?
I claim the answer is no.
I mean, can you do better than the parity check method?
It's a simple method, but in some sense, it's optimal because for every code word,
I mean, if you try to get away with more than two to the n minus one code words,
I claim that you're going to have to have in there two numbers that can be confused with each other
if one digit error gets made.
Here's why.
For every code word, let's pair it up with its mate.
Where the mate of the code word is the same word except the first digit is toggled.
In other words, if the first digit is a zero, we turn it into a one.
If that first digit is a one, we turn it into a zero.
So for instance, the code word zero zero zero pairs up with the code word one zero zero.
And if I take one zero zero and I toggle its first digit, then it becomes zero zero zero.
You can think of those two code words as holding hands.
They form a couple.
They're mates of each other.
Similarly, zero one one holds hands with one one one, one zero one holds hands with zero zero one,
one one zero holds hands with zero one zero.
So how many couples are you going to have?
You're going to have two to the n minus one couples.
So if you had more than two to the n minus one code words, then by the pigeonhole principle,
two of them, two of your code words would have to be couples.
But if two of them are couples, then they're going to be susceptible to single digit errors.
Okay, here's a problem I also saw at one of those math camps.
It says, imagine an evil scientist, a mad scientist has created a machine that can turn either two cats into one cat or vice versa.
Two cats go into the machine, they become one cat, or one cat goes into the machine, it becomes two cats.
It also has a machine that will turn a cat and a dog into a dog,
and another machine that will turn two dogs into a single cat.
And vice versa, a cat can become two dogs, a dog can become a cat and a dog.
And here's the question, is it possible to start with three cats and a dog and end with a single cat?
Okay, the answer is no.
So we're going to use parity to prove that it's impossible.
So look at all three of the machines that I have.
In each machine, notice that the parity of the number of dogs doesn't change.
If we start in the first machine, two cats becomes a cat,
that zero dogs becomes zero dogs.
Nothing's changed with dogs.
In the second machine, similarly, the cat and the dog becomes a single dog,
or the dog becomes a cat and a dog, the number of dogs doesn't change.
In the third machine, two dogs become a cat, or a cat becomes two dogs.
In this case, though the number of dogs changes, it changes by an even number.
It either goes down by two or up by two.
Therefore, no matter how you start, and no matter what machine you go through,
the parity of the number of dogs can't change.
So if we start with three cats and a dog, then we have one dog to start with.
Is it possible to turn it into a single cat?
No, because a single cat would have zero dogs,
and that would involve changing the parity of the number of dogs,
somehow from odd to even.
Okay, so that means it's impossible.
Okay, I want to end this lecture with a magic trick here.
You'll have to go to your screen to do this one,
and it uses these alphabet cards.
These alphabet cards actually have animals on them.
A is for alligator, and B is for bear, and so on.
Using these alphabet cards, we're going to lay them out on your screen for you,
so that all 26 letters are visible.
Get to your screen. You actually have to get close,
and I want you to begin by placing your finger on any one of the vowel cards.
Okay, so look at the screen.
Place your finger on any one of the vowels, A, E, I, O, U, even Y or W, whatever vowel you want.
Now, move your finger to any adjacent card.
This is important. An adjacent card is any card that is touching yours either horizontally or vertically.
It has to be physically right next to it, not just in the same row or column,
but physically right next to it, and you're not allowed to go diagonally.
It's either the card to the right, the card to the left, the card above it, or the card below it,
and you're not allowed to walk into empty space either.
So for example, if you started at card A, you can move either to card B or to card F,
but nowhere else. You can't move anywhere else.
So have you made your move yet? Good.
Now, go ahead and take two more steps.
Again, each step has to be to a card that is horizontally or vertically adjacent to where you are,
and now take three steps. I'll wait.
Okay, I'm going to remove a few cards. Hopefully, you are not on one of these.
Okay, now take another three steps.
Remember, each step has to be on a card. Got it?
Let's see. I don't think you're at any of these spots either.
Okay, now take one more step.
It's getting trickier, but I'm pretty sure you're not on any of these spots.
Now take three more steps.
Now take two more steps.
Okay, let's get rid of these cards.
I'm definitely not on those cards, so I'm sure of that.
Now take one more step, and I'm going to get rid of a few more.
Okay, it's getting trickier. I feel like you're being painted into a corner here.
Take three more steps.
I'm going to remove these two cards.
Now, five more steps.
Okay, and just three more steps, and we're going to get rid of these three cards.
And if we've both done our jobs correctly, then you should now be on card P, the parrot card.
Did I get it right?
Hopefully.
So, how does this trick work? How is it supposed to work?
Well, the answer is almost staring you in the face.
Let's color our squares so that they alternate as light and dark squares, like on a checkerboard.
Okay, so we'll say A will be a light square, B will be on a dark square, C will be on a light square, etc.
The key observation is notice that every vowel, whether it be A, E, I, O, U, W, or Y, they all happen to be on light squares.
That's because their position in the alphabet are all odd numbers.
A is 1, E is 5, I is 9, O is 15, U is 21, W is 23, Y is 25, the product of a misspent youth.
Okay, so after you make your first move, remember you started off on a vowel, which means you started off on a light square.
After you make your first move, which was one move plus two moves plus three moves, that gave you six moves altogether, an even number.
So, I knew that since you started on a light square and you made six moves and every move takes you from a light square to a dark square or a dark square to a light square,
I knew that since you started on a light square that after six moves, you would still have to be on a light square.
So, I removed three dark squares, three cards that were on dark squares.
Next, I asked you to move three spaces and when you move three spaces, the parity changes.
So, I knew that you were now on a dark square.
So, I removed some cards that were on light squares.
After each step, I knew the color of the square that you had to be on and I just kept removing cards of the opposite color, on squares of the opposite color.
There was no escape from, in fact, I told you that the explanation was staring you in the face because this card trick was based on parity and there's no escaping from the laws of parity.
As we've seen, we can solve many interesting problems just by looking whether a number is even or odd.
That is just by looking at a number's remainder when we divide it by two.
As we'll see in the next lecture, when we look at the remainder when we divide by other numbers, we get some pretty odd results that I think are even more interesting.
