Since a graph is a collection of vertices and edges, where the vertices are connected
by an edge if they're related in some way, then it's not surprising that graph theory
has been used to model social activities which arise as the result of human interaction.
In fact, in many graph theory courses, the first theorem presented often goes by the
name of the handshake theorem.
Recall, in a graph, the degree of a vertex, denoted d of v, is the number of vertices
adjacent to v, or equivalently the number of edges that use vertex v.
For example, in this graph, the degree of vertex 5, d of 5, is 4.
The handshake theorem goes like this.
It says simply, the sum of the degrees of the vertices is twice the number of edges.
Repeat that with me.
The sum of the degrees of the vertices is twice the number of edges.
This can be expressed algebraically as follows.
Suppose a graph has n vertices, v1, v2, through vn, and it has e edges.
Then, the d of v1 plus d of v2, up to d of vn, is always equal to twice e, twice the
number of edges.
Let's verify that for the graph we have in front of us.
Here, e is 7, we have 7 edges, and the degree of vertices 1 through 8 are, respectively,
2, 2, 2, 2, 4, 1, 1, and 0.
Adding those numbers together, we get 14, which is twice 7, that is, twice the number
of edges.
The proof is pretty simple.
If we count the edges that leave each vertex, then every edge is counted exactly twice.
This is called the handshake theorem, since if at a party, everyone keeps track of the
number of people whose hands they shook, then the sum of the numbers must be even.
Here, every vertex represents a person, and every edge represents two handshakes, x shaking
the hand of y, and y shaking the hand of x.
New definition, a complete graph, kn, think of k as standing for complete, it doesn't
really mean complete, I'll tell you what it stands for later.
But anyway, kn consists of n vertices, where every pair of vertices is adjacent, that's
why it's complete.
Every possible edge that could be there is there.
So for instance, here's k1 with just one point, here is k2 with two vertices connected
by an edge, k3 looks like a triangle, k4, that's not a square, but rather it's this configuration,
it has six edges, all possible connections are being made.
Or if you'd rather not draw it as a square with an x in it, you could draw it this way,
looking like a tetrahedron, if you will.
Sometimes we don't label the vertices of the graph, it's okay to write k5 looking simply
like that.
In our very first lecture, we encountered Ramsey's theorem, which I'm going to present
to you what's the 3-3 version of Ramsey's theorem.
It says, among any six people, there must always be three mutual friends or three mutual
strangers.
Or in the language of graph theory, if every edge of k6 is colored red, where a red edge
represents a friend, or colored blue, where a blue edge represents a stranger, then there
must exist a red k3 or a blue k3.
Again, every edge is colored either red or blue, and you can't avoid creating a red
triangle, an all red triangle, or an all blue triangle.
Okay, so here, the proof, I'll run through the proof quickly, vertex 6 must have either
at least three red edges or at least three blue edges, right, because it's got five edges
leaving it.
We'll assume without loss of generality, it has at least three red edges leaving it.
Let's say it has red edges going to A, B, and C. Now if any edge between A, B, or C is
red, then that gives us a red triangle, a red k3.
On the other hand, if none of those edges are red, then we must have all of those edges
being blue, giving us a blue triangle, a blue k3.
Either way, we find ourselves with a red k3 or a blue k3.
You might ask the question, is the theorem true with five people?
Must any group of five people contain three mutual friends or three mutual strangers?
And the answer is no, you don't necessarily have that situation.
For example, suppose my graph k5 was colored this way with these five red edges and these
five blue edges, then there is no, obviously there's no red triangle, there's no red k3,
and obviously there's no blue triangle, no blue k3.
That's just a twisted pentagon if you look at it.
Now let's go to a new level.
Let's look at what's called Ramsey's three four theorem, which says this, any group
of 10 people must contain three mutual friends or four mutual strangers.
That's why it's the three four version.
Any group of 10 people must contain three mutual friends or four mutual strangers.
Or equivalently, if every edge of k10 is colored red or blue, then it must contain a red triangle.
Red k3 or a blue k4?
Here's the proof.
Consider vertex 10.
Now it's true that since vertex 10 has nine edges leaving it, then it must have either
at least five red edges or at least five blue edges.
That's true, but we need to work harder to get the blue k4.
So instead, I'm going to make another true statement that is vertex 10, I claim, must
have either at least four red edges leaving it or at least six blue edges leaving it.
Why is that?
Otherwise, otherwise it would have at most three red edges, at most five blue edges.
That's at most eight edges leaving it, and we know that vertex 10 has nine edges leaving
it.
So I'm going to break this into two cases, and they both have to be considered separately.
Case A, suppose vertex 10 has at least four red edges leaving it.
So let's say vertex 10 has a red edge going to A, B, C, and D. Now, if any edges among
A, B, C, and D are red, then that's going to give me a red triangle, a red k3.
If I have a red edge between A and B, then A, B, 10 forms a red k3.
On the other hand, if none of those edges are red, then they all have to be blue, but
then that gives me a blue k4.
You see how that goes?
All right, we're not done though.
That's just case A. That was the case where vertex 10 had at least four red edges.
Now consider case B where vertex 10 has at least six blue edges.
Now, since it has at least six blue edges, that number six should sound familiar, right?
We know that among six people, there must be three mutual friends or three mutual strangers.
That is to say, among these six vertices, A through F, there must either be a red k3
or a blue k3.
When I look at all the edges connecting them, they're all red or blue, there has to be,
by Ramsey's 3-3 theorem, a red k3 or a blue k3.
If they have a red k3, then we're done.
Right here, we're done.
B, D, E, that forms a red k3.
Otherwise, we have a blue k3.
If B, D, E forms a blue k3, then when you bring in vertex 10, then we have a blue k4.
All of those vertices, B, D, E and 10, are connected with blue edges.
Either way, in case B, we're going to have a red k3 or a blue k4.
Since it worked for case A and it worked for case B, then we're done.
You may ask the question, is the theorem true with nine vertices?
Go ahead, ask the question.
Is the theorem true with nine vertices?
The answer is yes, and here's the proof.
Consider k9, no, not that k9, the other k9, the graph k9, thank you.
In the graph k9, if every edge of k9 is colored red or blue, then it must have a red k3 or
a blue k4.
I'm going to build on the previous proof.
We know from the last proof, if any vertex, not just vertex 9, but if any vertex in the
graph has four red edges or six blue edges, then we're done.
Thus, we only have to consider the situation where every vertex, one through nine, has
exactly three red edges and exactly five blue edges.
That means every vertex with its eight edges leaving it, three of them are red and five
of them are blue, because if you have four or more red edges, we're done.
If you have six or more blue edges, we're done.
But I claim this situation of everything having three red edges and five blue edges is actually
impossible in k9.
If we throw away the blue edges, what would we have left?
We'd have a graph with nine vertices where each vertex has degree three.
But then the degree of vertex one plus the degree of vertex two up through the degree
of vertex nine would be 27, but that's odd, literally.
That's an odd number, and that's impossible by the handshake theorem.
We know the sum of the degrees of the vertices must be an even number, twice the number of
edges.
It can't be 27, because I know I don't have 13 and a half edges.
You may ask the question, is the theorem true with eight vertices?
Here the answer is no.
That is, with eight people, you might have, it's possible with eight people to not have
three mutual friends or four mutual strangers.
For extra credit, try to find a way to color k8 so that it has no red k3 or any blue k4.
It can be done with 12 red edges and 16 blue edges.
Now, Ramsey's theorem goes beyond 3, 3 and 3, 4.
The more general version says, for any numbers r and b, there is a number n so that if the
edges of kn are all colored red or blue, then it must contain either a red kr or a blue
kb.
This theorem, by the way, can be extended even with three or more colors.
In fact, some people like to look at these things called Ramsey numbers.
It's the smallest number that will make the red kr or blue kb theorem true.
We've shown that the Ramsey number r3, 3 is 6 and we've claimed that r3, 4 is 9.
It turns out r4, 4 is 18.
Once you get beyond that, a lot of the numbers we don't know exactly, we just know ranges
of them.
For instance, we know that the fifth Ramsey number, r5, 5, must be between 43 and 49.
That is, with 49 or more, you definitely are going to have a red k5 or a blue k5 if you're
coloring a graph with 49 or more vertices.
With 42 or fewer, you might not have a red k5 or a blue k5.
We know that the sixth Ramsey number lives somewhere between 102 and 165.
That's a pretty big range.
The great mathematician Paul Erdisch asks us to imagine that aliens landed on Earth
and demanded the value of r5, 5, the fifth Ramsey number, or they would destroy our planet.
In that case, he claims, we should marshal all our computers and all our mathematicians
and attempt to find the value.
But suppose instead that they asked for the sixth Ramsey number?
In that case, he believes we should gather all our resources to attempt to destroy the
aliens.
Here's another classic application of discrete mathematics to social networks.
Although it doesn't involve much graph theory, it's a problem that can be described and
solved using discrete mathematical reasoning.
It's called the stable marriage problem, and it goes like this.
Suppose you've been hired to be the village matchmaker for a town with n men and n women.
Who wish to be paired up with each other in a nice and logical way.
Now each man provides you with a list of the names of all n women ranked from first choice
to last choice.
Every man has his own list.
Every man has his own preferences.
And each woman does the same.
She provides you with a list of ranking all n men.
Your job is to provide a way to pair up the n men and n women in such a way that no one
extra marital affairs will take place.
In other words, there has to be no man I and no woman J so that I and J prefer each other
over the mates they've been assigned.
So you have to pair them up in such a way that no hanky-panky is going to happen.
The stable marriage theorem says that your job can always be accomplished no matter how
the men and women have ranked each other.
You can always find a stable pairing.
Better still, it actually provides an algorithm that accomplishes your task.
Here's how it goes.
In round one, each man proposes to his first choice.
So every man gets down on his knee and proposes to his top choice.
Each woman that gets a proposal anyway tentatively accepts her first choice and flat out rejects
any other offers she got.
So the offer that sounded best to her according to her preference list, she says, I'll think
it over with you, maybe, I'll give you a definite maybe.
And to every other guy that proposed to her, she says, no, I can do better than you, go
away and never come back.
Okay, next, all the rejected men, what do they do?
They now propose to their second choice.
And the women behave again in the same sort of way.
If a woman gets a better offer than the one that she's tentatively accepted, she'll tell
the one that she's tentatively accepted to go away, she'll tentatively accept the new
best offer and any other offers she got that were worse than her current best, she says,
go away, don't come back.
Okay, the rejected men go back again and they again propose to their next choices.
And this process continues until eventually, eventually every woman has an offer and when
every woman has an offer, every woman is tentatively holding on to a different guy and at that
point the algorithm stops.
At that point, every woman is tentatively paired with a man and the matchmaker says,
and now the pairing is permanent.
This is how the matchmaker, this is how you as matchmaker are going to make the assignment.
So why would this algorithm result in a stable pairing?
This is the beautiful part, pure, discrete logic.
I claim that this process is guaranteed to produce a stable pairing.
Proof, suppose that there was a man I, not me I, but you know, the variable I, and a
woman J such that I prefers J. I claim J has no interest in I.
Why is that?
Suppose I prefer J to the mate that he's been assigned.
Then according to this algorithm, that must have meant that I must have proposed to J
earlier and J must have rejected him.
Either for the, she must have rejected him for somebody and whoever she wound up at the
end had to be at least as good as that, right?
Because the women could only trade up along the process.
So therefore, even though I is interested in J, J is not interested in I, and therefore
no affairs are going to take place.
By the way, you might ask, is the stable assignment unique?
Is there only one way to pair them up in a stable way?
Sometimes it is, such as when man one and woman one are each other's first choice and
man two and woman two are each other's first choice and so on.
But often there are several different ways to create a stable assignment.
In fact, it's still an open question in discrete mathematics to define the maximum number of
stable pairings that are possible as a function of N.
As a matter of fact, I even have a paper on that subject.
It's called, How do I marry thee?
Let me count the ways.
So who gets the better deal in this algorithm?
The men or the women?
I mean, thinking about the process, who seems to be in control here, the men or the women?
It may seem like since the women get to do all the accepting and rejecting that they
get the better deal, but it turns out this algorithm actually favors the men.
As it turns out, for each man, among all the women that he could have received in a stable
pairing, that might not include his first choice, but among all the women that he could
have received in a stable pairing, he gets the woman that he most desires in that set.
This algorithm is called male optimal.
And unfortunately, the algorithm is also female-pessimal in that each woman receives her least favored
mate among all the men she could have been given in a stable pairing.
Incidentally, a version of this algorithm is actually used in the medical community
to assign medical residents to hospitals.
The difference here is that each hospital takes several residents.
It's not monogamy here, and takes other factors into consideration, like when married couples
are applying together and have to be assigned to the same hospital.
A few years ago, they changed the algorithm so that instead of the algorithm being hospital
optimal, it was resident optimal.
The stable marriage problem can be represented with a complete bipartite graph KNN.
Let me define that here.
That consists of N vertices representing the men, N vertices representing the women, and
we have an edge that connects every man with every woman, but we don't have any edges between
men, and men, we don't have any edges between women and women.
For example, here's the graph K33.
Three vertices on the left, three vertices on the right, and all of our edges go left
to right or right to left, none of them go up and down.
After being given everyone's preference list, your job as matchmaker is to find a perfect
matching in KNN that is stable.
What do I mean by a perfect matching?
All it means is it's a selection of N edges so that every vertex is included on exactly
one edge.
For instance, here's a perfect matching in K33.
I don't know if it's stable or not, but it's one way of assigning the men to the women.
One goes to four, two goes to six, three goes to five.
You may ask, how many perfect matchings does KNN have?
You don't have to be stable, just how many perfect matchings will KNN have?
Well we know this from our basics of combinatorics.
There are N factorial perfect matchings, since vertex one has N choices of an edge, then
vertex two has N minus one choices of an edge, can't go to wherever vertex one was matched
up with, vertex three has N minus two choices of an edge, and so on, therefore there are
N factorial perfect matchings.
How many perfect matchings does this graph have?
Perhaps this represents students sitting at two rows of desks and everybody has to trade
homework papers with someone sitting next to them.
So this is called the two by four grid graph.
It's got eight vertices here.
The two by four grid graph has five perfect matchings as shown here.
You may ask, how many perfect matchings does the two by N grid graph have?
Well, let's look at them.
When N is equal to one, there's just one way.
When N is equal to two, we see there are two ways.
They can go like this, or they can go like that.
When N is equal to three, we see there are three ways.
When N is equal to four, we just saw there are five ways.
There are five perfect matchings in the two by four grid graph.
When N is equal to five, I'll tell you there are eight ways.
Now look at those numbers, two, three, five, eight.
Who can't we eliminate?
Fibonacci, of course.
The number of perfect matchings in the two by N grid graph is F sub N, the Nth Fibonacci
number.
Now, why is that?
Well, if you take a perfect matching in this two by N grid graph, if you chop that matching
in half horizontally, look at what you have.
You have a one by N board with squares and dominoes.
And since we know that the number of one by N boards, the number of one by N strips with
squares and dominoes is the Nth Fibonacci number, there we have it, our Nth Fibonacci
number.
Now, suppose you wanted to know how many perfect matchings does the N the by N grid graph have.
Well, when M and N are both odd, the answer is easy, zero.
You see why?
If you have a graph with 15 points in it, you can't pair them up with seven and a half
edges, because you have to have an integer number of edges.
So the three by five grid has no perfect matching.
The M by N grid has no perfect matching if M and N are both odd.
On the other hand, when M and N are both even, the answer is very hard.
I'll just show it to you here.
It is a messy expression.
You may ask, how many matchings does the M by N grid graph have?
They don't have to be perfect matchings.
We don't insist that every point be part of a match.
So how many ways can you do that?
Here this is an unsolved problem.
Here's an example of a non-perfect matching in a four by six grid graph, but I don't even
know if anybody knows how many non-perfect matchings are even in a graph of that size
because there are a huge number of them.
Here's another nice application of graph theory in social problems.
This called the structural balance problem.
Now what I want you to do this time is finish the following sentences.
The friend of my friend is my friend.
The friend of my enemy is my, well, the most likely answer is enemy.
The enemy of my friend is my enemy, but the enemy of my enemy is my friend.
Maybe you've heard all those expressions before.
My question to you is what if everyone lived their life by these rules, those four rules
for living?
This problem has actually been addressed by sociologists to explain polarizing behavior.
It can be shown using graph theory that if everyone lived by those four rules, then only
two stable societies could emerge, either one where everybody was friends with everybody
else so there weren't any enemies to deal with, or the situation where there are two
groups of people, say red folks and blue folks, so that all the red folks are friends with
each other and all the blue folks are friends with each other, but all the red folks are
enemies with all the blue folks and vice versa.
You can actually prove that theorem using graph theory, though we won't do that here.
Paul Erdisch, whom we met earlier, was the most prolific mathematician in history.
In his lifetime, he wrote more than 1,400 mathematical papers, more than any other mathematician,
and second only to Euler in the number of published pages of mathematical research.
Erdisch obviously saw mathematics as a social activity and had more than 500 collaborators.
In fact, mathematicians have playfully created a graph in his honor.
It's called the collaboration graph, where the vertices represent mathematicians and
two vertices are adjacent if the mathematicians have written a paper together.
A person's Erdisch number is the number of steps that it takes to get to the vertex
represented by Erdisch.
Thus, Erdisch has an Erdisch number of zero, and he's the only one with an Erdisch number
of zero.
Anyone who's written a paper with Erdisch has an Erdisch number of one.
Anyone else who has written a paper with someone who has written a paper with Erdisch has an
Erdisch number of two, and so on.
My own Erdisch number is three, and it can never be one since Erdisch died in 1996.
But if anyone out there has an Erdisch number of one and is watching this course, let's talk.
