We
ended our last lecture by talking about the collaboration graph, modeling how
mathematicians collaborate to produce new mathematics. In this lecture, we consider
the opposite situation where people are competing against each other. Specifically, we shall
apply directed graphs to understand tournaments that arise in sports and other competitions.
There are three common tournament formats. Elimination tournaments, as is done in college
basketball tournaments. There is the Swiss format, where winners continue to play winners
and losers continue to play losers, as is done in many chess tournaments. And in duplicate
bridge, sometimes they use round robin tournaments, where everyone plays, everyone else in their
division. We're going to focus in this lecture on the round robin situation, where everybody
plays everybody else once. Recall, from our last lecture, KN is the complete graph on
N vertices, where every pair of vertices is adjacent. So, for example, here is our graph
K4. A tournament is a complete graph where every edge has an orientation. Either I points
to J, or J points to I. For example, here is a tournament with four players. How do
we interpret the tournament? Our interpretation is I points to J means that player I beat
player J in a round robin tournament. You can think of as I pointing to J saying, aha,
I beat you, or you might look at the I pointing to J kind of looking like a greater than sign.
So here, we see that player I beat player IV, but player I lost to players II and III.
The score, or sometimes referred to as the out degree of a vertex V, is the number of
edges leaving V. So the scores for I, II, III, and IV are respectively I, II, II, and
I. Notice that in this tournament, we have the interesting situation that I beat IV,
and IV beat III, and III beat II. So we have a chain that goes all the way through this
tournament, I beat IV, IV beat III, III beat II. This is called a directed Hamiltonian
path because it's a path that goes through every vertex of the tournament. Now, does
every tournament have a Hamiltonian path? You may remember that when talking about graphs
in general, it's a pretty hard question to determine if a graph has a Hamiltonian path
or if a graph has a Hamiltonian cycle. And yet, in every tournament, you may be surprised
to learn, every tournament does have a directed Hamiltonian path. Specifically, we have the
Hamiltonian path theorem that says, for any number of players n greater than or equal
to one, for every tournament with n vertices, there is always a sequence of vertices V1,
V2 through Vn, such that V1 points to V2, V2 points to V3, and so on down the line points
to Vn. In other words, we can list our players in some order so that player V1 beat V2, V2
beat V3, and so on all the way down to Vn. So, for example, in this tournament graph here,
there are lots of Hamiltonian paths. We see that we can go from 1 to 4 to 3 to 2, but
there's also 2 to 1 to 4 to 3, or 2, 4, 3, 1, or 3, 2, 1, 4, or even 4, 3, 2, 1. Those
are all directed Hamiltonian paths. But you'd expect that to become much harder and harder
as the tournament gets larger and larger, and yet we can prove that there will always
be at least one Hamiltonian path in your tournament. So, we'll prove that by induction on n, the
number of players, or the number of vertices. So, base case, when n is equal to 1, we have
a one-player tournament. There's only just one. That works, okay? Not very interesting.
Let's look at n equals 2. Then, we have two players. They play one game, either one beat
two or two beat one. Either way, we have a Hamiltonian path. So, our base case clearly
true when n is equal to 1 or 2. Next, we state our induction hypothesis. Assume
the theorem is true for tournaments with k vertices. Our goal is to prove that it continues
to be true for tournaments with k plus 1 vertices. Alright, so, how do we start the
proof? Consider a tournament with k plus 1 vertices. What do we do now? Well, the goal
of induction, if we want to use that induction hypothesis, is we want to reduce that problem
from a k plus 1 sized problem to a problem of size k. How do we reduce it to a problem
of size k? Well, why don't we kick out player k plus 1? I mean, let everybody play their
games, including player k plus 1, but let's now ignore k plus 1 and his results. So, removing
k plus 1 from the tournament, this produces a tournament with k vertices. Now, by the
induction hypothesis, I know that there's a Hamiltonian path among these k vertices.
That's what induction does for us. Hence, there's some arrangement of the vertices so
that v1 beat v2, v2 beat v3, and so on down through vk. To make my notation easier, let's
just assume it happened in numerical order. So, 1 beat 2, 2 beat 3, 3 beat 4, and so on
down to k. Now, we have to bring k plus 1 back into the picture. And we want to create
a Hamiltonian path that uses all k plus 1 players. So, we have three situations to consider.
Case 1. If k plus 1 beat player 1, then we're happy. We have a Hamiltonian path. Do you
see it? k plus 1 beat 1, and 1 beat 2, and 2 beat 3, and so on down the line. That is
a Hamiltonian path. So, if k plus 1 beats player 1, then we're happy. What's the other
obvious situation? If player k beat player k plus 1, because then 1 beat 2, and 2 beat
3, and 3 beat 4 all the way down to k, and then k beat k plus 1, and so that would be
a Hamiltonian path. Okay. Otherwise, if k didn't beat k plus 1, k plus 1 must have
beat player k. So, let's let i be the first player that k plus 1 beat. We know we at least
beat player k. Maybe he beat somebody earlier. We know he didn't beat player 1, because we
already considered that case. So, there has to be some number i between 1 and k that player
k plus 1 beat player i. We're going to find that first one. Well, in that situation, what
do we have? That must have been the case that player k plus 1 lost to players 1, 2, 3 up
through i minus 1, but k plus 1 beat player i. Therefore, we can insert it into our Hamiltonian
path. What we really needed was that k plus 1 lost to player i minus 1, and beat player
i, and now we have a Hamiltonian path using all k plus 1 players, and that completes our
proof by induction. Our next theorem was used by Professor Steve
Moorer of Swarthmore College to explain the pecking orders of chickens. It turns out that
for any two chickens, one is always dominant over the other. The dominant one will peck
the other one on the head and neck. That's actually where the term pecking order comes
from. However, it's rarely the case, so I hear, that one chicken dominates all the others.
I mean, so everybody pecks people and everyone gets pecked by others. So, the question is,
is there some way that we might be able to determine which chicken or chickens are the
most dominant? So, this is actually one of my favorite
theorems in graph theory, and it's called, I kid you not, the King Chicken theorem. The
King Chicken theorem says this. Well, first, let me give you a definition. In a tournament,
we say that x is a king chicken, or simply a king, if x has the following peculiar bragging
rights, x can say to any opponent y, either x beat y, or there is a player z out there
such that x beat z, and z beat y. So, if I'm a king and I see any other person out there,
I can either know that I either beat that person, or I beat somebody who beat that person.
In other words, in a tournament, the King Chicken theorem says there's always a vertex,
vertex x, say, from which we can walk to any other point in at most two steps. So, starting
from a king vertex, you can walk to anywhere in at most two steps, and the King Chicken
theorem says that such a point must always exist. So, here's an example. In our tournament
that we've been looking at, player two is a king. Why? Because two beat one, two beat
four, and though two did not beat three, two beat four and four beat three, so two can get
to three in two steps. Now, to make life interesting, player three is also a king, because three
beat one, three beat two, and three beats two who beat four, and even player four is
a king, because four beat three, four beat three who beat one, and four beat three who
beat two. Now, is everyone a king? No. In this situation, player one is not a king. You see
that player one is not a king, because one cannot reach player two in two steps. He can
get to two in three steps. He can go one to four to three to two, but he can't get there
in two steps, because he lost to two, and the only player he beat was four, but four
did not beat two. So, as it turns out, we'll see later, with four players, it's actually
impossible for everyone to be a king. Okay, but I'm going to prove for you now the king
chicken theorem, that every tournament has at least one king. Now, unlike the last theorem,
the Hamiltonian path theorem that used induction, this one's actually a little hard to prove
by induction. The proof, however, is even simpler and very satisfying. Here's how it
goes. So, you have a tournament, and everybody's played their matches, and I claim there has
to be at least one king. If you had to just quickly look at the tournament, who would
you most likely pick to be king? What would you look at? You would probably choose a vertex
that had the most victories, right? And if there was a tie, if there were several of
them, just pick any one, so that let V be any vertex with maximum out degree. Let's
suppose V has K victories, and let's say V beat players V1, V2 through VK. Now, does
player V have to be a king? You might be surprised to learn the answer is yes. With having the
most victories, I'll prove to you that V must be a king. Why? Well, suppose not. What
would it mean for V to not be a king? Then there would have to exist some vertex U that
V couldn't reach in two steps or less, right? So, there has to be a vertex U such that U
beat V, and U beat everybody that V beat. U beat V1, V2 through VK. What's wrong with
that? Well, then player U must have beaten K plus, at least K plus one opponents, namely
V and all of the people that V beat. But that contradicts the assumption that V had maximum
out degree because U had to do better. Isn't that a gorgeous proof? Now, the King Chicken
theorem is a surprising result with a very elegant proof, at least in my opinion. So,
what does a mathematician do with it? I want to take time in this lecture to show you.
Some mathematicians might go out and try to find situations where it can be applied, but
many would look at this theorem and this gorgeous proof and wonder if it could be pushed further.
Are there related theorems that could be proved? In the remainder of this lecture, I want to
give you a taste of the sorts of problems that a typical discrete mathematician would
naturally consider. So, starting with this theorem, which is in itself a surprising theorem,
if a player loses, then that player must lose to a King. So, any player that loses has to
lose to one of the Kings. Remember, we might have several Kings out there, but if a player
loses, they must lose to one of the Kings. Here's the proof. Let V be any vertex. Now,
looking at V, we can classify all the points in our graph as being in one of three situations,
either it's V, or somebody that beat V, or somebody that lost to V. So, I'm going to
let W be the set of winners, the set of vertices that beat V, and I'm going to let L be the
set of losers, the set of points that lost to player V. So, we could illustrate that
as in this diagram. So, there's V, there's everyone above it. We know that V lost to
at least one player, remember, and everyone below it. So, let's first just focus on the
set W. Just looking at the set of players that beat V, that doesn't include the vertex
V. Now, we know since they formed their own smaller tournament, that tournament has to
have a King, at least there has to be a King of W. Let's call that King K. But I claim
that K actually has to be a King of the entire tournament, not just the set W. Why? Well,
we know that K beat V, and for any vertex in the loser's bracket, anyone that V beat,
K can get to them in two steps. Therefore, every point in the tournament can be reached
by K in at most two steps. Isn't that neat? Another definition of strength is a vertex
V is called an emperor. If V beats W for a long time, it's called a king of the entire
all W. The emperor defeats all opponents. This is beyond being a king. The emperor can get
to everybody in one step. A king can get to everyone in at most two steps. Clearly, if
V is an emperor, then it is also a king. In fact, it's got to be the only king, because
nobody beat V. There's nobody who could get to V in two steps. If V is an emperor, it's
the only king. Surprisingly, I claim that if a tournament has exactly one king, let's
call that King K, then the king must also be an emperor. We can prove that. Let's do
it. Suppose K is the only king. Could K have lost to anyone? I claim K has to be an emperor,
right? Could it have lost to anyone? No, because by our last theorem, if K lost to anyone,
it would have had to have lost to another king. But K was the only king. Therefore, it couldn't
have lost to anyone. Therefore, K is an emperor. Here's another corollary of that theorem.
I claim that no tournament can have exactly two kings. And no tournament can have exactly
two kings. Here's the proof. Suppose the tournament has two kings, A and B. Now, A and B had to
play each other. So, without loss of generality, let's say that player A beat player B. Now,
A had to lose to somebody, right? Why did A have to lose to somebody? If A didn't lose
to anybody, B would not have been a king. Okay? But then, that means by our earlier theorem,
since A lost to somebody, A had to lose to a king. And A didn't lose to B. Consequently,
there must be at least one more king in the tournament. So, just by having two kings,
A and B ensures the existence of a third king. Okay, so here's another question. In a tournament
with N players, can every player be a king? Right? Can we have Lake Wobegon, where not
only is everyone above average, but everyone's a king? Well, we know that's impossible when
you only have two players. You can't have both of them being kings. I also claim that
that can't happen when you have exactly four players. I said that earlier. With four players,
not everyone can be a king. And let's see why. Now, when N is four, that means if four
players, everyone has three opponents. Right? Now, I'm going to prove that, I want to prove
that not everybody can be a king. So, nobody has three victories, because if somebody had
three victories, you'd only have one king, and therefore not everyone could be king. And
nobody has zero victories, because if someone had zero victories, they can't be king, and
therefore everyone couldn't be a king. Thus, I'll assume that everyone has one or two victories.
Alright? So, now since I have a total of six edges in my graph K4, in my tournament K4,
and everyone has one or two victories, the only way that can happen is if two players
have exactly two victories, and two players have exactly one victory. That's the only
way I can get two twos and two ones to add up to six, the number of edges in the tournament.
Let's say the players who had two victories, let's call them A and B, and let's let the
other two, the only that had one victory, let's call them C and D. And since A and B
had to play each other without loss of generality, let's say that A beat B. Now, that forces
B, since it had two victories, to beat C and D. And A has one other victory, and without
loss of generality, let's say that A beat players C. But then I claim C can't be a king,
because C would not be able to reach B in two steps. Why? Well, we know that C lost
to B, we see that C lost to A, so even, and in fact C had to beat D, that's fine, but
D did not beat B, B beat D, so we see in this tournament that C could not be king. So no
matter what situation you have here with four players, it's impossible for everyone to be
a king. By the way, analogous to the king chicken definition, we could also define an analysis
concept for some, some big loser called maybe the, the king turkey, that's my term, that
everyone can reach in at most two steps. Naturally, every result that we've obtained
for king chickens would apply to king turkeys too. Okay, but let's go back to our earlier
question. In a tournament with N players, is it possible for every player to be a king?
We know that you can't have everyone a king when N is two, and you can't have everyone
be a king when N is four, when you have four players, but surprisingly, the answer is yes.
For any other number besides two or four, it's possible for everyone to be a king. So
let's see how to prove that. Let's look at some small examples first. When N is equal
to one, well he's, player is just king of his castle, there's no, no one to play, so he's
a king. When N is three, we have this triangle where A beat B, B beat C and C beat A, so everybody
can reach everybody in two steps. So everyone's a king there. I've drawn a graph here of K
five, a tournament with, with five players where, well, how do I know that everyone's
a king? If you look at the way, if you look at how the edges are oriented, you'll notice
that every player has exactly two victories. And we know that by the king, the proof of
the king chicken theorem that anyone who has the maximum number of victories is guaranteed
to be a king. And since all five players have two victories, we know that everyone could
be a king. You think we can do that for other tournaments. In fact, when N is odd, when,
we have seven players or nine players, then, etc., then I claim that every vertex, well
we know that when N is odd, every vertex has degree N minus one. Everybody plays N minus
one people, and N minus one is even. Therefore, the graph KN, since every vertex has even
degree, we know from our very first lecture on graph theory that that tournament would
have to have an Eulerian tour. So let's do, let's, let's create an Eulerian tour. Let's
go through the graph in a nice Eulerian way, covering every edge and ending where we started.
And as, draw your arrows as you take the tour, and the graph is going to have at every vertex
N minus one over two edges leaving it, and N minus one over two edges entering it. So
every vertex has the same out degree. And since everyone has the same out degree, everyone's
a king. Now in fact, everyone not only is a king chicken, everyone's also a king turkey
in that situation. Now I've only shown it to you for the, for the case where we have
an odd number of players. Here's the situation when you have an even number of players. Here
we have six players, and if you look at this tournament, I'll leave it for yourself to
verify that every player here is a king. That from every vertex, we can reach every other
vertex in at most two steps. In fact, to get all the other even tournaments starting at
six as our base case, here's what we're going to do. Suppose I have a tournament T with
N players where everyone's a king. Alright, let's say N is a nice, is an even number,
and everyone's a king. And now I'm going to prove that I can do it for the next even
number. I'm going to do that by adding two new players to join the tournament X and Y.
Now what can we do? How should X and Y win or lose their matches to create a situation
where everyone's a king in this bigger tournament? Here's what we do. We'll let everyone in T
beat X, and we'll let X beat Y and nobody else. Y is going to beat everyone in T, but
Y loses to X. Then I claim in this bigger tournament with N plus two players, everyone
is still a king, right? Because everyone in T is a king within T, and everyone in T can
get to X in one step or Y in two steps. So everyone in T is still a king of the bigger
tournament. Furthermore, X is a king in this new tournament because X beat Y, and Y beat
everyone in T. So X can get to anywhere in at most two steps. And Y can get to anywhere
in at most two steps also, because Y beat everyone in T, and everyone in T beat X, so
Y can get to X and everyone else in at most two steps.
Another question we might ask is, OK, for numbers K and N, where K is between one and
N, does there exist a tournament with N players that has exactly K kings? OK, so we're really
extending that question. Now, we know the answer is no when K is two, because no tournament,
no matter how many players you have, has exactly two kings. And we know the answer is no when
N is four and K is four, because we proved that with four players, you can't have four
kings. But what's really surprising and cool is the answer is yes, for all other values
of K and N, you can have a tournament with N players and exactly K kings. Here's the
basic idea behind the proof. Let's look at a specific case. Let's prove that there must
be a tournament with eight players that has exactly five kings, OK? Now, we know there
exist tournaments with five players where all five players are kings. We saw that and
proved that earlier. Then, if I want to create a tournament with eight players and five kings,
then what do we do? We simply add three more players to the mix who all lose to these five
kings. Therefore, I don't care what they do among each other, but they lose, everyone
of the new group loses to these five kings. Therefore, none of the three new players can
be a king because they never be able to get up to beat anybody in that king set. So, this
new tournament will have eight players and five kings. The people that were kings of the
first five group are still kings when considered among the eight. So, where do we go from here?
You might try to see what results you can find for directed graphs that are not tournaments,
such as when some players don't play each other or when some teams play each other more
than once. We've seen in this lecture that in any tournament, no matter how random the
outcomes, your tournament must contain some interesting structures like a Hamiltonian
path or at least one king chicken. In our next lecture, we'll return to the land of
undirected graphs, but we'll allow ourselves to put weights on the edges. Our focus will
be on a class of graphs that are simple, powerful, efficient and form the backbone of many graphs
as we take on the subject of trees and their applications.
