Lecture 24 We Made It
Let's take a look back at the material that we've covered in this course.
We presented this course as three major fields,
combinatorics, number theory, and graph theory.
But there were numerous places where these fields overlapped.
For instance, we saw how proofs, and especially proofs by induction,
played an important role in all three topics,
and counting methods were applied many times outside the set of combinatorics lectures.
We saw my favorite numbers, the Fibonacci numbers,
make cameo appearances in all three subjects.
They counted the ways to tile a strip with squares and dominoes,
the number of perfect matchings in a 2 by n graph,
and they provided us with an upper bound on how long it takes,
the important Euclidean algorithm to run.
I could probably offer an entire course on the magic of Fibonacci numbers
that combine and go beyond several aspects of this course.
For example, when you combine Fibonacci numbers with binomial coefficients,
we can get beautiful identities like this one,
the sum of n choose k times F sub k is F sub 2n,
which can be proved using induction or the binomial theorem or combinatorially.
Incidentally, if you like the material on combinatorics and combinatorial proofs,
and you want to see more of them, you might enjoy my book,
Proofs That Really Count,
co-authored with one of my favorite mathematicians, Professor Jennifer Quinn.
We saw how the powers of 2 played an important role throughout this course.
They provide us with additive building blocks for the integers.
Any number can be represented as the sum of distinct powers of 2 in a unique way.
For instance, 83 is 64 plus 16 plus 2 plus 1.
Those are all distinct powers of 2.
And yet, a similar result holds for Fibonacci numbers.
Any number can be written as the sum of distinct non-consecutive Fibonacci numbers in a unique way.
For instance, 83 can be expressed as 55 plus 21 plus 5 plus 2,
all of which are distinct non-consecutive Fibonacci numbers.
This is known as the second-door representation.
And in graph theory, the Fibonacci numbers count the ways that you can choose vertices from a path graph
so that no two of them are adjacent.
These collections are called independent sets.
For example, here are the path graphs of length 1 to 4 and their independent sets.
When n is 1, there are two ways of doing it.
When n is 2, there are three ways to do it.
When n is 3, there are five ways to do it.
When n is 4, there are eight ways.
2, 3, 5, 8, I hope you now appreciate Fibonacci.
By the way, when n is greater than or equal to 2, the number of independent sets in a cycle graph of length n
is the nth lucan number that we also encountered.
Notice here, when n is 2, 3, 4, and 5, the number of independent sets in them is 3, 4, 7, and 11, which are lucan numbers.
We were introduced to many mathematicians, but the one encountered most often was Leonard Euler.
We saw three theorems that were named after him, one in number theory and two in graph theory.
And by the end of this lecture, I'll show you another one of his in combinatorics.
So, what can you do with a course in discrete mathematics?
At my school, Harvey Mudd College, discrete mathematics is required of math majors and computer science majors,
and students from other majors take it as an elective course.
Since it's the first really proof intensive course, it's a prerequisite for many upper level courses,
like abstract algebra, logic and set theory, data structures and algorithms,
and full length courses in combinatorics, number theory and graph theory.
Let me say a few words about each of these courses.
Abstract algebra is the language of symmetry, and one of its main topics is group theory.
A group is a set where the elements can be multiplied together in such a way that the product always stays in the set.
Multiplication is associative, that means ABC equals ABC, no matter how you parenthesize.
And there's a number which I'll call one that acts like the real number one.
That is when you multiply one by something, it doesn't change.
And for every number x, we can find another number that kind of acts as a reciprocal,
a number y, so that x times y gives us one.
The positive real numbers form a group, but there are some finite sets that do too,
like the set of numbers 1 through p minus 1, when p is a prime and multiplication is done mod p.
One great result from group theory is Lagrange's theorem, which says that if g is a group,
and h is a subgroup of g, that is a group that lives inside of that group,
then the number of elements in h must divide the number of elements in g.
If the size of a group is n, then a consequence of Lagrange's theorem is for any element x in the group,
when you take x to the nth power, you always get the identity element 1.
Fermat's theorem and Euler's theorem that we saw earlier are in fact very simple special cases
of these theorems from group theory. Group theory overlaps by the way with combinatorics
and graph theory too. For example, we can use group theory to count the number of ways
that we could paint a cube with n colors, where two cubes are considered to be the same
if one cube can be rotated to look like the other.
And groups often have beautiful graphical representations that I won't go into here,
but I'll show you some pictures.
Let me say a few words about set theory and logic.
So in set theory, we played around with sets just a little bit in this course.
You can prove things like A intersect B union C equals A intersect B union A intersect C.
You could demonstrate that with a Venn diagram or by various logical arguments.
Another nice identity is that if you take the set of points that is not in A or B or C,
that that's equal to the set of points that are not in A and not in B and not in C.
So just like set theory has some nice laws like distributive laws, so do the laws of logic.
For any truth values A, B and C, where A, B and C can be true or false,
you can get statements like A and B or C equals A and B or A and C.
And there's a similar law of negation called De Morgan's law.
So in a sense, we can actually do algebra on logic.
This is called Boolean algebra and it reminds me of a funny cartoon I recently saw.
It showed the logician George Boole in a restaurant and it says Boole orders lunch.
He's going down the menu and he's saying yes, yes, no, no, yes, yes, yes, no, thinking very discreetly.
Here's another course that discrete mathematics is applied to, data structures and algorithms.
Earlier we encountered binary trees as a means of storing information,
but there are other ways to store data that have nice properties.
For example, we saw binary trees where every vertex had two children except the leaves at the bottom.
There are some trees called two, three trees where all the leaves are at the bottom
and they're all at the same height or the same depth from the top of the tree.
All the leaves are in a sense just like all the other leaves.
And every vertex above those leaves has degree two or three.
That is to say it has two children or three children.
Another thing one would learn in a course like that are sorting algorithms.
What's the fastest way to sort numbers?
The obvious ways take about time proportional to n squared.
The clever ways are time proportional to n log n.
If you were to take a full length course in combinatorics, you might encounter generating functions.
A generating function goes as follows.
Suppose you had a sequence of numbers a0, a1, a2, a3 and so on.
And rather than list them out in one long list with commas separating them,
instead we turn them into a mathematical function called a generating function.
So the generating function for that sequence would be called a of x,
which would be a0 plus a1 times x plus a2x squared plus a3x cubed and so on.
We're displaying all the values on sort of a mathematical clothes line
where we're looking as if it's like an infinitely long polynomial.
And sometimes this will have a very nice simple form
that reveals a lot of information about your sequence.
For example, let's take our favorite sequence, the Fibonacci numbers,
1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8 and so on.
That has as a generating function 1 plus 1x plus 2x squared plus 3x cubed plus 5x to the fourth plus 8x to the fifth and so on.
And if x is small enough, an absolute value, that actually simplifies to the function
1 divided by 1 minus x minus x squared.
Or you could do polynomial long division and see that that works regardless of what x is.
We can derive Bene's, I mean it's just amazing that in essence the entire Fibonacci series,
the entire set of Fibonacci numbers is captured in that one formula,
that one function, 1 over 1 minus x minus x squared.
We can derive Bene's formula from this along with many other properties of the Fibonacci numbers.
This by the way shows that discrete mathematics and continuous mathematics actually do have a lot to say to each other.
And the more you know about one side, the more it can help you on the other.
If you were to take a full blown course in number theory, you'll see that we spend a lot more time with prime numbers.
In fact, so much that they start developing their own personality.
In my course, I refer to good primes and bad primes.
The good primes are the primes that are one bigger than a multiple of four.
And the bad primes are the ones that are three bigger than a multiple of four,
or you could say one less than a multiple of four.
And the number two, it's the only even prime, so it's a little odd, wouldn't you say?
Anyway, here's one of the classic results in number theory.
We spend a bit of time talking about.
It's called quadratic reciprocity, and it says this.
It says, when does a number have a square root mod p?
So if I give you a number q, can you find a number whose square gives me q mod p?
And the answer to that, there's really a rather beautiful theorem involving that called quadratic reciprocity that says this.
With one sort of exception, with one class of exceptions, q has a square root mod p,
if and only if p has a square root mod q.
This is true whenever p and q are prime numbers, but there's an exception.
The only time that doesn't work is when both p and q are bad prime numbers.
When they're bad primes, both of them three bigger than a multiple of four,
then q has a square root mod p, if and only if p doesn't have a square root mod q.
As strange as this theorem sounds, it actually has applications like allowing you to figure out how to flip coins over the telephone
in such a way that you can actually trust the person on the other end without really seeing a coin.
It's more of a numerical coin.
If you were to take a full-blown course in graph theory, you might encounter coloring problems a little different from what we saw.
In this course, we colored faces on a map, we colored vertices on a graph.
You could also properly color the edges in such a way that two edges that go into the same vertex are not allowed to have the same color.
How many colors are you going to need?
First, if you look at your graph and you find the vertex that has the biggest degree, let's call that degree delta, big delta,
then obviously that vertex alone is going to need delta different colors.
Your graph is going to need at least delta colors.
Advising's theorem says that the minimum number of colors that you need is either going to be delta or delta plus one,
and it's going to be one or the other, and that's the edge chromatic number of the graph.
Now, even deciding, given a large graph, even deciding whether the edge chromatic number is delta or delta plus one,
that also turns out to be an NP-complete problem.
Okay, so plenty of advantages to learning discrete mathematics if you go on to take other mathematics courses.
But let's see some stuff you can appreciate right here, right now.
As I said, this lecture is on the magic of discrete mathematics,
and so I want to now show you some magic tricks that are actually whose secrets are actually based on discrete mathematics.
So the more you understand your discrete math, the better you can understand the magic tricks.
Okay, for my first trick is what I call the magic of eight.
I learned it from the ultimate mathematician, Martin Gardner.
So first I want you to write down a number.
It could be a one digit, a two digit number.
Heck, it could be a seven digit phone number, whatever you're comfortable with.
Write that as your first number.
Get out a piece of paper.
The second number, I want you to write down the number eight because this is, after all, the magic of eight.
The third number, you might need a calculator for this, is to take that first number and multiply it by eight.
Alright, so now you have three numbers.
I want you to add those three numbers together and you'll get some big number.
Whatever that big number is, I want you to take the digits of that big number and add them together.
If you have a one digit number now, stop.
If you have a two digit number, I want you to sum those two digits and see what answer you get.
Because this is the magic of eight, you should have, if we've done all our calculations correctly, the number eight.
How did I do it?
Did I have an innate sense of things?
No, I just knew a little bit of number theory.
Here's the secret.
The first number we can call that P.
Maybe P is your phone number.
The second number is eight.
The third number is P times eight.
When we add those three numbers together, we get nine P plus eight.
And now when I ask you to add the digits, then add the digits again, you know that means we're just working mod nine.
And when we put on our mod nine glasses, nine P plus eight simply looks like the number eight.
Okay, the next trick is one involving cards.
And I won't need all of these cards.
I'll just need some of them.
I can put some of the cards.
They can come from the top.
They can come from the bottom.
They can go anywhere in the deck that we want from the middle even.
Okay, I want 16 cards all together here.
And now I'll ask you how you want me to fold these cards up.
Before I do here, I'll flip a couple of these cards over.
See what we have here.
Two, three, nine, four.
Okay, two, three, four, nine.
That's interesting.
Now I'm going to ask you, do you want me to fold from the left, the right, the top, or the bottom?
You pick the first one, the top.
Okay, so I'll take the top and I'll fold it down just like that.
And then the left, okay.
And then the left again, sure.
And then the bottom, okay.
And then the top, all right.
And one more like that.
And if we've done all of our cutting and folding correctly, we should have the four aces.
Isn't that nice?
Okay, so some of you may have seen a trick like this before.
You're now going to learn the mathematics behind it.
So it's probably best explained with a visual aid.
Brought one here.
Now the first bit of sneakiness is that the four aces start off on the top of the deck.
And as I'm putting them down and up, I make sure, as I'm randomly putting them down in any which way,
that the four aces somehow manage to be on the main diagonal.
So the aces should be here.
So that's step one.
You want to nonchalantly get those aces on the diagonal, on this black diagonal.
And then I turn four other cards up almost as an afterthought.
We'll turn these four cards up.
Now it's always these four cards.
Why?
Because the four aces are on the black diagonal.
I'm turning the other four black cards up.
Okay.
And then we go through our folding procedure.
And as we fold and fold and fold, we're eventually going to consolidate on one spot.
Let's say we end up on this spot here.
Okay.
What can I say about this ace?
What's going to happen to this ace?
How many steps will it take to go from here to there?
It might go over there in one space, but it might also go over there in three spaces,
or possibly five spaces, or however many spaces it takes, it has to be an odd number.
Why?
Because it starts on a black square, and every move that you make as you fold,
you move from black to white or white to black.
We're using parity here.
And so what can I say about its orientation by the time it gets from this black square face down?
Every time it's on a white square, it's face up.
Every time it's on a black square, it's face down.
If it ends up here, it's going to end up face up.
So will all the other four aces, because they started on black squares after making an odd number of flips,
they'll end up here face up.
What about these other four cards that started on black squares?
They'll also take an odd number of steps.
But since they started face up, by the time they end up here, they will be face down.
And finally, all these white cards, those are all face down.
How many steps will they take to get there?
Since it goes from white to white, it's necessarily going to take an even number of steps.
So if they start face down, then after an even number of steps, they will also be face down.
Therefore, when all the cards are on this square, all the aces will be face up.
All the non-aces will be face down.
And if you ended up, say, all collecting on a black square instead, it'll just be the reverse.
You can just turn the cards over as you spread them out.
And though that gives you your four ace surprise.
The next trick, move this out of the way,
uses these dominoes, and I have in my possession a complete set of dominoes.
The dominoes have every possible pair on them.
So they go from zero to six.
The zero is represented by a blank.
And I ask my assistant, whoever that may be, to arrange the dominoes on the table
in such a way that they must always match as you go from one end to the next.
So this three has to be connected to a three, this two with a two, and so on.
They could turn around the corner if that makes your job easier.
Let's see, while we're doing this, here's a quick combinatorics question.
How many dominoes should be here?
We have seven possible values.
We choose two of them so that they're different.
So there should be seven choose two possibilities.
I got to go up here.
Okay, two, five, three.
Great.
So what do we have here?
Let's look at the end points of our domino.
Remember, this is done by a volunteer.
They can arrange them however they want as long as they use all of them.
Before I started my trick, however, I did a little back of the envelope calculation,
predicting what the end points of our path was going to be.
And we see that we started here with a three and we ended here with a four.
And you'll see that my prediction was that very result, three and four.
So how does that work?
What's the secret behind this magic?
It's nothing more than graph theory and a little bit of deception on my part.
When I told you at the beginning that I had in my possession a complete set of dominoes,
that was true.
But seven choose two is 21 dominoes and I only had 20 of them here on the table.
The 21st domino I had in my possession, but it was in my pocket.
It was this domino, three, four.
Why does that guarantee that we're going to have our end points as three and four?
Take a look at the graph, the graph K7, complete graph with vertices going from zero to six,
where zero represents the blank domino.
Every edge in the graph represents a domino.
For instance, the edge that goes from two to five, that represents the domino that begins with a two and ends with a five.
And so what do we know?
And what can I say about the degree of every vertex?
Well, it's a complete graph on seven vertices.
Every vertex is adjacent to all six other vertices.
So it's a connected graph.
Every vertex has even degree.
Euler's graph theorem says that the graph must be Eulerian.
But then I took away the domino, three, four.
That gets rid of the edge that goes from three to four.
As a result, this graph doesn't have every vertex having even degree.
Three and four have odd degree.
It's no longer Eulerian, but it is still drawable.
But we know that the only way that it can be drawn is if the end points are those points that have odd degree.
Namely, the three and the four, and that's why your prediction is guaranteed.
By the way, the trick still works.
Even if we add the dominoes that are matches, the double five domino, the double six domino, and so on, the trick will still work even if you have them.
But instead of having seven choose two dominoes, you'd have seven multi-choose two dominoes.
Minus one, of course.
Now we switch from mathematical magic to magical mathematics.
It's been said that there are two kinds of geniuses, the ordinary kind and the magicians.
The ordinary kind are just like us.
We could have figured out what they did if only we were about ten times as smart.
But the magicians, even after seeing what they accomplished, were still completely mystified as to how they did it.
Now when I think of who in the history of mathematics possessed supernatural qualities, the first two that come to my mind are Euler and Ramanijan.
Both of them worked on problems involving integer partitions, which we briefly encountered in lecture three on the twelve-fold way of combinatorics.
It's a topic that spans combinatorics, number theory, and even a little graph theory.
Recall that the partition number, p of n, counts the number of ways to allocate n identical pieces of candy into any number of identical bags.
Or, more simply, it's the number of ways to write the number n as the sum of smaller numbers where order doesn't matter.
So for example, p of 1 is 1 because I can just write 1 one way.
And the number 2, p of 2 is 2 because 2 can be written as 2 or as 1 plus 1.
3 can be written three ways, either as 3 or as 2 plus 1 or as 1 plus 1 plus 1.
Notice I don't have 1 plus 2 on that list because it's the same as 2 plus 1. Order doesn't matter.
Well, we see a pattern here, right? 1, 2, 3. Do you think p of 4 is 4? Well, actually it's 5.
Ah, but we see another pattern. 1, 2, 3, 5. I'll bet the next one is 8, right?
No, p of 5 is 7.
Wait, wait, wait. I see 2, 3, 5, 7. Those are prime numbers. Maybe the next one's 11.
Sure enough, p of 6 is 11. How about p of 7? Will that be 13?
Nope, it's 15. We wouldn't expect the prime numbers to be that well-behaved, would we?
As it turns out, there is no exact formula for p of n.
But Euler found a recurrence, and it's kind of like the Fibonacci numbers on steroids.
Here it is. It starts off like Fibonacci. p of n is p of n minus 1 plus p of n minus 2.
But then we subtract two things, p of n minus 5 and p of n minus 7.
But then we add two things back, p of n minus 12 plus p of n minus 15.
And then I subtract two things, and then I add two things, and then I subtract two things,
and this goes on forever until we reach 0 or below.
If we reach 0, we have p of 0 is 1, and if we go negative, p of anything negative is 0.
The numbers are added and subtracted two at a time.
And the numbers that we see here are of the form plus or minus p of n minus k,
where k is of the form j times 3j plus or minus 1 over 2.
You can use that recurrence to solve for p of 5, p of 6, p of 7, successively,
and you'll see they match up with the numbers that we saw earlier.
So there's the formula, there's even a more compact way of writing it using summation notation.
It's called Euler's pentagonal number theorem since numbers of the form j times 3j minus 1 over 2
are called pentagonal numbers, as is illustrated below.
Now recall that the Fibonacci numbers have a generating function.
A of x is 1 plus 1x plus 2x squared plus 3x cubed plus 5x to the fourth, 8x to the fifth, and so on.
And we saw that for small values of x, that simplifies to 1 over 1 minus x minus x squared.
The generating function for partition numbers, where we're using 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 15, and so on,
that also has a nice simplifying generating function, but the denominator is an infinitely long product.
It's 1 over 1 minus x times 1 minus x squared, 1 minus x cubed, 1 minus x to the fourth, 1 minus x to the fifth,
and so on out forever.
Because of that, it has no simple closed form.
But Hardy and Ramanujan discovered that p of n has a beautiful asymptotic formula.
They showed that p of n is approximately e to the pi times the square root of 2n over 3 divided by 4n over root 3.
Go figure.
You look at a number like that, and it reminds you that even if you live, breathe, and love discrete mathematics like I do,
you can't totally escape the continuous mathematics.
Here, even though these are problems about integers, we still see the numbers from calculus and geometry.
We see e, pi, square roots, so the more you know about one subject, the one field, discrete mathematics,
the more it's going to help you in continuous mathematics and vice versa.
Well, congratulations.
You've just gone through a very rigorous mathematics course.
It's possibly the first course you've ever taken where the emphasis was on concepts and problem solving,
instead of plugging and chugging through formulas and symbol pushing.
You've probably never done so many proofs before either, except perhaps in your high school geometry class.
I didn't expect you to come into this course with a love of doing proofs,
but I hope that you have a better appreciation for them now.
The rigorous training that you've just had in discrete mathematics and logical thinking skills
should serve you well in your daily life, as well as in any future math courses you may choose to take.
At least, that's what I'm counting on.
Thank you.
