The Stoa is a digital campfire where we cohere in dialogue about what matters most at the
knife's edge of what's happening now.
We are, wow, this is a double header today and we started at 12 noon Eastern time with
a great session on the ecology of, an ecology of communication with Nora Bateson and Diane
Musho Hamilton and today, and I'm going to ask them to write their correct name.
I don't know why that happened, but our guest today this afternoon is Zach Stein and Daniel
Smockdenberger, for some reason the default is my name, but I did not do that.
So I'm going to hand it over to Greg, and let him take it from here in terms of setting
the stage.
Amen.
Well, it's a real honor to be here, I'm super psyched, I get to touch with my good friend
Zach Stein and get to have a hear from Daniel Smockdenberger, one of my real leading forces
and leading edges in society as far as I'm concerned right now that I follow.
So I'm super excited for us to talk about the we, the I, the it, think about what it
is that we are doing as a collective, reflect on our epistemics and our values and the direction
of our education.
And so I'd like to welcome Daniel.
Thank you so much for joining us.
I'm just enjoying the comment thread, it's actually really great right now.
Cool.
Cool.
Good way to start.
Good to see everybody here.
Thanks for having me.
I, Rain that is here today, it's good to see you.
Cool.
Cool.
And Zach, welcome to you also.
Yeah, thank you.
I'm, I'm excited, this is a hell of a jam we've got set up here.
Absolutely man.
So what I'd like to do is play a clip from Daniel's recent conversation with Brett Weinstein,
a long conversation, a three hour conversation, but there was a portion that just jumped out
at me, because it reflected on the very theme of our session.
And it's within two minutes, but as Daniel does, there's a lot packed in that two minutes.
So I want to play that.
And then, and this is similar to what we did earlier Daniel, you frame the song, but first
we're going to start with comments by Zach, double G, Greg and Regas and myself, and then
have you come in.
You're going to hear us sing on your song, and then you come in.
How's that feel?
I like it being facilitated by a jazz guy.
Cool.
All right.
So let me screen share and let everybody see what I'm talking about.
Okay.
And the only answer out of the oppression or chaos is the comprehensive education of
everyone in the capacity to understand at least three things.
They have to increase their first person, second person and third person epistemics.
Their third person epistemics is the easiest philosophy of science, formal logic, their
ability to actually make sense of base reality through appropriate methodology and find appropriate
confidence margin.
Second person is my ability to make sense of your perspective.
Can I steal man where you're coming from?
Can I inhabit your position well?
And if I'm not oriented to do that, then I'm not going to find the synthesis of a dialectic.
I'm going to be arguing for one side of partiality, harming something that will actually harm
the thing I care about in the long run.
And then first person, can I notice my own biases and my own susceptibilities and my
own group identity issues and whatever well enough that those aren't the things that run
me?
When I look at the ancient Greek Enlightenment, the first person was the Stoic tradition.
The second person was the Socratic tradition.
The third person was the Aristotelian tradition.
There's a mirror of all those in modernity.
We need a new cultural enlightenment now where everyone values good sense making about themselves,
about others, about base reality, and good quality dialogue with other people that are
also sense making to emerge to a collective consciousness and collective intelligence
that is more than our individual intelligence.
And so that we have some basis of something that isn't chaos, but that also isn't oppression
because it's emergent more than imposed.
So it's like it's cultural enlightenment or bust as far as I'm concerned.
All right.
So I don't.
Okay.
It's cultural enlightenment or bust.
So I would like Zach to riff on that and then double G Greg Enriquez and then I'll say
a little something something and then we'll go from there.
Totally.
I mean, this is the core of the, you know, almost the year long work Daniel and I have
been doing with the Consiliate Project and in many ways the root of our collaboration
and the root of a lot of the work that I do as an educational philosopher.
I didn't put it in terms of cultural enlightenment.
I put it in terms of that we're an educational crisis.
And so yeah, it's a deep diagnostic point and reason for hope, I think for the future.
And so yeah, there's a lot of things to say specifically, I will say that a cultural enlightenment
doesn't mean the modern enlightenment, right?
So it's important not to mistake it for what Greg calls men's, which is the modern enlightenment
natural science, which would be one third of what Daniel spoke to, right, that we need
actually a different kind of more comprehensive cultural enlightenment, which you know, there's
historical precedent, the when Daniel speaks to the education of everyone, right?
This is one of the great dignities of modernity.
And I attributed to John E. Most Communious, who I've spoken about on the stove before
and spoken with Greg about.
And it is that notion of the basis of new social reality beginning with culture, specifically
with the life of the ideas that live between us.
And the first person second person third person framing of course is resonant with
my metapsychological model with development and so on and transcendence and the notion
that there's a kind of a for lack of a better shorthand and up leveling necessary across
each of those three modalities, which needs to be facilitated by kind of like techno social
education-centric reform at a very broad scale.
And so that's a big project.
But it begins with realizing that this is the project to do,
that it's fundamentally educational work
that needs to be done first in the interest of something
like an enlightenment.
And if you look around, these are the times
in which enlightenment arise.
Liminality, times of chaos, when convention both breaks down
and is reified and locked in.
So the age of Communius was that, the Thirty Years War,
and that route between the Renaissance
and what we call the Enlightenment.
So it's a deep, it speaks to me, if I'm thinking of a song,
this is a deep, deep set of chord changes,
which are, yeah, deep enough to bring
multiple types of collaborative elements on top of.
And this isn't a narrow thing that's hard to improvise with.
This is actually a large statement
that can galvanize a bunch of different endeavors.
So yeah, so I'm glad you guys started with that.
I'll leave it there because there's much, much else to say.
So I think Greg would go next, double G.
Yeah, there is a lot to say.
It's a beautiful clip.
I think if I now, at the days, think
about the educational process, I tend
to think about it as skill development and soulmen
and transcendence, which is another tripartite
that I know that Zach has educated me on in ways
of thinking about our own development.
When I place it in my own context,
I'm embedded in American psychology.
And I talk often about the problem of psychology.
And really, it's a problem of American psychology.
And I believe that the problem of American psychology
actually can be traced back to the Enlightenment
and its fundamental confusion about the first person,
second person, and third person.
The process by which we generated a third person matter
in motion epistemics and how that scientific message
and epistemology got dominant.
And then how we didn't know how to sync it up
to a first and second person way of being in the world
is absolutely essential.
And I think in relationship to this Enlightenment,
if we are going to be so bold, is
to fundamentally create an opportunity
to educate around all three perspectives,
to appreciate which each of those epistemic frames is about,
and to begin to generate sense-making systems that
allow us to cohere.
And I did, just as you know, I think
that failure to do that is deeply, deeply dangerous.
Thank you.
Thank you both, Zach and Greg Doublejean.
So I'll put in terms of an idea that I
have been developing of late cultural intelligence.
So in the course that I actually taught
through the Aligned Center this past fall into winter,
there were three parts.
The first part was cultural literacy.
So what is culture?
What does it mean?
What does culture do?
I also decoupled culture from race.
The course was actually called Cultural Intelligence,
Transcending Race, Embracing Cosmos.
And I did that move specifically because mixing up race
and culture has gotten us into all kinds of trouble
since at least late 1600s.
Also, cultural literacy has to do
with understanding certain developmental models,
both for a person and for societies and civilizations
and groups.
I'll just leave it there.
But I know almost everyone on this call
knows what I'm alluding to.
There's different names and different models.
Then we need some case studies.
And in the course, I used Western culture, American culture,
and Black American culture as the case studies
of culture in action.
And then in the last part, I made it
into the personal, the more I part of the I we it.
And to deal with certain issues with cognition and emotions.
And then with shadow and cultural somatics,
a need for us to deal with the reality of trauma
and integrating that so that we can move forward
and develop in various ways.
And then our spiritual vision, your insolments that I think
is a key part of that, where we embrace
a more cosmic vision that may sound woo-woo.
But I mean it in more of a philosophical sense,
like rooted cosmopolitanism.
We can have a rooted identity or a rooted identities.
But we also, at the same time, can
be citizens of the world and citizens of the cosmos.
That's where we come from.
We're star stuff.
So I think cultural intelligence, what
I'm calling cultural intelligence,
is a part of this cultural enlightenment
that I totally agree is necessary.
So that's my comment.
And now we hand it over to the man himself, who
made the statement, Daniel.
I don't think I said anything particularly original
in that statement.
But maybe it was a good starting place,
describing the need for a philosophy that
is first, second, and third person.
I think many people have done.
I heard it from Ken first, at the University College.
The couple thoughts that come to mind first is that the thing
that I'm saying is necessary is actually not all that lofty.
Like an integrated metaphysics that actually gets beyond the
or properly addresses the subject-object distinction
and the limit of the distinctions between first,
second, and third person and formalizes all that.
Like that would be nice.
But that's not needed.
When I talk about second-person epistemology,
I'm talking about some very basic shit, which
is can I try to get where someone else is coming from
and do a decent job of actually trying to inhabit what
it's like to be them and how they're seeing things?
Can I try to steal man it rather than straw man it?
This is a very basic capacity, but almost completely non-existent
in the public sphere currently.
When I talk about the first person,
very, very deep nuanced phenomenological insights
are not that needed.
It's like, can I pay attention to where
I have motivated reasoning?
And I really want the answer to be one thing as opposed
to something else.
And I want to be right.
And I'm not that earnest.
Can I just pay attention to and value my own earnestness
enough?
And then with third-person, again, it's like, before I share
something on Facebook about the virus,
do I know what a virus is?
As opposed to a bacteria or an exosome,
like, just do I have the basic shit about what I'm talking
about?
And if not, just study more a little bit.
So I would like an integrated metaphysics.
I would like to move in that direction.
But I would like more people that can hold uncertainty
about the hard questions while being able to advance
the basic stuff well.
I think sometimes the desire to be able to formalize
the metaphysics actually comes from a certain uncomfort
with uncertainty and wanting to be
able to have some perfected or totalizing knowledge.
And I'd rather people who are like,
I don't know lots of fundamental things
about the nature of consciousness and its interaction
with matter.
And if it's purely computational or not or whatever.
But I can try to get your perspective.
And then I can try to synthesize the partial values
and the perspectives to see how to move forward.
When the famous saying by von Klausowitz that war is politics
by other means, the key is actually
the opposite side of that statement,
that politics is how you sublimate warfare for people
who actually want different things and value different things
and have different sense-making of reality.
So and warfare is so nasty.
And people who haven't lived through it
have such a bad intuition about how nasty it is.
That coming to compromise is actually a really important
thing.
So I want to be able to under, I can't just demonize
the other people, try to get a short win
and keep driving cultural arms races
and actually get anywhere good.
I've got to try to understand where they're coming from well
enough that we can find some common ground.
Because all the other answers suck.
And that for us to be able to remake home-in-society
institutions that derive their power
from the consent of the governed, the governed in order
to consent have to understand the issues.
And so that means that there has to be a culture that
values understanding these things enough,
that we invest in it enough, that that's possible.
And that's what I mean by a cultural enlightenment.
That's great.
That's great.
And I love how as abstract and detailed as you can get,
I love the fact that you're like, this is basically what it is.
And we can put various labels on it.
But if we can get people to steal man,
if we can get people to, as John Vervecki says,
do self-correction, question their own shit,
and look at what you call base reality, that's where it is.
But like you said, in the public sphere,
in the public square, this is so little there.
Though there are, as Zach implied,
there are various movements going on in groups of people
that are doing this.
So one of the things we tried to do for this series
is actually start with conciliants.
We started with a session called From Matter to Life,
to Mind to Culture, where we had a physicist,
an evolutionary biologist, a psychologist,
Greg Double G, and myself dealing with culture.
Usually, those domains don't engage in conversation.
So that was our attempt to actually model that.
What I'd like to ask you and Zach, Daniel,
is for the conciliants project that you've
been working on for a year, and that should be seeing
the light of day pretty soon, what
can you tell us about what we should be looking out for
and what we can expect, because it's a real big deal.
And I want to honor you and Zach and others
who work on this project for having the courage
to take a heroic step to not only analyze, not only what's
wrong, but how civilization is going down the tubes,
but taking the step of trying to do something about it
to make sure it doesn't happen.
So I want to thank you for that.
Yeah, I think one just theoretical thing
I want to say, because I forgot to say it,
and I think it's a bit important.
I just got off speaking with a group of retired congressmen,
and they were talking about not just the breakdown
in education in civics, but any kind of cultural value
in civic engagement or the moral development that's
associated.
And when you read the founding documents,
here in any kind of thoughtful, open society philosophy
will say something similar is that there
is a moral education, along with the epistemic education
that's required, because a democratic system of governance
means a process of collective choice making,
where we all participate in making some choice as opposed
to have some ruler make it for us.
And the choice is informed both by what we value
and what we think is, and the effect will be.
So the epistemic is what is, what
will the effect of the injunction be, or the activity be.
But there's also the values part.
And every system had some way of being
able to bind the well-being of the individual
and the well-being of the collective at various scales.
Tribes obviously had to have that.
And religion was a method of doing that.
And patriotism was a method of doing that,
that my sense of being able to have honor was bound to duty,
that there was a connection.
Obviously, for a bunch of reasons,
some unfortunate, some legitimate things like religion
and patriotism have kind of waned deeply,
as have local community identities.
And the market idea, the kind of Randian idea,
was just pure greed creates the greatest good for everybody,
because I only get ahead in the market
if I produce a good or service that other people really
want that benefits their life at a better value
that the rational economic actor consumes.
And of course, behavioral economics
showed us that that was utter gibberish,
because we can manufacture demand for nonsense.
And it's way easier to make money
through extraction than actual production
and lots of other things.
And yet that meant the idea of binding
the way the individual gets ahead with some kind of collective
value is broken.
And the kind of market ideology said,
the invisible hand will just magically create good,
and it doesn't.
And so that kind of values base of culture,
you can see that it's missing, right?
Like right now, neither the left nor the right
have a value on understanding each other.
They just have a value on appealing to their own base
and demonizing each other.
I was just one thing I wanted to add.
Well, thank you for adding that.
I mean, our second session was values
as energetic transcendence.
So we are really trying to play the core changes
that are really needed.
So thank you for that addition.
Zach, would you like to come on in back?
Yeah, absolutely.
And to get your question, Greg, I mean, generally,
when one is writing a book and it hasn't been released yet,
one doesn't speak too much about it.
But I can say that in a sense, I don't want to jinx it.
But at the same time, there are some things
that can be said in general, which
are that it's an educational project aimed
at the foundations of our shared social understanding.
And so the focus is, in many ways,
the media and the news and what's happening
in the context of the way that the world and its complexity
is staged for us by the media, that the media gives us
resources for sense-making, and these resources
are insufficient.
And so some of what we're doing is pointing that out,
but only in the context of equipping people with ways
to both ask more of their resources
in terms of what they're getting to actually put
a different kind of demand on the media,
but also to allow for the convergence of a movement
around this shared sense that we're
in an informational crisis akin to an ecological crisis.
And there is an information ecology, of course.
And there's an information ecology precisely.
So the idea would be that there's
kind of a founding move that needs
to be made here in drawing attention
to the crisis in the information ecosystem.
And there are a group of people who already identify
as those who are seeking to save the informational ecosystem,
to save reason and truth, goodness, beauty,
things of that nature, and discourse, communication,
perspective-taking, the simple civic virtues
that Daniel was speaking to, which
are not a given, which do not necessarily emerge
with each new generation.
They must be educated for.
And so, yeah, so it is that.
It is part media literacy, part advanced situational
assessments, but larger part education and capacity building
and model offering to make that first move,
to create a catalyst that can have ramifications
into something like a broader cultural enlightenment.
Not a lofty new metaphysics, but in fact, just
new forms of civic virtue that get us out of this death
spiral, basically, which is what we're in as a culture.
Absolutely.
When you say new forms, will they be new?
Or will they be?
Is it a question of what from what is in the past
that we need to take forward?
What do we need to let go of?
And then what innovative forms can we come up with?
Because certain things that we have let go,
we need to reclaim.
I mean, be specific.
And we're in like a post-conventional,
post-institutional moment, where we are exactly being
asked to vet those aspects of convention
for what they're worth.
And so it's not that we're creating something
whole cloth new, we're in fact rescuing
the virtues of modernity and premodernity.
And jettisoning those that need to be,
like because they didn't have computers,
printing presses, and other things.
But the virtue, in a sense, was basic.
And so again, convenience, right?
Bishop of the Bohemian brothers, deeply mystical,
but ecumenical, uniting, trying to bring a sense of resilience
during the war.
So yeah, so there's a very deep educational catalyst
that's trying to be created.
So I'll pause.
Great, come on in at any time.
Yeah, actually, Daniel, I was wondering
if you would just share some of what you see
as really hopeful about the conciliate.
Where do you see, there's a lot of catastrophic risk.
Where are you seeing some of the most hopeful opportunities?
I think it's been getting kind of surfaced here
that there are things already happening
that are signs of a nascent movement
to a cultural enlightenment that just doesn't recognize
itself yet.
And so if you look at Tristan Harris and Center
for Humane Technology and all the groups that are looking
at the way that there are unhealthy aspects of how
the information ecosystem works, social media, et cetera,
and working to address that, that's already
a movement to identify how sense-making is broken,
how the fourth industrial revolution is not
being rightly directed for open society
or even a networked society.
But it just thinks that it's focused
on the social media problem.
And then there are other groups that
are focused on perverse incentive in journalism
and trying to fix some of the perverse incentive
in journalism to not have to have click-baity titles
and really short, salacious things.
And there are other groups that are focused
on how to get better education and civics to high school.
But they don't all realize that they're
part of the same project, that those are all
focused on where there are things that are actively
damaging public sense-making and or where there is a need
for further development of it.
So one of the things we're seeking to do
is to identify all the groups that are doing good work that
is ultimately around that and to be able to curate and up
regulate the signal to those and reframe them as not just
education or journalism or social media
or identifying Twitter botnets or whatever,
but as parts of this cultural enlightenment
where you move away from the SDG focus of here's
all the stuff the world should do.
World should coordinate to do these things.
And you realize, well, we should have done nuclear disarmament,
and we have not ever done that.
And we should have done the SDGs back when they were called
the Millennium Development Goals.
We couldn't do them.
Why do we suck at doing big global things that are critical?
And as we move into increasing catastrophic risk,
that's more problematic.
Upstream from the question of what should the world do
is how do we coordinate better at all?
The really critical things at scale.
And upstream from how do we coordinate better
is how do we make sense of reality
and communicate effectively prerequisites?
So what we're looking at is what are the missing prerequisites
that make coordination possible that make all of the goals
worth having possible?
That's great.
That's really great.
One of the things that I'd like to bring to our discussion
is what was mentioned before regarding civic values.
I am very strongly influenced by the work of Ralph Ellison
and Albert Murray, both of whom were very high modernists.
And I think proto-integralists, and you can even
say proto-meta-modernists.
And both of them had a strong allegiance
to the principles of American democracy
based on what Ellison called our sacred documents,
Constitution, Declaration of Independence, Bill of Rights.
Now, for some who hear that, who perhaps
are from the post-modern progressive perspective,
there may be a cynicism that arises.
Because you can talk all that, all you want to,
but we know that that stuff isn't true, hasn't been true,
particularly for certain groups of people.
And I happen to look like the group of people
that they're referring to.
But Ellison and Murray not only acknowledged that reality,
they also had the consciousness and the awareness
that having that beacon of light, that beacon of possibility
that's represented in those documents
and the values and virtues of those documents
is an energetic force in and of itself to move you towards it.
So even if it's inch by inch by inch,
and then there's regression, and then that's the reality,
you still have something to agree upon
that we're moving towards.
And if you can agree upon that, then we
have somewhat of a common ground.
And you also have a need for a higher ground
based on new developmental and post-conventional reality.
We have that too, but we need to think
common and higher ground.
And they were really aware of that.
So we're going to have to re-embrace some of those
whole liberal values.
And I don't mean liberal.
I mean classic liberal, you know what I'm saying?
So I just want to bring that, because I
think that is really important to voice.
Zach, Daniel?
Totally.
Yeah, I mean, there's so many directions to go with that.
Well, the first thing I'll say is that there's a,
I'll go theoretical, because it's easier for me anyway.
There's this issue in developmental psychology,
which can be kind of like transferred
on to the scheme of historical development, which
is like transitional and enduring structures
and development, that there are these themes which
emerge over multiple developmental levels
over multiple years of your life, which
continue to be perennial themes, which you actually deepen.
So like fairness.
On the playground, fairness is about how many M&M's does
each kid get, like literally count the M&M's,
or Johnny will freak out.
And he does, because it's not fair if he gets fewer,
unless there's stipulations, because he's smaller or whatever.
But there's a greed upon fairness.
This thing emerges all the way through adolescence.
And then if you study philosophy and you read John Rawls,
you get a principal conception of fairness.
So this issue of, as history unfolds,
there is going to be in retrospect a lot of hypocrisy,
because earlier renditions of a perennial theme
were understandably limited in their first or second or third
or fifth or 100th articulation, because this thing will not
stop being unpacked, that the things we think constitute justice
now, and medicine now, and science now, 50 years from now,
they'll look back on and be like, whoa, dark age, yikes.
And yet they will still be pursuing something
like science, justice, human flourishing, hopefully,
if we succeed.
And so there's this question of, how do we retrospectively
render to our ancestors trust in the judgment
that they had, that they were actually
doing the best with what was given to them?
And then how do we see when, in fact, that wasn't the case,
and there was evil, and there was mistakes, right?
And that's a polarity, but it's a great in-between
about the complexity of rendering moral judgment
to the past, and also the relationship between generations.
And so it's a deep issue that we are now
grappling with, part of becoming, I think,
hopefully a more mature species, is
that attempt at the full remembrance of who you are,
similar to what happens when you mature as a person, right?
That at a certain point, you've got
to start dealing with your shit.
And if you don't, you will limit your future possibilities
by a lot, your future relationships,
your development of future capacities.
So there's a reckoning that happens with maturation
and with capacity development and a whole bunch of other things.
And so I'm kind of superimposing that as a historical lens,
but it's useful, broad brush strokes to think.
Like, yes, we, this is apocalyptic in the sense
of everything being revealed, that this
is a time when we're trying to grapple
with the full extent of history, right?
It was a joist waking up from the nightmare of history.
And so yeah, so I don't think it's trivial,
but I, to say that one believes in the founding vision
of the United States.
But I think it's an important thing
that we're going to have to figure out what we, meaning
people who live within the geometric system,
what we think about that kind of phrase,
because that kind of phrase is actually tearing us apart.
And yeah, so I'll leave it there.
But it's a deep, again, you hit a deep chord there,
and one that's going to resonate across a whole spectrum
of response.
And someone in the chat put our declaration
by Danielle Allen, Harvard political philosopher, who
was one of my very favorite.
She's incredible.
And I want to thank that person for mentioning that,
because I want to voice her.
I'm also wondering, Zach, how does your meta-psychology
fit within the educational project?
I mean, it's insofar as I'm having an impact on how
the conceiving and executing of the project is going.
It's completely woven in.
I don't think it will ever be something we explicitly teach.
I mean, I don't know, but I doubt it.
But it is certainly part of the way
we're thinking about it.
Yeah, I mean, for example, image, visual literacy
as an aspect of media literacy is huge.
And this is something I talk about with our editor-in-chief
a lot is the nature of the imagery
and the way image captures personality.
Words capture development, mind, skill.
Image captures personality.
That's why the image of a man being kneeled on
is so much more powerful than just the words of a man
being kneeled on.
And so the repetitive, repeated, re-traumatizing
playing of the image in the media landscape
is like a kind of like a psychological torture
that we submit ourselves to because we're addicted to it
and so there's a lot of things in the aspect of installment
that actually are being addressed but not head on
if we're not like, we're working on installment,
but we're actually working on personality, character, value.
And some of that will be not in the words
but how the words are presented, that the medium becomes
the message, that the nature of the design and imagery
and those kinds of choices, as opposed
to it just being a cognitive, linguistically mediated project.
And then of course, because as the annual saying,
we're curating the space, we're trying to bring in the best
of what we can find and build a movement,
a lot of my concern as a psychologist
is it has nothing to do with what people are thinking
and everything to do with what people are feeling
and the way they're processing their emotions
and relationships.
And so I'm going to be trying to pay a lot of attention
to those groups that are looking at the psychological
and emotional precursors to even being interested
in civil conversation, you know what I'm saying?
Like, so yeah, so there's a lot to do in these arenas.
So in that sense, I think it's very much informing the project
but it's one of many models that are being used
to shape the project.
Daniel, I was wondering if you could talk a little bit
about, you know, sort of how you're thinking about ethics
and values and relationship to the project.
And is it fair to say, I noticed your conversation with Brett
when you got on this,
wove in and out with sort of foundational issues of value.
So if we think about the three points of view
and also then think about the foundational values
that we can be guided around.
That to me always seems to be a super important place
to find and create common ground.
And I see my friend, Mike Moskolo here has built a frame
around how to understand need and value.
So I just wondered if you could offer some reflection
about value-based discourse.
I'll start by taking something that Zach was just saying
where he was discussing how media is affecting people
traumatically or emotionally in addition to cognitively.
And just a decision that we had to make around that
and how it reflected a value that we hold
and then I'll get into the deeper question.
Early in the process, there was a branding team
that came on to help us and they're like,
what emotions do you want to evoke with the site?
And I'm like, not, I don't want to evoke emotions.
This is the whole point is that that's actually the thing
we're trying to cure is figuring out how to use
scientific split tested optimization of images
and whatever to evoke emotions for some kind of purpose.
I actually, if anything,
I would want to evoke an emotion using a technique
then show people how we did it.
Just like do the magic trick and show them and say,
this is what is happening to you all the time.
Here's someone on the left doing it.
Here's someone on the right doing it.
Here's the market doing it.
Here's a religious leader doing it.
Now fucking go look for this everywhere
and have more immune system
to this kind of memetic manipulation.
So cultural engineering, the goal of it usually is
how do we control the thinking, feeling, values,
and ultimately behavior of a lot of people
towards some specific vested interest.
Our goal is cultural engineering of a different type,
which is how do we make all of that first type
of cultural engineering not work anymore?
Our goal is to obliterate the effectiveness
of narrative, memetic, and info warfare.
And in order to do that, it's how do,
and it's an asymmetric war currently.
It's, you know, trillion dollar companies against a person
who doesn't even realize they're engaging.
So it's how do we equip people better to recognize
when those things are happening?
How can we equip them to notice when Russell conjugation
and lay cough framing is happening
or when statistical cherry picking of data is happening,
when conflation is happening,
and also when the right kind of imagery
and evocative dynamics are being used.
So there is a value embedded in that for us,
which is seeking to increase the,
I mean, it corresponds to when Greg,
you were saying liberalism earlier
is a core of it means that the idea of promoting liberty
and the sovereignty of the individual,
how do we actually increase the sovereignty
of the individual against asymmetric forces
seeking to co-opt it?
Because to the degree that we can get better
and better causal mechanisms to affect other people's choice,
we're actually debasing the reality of their choice.
And an ethical system, however we figure it out,
is a system for making the right kinds of choices,
to take away other people's choices.
So to the degree that I compelled someone
into an ethical choice is no longer ethical.
So our goal is how do we actually help nurture
the growth of people who think and reflect deeply
on these things and want to talk with
and listen to other people who are also thinking on them.
And we don't have to have an absolute ethical system.
Like, you know, most ethical systems
have reducto ad absurdum applications
that show where they become nonsense.
So the goal is a negative utilitarian
and you want to minimize suffering,
you should kill universe
because there's suffering in the universe, right?
And there's each of those different,
every form of utilitarianism has some weird edge cases like that.
So do values, ethics.
And so, again, there is a fundamentalism I'm not seeking.
I'm seeking people who can ground abstractions
and felt sense
and have a certain trust of their own reasoning
and a trust of other people's reasoning
to come to what the best emerging thing
they can move forward with is.
We were talking with Nora Bateson today
and I'm sure this is what Greg would want to hook you up on.
But, you know, her narrative around warm data
and the context of the influence that you have inside of it
in relation and attending to not the formulaic
but the echoes of impact
and the capacity to have grace
and sort of participatory flow
in whatever that kind of system is
that rather than prescribing some complicated ethical code,
you have to be very, very wary of those kinds of things.
So I'm hearing you infuse that aliveness
and reflexivity in the best sense
in terms of the kinds of propagating values
that would enable us...
Nora's work with warm data is one of the things
that I hope we can signal boost
because she's looking at complexity
from the embodied standpoint,
so not kind of the mathematics that are studied at Santa Fe Institute,
but the complexity of how many different contexts
and perspectives and nuance people can inhabit
in the way they approach anything.
And I think it's more relevant to actual choice-making.
Specifically, though, any ethical system that gets formalized
and optimized, I believe, becomes a paperclip maximizer.
And I'm particularly concerned with...
as people pursue enlightenment ideas
and they go more rational,
you get instrumental rationality
and utilitarian or consequentialism,
and you can do the worst evil things
in the name of utilitarian ethics,
because if I'm sure that the trolley's going to kill 100 people
if I don't do anything,
then, of course, I'm justified in making it for sure kill one person.
But the real trolley problems
that we're trying to make decisions about
have way more uncertainty.
They involve complexity where we say,
okay, well, I'm sure that AGI is going to emerge in 20 years,
and I'm sure that it's going to get rid of all hydrocarbon life
based on the von Neumann Morgenstern decision-making principle
and blah, blah, blah.
And therefore, I need to chip people's brains right now.
And so we will make choices that risk really terrible things
or are willing to cause harm because of a worse harm
that we're actually over-weighting our certainty on.
And so bad epistemics,
combined with fear of the unknown
and a desire for excessive certainty,
driving instrumental rationality
is the name of a lot of well-intentioned evils.
And so we have to be careful with that.
Daniel, I want to push back on one of the things you said before,
Greg Double G asked you what he did about Norbetson's warm data.
And the pushback is the idea that you can actually create images,
a model, a process that is not going to involve the emotions.
I know you didn't say it doesn't involve the emotions.
The implication of what you said is that you don't want to manipulate
people's emotions, and that's very admirable,
and that's ethical.
But what we know about embodied cognition and 4e cognition is that you don't have
cognition without your emotions.
So one way or the other, you're going to have emotions involved.
Therefore, you have to make some choices.
What type of fruitful emotions do you want this to evoke?
And if the emotion has to do with the kind of awareness,
what I think is an application of what I'm calling cultural intelligence,
the ability to discern certain distinctions and how various forces
are trying to get you involved in their narrative schemes for their purposes
and being able to look at that as an object rather than being subject to it,
there's going to be emotions involved.
So I don't think that's realistic.
That's my pushback.
I don't think that's realistic at all.
So I can try to report on the Amazon rainforest cutting
in different motivated ways, where in one way,
I want to make it seem like the world is going to come to an end tomorrow.
If one more piece of rainforest gets cut and the Bolsonaro is doing it out of
like baby blood drinking evil.
And I can make an evocative thing that will just make utter horror and outrage.
But I can also do the thing that Bolsonaro is doing,
which is to show how much fucking jungle there is,
and these few indigenous people in there,
and then all these poor farmers in Brazil who don't get to actually make
any money because all this stuff is protected for no reason that's keeping
them from being able to access that land.
And I can invoke outrage at the exact opposite thing.
So, and both of those are very partial perspectives and invoking certain
kinds of responses for political reasons.
I would like to help make the clearest overview of the thing that we can.
It's not unbiased.
It's bias corrected by trying to take all the biases, right?
By trying to take the various perspectives,
trying to inhabit them, trying to see what we can verify or see as true in them.
And then also what we can falsify or see as missing,
unwarranted or, you know, whatever.
Basically a scientific process.
I mean, that's an element is the scientific process.
Yeah, and earnest, because it's not science in that if I'm asking what
someone's perspective is, it's not measurable.
It's recordable.
It's an earnest endeavor into inquiry.
Right.
And what I want people to feel is whatever the healthy natural emotion comes
from seeing reality is, maybe they feel sad, maybe they feel some anger,
but hopefully they come to some inspiration or hope or responsibility.
Right.
But I want them to feel the real thing that comes from seeing reality
clearly, naturally, as opposed to some manipulated emotion that I'm
intending them to feel.
And then I'm manipulating what I show them to achieve that emotion.
I'm not trying to prevent them from emotion.
It's just the emotion isn't the outcome I'm seeking so that I am.
What I'm seeking is their clarity.
And then there is a healthy emotional response to clarity.
Beautiful.
So you're trying to use third person.
I like your term base reality.
To then evoke.
First person awareness.
Of that base reality.
And then that's going to impact.
Second person we space.
I think that's a very subjective.
Interpersonal dynamics in a certain way that hopefully now this is my.
This is my bias. I have a bias towards.
Tipping a tipping point.
I have a bias towards a group of people.
And groups of people.
Who will as happened in other enlightenment.
Achieving a certain.
A certain culture together so that their.
Thought words and behavior were aligned in a certain way that it can
move the entire culture in society for.
That may not be realistic.
But I think that with the critical mass.
It can happen.
Is that something that.
You can gravitate to Daniel and Zach.
I'd like to say something about the previous point with the.
We've been calling the pedagogical atmospherics of the site.
Right. That.
The long standing mistake.
Of the kind of like sciences of learning.
Was to commit.
Descartes.
Fallacy. Right.
Which is to separate emotion from thinking.
And to believe that it is emotion that gets in the way of thinking.
But in fact it's.
Emotional emotion.
Emotional emotion.
Thinking doesn't take place in the absence of emotion.
It takes place in the presence of the right kind of emotion.
And so what good teachers do.
Is create.
These types of emotional environments that are non coercive.
So the experience of the website isn't.
One of an absence of emotion.
It's the experience of not having your emotions manipulated.
Okay.
Which is not a non emotional experience.
So that's why people like therapists.
So Greg probably gets this like therapists are also able to create
a space.
Ideally where you have a situation of not, it's not that there's no
emotion.
It's that you're not being manipulated emotionally.
But you are being presented with reality and concepts and images
and other things.
And so I think that the trick ends up being.
Not to make it devoid of emotion as if you can't do anything without
emotion, but.
You know,
you can't do anything without emotion.
You can't do anything without emotion.
Those, the right emotions to accompany that kind of thinking
emerges.
What Daniel said.
And so, you know, if, if you're trying to teach a child about moral
development.
And you read them a story that you think should evoke a moral
response.
And it doesn't.
Like they're just not moved by the.
By the heroic gesture of ethics.
They're not.
They're not.
They're not.
They're not.
They're not.
They're not.
That resonates them until they're actually moved by the story.
And so that question that the teacher knows how to not manipulate
your emotion,
but get those materials in front of you in such a context that you
experience the non-manipulated emergence of emotion.
And so this is again,
this deep questions at the basis of what we're doing have to do with.
Non-coercive forms of teacher Lee authority.
And there's no such thing as emotional relation.
And so very touchy stuff in postmodern contexts,
where for the most part there is no such thing as legitimate teacher
Lee authority.
And there is no such thing as.
Emotional relation that isn't basically with a downside power
dynamic in some, in some way.
And so the ability for the therapist to hold more space and give
you room to express your emotions is seen as actually potentially
a positive power game, which it is power,
but it is the power of teacher Lee authority,
which can be granted.
And so this is a very,
one of the things that is being nuanced in the pedagogical
atmospherics is that we are toying with this deeper issue of how
can you have something emerge in our culture as it is,
which becomes a potential focus for a legitimate distribution and
determination of teacher Lee authority.
And that's one of the main things is the reason teacher Lee authority
fails is because it got localized.
And we need to find a way to distribute the teacher Lee authority.
This is something I'm passionate about.
And I'll just say quickly. Yeah.
So from my vantage point,
I am working on a broad descriptive systematic metaphysics.
And part of that comes from exactly this point.
And that is enlightenment did not produce a coherent metaphysics
basically and part of the postmodern critique,
which then seeps into the authority.
Some of that is glorious and relationship to kinds of authorities
that emerge, but some of that undermined the concept of good
teacher Lee authority in a particular type of way.
And there are ways I believe to restore that both in terms of the
kinds of process and structures that we engage in at a process level
and at an analytic level that would bring some clarity.
But anyway, I just want to.
So one thing, one thing,
one thing very quickly, Daniel,
I promise and rain we're going to be bringing people in shortly.
I just want to say that this process reminds me very much of
Ellison and Murray's perspective on the blues.
So the blues can be viewed as third person based reality,
the reality that as Murray says,
life is a low down dirty shame.
But at the same time, you have to make a choice.
Are you going to, and this is going to be an existentialist riff.
Are you going to basically cut your wrist?
Or are you going to go out and swing?
Are you going to engage?
Are you going to have what Kenneth Burke called a frame of acceptance
of struggle, of life, of all the things we,
or are you going to have a frame of rejection where you say,
well, that's wrong. It's unjust.
It shouldn't be that way,
which I think is an immature way of looking at it.
So there's some aspects that's in the black American blues,
idiom, wisdom tradition that aligns very strongly.
And I just wanted to voice that.
Okay.
I appreciate that.
Thank you.
Go ahead, Daniel.
Go ahead.
Yes, I wanted to add something.
How we are addressing this teacher,
the authority topic, because.
We don't have any authority that anyone doesn't grant.
And we don't want like ultimately,
we don't want anyone to trust us and defect on their own sense,
making us, we want people to.
Develop better sense making that they can trust on their own.
So how, how we're handling that is say we do sense making on a
particular piece where we're trying to make sense of what's going
on on the India, China border or whatever it is.
So we have the piece, but then we also have how we came up with
our sense making on it.
So what data sets did we look at?
What epistemics did we apply?
What are the other views?
And what was our sense making on their views?
So we actually make our epistemics crystal clear.
And then we allow people to criticize them.
So we can say, if we miss something,
if we included some data that was false,
or we miss some critical data, tell us if,
if we find out that you're right,
we will publicly update it and credit you if you want that.
If not, we'll show the position.
So we're not attached to a position.
We're attached to the best earnest process we can.
We're making it transparent.
So we're trying to take this process fork it, modify it somewhere
else. You can, it's public comments.
Sure.
And so the goal is to help people develop.
So it is developmental, right?
It is to help people develop better capacity,
but where they get to have full transparency into that process.
And then the other part I want to say about emotions is in so far as
there's an emotion I'd like to induce beyond just the emotion that
naturally arises from seeing what there's to see.
I think there is a kind of epistemic nihilism that is pretty ubiquitous
where people don't feel like they could make sense of what's going on.
And so it's hard to make sense of what they should do with their life
or how to vote or how to apply their time or anything.
And if someone was to have any experience reading where they start to
see the possibility that emerges of making better sense of things,
that they have a certain kind of epistemic hopefulness start to emerge.
An inspiration, not an inspiration in some answer out there,
but an inspiration in their own capacity to increase the basis of
their agency, which is their capacity to make sense of the world.
If there's any emotion specifically that I would hope would come about,
it would be that one.
That's great.
Can I interject here?
Because the teacherly authority bit is key.
Like one of the signs of legitimate healthy teacherly authority is that
it is trying to make itself obsolete.
Like the good teacher is trying to give you exactly the skills you need
to no longer need the teacher.
And the good therapist is trying to give you the skills you need to no
longer need the therapist.
They're not trying to keep you addicted to them as the authority.
That's not teaching.
That's something else.
That's not actually teaching.
That's just the authority.
And one of the ways to think about propaganda,
you'll never actually know all you need to know to replace the propagandist.
Behind design.
So long problems with so called conspiracy theories.
But in any case, the broader point there is that there are many indices
that how do we tell the difference between legitimate and illegitimate
teacherly authority.
And that is one of them that it seeks to make itself obsolete.
And so this is precisely what the concealings project is seeking to do
that.
In fact,
we're trying to show you under the hood exactly what we're doing.
So you can have that sense of being empowered to step into their own,
your own sense making,
and rather than just having to keep to come to us.
And so I think that's one of the dynamics that you find in the media
currently is that you're addicted to the, to the trough,
like or go keep going back to eat more of the like high fructose news stuff.
And that's just an egregious violation of the obligation that the media has.
Which is to you.
Yeah, go ahead.
Sorry.
So you would like to, in my own words,
increase people's sovereignty, not to become rugged individuals,
but to become self determining in their own sense making in terms of like,
what they actually think and feel.
Not based on the manipulations that are all about them in the media sphere,
including advertising and PR,
but to really take a look at, you know,
what do I think?
What do I believe?
And why?
And that's powerful.
I also want to say that,
that goal of the teacher, you know,
teaching the students so that the student goes beyond the teacher,
that goes back a long ways, doesn't it?
I got that from Dewey.
I got that from Dewey because Dewey was like, all right,
y'all, you, because people were inspired by Dewey and they made all these
crazy schools where they just let the kids do whatever they wanted.
Basically the absence of teacher,
the authority in the wake of a very strong critique of teacher,
the authority which created chaos and kids who never learned to read or
there you.
Anyway, so he was like, okay,
what constraints on freedom are legitimate?
He's like, those constraints on freedom are legitimate,
which basically set you up for,
greater freedom if you hadn't of had the constraint put on you.
Right?
So the idea is like,
you don't want to allow for freedoms that end up putting the person in a
situation to have fewer freedoms.
Right?
So it's about that dynamic and the eventual,
you know,
graduation of the, of the student into the lifelong learning journey that
the teacher put in.
Rather than being locked into a set of ideas,
which just holds them the rest of their life.
And they're basically caged in these ideas.
And those ideas come with an identity and then the,
the ego becomes attached to the worldview.
And then you're in that place where for a long time,
psychology thought that brains didn't change after the 20s and 25s and
that people didn't change.
And in part it was because there was a,
there was a calcification of that.
Identity and cognitive architecture as a result of,
I think certain forms of schooling.
This is sweet.
This would be dewy's.
I'm basically recounting dewy's argument here about why we cease to
continue to develop and grow.
So yeah, that would,
what you learn from your teacher should be.
That you can go on to have many teachers.
And to, to, to move up and out and up and through.
So yeah, there's a, there's a beauty in that.
Way of thinking about constraint and authority.
Right.
That in fact,
this is the very stuff of intergenerational transmission and
cultures that can exist in perpetuity have figured this out.
And we are in a crisis of teacher,
the authority and intergenerational transmission.
Rain.
There are some questions, I think.
Yeah, maybe we'll go to questions.
I've got some good questions in the chat.
I'm going to jump around a little bit.
To kind of follow the, the thread we're on.
So since we were talking about teacher,
the authority, Rob Hart has a question,
which I'll repost in the chat here.
Um, Rob, do you want to ask your question or it, uh,
Zach spoke to it.
Um, so if you'd like to modify it at all, please go for it.
Yeah, I think Zach did start to answer this and I would love to
hear him kind of deep in one of the ideas he said about freedom,
but the question I originally said was, um,
what do you think is the best thing that a teacher can want for
the student and the world.
And use their teacherly authority to produce in the student's journey.
Um, and so I, I have really enjoyed your use of the
tripartite model.
And I've kind of seen each lane of this tripartite model of,
of our psychological development as a way that we approach
sovereignty or a way that we,
you know,
the way that Daniel uses it.
And I'm curious if that relates to what you mean by freedom.
Um, and if the.
The whole panel could sort of weigh in on what,
what they believe to be the highest level of freedom.
Um, and I think that's a good point.
Um,
if the whole panel could sort of weigh in on what,
what they believe to be the highest good that a teacher can seek for
the student using their teacherly authority.
Uh,
I'll begin and I'll try to be brief. Cause I think I've spoken a lot. So.
So Margaret Mead wrote a book called culture and commitment.
And in this book, she suggested that there were three kinds of cultures.
There were cultures where it never really changed.
Um,
And in those situations, it was very,
actually easy to know what as an elder,
one should teach the youths.
It was precisely what they needed to know to do what had been done for
centuries. Right.
Um,
And then there's the second form of culture.
Uh, where there is some change, but not that much change.
Um, and enough change where you can actually teach kids to how to
change.
Um,
how to change.
Um,
how to expect certain kinds of change. And there,
there's a more collaborative relationship. Um,
this is what the era that Margaret Mead believed she grew up in.
Right.
Um, which was, uh, like war wars.
Uh, and, but she came to realize that there's a third form of culture
where in fact, uh, things change,
begin to change so rapidly that it becomes very,
very, very difficult if not impossible for the elders to know.
Um,
that the students will inherit a world that the elders literally do not
understand and they become aware of that fact.
And so there's a room like this weird reversal.
And this is actually the root of the roof of the youth rebellion and
the intergenerational crisis is the fact that this something like this
has occurred and we don't know how to negotiate this as educators.
Um, but what it means, I think is that.
The educators responsibility is to allow the student to find the
problem that is theirs to work on.
It's very vague.
So you need to allow for enough freedom such that and enough support
such that the project that of the,
the project of their life, right?
The image of their life to get to the meta psychology aspect of it
that you're working on, who will you be in the future?
And the elder says, I cannot imagine.
And the youth says, now I can,
because you've given me the resources to imagine, right?
Beyond what you're capable of imagining.
So that's the responsibility.
It's not to determine for them.
Or to pick out of some slot of jobs that we're aware of now or
something like that, right?
It's actually to give the resources of judgment and discernment.
Resources of imagination.
Because we're in that situation.
Um, uh,
Of not being able to imagine what it will be like for them.
Those who come after us who will not be like us who inherit this
world that we've created with its hyper objects and its risks.
Um, so yeah, I think that in that sense, that freedom is there,
but it's a letting go, which many parents know,
but which we're having to exercise at an intergenerational level,
which is very complex.
So that's, uh,
I'll leave it there.
I'll very quickly say, I think we need to teach young people how to
improvise because when you're dealing with double binds and you're
dealing with uncertainty,
you're going to have to improvise, but I don't mean winging it.
I'm talking like jazz improvisation where you've got to have the chops.
You got to have a lot of knowledge.
You got to have, you know,
a lot of grounding in base reality in history and knowing know
thyself and go back to that.
Um,
because at certain points,
you're just going to have to,
in the moment,
make choices that one hope is,
is the wise spontaneous choice in the improvisation.
That's part of a model that,
that my wife and I do the jazz leadership project.
We look at improvisation as wise spontaneity.
So I would just say that.
Um, and for that, you've got to not only support,
but you've got to challenge them.
You've got to give them structure,
but you've got to give them a certain amount of freedom within the
structure to express and to experiment and to make mistakes and
then learn from those, all of that.
So I really think it's a balance of those, those elements.
Hey, let's jump to Tyler Wakefield.
He just asked a question that got some plus ones.
It's on the topic of education still,
but a different angle, um,
when it comes to the Institute,
the institutional aspect of the Academy,
if you'd like to ask your question, um,
and open to Zach or Daniel to respond.
Hi, yeah.
If anyone wants to respond to this, I was just, um,
you know, um, we've been talking about, you know,
and, uh, maybe an educational enlightenment. Um,
but, you know,
I'm wondering when a lot of these, uh,
these processes that are developed,
whether it be journalism or, um,
other sorts of propaganda come out of, you know,
the university structure, people educated within it. Um,
I was interested, uh, what, um, you know,
what's to be made of the Academy or is,
is this movement that is going to, um,
exist outside of it? Is that the expectation?
Because the institution simply can't be, um,
repurposed to, to do this type of interdisciplinary thinking. Um,
or is this, is there an idea that this movement will, uh,
eventually permeate into, um,
the Academy or is that necessary? Um, I'll just, you know,
What a great question that we need about two more hours to,
I'm not touching that.
I'm not in the Academy. So I'm going to let, uh,
let those that are or have more proximity to it, to, uh,
to answer that, please. Um, well, I'll,
I'll just say I'd like to hear Daniel's take on this.
I'll say briefly, if somebody who's, uh,
has two professor parents in the audience even, um,
and grew up in the Academy, um,
my hope is, is that there is a,
a zeitgeist of awareness,
maybe spurred on by COVID, um,
that we are in a major cultural shift, um,
and that the structures of modernity, um,
as both terrifying and glorious, uh, as they were,
I think there is the hope of an increasing conscious awareness,
uh, that maybe transformation could happen.
That's being in some ways very optimistic because I also have a pessimistic side
that sees an enormous amount of inertia and static, um,
and stasis. Uh, and indeed, you know,
I find myself in these circles now, uh,
following Jordan Hall and Zach Stein and Daniel Smoktenberger,
as opposed to, um,
my sort of standard academic, uh, friends,
precisely because of the mentalities and the structures that are at place.
Um, certainly my own work in the context of America,
what I call American psychology, what it became, um,
how it was established and what it might become is very much something
I'm passionate about. And I believe that if the consciousness raises
and the sensibilities that emerge,
and we start to cultivate a wisdom commons about how to educate folks
for the new next generation, um,
there may well be a very, very strong impact,
a wave of impact across the academy so that they begin to restructure.
Um, it's definitely needed and it is my deep hope that that potential might emerge.
I'll go ahead and say something and then we let Zach end with it since this is, uh,
his topic in more depth.
I don't think we can consider the restructuring of any of the major institutions
in isolation because they are all inter, uh, affecting.
So obviously if the purpose of schooling is to prepare people for a workforce,
then that's a very real constraint,
how much of the, uh,
tax money can actually be invested into the education if most of the people are going to be laborers,
like what education is relevant to be a labor.
Uh, well with technological automation,
creating a massive amount of job obsolescence in the next while,
largely in the labor fields,
that's both a risk and an opportunity.
What could it portend for different kinds of education?
So also things like.
What is it?
What is education in the.
Information singularity.
Post information singularity when you've got something like a hundred thousand peer review journal articles in each field per year come out and there is no such thing as an expert in any domain anymore.
And so to be an expert has to be increasingly hyper specialized micro fields,
which also means increasingly poor understanding about any of the kind of broad topics.
But the broad topics then end up having those who focus on to have the problem of a lack of the depth where the devil and the details ends up mattering.
And so then we start looking at how can the right kinds of computational infrastructure, machine learning, et cetera, not replace but augment human capacity and what do we want to train people to do both when we don't need the people for labor in the same way and we also
want to train people for all of the compute, but there are things that people are uniquely good at and it happens to be that the things that they're uniquely good at and that we have intrinsic motivation around largely coincide.
So factoring the change in the technological and economic base in association with the educational base is the way I would say is the beginning and starting to think about this.
I mean, we definitely don't have the answers we have a lot of design constraints, and some of the answers. And this is why the goal of a cultural enlightenment of more people starting to think deeply about all of the institutions that need restructured,
and how to do that has to happen but it's like, okay, well, how do you go against the direction of market incentive? Well, the market isn't going to incentivize anything that goes against the market incentive.
Well, the state could, but the state ends up getting captured by the market interest it's supposed to regulate if it's not regulated by the people. So ultimately, if the if the market incentive is not flowing in the direction that you want comprehensively
where is the change going to come from it well it can't come from the market alone it can't come from the state that isn't grounded in the people actually has to come from culture, which means people valuing something other than what the market currently values enough to reform
institutions that can guide market type dynamics. And so the thing we're interested in doing right now is how do you actually even just take the people that are already sympathetic to these ideas and gather them somewhere, which obviously this is one example of
how to provide better education resource information processing and the ability to work on these problems and in more collaborative and effective fashion.
And I think that is kind of what a cultural enlightenment that ends up leading to the reformation of institutions usually looks like.
So things one is that what depends what you mean by Academy because there's at least two things happening there's higher education, which is sometimes just an extension of high school as a necessary upper stack on the public education system.
And then there's the Academy where there's something like supposedly ongoing knowledge production. Right. And these things two things are often happening in the same so called university, which is this massive, especially a state schools is massive
research complex that is doing both higher education and academics right, academics being, you know, independent research in the humanities and science etc. So these two things.
Both of those are in radical crisis right now. COVID really complicated and already debt riddened higher education complex in the United States so we're actually, no matter what we do intellectually over here.
We're looking at a very different higher education coming in the coming years, higher education, I said higher education this is about what we do with those people who are exiting high school.
The question of what's going to happen to high level knowledge production is also extremely interesting and this is where we're getting to Daniel's point about computational assistance to human judgment at the edge of expertise and a whole bunch of other things that are coming at the
level that's pretty fast and hard. And the radical de incentivization of the humanities, like this is that's another crisis in higher education is the absence of from a market perspective and even political perspective sometimes doing really solid work in the humanities
and political science and stuff of that nature. So yeah so I am kind of avoiding answering the question in a concrete way and saying like there's so much indeterminacy right now in exactly that region that it's not clear.
I could see a mass homogenization where you get like 12 big brands of higher education who've consolidated all the little players and you get kind of a centralized probably state subsidized system.
But I could also see just a radical fragmentation Wild West market driven pseudo higher education with pockets of amazing stuff. So I think the answer is we'll see.
We'll see.
There's certainly not right now from where I sit.
Anyone knocking on my door from the Academy telling me that there's a groups in the Academy organizing around this. I see them hunkering down, trying to preserve the old system and business model, which is I think going to fail.
So.
Thank you. We get one more.
Daniel. Yeah.
Chris D. I just reposted your question. You're here. Feel free to unmute yourself.
Yeah, hey guys thank you so much for this conversation.
My question has to, and my attention is the Concellions project challenges legacy media legacy media gets a lot better at being ethical and delivering high quality information.
So, where do you see the best case scenario for the Concellions project on its impact on legacy media, and how are you going to deal with backlash from let's say not only the traditional institutions but also the memetic tribes as well.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right.
This document I want to write and put on the side. I'm not sure if we will, but I, I like the idea.
That is called something like predictable responses.
You know, if you are in the Q and on tribe, you think that this is part of the deep state cabal because somebody in our advisory councils three steps connected to Epstein.
If you are part of the woke crew, you think that we are giving voice to racists rather than canceling them by hosting dialectics with people on the right.
You know, those kinds of things and then say, if you had a response arise that was anything like these, and that was, and that you're kind of adjacent to that group you're not actually thinking you're just a memetic propagator right like there is a stimulus response process happening and you,
and you should be concerned about that, like you should want to know that you're actually thinking see if you can come up with a response other than the one predictable by your social sphere.
So, that's one answer on the way, by the way, I could just, I could just feel that there were people triggered by what you just said.
And if not in this group. Yeah, on the video.
You know, so.
But I mean, hey, you need to get a response but I but I wonder.
I don't lose your thought but I really wonder if another way of going about that is not just the presumption that you should not be caught by a particular narrative.
But the steel manning maybe this way, the steel manning is so powerful, if you can voice with integrity, the perspective, and maybe lawyers do this naturally of others you disagree with to me seems to me that's such an incredibly important step.
Yeah, I mean, it's, it's pretty straightforward to argue that the political opponents that you disagree with don't stop existing because you cancel them, or because you ignore them or because you call them idiots or terrorists or communists or Islamophobes or
whatever it is to dismiss them, they don't stop existing and they don't stop being political actors.
And if you polarize them against you they're also smart and paying attention to what works and if you win they reverse engineer the tool that one and use it next time.
So if you want to keep driving cultural arms races keep doing that, but just do the math on where that goes with exponential tech.
If you want something other than a cultural arms race don't be so myopic, temporally myopic that you think winning this time actually matters very much, and then say how can we actually the respect for these humans is actually obligate there is no way forward on a shared planet without without getting
rid of them and we can't get rid of them so you know how do we how do we handle that so yes, you can explain those things.
I think actually making the point that I don't think most people want to think of themselves as being more predictable than a GPT three algorithm.
I think that most of their tech speech is more predictable than a GPT three algorithm most people's text response wouldn't even pass a good during tests because they're so following certain memetic tropes and to have people think about that is actually a valuable thing.
Now the mainstream media question.
The analogy that I think it's an interesting one is
it was supposed to be that the market worked by people having demand for things that would actually increase the quality of their life creating an evolutionary niche for supply supply would emerge and you'd have competition of who could provide the best product or service the best price, and then
I think it's better but of course as soon as supply side is organized and demand side is not organized, and it can exert force and to be able to manufacture demand manufactured demand broke the intelligence of the market, right.
And so you can't say well let's use demand to change supply because demand isn't coordinated so it's an asymmetric war and the supply side wins.
Sometimes you have to use supply to change demand to change the rest of supply and that's what I see that Elan did with Tesla and electric cars. Before Tesla there just was not a big demand for electric cars.
And so he was able to make a car that was interesting enough that demand went up enough that now all the other car companies are making electric cars faster than they would have been otherwise.
So our goal is to show what good media could be like what good news could be like in a way that makes demand for something that doesn't currently exist that people know that actually creates an incentive for other news organizations to do better news because
there's a better educated populace actually demanding it where right now they have an authentic market incentive that's been erased to the bottom because people actually click on the more salacious click baby stuff.
And so we're hoping to be able to educate consumer patterns of media enough that it actually changes the topology of the markets to make the supply side have better incentives.
Right.
Rain had to sign off so I'll manage a few more questions as long as we don't maybe do one.
I think it was Jason Killinger is Jason.
Hey.
Hi so I asked the first the first second and third person development that Daniel you spoke of that Greg played at the beginning also speaks I think to values and I'm wondering if while we're waiting.
Obviously we have major leaps that we need to take in media and in education and I'm wondering if there's kind of like a fast track base level that we need to get to that's on that speaks to those around values that if that's like the
kind of place we can immediately go. I'm wondering if you have any thoughts on on on that and kind of like movements or people that are that are getting us that are kind of like taking care of that level right now that we can kind of put support behind.
I don't know that I understand the question exactly.
I think I understand a part of it. So what are the values that are involved in what we're talking about and what could be done or is already being done on values development work.
So I guess I mean like finding finding this coherence like on the basis of values like a thing that keeps coming up for me is like, I keep asking people, like, do you love where how far do you extend your circle of care, like those kind of
things that I think are are kind of like a ground floor towards like a, you know, cultural enlightenment.
Yeah, I think the process you're describing of dialogue that looks at things that are shared rather than different first, and build some kind of shared life experience commonality value, I think super valuable.
One thing that we're doing early on is the second person sense making is largely about values. It's, it's, it's what is.
So, let's say for instance I'm, there's some issue where there's a polarization around whether or not this particular proposition should go through and it seems to be around something that if it does will benefit the economy but damage the environment and if it doesn't the
environment will be preserved but the economics won't get ahead or whatever. So we can identify well what are the values independent of the strategy fuck proposition a yes or no.
And the values are I actually want my kids to be able to get a better job, and then values over here are, I want to have this last little bit of old growth force protected.
When we identify what everybody's values are first almost everyone can empathize with everyone's values if they aren't bound to a strategy where they're in a theory of trade offs were valuing your value requires going a particular direction in a proposition that messes up the thing I'm more directly connected to.
So can we separate the values that we're seeking to serve from a proposition of how to serve them. Then can we all hear everybody's values and then say, is there a proposition that would serve all of them better.
The key reformation of the democratic process and it was actually the goal of the town hall and scale just messed it up is before you get into voting on a proposition wasn't even a good proposition did you do sense making to help bring that about and a big part of the sense
making is not just what is but what are all the things that people care about connected to this.
One of the things when we're sharing different narratives is not just what a different people think is true but what is it they care about that is ultimately motivating them that can engender the empathy of each other.
I think that's a very, very key shift and move, you know, is foundationally you do this all the time in therapy, what is the care, what is the value, and how do you hold multiplicity of different values and then look for adaptive synergies across them in some of the solutions
but that value piece and then empathizing with it steelmaning and honing it relating to this crucial process.
I know for us has been here and spoke before and he's done the best work I'm aware of on what that democratic like system could be of getting all values to inform where we're not doing anything that advance in terms of trying to actually formalize the
governance system here we're trying to actually just at the communication layer can we even understand the values where other people are coming from are we seeking to do that and in the media pieces we're putting out.
Are we helping make explicit when we steal man the positions both the partial epistemic truth but also the values that they're holding.
Yeah.
I think you say for us, I think you talk about forest land tree correct for us.
And that sense making is ultimately an ethical and value laden process that and this is Habermas point ultimately that there's this thing rationality, which you can do by yourself on a desert island, which is just about manipulating the world but then there's this
thing called reasonableness, which is about how reasonable you are and how balanced and comprehensive and how much respect basically you showed to those who in who you're in discourse with.
The key base and Daniel said it like, you know, respect for other humans is obligate.
Like, not because you'll go to hell or whatever but because if we keep amplifying the cultural war, we will create a situation of inevitable self induced extinction.
There's this base notion of reasonableness rather than rationality, for example and the reasonable includes the emotional right. It's unreasonable to exclude emotion, although it could be rational for a little bit of time to exclude emotion, but it's completely
unreasonable to make continual demands on the exclusion of emotion so there's a there's a deep basis of values at the root of sense making and in my model of course you get the installment and trans and development and transcendence
you know, the root of the value of self and other.
I like the word justification a lot but
So let's let's do one more. Yeah, I think we have one more question. Evan McMullen is is on deck. If you want to unmute and ask yourself, Evan.
Alright, thanks. Can you guys hear me. Yep. Yep. Cool. So this goes back a bit in the conversation to when you were discussing teacher lay authority and so my question has to do with
I'll just read it so my question says that it seems that one of the thorniest issues related to this issue of teacherly authority is that the fact that most of us were coerced into an educational system where the source of teacherly authority was ultimately not epistemic but the threat of physical violence and coercion.
And so this seems to have created a trauma surrounding the teacher student dynamic and many if not most people in our society. And so I wonder if you have any thoughts on how we might address that as individuals small groups and as a society at large.
I can handle that Daniel do you need to run. If you look like you needed to run like you were bowing out I can handle this if you need to go. This will be the last question, unless you're interested what I'm going to say but you can probably predict it.
The, yeah, you're absolutely correct that in fact the crisis of teacherly authority or in is not contrived and artificial and kind of like made up.
It's a legitimate crisis of teacherly authority that for a brief period of time, the modern nation state was able to instantiate a form of teacherly authority that was unprecedented just world historically.
And what Comenius was cooking actually back in the 17th century.
And, but that was just a window of time when it could be sustained in an American particular by something like a civic religion, where in fact your high school teacher was a potentially inspiring
So there by the state who was this admirable thing that you were so like those days are gone, like the, the screen one, and schools lost.
And that was just the nail on the coffin of teacherly authority that had already been degraded for a long time, in part because of the inability of the school systems to demonstrate their problem solving capacity, which is to say no child left behind and a few other things,
all the students.
They're like, this is not working. Like we can tell you adults actually don't know precisely how to run this enormous urban school district in terms of the way you're distributing money and other things so it became very transparent and the most reflective intelligent middle
school to early high schoolers usually either strategically manipulated the system in order to advance themselves, or just cynically checked out, essentially.
And so that means we're in a situation of having to deal with the downstream consequences of a multi decade long crisis of teacherly authority in the schools.
And so that means people don't wouldn't recognize good quality teacherly authority if they saw it. And that's why people are actually susceptible to pathological forms like cults and spiritual teachers that are corrupt and things of that nature.
So yeah, so I, I don't know how to kind of de traumatize that but I do think that some of it has to do with those that pedagogical atmospheric on the site that there needs to be explicit and clear just how much we're putting in your hands, and that we've got nothing
that people are under our sleeves or somebody behind the curtain pulling the strings on us that in fact you are seeing it.
And then it's all on the table and you can enter like peers into a relationship. And that's what every child would love like to have been able to do.
If you reach a certain age of self reflection would be able to say hey what do I, who do I, and how do I, and they begin to ask their questions and they begin to pursue it, instead of being forced to sit in an uncomfortable desk for six hours a day, being talked to by a woman who's not smarter than your
mom, who is only there because her issues paid and you know what I mean so there you are.
So, it's kind of a cynical note to end it on.
Well, and on that note, now I know you've got to go and we're getting near Daniel. Do you want any offer any sort of summary thoughts or reflective thoughts for us to show on as we think I talked plenty I would just say thank you for having me here for hosting these dialogues and I hope.
I hope it was something in here was useful for the people who are here.
Absolutely. Thank you so much Daniel for coming and and joining us and sharing and you also Zach. And of course, Greg and Rick as my partner in this endeavor.
And we want to thank all of you who have been here sharing in the chat, asking questions explicitly, the listening in just being a presence and a part of the field and container that we created so we want to thank you all.
And I want to say that our final session will be next Monday, the 22nd featuring Jordan Hall, Zach Stein again, and Jamie wheel, and we'll be looking at once again the issue of of a commons and hopefully we can get to a wisdom
common so we hope that folks will share, and we'll also come back.
And thank you, Greg. Thank you guys so much for everyone becoming sharing that really appreciate it.
Alrighty, thanks everybody. Take care.
