Yet another Nobel Prize winner has been caught with some dodgy looking stuff in his papers.
The person I'm talking about is called Thomas Soudoff, a German American neuroscientist at
Stanford. Now we'll get to the suspect looking stuff in his papers in a second,
but first I want to give you a bit of background to Soudoff himself,
talk about his Nobel Prize because I think his research, at least as a psychologist,
is pretty interesting. So in 2013, Thomas Soudoff won the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine,
along with his colleagues Rothman and Scheckman, for their work on something called
vesicle trafficking. What the heck does that mean? So basically imagine these are two different
neurons in your body. Between each neuron in your body, there is a little gap. So when this
neuron wants to send a message to this neuron, it needs to find a way to send a signal across that
little gap. We call that gap a synapse. So when this neuron wants to send a signal to this neuron
across the synapse, it uses these little balloons of fat that it has inside its body, which are
filled with various different chemicals, which we call neurotransmitters. And so when it needs to
send a signal, those balloons of fat fuse with the surface of this neuron, releasing the neurotransmitters,
stuff like dopamine or endorphins, which you've probably heard of before, which then tells this
neuron to fire. And essentially Soudoff and his colleagues discovered that this process
is controlled by calcium, and also something which they discovered, which they called snare
proteins. And the discovery of these mechanisms come with a lot of different implications for
various different psychiatric disorders, like depression disorder, anxiety disorder,
potentially autism. So that's a bit of background on Soudoff's Nobel Prize. And as you can imagine,
being a prominent scientist like this, winning a Nobel Prize comes with a lot of perks. Soudoff
currently is a professor at Stanford at a place where the average salary for professors is 200,000
a year. And I imagine Soudoff is owning a healthy amount more than that, given he's a Nobel Prize
winner. And Soudoff is also on a bunch of other companies who do work related to his research,
including one called Sanofi, which according to this website, earns him another healthy
$150,000 a year. Now, so Soudoff is very successful. And I've absolutely no problem with that. I
think that scientists who do great work should be paid well and should be successful because,
of course, we want to incentivize scientists to make cool discoveries and do impactful work.
However, what we don't want are scientists cheating in order to have that success. Now,
I'm not directly accusing Soudoff of cheating here. But as of the time of filming, there are 35
of Soudoff's papers that have been flagged on a website called Pubpeer, which if you're
unfamiliar, is a website where fellow scientists can critique other scientists' work and point
out things that they think need to be addressed. Unsurprisingly, the person who has found the
most anomalies in Soudoff's work is friend of the channel, Elizabeth Bick. Bick has found
multiple instances of duplications of images and just images that don't look right in her opinion.
So I'm going to go through a couple of different examples. This first one is a 2012 paper from
Soudoff and his colleagues. This image seems to be the result of some kind of fluorescence
microscopy. It's showing aggregations of a protein called alpha synuclein, which I believe
is a protein that is associated with Parkinson's. I think I'm not an expert by any means, but I
think the way this works is that the clumpier your alpha synuclein, the more neurons die,
and the worse your Parkinson's is. So I believe each box in this figure is supposed to represent a
different mutation of alpha synuclein. So each box should be unique and completely different to
each other. But as you can see from the two areas highlighted in yellow, these sections of the boxes
are identical, but rotated 90 degrees. And also the two areas in purple are identical as well,
but rotated 180 degrees. So that looks pretty dodgy, right? How did that happen? Are the authors
trying to make their results look different to how they actually are? Well, according to the
authors of the paper, it was an honest copy and pasting error. Jacqueline Burr, who's the first
named author on this paper, said that, yeah, it was some kind of copy and pasting error,
something about the images were on a PowerPoint and they had to crop them and paste them and they
cropped the wrong one or something. And then she posted a corrected file. Okay, so that looked
pretty dodgy, but the interaction was at least, you know, pretty cordial between Elizabeth Bick
and Jacqueline. Nothing too heated going on there. However, when it comes to Soudof himself,
his responses to Elizabeth Bick have been less than cordial, should we say? If we take a look
at this latest pub peer post by Elizabeth Bick, this was just posted a week before the time of
filming. This paper came out in 2010 in one of nature's journals, specifically nature, structural
and molecular biology, which is a pretty prestigious journal. And as you can see, there's again
examples of image duplication, the rectangles in the same colors are identical. So as you can see,
there are three orange rectangles, three red rectangles, etc, etc. You can see there's lots
of duplicated areas within this image. Now that is something which is concerning in a western
blot image like this. And Soudof's reply was a little defensive. He goes, thanks, I'm trying to
understand the accusation here, that within digitally reproduced images of immunoblot stripes
that are clearly not stitched, and were reproduced from non digital data at low resolution, contain
tiny areas that are unexpectedly similar, i.e. intentionally manipulated, whereas the bands
themselves are not manipulated. I'm just trying to figure out what Dr. Bick's AI powered software
mining our old papers may have found. This is such a bizarre accusation. So essentially, Soudof is
blaming these visual artifacts on the fact that the image is low resolution, which is complete
nonsense in my opinion. And that is also the opinion of another pub peer poster, who said,
figure S6B contains rectangular regions that are perfect clones of each other. This cannot have
happened by chance, as in much much less than 10 to the power of 986. And blaming this on a
reproduction artifact of a digitized image is as believable as saying the dog ate my homework.
In a much cooler tone, Elizabeth Bick also replied to Thomas Soudof's comment by saying,
Dr. Soudof, I am not accusing anyone of anything, but I am trying to find a reasonable explanation
for these unexpected areas. As I am sure you will know in western blots, the bands are the only
type of results. Negative lanes are of equal importance since they show a lack of expression
of the protein of interest, as is the case here. If you don't understand what that means, maybe
this is the first Pete Judo video that you're watching. The way that western blots work is that
they show bigger blots if that protein is more present in your sample. So the bigger, darker,
and thicker the blot, the more present that protein is. And if there's no blot, that means that
that protein isn't present in your sample. So Elizabeth Bick is pointing out here that just
because the blot itself was not duplicated doesn't mean that this isn't important.
The fact that this negative space has these clear duplications indicates that perhaps there was
something there before that has now been covered up, or perhaps this image was manufactured artificially,
and therefore these visual artifacts are being discovered. And then at the end of the comment,
Elizabeth Bick kind of drops the mic on Soudof and says, also, I found these regions by eye.
And actually, it's quite ironic that Soudof is making fun of AI algorithms in this case,
because if anyone has used a dodgy AI to produce their work here, it's Soudof's colleagues most
likely. This looks like something that might happen as a result of some kind of western blot
image generating AI, or it could just be somebody messing around with Photoshop,
either the author themselves or somebody that they paid. Either way, these kind of visual
artifacts should never be found in legitimate western blots. And so this looks really dodgy.
And in my opinion, I don't think that Soudof's reply is particularly convincing or that he's
handled the situation very well at all. So those are just two examples of the anomalies that are
coming out about Soudof's work. And there seems to be a couple of new ones every week recently.
Like I said, there are now 35 papers being looked at as having suspicious stuff in them.
And actually one of Soudof's papers has already been retracted. This is the paper. It's a 2023
paper that was published in PNAS. That's PNAS. No jokes in the comments, please. So the reason
why this PNAS paper was retracted is because there's a bunch of fake data in it. Here are some
examples of the data that was called out by people on Pope here. As you can see, the two areas in
green show exactly the same numbers, the exact same measurements for two different experimental
conditions. The chance of that happening in reality is basically impossible, especially not in exactly
the same order. Same here with the numbers in blue. Same here with the numbers in cyan and
the ones in pink as well. This didn't just happen once in the paper, but happened multiple times.
As you can see, there's another set of numbers here in the experimental condition on the left.
These numbers are all grouped together on the ones on the right. There seems to be a few random
numbers. I don't know if the author was trying to throw people off and trying to make it look like
they weren't cheating when they obviously were. So there's clearly some dodgy stuff going on here.
Why do the numbers look like this? This kind of exact duplication of numbers in the same sequence
is impossible. It's clearly being manipulated by somebody. So because this paper looks so dodgy,
the raw data was independently analyzed by another scientist at Stanford, a guy called Dr. Daniel
Martis. And as a result, the paper has now been retracted from PNAS. Fake data. It's back again.
So with one retraction under his belt and over 30 papers now under investigation,
it is not looking good for Dr. Sudov. But establishing intent and who in each of these
cases actually did the cheating or honest mistaking is a lot harder to establish. In my opinion,
it seems highly unlikely that Dr. Sudov himself was the one who was doing any of this stuff.
As the final author on the paper and as a scientist of his caliber,
he's likely just there at an advisory role meeting with the students and postdocs who are
working with him who actually do all the legwork for each of these papers. But nevertheless,
it still doesn't look good to have so many papers with your name on it that have these
kind of anomalies coming up. So let me know what you think of this Sudov situation in the
comments below. Thank you guys so much for watching and I will see you in the next one. Bye bye.
