I think most anthropologists feel somewhat
proprietary toward the concept of culture, but we also have to take great pride in the
fact that it's been widely adopted across academic disciplines and in popular discourse
as well.
But what is culture exactly?
In this lecture, we're going to look at the concept of culture and how it's changed since
the 19th century, and pioneers such as Edward Tyler and Louis Henry Morgan.
They and other cultural anthropologists considered culture to be singular, synonymous with civilization.
And then Franz Boaz, the father of American anthropology, turned attention to the multiplicity
of cultures and argued for cultural relativity, not judging one's culture's customs by the
moral standards of a different culture.
The notion of cultural relativity underlies most modern definitions of culture, yet as
we will see in the conclusion to this lecture, cultural relativity has its limits.
Now as a formal discipline, anthropology only began about a hundred years ago, and in the
mid-19th century, evolution was an idea very much in the air at the time, as we mentioned
in the last lecture, Darwin and Wallace, Marx, whose scheme was fundamentally evolutionary
as well, and less remembered, but just as important in his day, was Herbert Spencer.
Now Spencer, who was born in 1820 and died in 1903, was an English social philosopher
and an early advocate of the theory of evolution.
Indeed, he was the one who coined the phrase, survival of the fittest, which is often attributed
to Darwin.
Now Spencer's work attempted to combine biology, sociology, ethics, politics, combine all the
fields of knowledge into a unified theory organized around the principle of evolution.
And this was, his basic theory was that things evolve from being less complex to more complex,
from being homogeneous to being more heterogeneous.
Now Spencer and his followers attempted to apply natural selection to human societies,
and this is a theory that's come to be known as social Darwinism.
The social Darwinists argued that human society was like nature in being a competitive arena
with limited resources in which individuals fight to survive.
Spencer used this to justify laissez-faire capitalism in England and the English class
system.
He was a staunch Tory.
He believed that welfare programs acted against the struggle for survival.
They prolonged human suffering by buffering people against the forces of nature.
He believed, he believed that humans were perfecting themselves and that without government
intervention suffering would eventually be eliminated in the world.
Now certainly our social lives, I mean take workplace politics, certainly some aspects
of our social lives look like a competitive arena of natural selection, but it's social
and not biological.
And this is what Spencer crucially missed, was that culture opts us out of evolutionary
processes, that culture holds us to a higher moral standard than mere biological imperative.
Like the idea of evolution, the concept of culture was very much in the air in the mid-19th
century as well.
We could point to a number of scholars who were dancing around the culture concept at
the time, Alexander von Humboldt for example in Germany, but here we're going to focus
on three men who did more than anyone else to establish anthropology as a formal discipline.
And they are Sir Edward B. Tyler, an erstwhile English businessman who became the country's
first professor of anthropology, Lewis Henry Morgan, a Rochester, New York lawyer and parlor
intellectual, and finally Franz Boaz, a German Jewish scholar and an immigrant to the United
States.
Edward Tyler had become interested in the study of other cultures during a trip to Mexico.
He was largely self-taught, but he went on to write the first general textbook in anthropology
in 1881, and in 1884 Oxford University created its first readership in anthropology for him,
and it was known the discipline at the time was known as Mr. Tyler's Science.
He was often called upon in this context to defend the establishment of a whole new discipline.
There are so many subjects to study, people would ask, why have another academic discipline?
And he responded that, well, it's like a backpack.
A backpack adds more weight, but it allows us to carry everything else.
And he said that anthropology serves the same function in the academy.
It's an additional discipline, but it brings everything else together and allows us to carry
this weight more effectively.
In his book Primitive Culture, and this is a title that we would be loath to use these
days, but it was published in 1878, he famously defined culture as that complex whole which
includes knowledge, belief, art, law, morals, customs, and any other capabilities and habits
acquired by man as a member of society.
Now there are a couple of crucial points here.
First of all, Tyler allowed that culture is learned, we're not born with it, it's acquired,
and he allowed that culture is shared as a member of society.
But let me go back and read the beginning of this quote, culture or civilization is
that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, arts, law, morals, customs, and any
other capabilities and habits acquired by man as a member of society.
So one thing that we see wrong with this definition today is it's stress on the singular, civilization
or culture, and Tyler believed that all human civilizations followed a single line of evolutionary
development, unilineal evolution, and he believed that societies were progressing.
Everything was progressing, everything was getting better, but this is unilineal evolution
where everybody is moving in the same direction.
All societies are on a scale of evolution, but they're stuck at different levels.
Now Tyler focused on survivals, ancient traits that were still practiced today by primitive
peoples due to the weight of tradition, and he focused on survivals because he thought
it gave him a window onto the past of his own civilization, the past of all of humanity,
since he believed that at one time the Europeans were savages as well.
In its own way, this is a very progressive sentiment, at least for its day.
Primitives are real people too.
They're just at an earlier stage of cultural development, a cultural infancy or a cultural
adolescence, if you will.
He believed in the psychic unity of all mankind that everybody everywhere has the same basic
mental capacities so that he argued that people are all essentially rational and that they
learn from their experiences.
Now around the time Tyler was writing in England, Lewis Henry Morgan, another armchair anthropologist
as we call them, was pressing forward on the same front in the United States.
Morgan, he was born in 1818, he died in 1881, and he was a wealthy Rochester, New York lawyer.
He had made his money in railroads and then decided to semi-retire and pursue more gentlemanly
pursuits.
He was a parlor intellectual, and ever since he was a boy, he had been fascinated by the
Native Americans who lived in New York, and he actually at one point went out and did
some field work among the Iroquois or in lawyer work as well.
He helped the Iroquois fight a government, the US government taking some land away under
duress, and then he helped the Iroquois fight this and get their lands back.
And while he was working with Iroquois, he discovered that they view their relatives
very differently than he did, and being a lawyer he was sensitive to issues of dissent
and of kinship and inheritance.
Now the Iroquois are a matrilineal society, they trace dissent through female lines.
And another interesting thing he found was that they call the children of same-sex siblings
by a different name than they call the children of opposite-sex siblings.
So this is to say they had two different terms for cousins.
They would call one's mother's, brother's children cousins, and they would call one's
mother's sister's children brother or sister, just as if they were full siblings.
So he was fascinated by these differences in kinship, he was fascinated by the legal
implications, and so he started sending out questionnaires to whites around the world,
missionaries, government officials, colonial officials, and asking them about the native
peoples, the kinship customs, the technologies and so forth, of the native peoples with whom
they worked.
He gathered up all of this data and he published his magnum opus in 1877 called Ancient Society.
And in this he put forth a model of evolution that had three stages, savagery, barbarism,
and civilization.
And he believed that all societies progressed through these three stages.
Everybody started out as savages, some eventually moved to become barbarians, the rest and
of course the rest civilization was Western European civilization and American civilization.
Now there were some key traits that he associated with each of these stages.
For example, savages practiced promiscuous sex.
Savages had multiple spouses, multiple wives, and in civilization we had reached the pinnacle
of monogamy.
Likewise, savages had fire, barbarians had the bow and arrow, and civilization at the
time anyway had the steam engine, again the pinnacle of technological development.
So like Tyler, Morgan saw societies progressing through a unilinear evolutionary scheme.
All groups had or will progress through the stages of savagery, barbarism, and eventually
become civilized.
While today this perspective seems highly ethnocentric, at the time it was a fairly radical proposition.
Savages and barbarians are just as much people as civilized individuals are.
They're just at a different stage of development.
Now Morgan was a staunch champion of private property in the state, and these were both
hallmarks of Morgan's highest stage of human development civilization.
But Morgan was also a truly an evolutionist, and he saw that civilization doesn't mark
the end of evolutionary change, and in ancient society he concluded by noting that, quote,
a mere property career is not the final destiny of mankind, if progress is to be the law of
the future as it has been of the past.
So we have Tyler, and we have Morgan, these 19th century evolutionists.
But the edifice built up by these two men was to be torn down by the work of one quite
remarkable man, Franz Boaz, widely considered to be the father of modern American anthropology.
Boaz, he was born in 1858, he died in 1941.
He was born in Minden, what is in Germany, in Minden, Westphalia in 1858, two years after
Freud was born, interestingly enough.
His family was of the prosperous, liberal, and well-educated German middle class.
As a child he was somewhat sickly, and as is the German custom of that day and even today.
His parents would take him to the seashore for cures, and it was during these trips
as a young child to the seashore that he decided that one day he would cross the North Sea
and go explore the Arctic Circle, a wonderful dream for a small child.
But Boaz was more intent than most children in their dreams.
He would starve himself, he would go on semi-fast, not eating very much, or not eating at all
some days to prepare his body for the rigors of such a journey.
In his university studies, and first he studied at Heidelberg, and then he went on to Bonn,
and finally studied at the University of Kiel, Boaz applied himself to both geography
and physics.
In his 1881 doctoral dissertation, it was in physics from the University of Kiel, and
it was on the color of seawater.
And he initially started out, he was very much concerned with the objective measures
of changes in the color of seawater, light intensities, the polarization of light when
it's reflected against the water, the absorption of light in the water.
As he was doing this research, he came across the, he discovered that people perceive these
colors differently.
Where one person might see green, another might see blue, or bluish-green, or greenish-blue.
And he came to see that there's this subjective quality to perception of colors.
And so he started, this was the kernel of the line of thought that would eventually lead
us to his definition of culture.
And here he's working really at the intersection of hard science and subjective understanding.
And it gets us back to what anthropology does best, traveling this divide, trying to be
a science, but also trying to offer a more humanistic understanding as well.
So in 1883, Boaz has gone through his state service in Germany, and fulfilling a childhood
dream, he convinces the German Arctic Commission to send him off to the North Polar, not quite
the North Pole, actually to Baffin Island, which is today in the far northeast of Canada.
But it's within the Arctic Circle.
He was to stay there for a year, and he was going to map Baffin Island and also study
the relationship between man and his environment.
And what better place to study the relationship of man and the environment than such an extreme,
an extreme environmental place.
So he goes to Baffin Island, and he starts living with the Eskimo.
Now let me mention here that today we call the Eskimo Inuit.
Like the names of many ethnic groups around the world, Eskimo is actually a pejorative.
It's a word from a neighboring group, an Algonquian group, and it means dog eater or
eater of raw meat.
It's not what these people call themselves.
They call themselves the Inuit, which means real people.
Anyway.
So he goes and works among the Inuit, lives and works among the Inuit.
And his trip was in many ways a disaster.
He arrived late, the winter was exceptionally bad, the hunting was bad, the dogs were dying.
He describes these trips where the men would go out and spend 24, 36 hours wandering around
in this really deathly cold.
Nonetheless, he was able to survey most of Cumberland Sound and Davis Strait, these sections
of Baffin Island.
And he did so with the aid of the Inuit.
They were able, and he was quite amazed by this, they were able to draw incredibly detailed
maps of the coastline, which Boaz then used as a basis for drawing his own maps.
And he was very much amazed by their sophisticated comprehension of geography.
Now during his stay, he immersed himself in Inuit culture, living just as they did.
And he was very much struck by their basic humanity and their generosity.
He wrote to his fiance at the time, I often ask myself what advantages our good society
possesses over those of savages.
And I find, the more I see of their customs, that we have no right to look down upon them.
Where among our people could you find such true hospitality?
And this experience really sharpened Boaz's idea of the basic equality of all peoples.
And it wasn't necessarily based on logical reasoning, but on emotion, the kindness and
sensitivity these Inuit people had shown him, combined with the behind the scenes look
that he got of Inuit culture, led him to develop the discipline of anthropology really in many
ways.
It was with feelings of sorrow and regret, wrote Boaz, that I parted from my arctic friends.
I had seen that they enjoyed life as we do, that nature is also beautiful to them, that
feelings of friendship also root in the Eskimo heart, and that the Eskimo is a man just as
we are.
His feelings, his virtues and his shortcomings are based on human nature, like ours.
So after his work on Baffin Island, Boaz returned to Germany and then fleeing anti-Semitism,
of course anti-Semitism was nothing new to Germany, it didn't arise with the Third Reich.
He immigrated to the United States.
And in the United States, he founded anthropology programs at the American Museum of Natural
History in New York City and at Columbia University, and single-handedly produced a generation
of students who went out and founded anthropology programs across the country, establishing
the discipline.
While in the States, while working at the American Museum of Natural History, he initiated
an expedition to the Northwest Coast of North America to study the Northwest Coast Indians.
The Northwest Coast goes from British Columbia up through Alaska, and he worked in particular
with a group known as the Quacutal.
The Quacutal are best known for their masks and their totem poles.
If you've ever been to the Field Museum in Chicago or the Museum of Natural History
in New York City, you can see some of Boaz's collections from the Quacutal.
And he went to the Quacutal and he had this notion that he had to do salvage ethnography.
The whites are starting to encroach.
I have to go in there, Boaz thought, and save all of their stories, save all of their legends,
record their language, record the grammar and dictionaries, take physical measurements
even, and collect all of these artifacts, totem poles and masks and so forth.
And this really gets at the heart of Boaz's method.
Boaz stressed that anthropology and our understandings of culture have to be inductive.
We don't start out with theory like Tyler and Morgan had, and then try and prove or
disprove it.
He says, no, we have to go and live with the people that we're studying, soak all of this
information from daily life up, and develop theories out of that.
So Boaz argued that cultures are guided by what he called an unreflected logic, and that
the job of anthropologists is to go in and record this unreflected logic.
Boaz argued forcefully against the 19th century evolutionist.
He was a German-Jewish immigrant.
He had a vested interest in arguing against racial determinism.
He argued that humans are born with certain capacities, the capacity to learn a language,
the capacity to learn a culture, but what language, what culture doesn't matter?
Or rather, it's a matter of chance, where one is born, the chance circumstances of birth.
One line of thought that Boaz is associated with is called today, historical particularism.
And this was his argument against unilinear evolution.
Morgan and Tyler had said that all societies fall along this unilinear chain of development.
Boaz said, no, each culture has its own history.
Each culture has its own past.
Different cultures aren't set upon a unilinear scheme of evolution, but rather there are
multiple lines of evolution and development.
And to understand the culture, we have to look at these bases, their particular circumstances
of development.
This came to play most vividly in a dispute he had over mask displays at the American
Museum of Natural History, and actually at the Smithsonian as well.
The normal practice of the day was to group masks together based on how they looked.
Okay, let's put all the bird masks in one section.
Let's put all the fantastical God masks in another section.
And Boaz said, no, based on this principle of historical particularism, we have to put
the masks in their cultural context.
A mask made by the Quacutal is not the same as a bird mask made by the Trobriand Islanders
or a bird mask made by the Maya.
They all have very different meanings in their own culture.
And so he argued that rather than group things together by their aesthetic appearance, we
have to put them together based on their particular cultural histories.
Now Boaz was also an early and an ardent opponent of scientific racism.
And think back to the day in the late 19th, early 20th centuries, this was still very
much the norm.
In an 1894 address to the American Association for the Advancement of Science, a very controversial
speech, he systematically refuted all of the scientific claims for Negro inferiority.
Their position in society, he argued, reflects the discrimination against them.
Their plight is not the cause of racism, it's the product of racism.
And he argues, and I quote, we might rather wonder how so much has been accomplished in
so short a period of time against such heavy odds.
Likewise, he very much argued against discrimination against immigrants.
And in 1907, he began a massive study that looked at 18,000 immigrants and their children,
immigrants from Southern Europe and from Eastern Europe.
And in measuring their skulls, these were physical anthropology tests, and in measuring
their skulls, he found that in the first generation, the skulls of immigrants approached the size
of native-born Americans.
And so it wasn't their biology which kept them this way, it was the circumstances in
which they lived, their nutrition.
And once they were living in an American environment, eating an American diet, their children physically
became more like American children.
So he used these lines of thought to build up a theory which is known today as cultural
relativism.
Before his early work with the color of seawater, and that different people perceive of the
color of seawater in different ways, color, as it occurs in nature, the color spectrum,
of course, is a continuum.
It documents different wavelength frequencies of light.
There are no distinct colors such as green or red given in nature.
Our language leads us to break up the spectrum into these neat categories, red, green, blue,
and so forth.
And languages differ in how they break up the color spectrum.
There are some languages in the world that only have two colors, dark and light.
Many languages around the world conflate green and blue, a color that linguists often call
group.
We use this idea of people perceiving the world differently to develop a notion of cultural
relativity.
And this is a central idea in modern cultural anthropology.
And it is that a culture has to be evaluated in terms of its own values, not according
to the values of another culture, and that these values are relative.
One person's terms and categories cannot be transposed to another.
There's no culture that's better or worse than another.
They're just each products of a unique history.
And this was very much opposed, again, to the 19th century evolutionist.
And it was the idea that I think most of us probably take for granted these days that
don't judge until you understand the culture.
Sometimes this is easy.
The Eskimo kiss by rubbing their noses.
The Belgians put mayonnaise rather than ketchup on their French fries.
Sometimes cultural differences like this, especially the quirky ones, are easy for us
to digest.
But very often the issues are much stickier.
My colleague Tom Greger, for example, works with the Mejinaku in the Amazonian rainforest.
And a culturally sanctioned punishment for young girls and for women who have entered
into adulterous relationships is gang rape.
And one time he reports that he was in the field and a young woman was accused of having
sex with another young man.
And the men in the village were preparing to rape this woman.
So in circumstances like this, fortunately, in that circumstance, the tensions diffused
and nothing happened.
But he had to make this choice.
This is the tradition of another culture.
I'm a cultural anthropologist.
I need to be sensitive to this.
But where do we draw that line?
Where is it okay to step in and say, no, that's over the boundary, and we have to take action?
So we could take Nazi Germany as well, and this is where Boaz really had to modify his
own views of cultural relativity.
An extreme cultural relativistic point of view would say Nazi Germany, the ideology
of national socialism, this is the product of German culture.
We have to take it as that.
We can't judge it based on our own sentiments.
But of course we do judge such things.
And Boaz himself backed off from his extreme cultural relativism in the early days of World
War II.
But in a broader, more practical sense, cultural relativity means temporarily suspending judgment
of other people's customs and practices until we can understand those customs and practices
on their own terms.
The debate these days about cultural relativity, one debate these days, focuses on the practice
of female circumcision, and this is the removal of the clitoris, surgical removal of the clitoris.
Female circumcision was practiced in the United States and Europe through the 1800s as a medical
treatment for masturbation.
And it's still practiced today in large parts of Africa, particularly Muslim areas of Africa.
In Somalia, for example, girls are circumcised when they're between the ages of 6 and 12
somewhere in there.
The operation is performed without anesthetics in not sterile conditions.
The girl is normally restrained by an older woman, circumcised with a razor blade.
But after this, the girl is no longer a girl.
She's a woman.
And the staunchest advocates for this, even in Somalian society, are the women themselves,
arguing that women have to go through this process to not be women, not be girls anymore,
but to become true women.
And it also offers the additional benefit of being able to visually prove virginity
at the time of a wedding.
Now most Westerners find this custom of female circumcision repulsive.
And the World Health Organization has even condemned female genital mutilation, but it
continues to be widely practiced.
And it's, again, it's even advocated by the women themselves.
Not all Somalian women are proponents of female circumcision, but a fair number are.
And this is one of those ironic circumstances where human rights is at odds with cultural
diversity.
We've come a long way in terms of our understanding of culture from the work of Spencer and Tyler
and Morgan and their evolutionary scheme of things.
Boaz's concept of cultural relativity is widely held not only in the academy, but throughout
society.
We often speak of multiculturalism, cultural sensitivity, and so on.
This is part of our vocabulary today.
And yet now more than ever, we're faced with the difficult moral questions and this question
of the limits of cultural relativity.
Where do we draw the line?
At what point must ethical obligations trump respect for cultural differences and force
us to take action?
We could all probably agree that genocide is beyond the pale.
What about female circumcision?
Is a woman's right to have her body intact more important than the right to respect the
traditions of other cultures?
What about when women's rights comes into conflict with cultural rights?
These are issues that we're having to grapple with these days.
In the next lecture, we look at the work of two cultural anthropologists who have really
pressed the envelope in this issue of cultural relativity and strongly advocated for an extreme
position of cultural relativity and changed the discipline of anthropology in doing so.
