Lecture 4.
Fieldwork and the Anthropological Method
We anthropologists distinguish ourselves from most of the other social sciences based on
our emphasis on fieldwork, going there wherever there may be to study them, whomever they
may be. We build our theoretical models not out of ivory tower ruminations, but from observed
experience. As an anthropologist, I'm very much concerned with observable behavior, what
people actually do rather than what they should do. Political scientists and sociologists
and economists develop abstract models of human behavior, very interesting abstract models
that can tell us a lot about human behavior, but anthropology has a lot to offer in building
up theory from fieldwork, from data that we gather on the ground. In the lecture today,
we focus on the ethnographic fieldwork of two anthropological pioneers, Bronislav Malinowski
and Margaret Mead, both of whom were drawn to life in the Pacific. Malinowski worked
in the Trobriand Islands, Mead worked on Samoa, and their writings set the early standard
for 20th century ethnographic fieldwork. Ethnography, what is ethnography? Cultural
anthropologists do ethnography. The term comes to us from the Greek ethnos, which means race
or people or ethnicity and graph, writing or representation of. Thus ethnography is
writing about other peoples. But ethnography is the way in which cultural anthropologists
use it, refers to both a process doing ethnography and a product, the ethnography, a book that
we wind up with. In terms of the process, it involves participant observation, going
and living in the place that's being studied for an extended period of time, and learning
the culture as a child, learning the culture from the inside out. We gather data, we have
a number of methods for data gathering. We do formal and informal interviews, we map
out fields, we conduct surveys, we do time allocation studies, we look at the caloric
intake of families and so forth. But we also try and get a more subjective understanding,
walking in the people that were studying shoes. Now we also, that's the process of doing ethnography.
The act of writing ethnography, we come back, digest all of this information that we've
gathered and write it up using the minutiae of everyday life that we've gathered in the
field to interrogate larger issues, theories, stereotypes, public policy even, whatever
it may be. And in this, as Boas pointed out, anthropology is fundamentally inductive rather
than deductive, building up theory from all of this data that we find in the field. Now
Morgan did some field work with the Iroquois, as we have mentioned. Boas saw the importance
of field work and instilled this in his students. But it was Bronislav Malinowski who became
the most vocal proponent of long-term modern field work. Malinowski, he was born in 1884,
he died in 1942, he was born in Krakow, what is today Poland, but at the time was part
of the Austrian Empire. His parents were minor Polish nobility, his father an expert in Polish
folk dialects. At school, Malinowski studied physics and math with an additional emphasis
on philosophy. And note here that like Boas, there's a blurring of the boundary between
what were considered to be hard sciences and the softer humanities. He received his PhD
in 1908, dissertation was on the principle of economic thought and it was conferred with
the highest honors of the Austrian Empire, sub auspices imperatoris. He went on to Leipzig
to study folk psychology and continued moving westward and moving toward the discipline
of anthropology, eventually winding up in London, studying under an early anthropologist
Edward Westermark in this burgeoning new field at the London School of Economics. In 1914,
he got a fellowship to go and study the peoples of an island, Malou off the coast of New Guinea.
And when he was traveling there, he was traveling first Australia, this was going to be his home
base during his field work, but as he was traveling en route, World War One broke out.
This is 1914, World War One, 1914 to 1918. And he found himself an enemy alien in Allied
territory. He had been born in Krakow, he was an Austrian citizen. And so the Australian
authorities were very kind given the circumstances once he reached there. They allowed him to
travel around Australia, travel around New Guinea, which was part of Australia, even helped
fund some of his exploration and research. But they wouldn't allow him to go back home,
wouldn't allow him to go back to Europe. He was stuck. And what was meant to be a relatively
brief trip turned into a several year stay. His field work, he began by exploring some
of the islands off the coast of what is today Papua New Guinea. And you'll remember that
New Guinea is divided into two parts today. The western part is part of Indonesia. The
eastern part is Papua New Guinea. And in 1915, he goes to the Trobriand Islands, which are
located off the coast of New Guinea, off the southeast coast of New Guinea. He stayed there
for a year from 1915 to 1916. He returned briefly to Australia for a respite and then
went back to the Trobriand Islands from 1917 to 1918. Thus he spent two years in total on
the Trobriand Islands. And he became the most vocal proponent of what would become anthropology
signature method, participant observation. But really, he was making a virtue out of
a necessity. He couldn't go back to England even if he wanted to. He couldn't go back
to Krakow even if he wanted to. He had to stay in the Trobriand Islands. But having been
forced to do that, he saw the value in long-term fieldwork, long-term participant observation.
And he compelled the discipline out of its arm chair. He learned the local language.
He lived in the local communities. And he generally took part in everyday life. And
allow me to read a quote from one of his books where he describes his early fieldwork experience.
Imagine yourself suddenly set down, surrounded by all your gear, alone on a tropical beach
close to a native village, while the launcher dingy which has brought you sails away out
of sight. Since you take up your abode in the compound of some neighboring white man, trader
or missionary, you have nothing to do but to start at once on your ethnographic work.
Imagine further that you were a beginner without previous experience, with nothing to guide
you and no one to help you. For the white man is temporarily absent or else unable to
waste any of his time. This exactly describes my first initiation into fieldwork on the
south coast of New Guinea. I well remember the long visits I paid to the villages in
those first weeks. The feelings of hopelessness and despair after many obstinate but futile
attempts had entirely failed to bring me into real touch with the natives or supply me with
any material. I had periods of despondency when I buried myself in the reading of novels
as a man might take to drink in a fit of tropical depression and boredom.
Now the culture he found in the Trobri, he was eventually able to break into Trobrian
society and to commune with the Trobrianders as much as he could, and the culture that
he found there was radically different than anything he had ever encountered. The Trobriand
Islands are a group there are four main islands, numerous small ones off the coast of New Guinea.
The main island where Malinowski worked is called Kiriwena. The Trobrianders are a matrilineal
society. Descent and kinship are traced through women and not men, and you'll recall that
it was the matrilineality of the Iroquois that had peaked Louis Henry Morgan's interest
in anthropology as well. The Trobrianders were also a classic chieftain, a ranked chieftain.
Some families were ranked higher than others. There were chiefly families, there were noble
families, and there were commoners, and there were various levels of chiefs as well. He
found a society that was in some ways infatuated with the yams. Yams were the staple crop of
Trobriand society, but they were also at the symbolic heart of Trobriand society. Yams formed
much of the wealth of Trobriand males. He found a system where there was intricate trade
networks connecting these islands with one another, and trade not only in subsistence
goods but in symbolic items as well. Now we're going to have a chance to come back to Trobriand
culture later in this course, and it's a fascinating place, and Malinowski was very much taken
by it. And living there for as long as he did allowed him to go beyond just the most
striking exotic customs, just the most unusual things to look at what he called the imponderabilia
of everyday life. Malinowski wrote widely on a wide variety of topics. He wrote about
Trobriand gardening, he wrote about Trobriand magic, he wrote about trade, he wrote about
sex, and he did more than almost anyone else to popularize anthropology, especially in
England. And to give you an idea, these are some of the titles of his books published
in the 1920s and 30s. Crime and Custom in a Savage Society, Myth in Primitive Psychology,
The Sexual Life of Savages, Coral Gardens and Their Magic, these all fascinating wonderful
titles, wonderful catchy titles, but also all very fine-grained ethnographic analyses.
The sort of work that we still read today in anthropology because of its vivid and comprehensive
descriptions of Trobriand life. I will mention here in passing that his diary was published
posthumously. His daughter in fact wrote the preface and edited parts of the diary.
And it turns out, based on this, and it was supposed to be a very private diary, but it
turns out that he was also bad tempered, he was contemptuous of the natives at times,
he was a bit misogynist, he had very explicit sexual fantasies. But as the quote I read
a moment ago said, he was on the verge of going crazy at times, literally isolated, the only
person who spoke his own language, no one much to interact with. And in his vindication,
I should note that he always publicly argued very vigorously against racial prejudices.
And in fact, one of his students, after he got back to England, he started teaching at
the London School of Economics. And one of his students was Kenyatta, the future independence
leader of Kenya. And many of his students stressed how much he valued cultural diversity
and fought against entrenched racial prejudices of the time.
So like Boaz, Malinowski came to the conclusion that societies or cultures are integrated
and that one must study them as integrated holes. Also like Boaz, Malinowski stressed
the native perspective on things, an emic perspective, the perspective from inside the
culture. And he was very much concerned with cultural context. He said that if somebody
understands why a native person, a Trobriander, does a certain custom that we might find odd,
if you understand it within the cultural context, there's a logic to what they're doing. We
might not understand that logic, but they do. And they're just as logical, just as reasonable
as ourselves, but they have a different set of resources and knowledge to work with.
Malinowski showed that there was always a logic if we understood the full cultural context.
He's reported to have once run into a cannibal in New Guinea. And it's said that the cannibal
asked him, what were the Europeans doing with all of these bodies that were being killed
during World War I? How did the Europeans eat all of that flesh? And Malinowski said,
well, we don't eat the bodies. And the cannibal replied, that's crazy. That's barbaric. Why
would you kill without any real object? So like Boaz, Malinowski was very much concerned
with cultural relativity. He was also, in terms of theory, he promoted a theory called, which
we call today anyway, functionalism. And this is the idea that every custom in a society
serves some sort of function. And we could divide these up into three main types. There
are basic functions, shelter, food, sex and so forth. There are integrative functions,
customs that keep the society integrated as a whole. And there are psychological functions.
In a couple of examples of the psychological functions, he noted, for example, that the
Trobrianders are very proficient gardeners. They can grow these huge yams, and yet they
religiously follow certain rights, certain magical rights when they're doing their planting.
And he said, why would they do that? They're such wonderful gardeners. Why did they have
to resort to magic in their gardening? And he concluded that it was because they were
trying to control those variables outside of their control, the weather, things that
they could not possibly control. They took recourse to magic to try and bring those
into their own control. The same thing holds true for canoes. He noted that the canoes
that the Trobriand Islanders built for travel in the inlets and bays around the islands,
they were nothing special. That people would just build them and there were no special
rights or rituals that went along with it. But for their long distance voyaging canoes,
there was an elaborate ritual process that had to go into building the canoes. And the
reason why, Malinowski argued, was to relieve their anxiety over these uncertain conditions
of weather in the sea that they had no control over at all. And so he said that lots of magical
customs, they serve to relieve people's anxieties about the future to, in his words, and I quote
here, to ritualize man's optimism. Likewise with the family, he said that the family served
a function in society and that function was to satisfy certain basic human needs, to domesticate
sex, to cope with caring for a child and training a child, and to serve as the locus for the
primary emotional attachments and social ties of individuals. So Malinowski's contribution
was then much like Boaz's, stressing cultural relativity and the study of other cultures.
The natives, they're not primitives, they're not savages, they have, they just have a different
set of values and perhaps a different logical structure than we do. So as Malinowski was
shaking things up in England in the 1920s with these racy titles of his books, Margaret
Mead, who was a student of Boaz's, was doing the same thing in the United States. Now Mead
was younger than Malinowski, she was also more self-consciously provocative than Malinowski,
and she was getting Americans to think about their own and other cultures in new ways.
So Mead, she was born in 1901, she died in 1978, a proper middle class, Midwestern Episcopalian
girl. In 1920, she goes to New York City, she transfers to Barnard College, which is
associated with Columbia University, and she starts hanging out in the wonderfully vibrant
counterculture of New York City in the 1920s, in Greenwich Village, the questioning of gender
roles, the fight for women's rights, the questioning of sexual norms and so forth, and in her senior
year in college, she takes a class from Franz Boaz, and she's hooked. She says, this is
what I have to do, anthropology is what I've been looking for. So she goes on and she writes
her MA thesis under Boaz, looking at the correlation of IQ tests, or looking at IQ test results
of immigrant children, particularly Italian immigrants to the states. And this was building
on Boaz's earlier work, where he had looked at head size, skull shapes and sizes of immigrant
children. And what Meade found was that there was a close correlation of the native language
of the household and how well children did on IQ tests. At the time, a number of people
were arguing that the immigrants are getting stupider every year as they come over, and
we're doing these IQ tests as they get off the boat to show that they're getting dumber.
And what Meade showed was that wasn't the case at all. The better someone spoke English,
the better they did on an IQ test. And so the longer children of immigrants had been
in the states, the better they did on these IQ tests. They weren't naturally mentally
inferior, just different. Something we would take for granted today, but at the time in
the 1920s, it was rather revolutionary. So in 1925, she sets off for Samoa. She wants
to go and do field work in this most exotic of location, Samoa. She's 23 years old. She's
five foot, two and a half inches tall, 98 pounds. And this just really gutsy young woman.
And this was no small journey in those days. A train trip across the country. She stopped
in Santa Fe and dropped off a friend, went to the West Coast, got on a ship and set sail
for Pogo Pogo. And this is where she was going to do her work. It was the capital of American
Samoa at the time. But once she gets there, she decides it's been too corrupted by American
missionaries and American colonial officials. And so she changes course for the island of
Tau. And she goes there because, and I quote here, it was the most primitive and unspoiled
area of Samoa. There was this pull, I've got to go to the place that's been least corrupted
by Western civilization to record their culture for future generations. She saw the field
as a laboratory to test various hypotheses. And primarily she went into the field to test
the hypothesis that a troubled adolescence was universal and necessary. And this is something
that Freud at least implied in a number of Freudians were expanding that adolescent conflict
between children and their parents is inherent the world over. But Mead sets out to prove
Boazian cultural relativity. And this is something that went very well with her gender politics
as well. She was fighting for women's rights. And she saw that these were cultural constructions,
the way in which women and men were conceived. And she believed that this was also the case
of children and parents. So she was conducting a type of salvage ethnography. She wanted
to go in and save these customs before they died away, before the decline brought about
by the influence of whites and missionaries and colonists. So working on Samoa, she learned
the language. We're not sure how well, but she learned the language and she worked mostly
with adolescent girls, 60 girls in particular. She got most of her information from 25 girls
and these were teenagers in early twenties. And most of her data came from just two individuals,
two key informants. And she strived for a subjective understanding of what life was
like on Samoa. She recorded lots of gossip, lots of stories and so forth. And she came
back and she wrote a book in 1928 called Coming of Age in Samoa, which became a nationwide
bestseller. And in this book, what she described was that adolescents in Samoa was largely
smooth. It was free of the conflict that we find in American society. And she tied this
to the freer norms of sexuality on Samoa. She said that young children, girls and boys
are encouraged to experiment sexually. Very often older men will initiate younger women
into the pleasures of sex. She writes of the adolescents going off and romping with having
sex underneath the palm trees. The custom of young adolescent boys sneaking out of their
houses at night after everyone has fallen asleep and sneaking into their lover's house
and sleeping with their lover and then waking up before anyone else the next morning and
leaving. She writes that sex was the pastime par excellence for the Samoans. Now she admitted
that there was different. Samoan society was a chieftain like the Trobriand Islanders.
There were different ranking of families and the chiefly families had certain obligations.
And among these chiefly families would choose one of their daughters to become a ceremonial
virgin. It was called a Taupu. And these girls were expected to maintain their virginity
until there was a defluration ceremony at marriage. And it brought a lot of honor on
the chief's families to have a Taupu in the house. But given this exception among chiefly
families, she said that with this major intergenerational conflict, control over sexuality, parents trying
to control their children's sexuality, that there were really no adolescent tensions on
Samoa. She writes and I quote here, growing up can be free, easy and uncomplicated. Romantic
love as it occurs in our civilization inflexibly bound up with our ideas of monogamy, exclusiveness,
jealousy and undeviating fidelity does not occur in Samoa. This was proof of Papa Frans,
as she called Boaz, of Papa Frans' theories of relativity over these Freudian notions of
universal elements of human culture. So after the publication of Coming of Age in Samoa
in 1928, she becomes really a national star up until her death in 1978, playing to our
world a growing liberal sensibility in the United States, a growing interest and willingness
to talk about sex. She had a column in Red Book. She was on the Merv Griffin show. She
was the public face of anthropology for at least a generation, if not a couple of generations.
Another anthropologist, Derek Friedman, had worked in Samoa after Mead. He worked there
in the 40s, so some 20 years later. And after Mead's death, in 1983, Friedman published
a book which debunked a lot of what Mead had argued for Samoa. He says that in fact, virginity
was highly valued among Samoans, yes by the elites, yes by the chiefs, but this had trickled
down to the commoners as well. He notes that Samoa has a relatively low rate of pregnancy.
If everybody is going off and having sex underneath the palms, why isn't there a higher
pregnancy rate? He says that Mead romantically confused rape with consensual sex, that these
night crawlers, these young adolescents who had left their homes to crawl into the homes
of their girlfriends, they weren't, you know, this wasn't romantic lovers meeting illicitly.
This was rape. And he argues that the girls of Samoa intentionally tricked Mead, that
there is a cultural valuation of teasing other people and tricking other people, and that
her informants played to what she was wanting to hear and told her these fantastic stories
about their sex lives. Now whatever the case, and there's been a wealth of data produced
over the last years supporting Mead and detracting from Mead, we're not really sure what went
on, but Mead, her notions of cultural relativity and bringing it to the fore of U.S. society
and really putting it in people's faces, shook up American popular culture and our notions
of what is acceptable and of cultural relativity. And this relativity, put forth by Boaz, put
forth by Malinowski, put forth by Mead, underwrites our modern understanding of culture. Not only
in anthropology, but in popular culture as well, in popular usage as well. Culture, and
but let me add a couple of things to this cultural relativity. First of all, that culture is
dynamic. It's a constantly changing process, a creative dynamic process. It's like a text
being written, like jazz or improvisation. We play off of themes, we develop our own
riffs. And in this slide, it's interesting to listen to a quote by Clifford Geertz in
his book The Interpretation of Cultures. The culture of a people is an ensemble of texts,
themselves ensembles, which the anthropologist strains to read over the shoulders to whom
they properly belong. I love this image of the anthropologist straining to read over
the shoulder of an informant, this text of culture that's constantly being written.
Culture's not a thing. It's not a list of traits, but an ongoing creation. Just as we
ourselves are not cultural automatons acting out preordained roles, neither are the Sherpa,
neither are the Bedouins, neither are the Trobrianders, neither are the Samoans. A lot
of times we give ourselves more cultural leeway than we do these other ethnic groups. Of course
we're creative. Of course, our culture is constantly being changed, but we tend to view
other ethnic groups as being more static in some way. Michael Hersfeld defines anthropology
as the study, the comparative study of common sense. Common sense, the things we take for
granted, just the way the world is. And that's what we do as anthropologists in many ways.
We study other common senses. We juxtapose those with their own way of doing things to
shake up our conceptions of the world. And this is what Malinowski and me did so well.
Now Geertz also, going back to Clifford Geertz, his book, An Interpretation of Cultures, Geertz
also defines ethnography for us, and let me read this. Quote, doing ethnography is establishing
for poor, selecting informants, transcribing texts, taking genealogies, mapping fields,
keeping a diary, and so on. But it's not these things, techniques, or received procedures
that define the enterprise. What defines it is the type of intellectual effort it is,
an elaborate venture in thick description. Now thick description, thick description in
Geertz's words, it's looking for the multiplicity of possible meanings in any given situation.
And the example he uses is of a wink. Let's say a person closes their eye, one eye, and
opens it again rapidly. Now what goes on there? It could be a twitch. The person might have
a neurological disorder that makes them twitch. Perhaps it's a wink. Is there information trying
to be communicated? Maybe it's somebody parroting another person who has a twitch. So maybe
there are, maybe it's someone parroting another person's winks. So there can be multiple winks
upon winks upon winks, if you will. And this is the problem of anthropology, and what anthropologists
strive to do is to uncover these complexities, to define the difference between a wink and
a twitch, or a sincere wink communicating information, or a parody wink, and so forth.
So whatever their faults of fieldwork, and Malinowski's legacy is tainted by his diary,
and as we'll see later in the course, it seems like he missed a number of female aspects
to Trobri and society. Mead's study has been contested by Friedman and others. But whatever
the faults of their fieldwork, we still read both Malinowski and Mead today for their evocative
and deep descriptions of native life in the Trobriand Islands and on Samoa.
