Lecture 8, Constructing Emotions and Identities.
In the last lecture we discussed possible ways that language can shape and influence
our views of the world, central metaphors for example, but today we're going to turn
to cognition and cognitive models.
Cognition is the way in which we think, it's the process of thinking, it's the interplay
of the mind and how it perceives and interprets the world.
So cognitive models then are models of thought, mental models about how the world works.
And we constantly, we're all constantly building up cognitive models, mental models about the
world around us and the way in which it works.
In many ways these are similar to scientific models.
We develop hypotheses, we test those seeing how people in the real world reacts to our
hypotheses and then we modify those hypotheses.
Cognitive models can be more or less idiosyncratic, we can have very particular personal cognitive
models about the world around us, or we can have more widely shared or conventional cognitive
models.
The more overlapping the cognitive models are between individuals, this is the area
that we talk about which is culture.
In this lecture we're going to look at cultural models, cognitive models of illness, of emotions
and of gender.
But first I want to begin by talking a little bit about personal cognitive models, idiosyncratic
cognitive models, models that are unique to you as an individual based on your own unique
life experiences.
And let me start off by doing a sort of a psychological experiment.
I'll say a word and picture the first thing that comes into your mind, just note the first
image, an image that comes into your mind, car.
What do you imagine when I say car?
Now we probably, we imagine something fairly similar.
It probably has four wheels, it has doors, it has windshields and so forth.
And yet beyond that, the particular sort of car we pictured in our mind's eye probably
varies significantly.
It could have been, it could be your car, it could be the car that you would like to have,
it might be the car that your parents had when you were a kid.
For me, I picture sort of a 1970's Ford LTD, or something like a kid would draw, very boxy,
four doors, four wheels and so forth.
So we can still talk, we can use the word car, we have this mental prototype of what
a car is, but the variation between us is fairly significant as well.
Now the best example of personal or idiosyncratic mental models is probably maps, maps.
Now what could be more objective than maps you might think, but we all hold very different
mental maps of the world around us.
Let's say that we, if we all lived in the same city, we would have very different mental
maps of the city.
I would know my area of town very well and have a very detailed map, and that detail
would probably gradually diminish the farther out I went from my own little section of town.
You likewise would have your own areas of town that you would have more detail on, and
this would diminish the farther out you went.
If we were giving directions to someone, how to get from place A to place B, you and
I would probably use different landmarks.
Some would be the same, but we would also have different landmarks and even different
routes that we would take.
Routes that we would take to work would vary, routes that we would take to the airport.
In the last couple of months, I've taken three trips, taken three taxi rides from my home
to the airport, and each time the taxi driver took a different route to the airport.
And at first, the first time this happened, I was a little bit nervous.
I was in the back of the taxi and I was thinking, is this guy taking me to some road somewhere
out in the middle of nowhere to rob me or kill me or something?
But actually, he had thought of a very clever way to go, given rush hour traffic, a route
to the airport that I had never thought of.
Took three taxi cab rides to the airport in the last months, three different routes, and
all different from the normal route that I would take.
So we have these idiosyncratic models, these mental models, maps of the world, but also
maps of the social world, models of the social world.
We also have cultural models, models that are more shared among individuals, broadly
shared among members of the same culture.
And these shared mental models are really the basis of culture.
It's what we talk about when we talk about culture, shared views of looking at the world.
A lot of cultural models we use in everyday life are simply handy shortcuts.
Take going to buy something, for example.
Let's say you're going to buy a bottle of wine.
You could spend weeks or months or really even years learning about wine, and you could
pick out just the right red to go with that steak.
I need a strong Merlot to go with the taste of the steak, or I need a really good Givert
Stremener to offset the spiciness of the hot Thai food we're going to be eating tonight.
So you could develop your cognitive models, your cultural models of the wine world.
You could invest the time and develop those very highly, or you could take a shortcut.
You could go to the store, and if there's no clerk around to help you, you could say,
well, I want to get a $15 bottle of wine.
So I'm going to look through the reds, and I'm going to find something in my price range.
And we use this shortcut, the price as an indicator of quality.
I want to buy a $15 bottle of wine for dinner tonight, or I want to buy a $20 bottle of
wine, or I want to buy a $50 bottle of wine.
And we're using a shortcut that says that higher price equals higher quality.
But in fact, in lots of blind wine tasting tests, higher price doesn't always equal higher
quality.
You can get a very good $20 bottle of wine and a very bad $50 or $60 bottle of wine.
But we use this as a handy little shortcut.
I mean, we're bombarded with so much information in our daily lives, we have to use these shortcuts
to get by.
We can't investigate every aspect of every product that we buy, for example.
And so we just assume that what's more expensive is better.
That's one example of a cultural model.
But let me give you another, a broader, a more widely shared notion of a cultural model.
And that is of the American dream.
This notion, this Horatio Alger story, if you work hard, you'll get ahead and you can
move up in the world.
We can all pull ourselves up by the bootstraps in the United States.
And this is a very powerful cultural model for people in the United States, and also
for other people around the world, particularly immigrants who come to the United States.
But look at the facts here, a recent study showed that 19% of Americans believe they
are among the top 1% of earners in this country.
19% believe they're among the top 1% of earners.
Another 20% say that one day they will be.
One day they're going to be in the top 1% of earners.
So 39% of Americans think that they're one day going to be among the richest 1% of Americans.
And the average median annual income of the richest 1% is $1.5 million a year.
It's not going to happen.
But having this model, having this cultural model that it's possible, really affects the
way in which they feel patriotic, the way in which they feel tied to their country,
the way in which they vote, the way in which they act in the world.
So one point of that is that our cultural models don't have to correspond to material
reality.
They're just as powerful even if they're not backed up by what's going on in the world
around us.
So just as we model the physical world around us in cultural and idiosyncratic ways, so
too we model our own bodies.
And here we can talk about body perceptions that disconnect often between our perceptions
of our bodies and the way our bodies actually are.
I'm a professor.
I work in universities.
There is literally an epidemic these days of eating disorders, particularly among young
college age women, anorexia, bulimia.
And very often this results from having a mental image of how their body is that doesn't correspond
with what their body actually looks like.
We could also mention powerful cultural models concerning illness.
And there are a number of culturally specific illnesses around the world.
In Guatemala, where I work, for example, we can talk about one illness called susto,
or fright.
And it's when the soul gets frightened and leaves the body.
Let's say you're walking down the road and a snake runs across the road.
You could get so frightened that part of your soul leaves your body.
And this makes you physically ill.
It physically rehabilitates you.
You can lose your appetite, you might become tired, you have a disregard for your personal
appearances.
And it sounds a lot like what we would call depression, clinical depression.
But there it's susto, and it's treated not by medicines, not by a medical doctor, but
by a shaman who can call the soul back and reseed it in the body once again.
There are a number of other culturally specific illnesses to the Maya in Guatemala.
There's a condition called nervios, having nerves.
There's a condition of ojo, of the bad eye.
If someone looks at you or looks at one of your children with envy or with greed, again
it can steal part of your soul and physically rehabilitate you, physically make one sick.
Now we would call these psychosomatic illnesses, but for the Maya, with whom I work, these
are real illnesses.
They're really sick.
It's the real deal.
This isn't something purely or just only psychological.
This is the real cause of their illnesses.
And so there are these cultural models of what causes illness around the world.
And let me just mention a couple of others.
The Inuit have a condition called arctic hysteria.
This is only found among the Inuit.
At certain points they will just go crazy.
They'll run out of their igloos, they'll rip their clothes off, they'll roll around
in the snow, sometimes they'll jump in the water, and sometimes they'll die.
Is it cabin fever?
Is it deficiency of a particular vitamin?
Perhaps, but it's only found among the Inuit, and the Inuit have developed this cultural
model to explain it and to understand it and to work it into their own cultural system.
And there are other examples.
Windingo psychosis we find among the Chippewa and the Ojibwa of the Northern Great Lakes
region, and this is a paranoid belief that others are turning into cannibals and that
one might be turning into a cannibal oneself.
There's Koro, which we find in China, the irrational belief that one's genitals are
retreating into one's body.
But I think the best way to illustrate this notion of cultural models of illness is to
look at our own society and take, for example, addiction.
Addiction in the United States.
This is a cultural category which has changed radically over the last 20 years or so.
For the better or for the worse, I'm not sure, but we've changed the way in which we perceive
of addiction.
We now see it as a real illness.
The fact hasn't changed.
An alcoholic, a coke addict, any of these people, the physical reality of it is still
the same.
But the way in which we talk about addiction now, it's not a moral problem.
It's a physical problem.
It's an illness.
It's a real illness that can be treated by medical doctors.
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder also, similarly, we, it was a condition unheard
of 20 years ago, and now it's estimated that somewhere between 4% and 12% of school-aged
children suffer from attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
And there's a large percentage, it's 4% of all children's prescriptions in the United
States these days are for riddling to treat this disorder that wasn't recognized 20 years
ago.
Now, this isn't to say that these aren't real illnesses.
It's not to say that our expansion of what we consider to be addictive, not only alcohol
and drugs anymore, but also gambling and sex and all of these other things.
It's not to say that these aren't real illnesses.
It's not to say that attention deficit hyperactivity disorder didn't exist 50 years ago, but it
existed in a different way.
If we didn't recognize it, if we didn't build up a cultural model to culturally sanction
this, then it wasn't real in the same way that it's real today, identifying that makes
it more real in a cultural sense.
And we can elaborate these cultural models and how these help us form our relationship
with reality.
So we have these culturally specific illnesses around the world.
And I want to go into some more detail about a couple of more culturally specific models,
both outlined by one anthropologist.
Her name is Nancy Shepper Hughes.
She works at the University of California at Berkeley, very prominent anthropologist.
So Nancy Shepper Hughes, she's working in the mid 1970s in Western Ireland.
She goes to the small village in Western Ireland, which she uses a pseudonym for.
She calls Bally Braun.
And what she finds there is what we would consider to be a particularly dysfunctional system,
dysfunctional in all sorts of ways.
It's very poor part of Ireland.
There's a lot of out migration.
Males are leaving their home villages and going to work in London or immigrating to
the States, leaving their home villages.
Particularly the sons are also leaving.
The older sons leave and the younger sons are left behind.
So as a result, you have families that are really matriarchal in many ways.
You have a woman and her children.
The older sons as they get older will leave and the daughters and the younger children
will stay at home.
So this creates this virtual matriarchy in Northern Ireland and Western Ireland.
And as a result, there's a very tight bond between brothers and sisters, the brothers
that stay behind, the younger brothers that stay behind and their sisters.
And Nancy Shepper Hughes argues, and quite controversially, I will add, that the combination
of the Catholic doctrine about sex that's practiced in this part of Western Ireland,
that sex is a dirty thing, it's a nasty thing, it's something that's only for reproduction,
it's something that we really shouldn't talk about.
And this is an area of Ireland where they have a really strict Catholicism.
Combine this view of sex with the demographic fact that most of the males are migrating out
and you have these households being run by women, a few males in the household, but as
a result of these two factors, the youngest boys who stay behind have a really hard time
overcoming their edible complex, incestuous feelings toward their mother and toward their
sister.
And so she also finds, and these are quite remarkable figures here, she finds, and this
was a survey done that she did in 1971, that 20% of the men in Western Ireland at this
time were in a mental hospital.
20% of the male population were in a mental hospital.
And remember, this is mostly the younger children that are, younger male children that stay behind,
the others have migrated out.
Of those, 89% were celibate, 89% had never had sex, and half were diagnosed with schizophrenia.
So you have 20% of the men in a mental institution, 89% of those are celibate, and half of those
are diagnosed with schizophrenia.
Now at the time, this has changed a bit in the States since then, but at the time schizophrenia
in the United States was associated with middle-aged married women, very much a middle-aged married
woman's disease.
But in Ireland, it was these bachelor men, these celibate bachelor men.
And why is this?
Shepard Hughes said it's because they have a hard time overcoming, handling their sexuality,
overcoming their heritage, and handling their sexuality in a productive way.
They've been raised in this household, in a society that's ostensibly patriarchal, led
by a man, but in this case the men, the, the elder men have left, and it's run by a woman
and so they never really overcome their psychosexual feelings toward their mothers, and toward their
sisters either.
And it's very hard for them to establish a healthy relationship with other women.
Now as a sideline here, it's interesting to note that with the distance of migration
away from western Ireland, the rates of schizophrenia went down.
The farther men left, the farther away they went when they left, the lower the rates of
schizophrenia.
But there was a proportional increase in the rates of alcoholism, the farther away men
left.
So I'm trying to tie this into cultural models, and to do this, one of the techniques that
Nancy Shepard Hughes used was to show her subjects tats, a thematic apperception test,
T-A-T, thematic apperception test.
It's a test used by psychologists, it's sort of like a Rorschach test, except it's a real
image.
They're charcoal drawings, and you can see real people, it's not abstract.
And so you show these images to a person and ask them to describe what's going on in the
picture.
In one picture in particular, there was an image of a woman, a bare-breasted woman, laying
in bed with the covers pulled up to right underneath her breast, and a man standing
beside the bed, turning away sort of with his arm over his face a little bit, as if
he were ashamed just a bit.
So she shows this to the men in Balibran, this town in which she was working, and asks
them to describe what was going on.
Healthy men, the normal men, the non-schizophrenic men that she interviewed, would say, give
stories such as, well, there was a boating accident, and his sister fell into the water
and her clothes were wet, and so he's brought her back home and undressed her and put her
into bed, and now he's turning away.
And the schizophrenic man would say, well, they've just had sex, and now the man is embarrassed,
he's feeling bad about this, he's feeling guilty, and that's the reason he's turning
away.
So there's very different interpretations of these same images, and I will mention here
that when I show these images to my undergraduate students, sex is inevitably one of the primary
themes.
So either I'm dealing with a lot of schizophrenics, or what we consider to be schizophrenia varies
dramatically from culture to culture.
Now Nancy Sheppard Hughes went on to write her next big book, another really very important
work in anthropology, about Brazil, where she had worked earlier in the 1960s as a Peace
Corps volunteer, before she went to graduate school.
And so she goes back to Northeastern Brazil after she's worked in Ireland, a little town
that she calls, using a pseudonym, Bomb Jesus, and really she worked in the shanty town on
the edge of this Brazilian city, and the shanty town was called the Alto do Crujero.
This is a big sugarcane region, the Amazon jungle in this area has been cut down.
If you look at satellite photographs, the National Geographic satellite photographs,
this is this splotch of brown in the middle of all of this Amazon region, because it's
all been cut down to grow sugarcane.
It's an extremely poor part of Brazil, poverty in the way that we can hardly even imagine,
like poverty of people going hungry, dying of hunger, literally dying of hunger, and experiencing
the delirium that goes with dying of hunger, and when your body starts eating itself from
the inside out.
You may have gone hungry for a day, or you may have felt hungry one day, but you know
it's hard for us to relate with this kind of hunger.
We've never felt this kind of hunger, not eating for days at a time.
So in the Alto do Crujero, on the shanty town on the edges of this Brazilian city, most
of the people work in sugarcane plantations.
Some of the women work as domestic health, it's very harsh conditions, there's a very
high death rate, poverty and hunger are extremely high, and the infant mortality rate is astronomical.
The average woman in this community has 9.5 pregnancies in her lifetime, 9.5 pregnancies,
and 3.5 child deaths.
So the average woman has three and a half of their children die, and most of these occur
before six months of age, and virtually all of them before one year old.
In addition, they have an average of 1.5 stillbirths.
So the average woman in the shanty town, the Alto do Crujero in Brazil, the average woman
gets pregnant 9.5 times, and a total of five of those, over half, results in the death
of the baby, either through a stillbirth or through an infant death.
Now Nancy Shepper Hughes sees this, and she notices that the women aren't mourning over
their dead infants.
They go to the grave, they bury their babies, but they don't cry, and in fact she titled
her book on the subject, Death Without Weeping.
And she asked herself, what's going on here?
Why are these mothers not crying when their babies die?
And she says, we have this idea in the West that we consider to be totally natural, that
women bond with their children.
It's like a woman gives birth, and we expect the violins to go up in the background, and
this instant bonding, the baby is put in the mother's arms, and there's this instant metaphysical
bonding between mothers and their children, this moment of epiphany.
And in fact, and there's been some recent research done on this, showing that a lot
of post-birth depression results from women not experiencing this instant bonding, and
that all women don't experience this feeling, and a lot of women feel guilty if they don't,
because we've built it up to be such a romantic ideal in our culture that everybody needs
to experience this same sort of bonding, that it's supposed to be natural, it's the
natural scheme of things.
But here, the women don't cry when their babies die, and why is that?
And Nancy Shepherd Hughes says, because the conditions are so harsh, I mean they don't
want to put any emotional attachment into these children until they're over a year
old, until they know that they're going to survive, and that they're going to live, and
really this relationship can really flourish.
And so what Nancy Shepherd Hughes argues is that this notion of mother love is really,
in her words, a bourgeois myth.
It's a myth developed in the West that romanticizes a natural bond between mothers and their
children that doesn't have to exist, that doesn't exist in this area of northeastern
Brazil where the women don't cry when their children die.
Now this research has created quite a stir in the academy.
A lot of people think that there is a natural bond.
Sociobiologists, for example, would argue that there has, we have evolved an evolutionary
propensity for women to become attached to their children.
And Nancy Shepherd Hughes says, no, this is a cultural model.
It's a cultural model that's especially insidious because we take it to be the natural scheme
of things.
But she says in Alto do Crucero, where they have these lifeboat ethics where you know
people are going to die, the chances are greater than 50% that any child a woman has
is going to die, why invest all that time and attention in that child?
So we have these cultural models of illness around the world, sometimes radically different
models about how we, the relationship between mothers and children and the nature of mother
love.
I would also like to mention in the lecture today a bit about cultural models of another
thing we take to be quite natural, which is gender.
Of course, there are women and men in the world, men act one way, women act another.
This is just the natural scheme of things.
But in fact, there's quite a bit of variation in the way in which men and women are expected
to act in different cultures.
Every culture around the world recognizes two genders, a masculine gender and a feminine
gender.
And here let me make a distinction.
We use gender to refer to the social categories associated with masculinity and femininity.
And we use sex more precisely to describe biologically male and females.
Now every cultural around the world recognizes at least two genders, but some cultures recognize
a third gender.
Take for example the Burdachi, these so-called two spirit people of the Pueblo Indians, of
the Zuni and the Navajo.
These were men, biologically men, but they lived as women.
They dressed as women did, they did women's work, and it turns out that they were very
highly valued because women were seen as potentially polluting.
And so on hunting trips and on an important rituals, shamans didn't want to take women
along because they could corrupt the hunt because they're just a little bit polluting.
So they could take along these Burdachi, these men women who could do all of the cooking,
who could do all of the taking care of the clothes and so forth on the hunting trips,
and yet wouldn't corrupt the nature of the hunt or this contact with the spirit world
in certain rituals.
On Samoa, remember Samoa, where Margaret Mead studied and romanticized the sexual life
of the people of Samoa.
On Samoa there's a group of people called Fafafinis, and Fafafini means in the manner
of a woman.
And these Fafafinis, they are males who wear women's dress, who do women's work, and they're
fairly highly valued among Samoan families because they can do both things that men can
do and things that women can do.
But these Fafafinis, when you talk to them, they say that they're really uncomfortable
with foreigners who try and categorize them in a specific way.
If they go with these Samoan Fafafinis when they go to Australia on vacation, they say
all the Australians think that we're transvestites or we're gays, and we're not.
We're a different sort of thing.
We're a third gender.
We're neither male nor female.
We don't fit into this Western binary opposition.
So these are some pretty radical differences.
Mother love, conceptions of mother love in different cultures, conceptions of gender
in different cultures.
And I would like to end here on somewhat of a lighter note, another example of cultural
models and one that comes from our own culture.
So let me ask you something.
Let's say that it's extremely cold outside and you go back to your home and the heat
has been turned off and you go inside and it's freezing cold.
You've just been out in the cold and you really want to get your house warmed up quickly.
So what do you do?
You go over to the thermostat and let's say that your ideal temperature would be 78 degrees.
What do you set the thermostat on?
Lots of people that I asked this question to in my classes and lots of people in the
States as a whole would say, well, I would go in and first I would turn it up to 90 and
get it really nice and warm and then I would go back and turn it to 78.
This is a very particular cultural model of the way in which a thermostat and heating
works.
It's a valve model.
We're sort of picturing the thermostat like the valve on a faucet that we can open it
up wider and more hot air will come out.
In fact, the way in which heating works, it's a binary operation.
The heating elements either come on or they turn off and it's not this gradation.
The air isn't hotter or colder.
The fan can blow.
You can put the fan on low or you can put the fan on high.
So the fan can blow at different speeds.
But actually the operation of the heating system is binary off or on.
And this having a cultural model though, that it's like a valve has real world implications.
If we go in, the house is freezing cold.
We turn the heat thermostat on 90 and then we forget it.
We go out and we run an errand or something and we come back and the house is burning
up and we've wasted all of this electricity that we didn't need to do because if you had
set the thermostat on 78 in the first place, it would have gotten to that temperature just
as quickly as if you had set it on 90.
So mental models are the way in which we look at the world.
These can be more or less idiosyncratic.
The less idiosyncratic or the more conventional they are.
This is what creates what we call culture.
So today we looked at cultural models of disease, of emotion, of mother love, of gender, and
to the ways in which cultural models can influence our own behavior when we go shopping, equating
high price with quality for example, or the way in which we use thermostats in our homes
or apartments.
In the next lecture what we're going to do is apply the scheme of cultural models to
the full bay of Northern Cameroon.
