Lecture 18, Cultural Contact and Colonialism.
So we've been talking about Elm in services, bands, tribes, chiefdoms and states continue.
We discussed bands, the Dobieju Wansi, we discussed tribes, the Yanamamu, we've talked
about chiefdoms with the Trobri and Islanders and today we're going to turn our attention
to states.
Now states are distinguished primarily by their large size and their large size gives
rise to a lot of the other elements that we consider to be distinctive of states.
States also practice intensive agriculture, they have market economies and significantly
they have socioeconomic classes.
Now these socioeconomic classes they may be hereditary or not, it may be a meritocracy
system like we have in our own country but the important thing is that there are classes
of people that enjoy different material standards of living and this is really distinctive of
states having socioeconomic classes in bands, in tribes, in chiefdoms you have people with
higher status sometimes, a chief or a headman but their material circumstances of life are
about the same as everybody else's but with the advent of states we get permanent classes
that have different access to material resources.
Now perhaps related to this is the fact that states also have centralized authority of
the rule of law and they have an army or a police force to enforce this rule of law as
well.
The army for conflicts with the outside world and the police force to maintain internal conflicts.
Now states first arose in Mesopotamia, the famous city states of Sumeria around 3500
BC, city states take many different forms and they've developed in different ways over
the years.
We have kingdoms, we have modern nation states and here let me mention that a lot of times
we use nation and state as synonyms but in anthropology they mean two very different things.
A nation implies a group with a shared common heritage, a group that considers itself to
be related to one another in some fundamental way, a common history, sharing a common history.
A state is simply a form of governmental organization characterized by the points that we just outlined.
Now nation states, often we talk about nation states and nation states are a very recent
addition to human history.
They're a product of western civilization, western Europe that arose in the 18th century.
Now nation states have become very expansionist and in fact everybody in the world today virtually
lives in a nation state but nonetheless they are this fairly recent addition to human history.
Now western states even before they became nation states, western states have been historically
very expansionist and this has led to situations of cultural contact around the world, sustained
cultural contact, especially starting in the age of discovery and exploration when
the Europeans were setting out around the world and discovering all of these native
peoples that they had no idea existed before.
Now in these situations of cultural contact there's often a clash of cultural models,
different ways of looking at the world and if you'll remember from earlier lectures we
talked about cultural models as being shared mental models, shared ways of looking at the
world and we tend to interpret new data, new situations and new events that we encounter
through in the light of these established cultural models that we already hold.
And so what I would like to do today is talk about a couple of situations of contact between
the west and other non-western states and the way in which cultural models have clashed.
And to do this I would like to begin by talking about Spanish contact in the new world and
the story of Aztecs, the Aztecs and Cortes.
Now when Cortes showed up in Mexico in 1519 he encountered a state level society, the
Aztecs were a state level society, a rather large state.
They had only begun the capital of the Aztecs, Tenochtitlan had been founded in 1345, so
it was a rather young empire, less than 200 years old, rather young as these things go.
And when Cortes showed up and he saw Tenochtitlan he was taken by the city, this is a huge city,
there are about 200,000 residents in the city itself, about a million residents in the metropolitan
area in the basin of Mexico.
This was five times larger than London of the time and so he was very much taken by the
size of the city but also what the city looked like.
It was some of the people accompanying Cortes called it the Venice of the New World because
it was traversed by canals.
The Aztecs used a particular kind of agriculture called chinampa agriculture where they would
build up soil from the bottom of these canals and make raised beds which were extremely
fertile that they would use then to plant their gardens on to supply the city with produce
and so forth.
So Cortes shows up in 1519, not very many troops but brings a few hundred troops with
him, crucially brings horses with him and discovers this incredible city in this vast
empire and he was very much taken by it.
Now as an aside, let me mention there was always the problem of communication in contact
between western states and these native societies and the way in which Cortes got around that,
the way in which he was able to communicate with Montezuma who was the Aztec emperor at
the time was by using two translators.
Now when Cortes landed on the coast of Vera Cruz, he very soon took into his service a
woman named Marina.
She was baptized as Marina and she's known popularly in Mexico today as La Malinche.
She was a woman who had been born to an Aztec noble family but her father had died and then
when her mother remarried her stepfather had sold her into slavery and she had been shipped
down from central Mexico, Mexico City, which is where Tenochtitlan was, down to the borderland
between the Aztec empire and the Mexican empire of the Yucatan Peninsula.
And so she had lived with Maya speaking peoples and had learned Maya.
So she spoke Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs, as well as Maya and she entered into
Cortes' service but this wasn't enough to translate, she still didn't speak Spanish.
However, some years earlier in some of the early Spanish exploration off the coast of
Mexico there had been a shipwreck and one of the survivors of the shipwreck made it
to the shore and had been living with Mayan peoples in the Yucatan Peninsula for a number
of years and so he spoke Spanish and Yucatec Maya, a Mayan language.
And so Cortes was able to communicate with the Aztecs by speaking in Spanish to this
man whose name was Joronimo de Aguilar and when he had heard that Cortes showed up he
made his way up to join the Spaniards as well.
So Cortes could speak in Spanish to Aguilar, Aguilar could speak in Maya to La Malinche
and La Malinche could then translate that into Nahuatl.
And La Malinche became Cortes' consort, Cortes had a child by La Malinche and she is a particularly
powerful figure in the Mexican imagination today.
And the one hand venerated as the mother of Mexican culture having the first mestizo or
mixed blood child with Cortes but also reviled by some as being a traitor to her race, helping
Cortes in his conquest of the Aztecs.
So Cortes shows up, he employs the services of La Malinche and Joronimo de Aguilar in
order to be able to communicate with the Aztecs.
And when he showed up the Aztec Empire was at the height of its expansion, perhaps it
would have continued expanding for several more hundred years.
But at the time he showed up the Aztecs had taken over all of central Mexico and they
had trading outposts even farther south throughout Central America.
Now as part of this Aztec expansionism there had been a change in Aztec ideology.
There were two primary gods, one was Witzilopochle and this was the god of the sun or the god
of warfare and the other was Quetzalcoatl and Quetzalcoatl was the god of fertility,
the god of creation and the god of literacy.
Now Quetzalcoatl was very often represented as a feathered serpent but he was also sometimes
represented and this is very common for Mesoamerican gods to have different representations, different
aspects.
He was also sometimes represented as a light-skinned man and this was very crucial.
So during the years of Aztec expansionism what had happened was the importance of Quetzalcoatl
as a god had decreased and the importance of Witzilopochle, the god of war and the god
of the sun had increased and Witzilopochle required blood sacrifice in order to continue
the cycle of existence.
So this ideologically underwrote the Aztec expansionism, capturing prisoners, bringing
them back to Tenochtitlán and then sacrificing them and perhaps as we mentioned in an earlier
lecture perhaps practicing cannibalism to some extent or not, we're not really sure
the extent of Aztec cannibalism but there had been this rise in human sacrifice and
in blood sacrifice.
In addition in the years before Cortes showed up there had been a number of strange omens
now perhaps this is hindsight, perhaps people are looking back, perhaps the Aztecs after
the conquest looked back and said, oh yeah all of those weird things that were happening
before Cortes showed up.
So it's hard to separate hindsight here from what was really going on before Cortes showed
up but there had been these bad omens and the emperor Montezuma was a bit worried.
His empire had been stretched to its limits by some accounts.
People that the Aztecs had subjugated were becoming unruly and so his grasp on the empire
as a whole was a bit tenuous and then these omens occur and then these rumors start circulating
that perhaps Quetzalcoatl is going to return and reestablish the order that he intended
for the Aztec empire.
So it's in this context that Cortes shows up and the story goes, the most common interpretation
of this is that the Aztecs mistook Cortes for Quetzalcoatl and they welcomed him willingly
into their capital city because this was the god, this was Quetzalcoatl returned and in
fact in most accounts we see that Montezuma prostated himself in front of Cortes when
he first showed up which would lead us to believe that perhaps he was taken as a god.
On the other hand perhaps these stories are a bit overplayed.
The historian Matthew Restall in a recent book Seven Myths of the Spanish Conquest says
it's actually very ethnocentric of us to think that the Aztecs thought that the Spaniards
were gods and it sort of plays into this European notion of we're inherently superior in some
way.
Of course the native peoples think we're gods because we are so exceptional.
Some stories say that the Aztecs believed that the Spaniards riding on horses were a
single beast.
This probably isn't the case.
White skinned people don't look that much different than Native Americans for example.
So it's probably a bit of a stretch for us to say that the Aztecs were so naive and so
gullible as to mistake the Spaniards for gods or to mistake Spaniards on the backs
of horses as being gods.
But nonetheless there was probably still some indeterminacy there.
There had been these omens, there was this myth that Quetzalcoatl would return at some
point in the future and so perhaps there was some, maybe Cortez is a god, maybe he's
not, we're really not sure.
But nonetheless Montezuma welcomed Cortez into Tenochtitlán and expected him, even
if he didn't believe that Cortez was a god, expected him to follow a model of expansionism
that was familiar to the Aztecs and to the Mesoamericans.
They would come in, perhaps they would become the new rulers, the Aztecs would begin giving
tribute to the Spaniards and they could continue their life pretty much the way it was, just
passing tribute up one more level in the rung.
However, of course it didn't work out this way.
Cortez's demands for gold increased and increased and after a couple of years, he showed up
in 1519 and after a couple of years through various acts of treachery he was able to actually
pretty handily defeat the Aztecs which happened in 1521 and instituted this whole period
of Spanish conquest and colonialism in the New World.
Now a similar story takes place in the Hawaiian islands, in the contact between the native
Hawaiians and Captain Cook, Captain James Cook.
So the Hawaiians were a state as well, a state system, or somewhere between a chieftain
and a state.
It's, again, these categories are not hard and fast and so it's hard to place particular
societies as a chieftain or a state.
But the Hawaiians fell somewhere between chieftains and states.
It was a society with extreme stratification, social stratification.
There were three distinct classes.
There were the nobles, there were about ten ranked lineages of nobility.
There were the dwellers on the land, the commoners, and then finally there were what we could
translate in English as the pariahs and this would be similar to India's untouchable class.
We had these three stratified classes in Hawaiian society.
The king owned all of the land and he administered the rights to the land through a vast bureaucracy.
And here we see a little bit of the chieftain aspect of native Hawaiian civilization.
So the king owns all the land and through his benevolence he allows the commoners to
work on that land.
And so just by making a living, they owe something to the king.
They're indebted to the king because it's his land.
The Hawaiians also believed that their kings were related to gods, physically related to
gods.
They were really god-like in some way.
And this led to one of the few instances in the world of sanctioned incest.
Brother-sister marriage was allowed among the nobility to keep these godly bloodlines
pure.
So in the 1770s, the king of Hawaii, King Kamehameha, was uniting all of the political
units of the various islands under his rule.
And this was a process that was completed in 1796.
And this centralization, like with the Aztecs, the centralization had religious overtones
and it was played out in a conflict between Ku, who was the god of war, and Lono, who
was the god of peace.
And again, very similar, Ku, very similar to Witsilopochle, and Lono, very similar
to Quetzalcoatl.
So in the process of conquering neighboring islands, Kamehameha really began to emphasize
the importance of the god of war, of Ku.
This makes sense.
An expansionist state, they're conquering and subjugating other peoples.
The god of war is going to take on more importance than Lono of the god of peace.
So it's in this context that Captain James Cook shows up.
And Cook, as we all know, was a famous voyager.
He made three main voyages between 1769 and 1779, probably added more to geographical
knowledge than anyone else had ever done at the time.
He explored and he mapped Tahiti, New Zealand, Australia, part of the Antarctic.
And on his last voyage, his third and last voyage, which took place from 1776 to 1779,
he first went to New Zealand, then he went back to Tahiti, which he had visited before.
And from Tahiti, he makes the voyage up to Hawaii.
So Cook is coming from Tahiti to Hawaii.
Now this is significant because the Hawaiian origin myths say that the Hawaiians originally
came from Tahiti.
And this may or may not be the case, but this is what the Hawaiians say for their origin
myth.
So Cook shows up in Hawaii on January 18, 1778.
But he doesn't stay for very long.
He stays for a little while and then he runs up the coast of North America to the Bering
Strait.
But when he came, January 18, 1778, when he came, this was during the period in which
Lono is supposed to make an annual return to the Hawaiian Islands.
And the God of fertility returns every year to ensure fertility for the years to come.
He comes, stays for a few weeks, they have a number of ceremonies for Lono, and then
Lono leaves.
And of course, this is all symbolic, but then Cook, this unusual white man, shows up around
the same time that Lono is supposed to show up, stays for a while, leaves, runs up the
coast of North America, explores part of the Bering Strait, and then he comes back to
Hawaii and he comes back to Hawaii in 1779, around the same time that he, around one year
later from his first arrival.
And so this fits into the Hawaiian model of what Lono is supposed to do.
Lono comes back year after year.
Cook shows up in January of 1778, shows up again in January of 1779, and a number of
interpretations have argued, namely by Marshall Solins, have argued that the natives welcomed
Cook as the returned God Lono, and that this fit perfectly into their, their model, their
ritual calendar of what Lono was supposed to do.
However, on Cook's second visit, he comes to Hawaii, they do a number of ceremonies
in which it seems like he was venerated as Lono, or these ceremonies to offer sacrifice
to Lono, and then toward the end of January of that year, the Hawaiians start getting
anxious for him to leave, and start encouraging him to leave, and this is when Lono is supposed
to leave.
You know, you've been here for a while already, isn't it, about time that you pack up and
set sail, and so Cook finally does that, he sets sail, but when he leaves Hawaii, the
Hawaiian Islands, one of his mass breaks, the mass breaks, and so he's forced to return,
and he's forced to return at a point in the Hawaiian ritual calendar in which Cook, the
God of War, kills Lono, the God of Fertility, and Lono is going to be regenerated year after
year, but this is part of the ritual calendar.
The God of Fertility comes, the God of War kills the God of Fertility, and then the God
of War, the God of Practicality, the God of Governmentality, takes over for the year
and allows the Hawaiians to continue their expansionist politics.
So Cook shows back up, and he gets killed.
He's killed, and Marshall Solins argues that he's killed because he was seen as Lono.
Lono has to be killed, and the Hawaiian King at the time, Kamehameha, was fearing for his
power.
If Lono comes back and takes over power, then I'm going to lose my own power.
There's a wonderful book that Marshall Solins has written called Islands of History in
which he sets it up like a murder mystery.
Who killed Captain Cook?
He winds up with the conclusion that one of Kamehameha's courtly noblemen killed Cook
in order to save the reign of Kamehameha.
This is one of those instances where it's the opposite of Cortez and Aztecs, actually.
The European here gets killed, and the Europeans get expelled, and the Hawaiians are able to
keep their reign for some time longer.
Now, of course, it didn't last forever, although the Hawaiians are a case where they were able
to maintain native rule for quite some time under British protection.
In 1898, the Hawaiians, of course, was annexed by the United States.
Now in these processes of contact between the West and the rest of the world, we very
often play up this idea of the Europeans being taken for gods and the misunderstandings of
native peoples about European intentions.
It's useful, however, to note that the same process worked the other way around.
The Winnebago of the Great Lakes region tell a story of the French showing up in the 17th
century and seeing a Winnebago man smoking tobacco, and the French had never seen anyone
smoking tobacco before, and they think that this man is on fire, so they dump water on
him to put out the fire.
But he wasn't on fire at all, of course, and so this is a case of the French misunderstanding
what is going on.
So these processes of misunderstanding, it's important to point out, go both ways.
We have better documentation for the native's misunderstanding, but there are these stories
like that of the Winnebago.
Now the process of colonization and of Western expansion wreaked havoc on native societies
around the world.
Disease, the native peoples did not have resistance to diseases.
There was warfare, there was subjugation, there were these long periods of colonial rule that
established racial hierarchies, many of which continue to this day.
It's also been argued that during the period of European expansion, an economic system
emerged in the world which continues to this day, and this idea is most associated with
two scholars, Immanuel Wallerstein and André Gunter-Franck, and they developed a line of
theory that we know as world systems theory or dependency theory, and they argued that
in the early days of colonial expansion what happened was all of the countries in the world
got divided into two main categories.
We have core countries, and this would be Western Europe, today we could expand it out
to say Western Europe, the United States, and maybe Japan, and peripheral countries,
and this would be everywhere else, but mostly talking about the southern hemisphere.
So core countries and peripheral countries, these overlap more or less with what we would
call colloquially first world and third world countries, the first world being core countries
and the third world being peripheral countries.
So Wallerstein and Frank argue that what happened was the colonial powers instituted
an economic system whereby peripheral countries would export raw materials to core countries,
and these raw materials would then be converted into commodities in the core countries and
then sold for a profit, and that profit would remain in the core countries and be reinvested
in technology, which would keep the core countries economically, technologically advanced
and keep the peripheral countries underdeveloped.
And so we could talk about cotton in India, for example, as a great example, cotton being
exported back to England, being converted into textiles, and then sold for a profit,
which would then be invested in technological development and keeping the first world ahead.
Now Wallerstein and Frank argue that this system of dependency that emerged between
core countries and peripheral countries actually continues to this day.
It got established during the colonial period, but it still marks global economic relations
to this day, and there are the best example of this probably comes from the rubber trade
in Brazil.
Now rubber was something unheard of in Europe in the 17th, 18th, even in the 19th century.
By 1800, there were a few products trickling into Europe, rubber balls, shoes or racers,
a few manufactured products, but mostly novelties.
But the Europeans were very much taken by rubber at the time, but the market for rubber didn't
take off until 1844, when Charles Goodyear developed the technique of vulcanization,
a flash heating rubber, which would make it resistant to becoming brittle when it got
cold.
And this expanded the market for how people could use rubber.
But even then, it wasn't until some years later in 1890, when John Dunlop developed
a pneumatic tire using this vulcanized rubber, that rubber really took off.
And this was around the time, of course, in which car production was taking off at the
same time.
So there became this enormous market for rubber, and most of the rubber at the time was coming
from Brazil.
Now, to give you a bit of background, the rubber naturally comes from the Hiveia Braziliansis
tree.
There's a lot of synthetic rubber today, but natural rubber comes from Hiveia Braziliansis.
This was the process of harvesting rubber was done by rubber tappers in the Brazilian
Amazon.
Rubber trees naturally are quite dispersed in the forest.
You might find two per acre or something like that.
And rubber tappers would make paths through the Brazilian Amazon forest.
They would find rubber trees, they would tap those trees, leave a little cup there, and
they would have a path that might take them days or even weeks to follow along to get
enough rubber trees to really have a big chunk of rubber.
And the tappers would periodically follow their trails through the forest, gather up
the rubber that had been collected in the cup, and at night they would melt it into
a big ball, and then they would take it down to the port towns on the Amazon River and
sell it to traders, and then it would be shipped back to Europe.
During the boom years of rubber, and this was really the late 19th and the very early
20th century, rubber production in Brazil took off.
And there were thousands and thousands and thousands of tappers being employed by the
rubber trade.
And to give you an idea of the volume of this trade, in 1850 there were 638 metric tons
of rubber exported from Brazil.
This is in 1850, right after good year had developed falconization, 638 metric tons.
By 1912, this had risen to 31,000, over 31,000 metric tons.
So this is a booming market going on in Brazil, and it introduced a lot of wealth into the
Amazon region.
A couple of cities, the main cities along the Amazon, are Belim and Manaus.
And they became as wealthy as their European contemporary cities.
Manaus famously, and Manaus is located right about in the center of the Amazon River in
Brazil, in the middle of nowhere.
And Manaus became the showcase city.
They built an opera house, which was supposed to be as nice as any opera house in Italy.
And in fact, there are apocryphal stories that Caruso once sung there.
So in 1896, Manaus opened this opera house, and they were trying to be as good, as nice
of a city as one would find in Western Europe.
However, what happened was, the rubber trade bottomed out some years later.
And this is an Englishman, by the name of Henry Wickham, had smuggled rubber seeds out
of Brazil back to London.
They had been cultivated in the Q Gardens, the Royal Gardens in London.
And then the English had set up rubber plantations in Malaysia.
Now it turns out that in Brazil, there is an endemic disease, the South American leaf
blight, that affects rubber plants.
And so you cannot set up rubber plantations in Brazil.
It just doesn't work.
However, the English had been able to develop these hybrids that they could use on plantations
in Malaysia.
And so the Malaysian market overtook the Brazilian market in just a number of years, and the
Brazilian rubber trade completely bottomed out.
And as a result, I mean, what this shows us is the danger of putting all of a country's
eggs in one basket.
Brazil at the height of the rubber trade was getting 40% of their export earnings from
this one product.
But then from competition from England and English colonies in Malaysia, they lost this
whole market and they lost out.
And this is really the danger of this kind of dependency.
Really on a single product in the world economy.
Now the effects of colonialism involve not just production, but also consumption.
Practices of consumption changed rather dramatically as native peoples came into contact with Western
societies.
And the most fascinating example of this comes from cargo cults.
And cargo cults emerged in Melanesia following World War II.
And what had happened in this area was that Japanese and American forces had come to these
small islands and set up these bases virtually overnight, set up whole cities, bringing in
airplanes, setting up airstrips, setting up stores and houses, and setting up virtual
little cities.
And the native peoples were quite taken by this, obviously.
But then at the end of World War II, the Japanese and the Americans pack up and they
leave.
And so the natives had experienced this period of extreme prosperity, but for just a short
period of time and then it was gone.
And so they start and they interpret this in terms of their native millenarial religious
beliefs, that there is a golden age is going to come at some point in the future and save
us from our conditions of material poverty.
And so they began to venerate the soldiers who had left.
And there are a number of cults that emerged in Melanesia and we call these cargo cults
and the most famous of which is the John Frum cult.
And John Frum was evidently an American soldier whose uniform had gotten left behind.
And the native peoples in the New Hebrides made an effigy of John Frum, began worshipping
him.
And they also built fake airstrips.
They built fake telegraph and radio huts.
And their rituals would be to light all of the lights along the airstrip and to do fake
telegraph calls to the Americans to come back and bring back all of this prosperity.
They don't know why you left, but it is our fate.
It's our millennial fate to have these great loads of goods coming in.
And some of these still continue to this day.
So in state level societies, because of their size, they have an unparalleled ability to
marshal resources and to be expansionists, to spread around the world, through colonialism,
through coercive trade.
And the responses to these have been quite varied, ranging from outright surrender and
colonization as with the Aztecs and the Hawaiians, and also a reinterpretation, putting this
contact, putting this new data into established cultural models, such as we find with the
cargo cults.
