Lecture 21, Late Capitalism, from Ford to Disney.
Last time we discussed cultural critiques of economic rationality and self-interest,
showing that we're not always as rational as we sometimes think we are.
Today we're going to look at the interplay of culture in our own economic system, which
is sometimes called late capitalism.
We're going to begin by defining two new concepts, Taylorism and Fordism, that come
to us from Antonio Gramsci.
And we're going to wind up looking at the way in which recent management theorists have
come to terms with Marx's notion of alienation that we introduced earlier.
But let me begin with the concept of Taylorism.
And this is something that was introduced from Antonio Gramsci.
And you'll remember he's the man who introduced the idea of hegemony in his writings from prison,
from an Italian prison, where he was in prison for being a Marxist.
Now Taylorism comes from the work of Frederick Taylor, who in 1911 published the Principles
of Scientific Management, which was really the first real management text published in
the United States and probably anywhere in the world.
And Taylor's great contribution was devising a means of detailing a division of labor and
breaking down the production process to its smallest possible component in time and motion
studies based around performance.
So the idea was, let's don't have an artisan assemble a whole stove, but let's have one
person put on the side panel, another person screw in these screws, another person put
on the knobs, and so forth.
Bringing the production process down to its smallest possible components and releasing
businesses from the need to hire skilled labor, to hire artisans.
You can hire unskilled labor if all they're going to be doing is screwing in bolts and
so forth.
So this was Taylor's addition to the management theory or his pioneering work in management
theory.
Now Taylor's ideas were really taken by Henry Ford and put into practice in his model of
mass production and the assembly line for the Model T.
Now Ford started making Model T's in his factory in Highland Park, Michigan in 1914.
And he was able to, by employing an assembly line model, by breaking down the production
process into its smallest components, whereas before you would go into an auto maker and
order a custom car, after Ford instituted the assembly line, he could make thousands
of cars, tens of thousands of cars, based on the same model, and sell them for a much
lower price.
So the assembly line model and breaking down the production process into its smallest components
realized incredible efficiencies in economics.
And this is best seen in the price of Model T's, which cost, in 1910, a Model T cost $780.
In 1914, after the assembly line had been instituted, it cost $360, less than half the
price than it cost the year before.
And this is really the promise of capitalism.
Greater efficiencies in the production process create more goods that can be sold for a lower
price and thus making them available to a wider swath of society.
More stuff for everybody.
Now also involved in the process of assembly line production and Tayloristic or Fordistic
production is uniformity.
The products have to be alike in order to realize these efficiencies.
Ford was famous for saying you can have a Model T in any color as long as it's black.
And this was part of the increase in efficiency was realized through uniformity.
Now as part of this process, Antonio Gramsci took these two ideas and called them Taylorism
and Fordism, and he critiqued them for increasing alienation.
He said that Fordism displaced a predominantly craft-based production in which skilled laborers
exercised substantial control over the conditions of their own work and then reduced it to these
smallest possible components and switched from skilled labor and artisanal labor to
unskilled labor.
And what this does is it increases alienation.
It increases the alienation of workers from the fruits of their labor.
If you're building a whole car, you feel the producer would feel vested in that car, would
feel a personal connection to that car.
If you're just screwing in a bolt in the wheel and you're doing that thousands of
times a day, you don't feel that same investment in the product that you're building.
There's not that personal connection between the worker and the product that's being created.
And so it increases the alienation of workers from the products that they're building.
It also invokes alienation of workers from the means of production.
They don't control their means of production.
They have to sell their labor and work for large companies.
Now this increased alienation, Ford was able to minimize the effects of this, the psychological,
the emotional effects of this by paying his workers well.
There's a trade-off.
You're not going to be the craftsman or the artisan that you once were, perhaps, but you're
going to be paid enough.
And Ford famously said that he was going to pay all of his workers enough that they would
be able to buy his own cars.
So this Fordist model of production, of mass production, of assembly line production really
took off in the early part of the 20th century in the United States and was applied to lots
of different models and not just cars.
Hilton made a fortune, for example, building hotel rooms that were exactly alike in cities
around the world.
There was this appeal of uniformity.
McDonald's building, you can buy the same Big Mac in Beijing or Kuala Lumpur or in
Paris or in the United States.
So there was this uniformity of products that went along with this.
And this is really the commodification of products.
Commodification means making a product not unique.
Original artwork is an anti-commodity.
An original piece of artwork cannot be reproduced in itself.
We can make lithographs, we can make copies of it, but the value of an original piece
of art is related to the relationship of the artist to that work.
An individual made this piece of work.
So art is the anti-commodity.
Commodities, when Ford turned cars into commodities, they became alike.
A commodity is essentially alike.
A ton of steel is a ton of steel is a ton of steel.
It doesn't matter where it's made.
And so part of the process of Fordism and Taylorism was a move toward commoditization
of products, making things less original, less personal, and more uniform.
They're cheaper if they're uniform, but you lose some of the personal qualities as well.
Now I introduced these concepts of Taylorism and Fordism that we get from Antonio Gramsci.
To talk about what we call today post-Fordism, forms of production that have arisen over
the last 20 years or so in the United States that take into account Marxist critique of
alienation, that take into account Gramsci's notions of Fordism and Taylorism and the problems
that that entails for workers, and trying to incorporate this into management theory
to make places better places to work.
And the best example of post-Fordism comes from the Saturn Car Company, Saturn whose
logo is a different kind of company, a different kind of car.
Saturn is a subsidiary of GM.
The company was formed in 1985 and the first cars rolled off the assembly line in 1990
in their plant in Spring Hill, Tennessee.
Now at Saturn what they've tried to do is reduce worker alienation through new styles
post-Fordist styles of labor management relations, changing the culture of the workplace in order
to change the economics of production.
And so what happens is at Saturn they form groups into teams and so rather than having
a person just screw in one screw on a dashboard they will assign a team to do the whole dashboard
assembly for example.
And these teams are empowered in very significant ways.
They act like little companies within the plant.
They'll make contracts with the production team behind them on the assembly line and
the production team in front of them on the assembly line.
And they're able to decide how many cars a day they're going to be able to put dashboards
on.
They're even able to decide they're working hours.
They have flex time and they can decide whether they want to come in at eight in the morning
or nine in the morning or they're given quite a bit of flexibility in doing these things
and this empowers the workers to feel more invested in the company that they're working
for.
Now this is allowed by a unique memorandum of understanding that was signed between the
UAW, the Auto Workers Union and GM to establish Saturn.
This gave the ability, this gave teams a lot of independence, the ability for them to act
like little independent businesses.
It allowed shop floor workers, blue collar workers to sit in on management meetings.
It allowed them to participate in marketing decisions.
It allowed them to participate in major purchasing decisions.
It really integrated management and labor in a new sort of way.
The trade off for this and all of this power given to workers, what the workers agreed
to do was to take a large portion of their salary in profit sharing based on profitability
and the efficiency of their teams.
Now interestingly enough in 2003 this memorandum of understanding was rejected, was revoked
by the union with the economic downturn of the early 2000s.
The profit sharing just wasn't profitable for the workers any longer and so they decided
to go back to an old style union contract.
But nonetheless in the early days of Saturn up through 2003 there was this new form of
management, of post-Fortis management and trying to get workers invested in new sorts
of ways in the company that they worked for.
Now this is best seen in a number of early ads that Saturn developed and it's stressed
that workers are no longer alienated at the Saturn plant, workers are no longer alienated
in the way in which Marx envisioned it.
And if I can, let me read some of the text of one of these ads, an ad that showed a car
worker who had moved down from Detroit to Spring Hill, Tennessee to start working in
the Saturn plant because he wanted to work for a company that embodied the values of
artisanship and workmanship that he wanted to reclaim.
So he says, it used to be I saw the product that I was making but that was just one part
of the thousands of parts that went into the makeup of a car.
There was no way I would ever see the cars that went into it.
The way things were done I just wasn't involved, no one ever asked me what I thought.
Then I heard about Saturn building a whole new car in a whole new car plant and they
figured out a new way of running things too.
No one else in the world had done it this way, not that I know of, not since the Model
T anyway.
Raw material comes in the back door and a car comes out the other end.
It's to me that when you see where your part fits into the bigger picture, it means a lot
more.
That's my perception anyway.
So it's this notion of workers once again being invested in the product that they're
building.
I'm not just screwing on a bolt, I'm not trying to just do as little as I can to get
through the day and clock out and go home and drink my beer.
This is more than just a job to me, it's a way of life and I want to build a quality
car because building Saturn cars is what I'm about.
And this has real emotional, psychological, cultural implications for workers, the way
in which they feel about themselves and the way in which they feel about the company they
work for, but it also realizes real quality improvements for companies.
If workers aren't employing the weapons of the week that we talked about in an earlier
lecture, trying to get by pilfering and foot-dragging and feigning ignorance in all of these ways
in which workers can resist the authority of management and do as little work as possible,
they're not involved in that culture of resistance between labor and management anymore, and
it creates a better product.
So Saturn is trying to reduce the alienation of workers from the product that they're building.
Saturn also very consciously tries to create a tighter bond between the producers of products
and the consumers of products.
Now in pre-capitalist societies, you would have had a very close relationship with your
butcher, with your baker, with the silversmith.
The people you bought products from, you would have social relationships as well.
And it's hard to, it would have been hard to divorce the social relationships from the
economic relationships.
And we've lost a lot of that.
We've lost a lot of this during the height of Fordist production, with the uniformity
of commodities that were being produced and the anonymity of large corporations.
But Saturn is trying to recapture this.
And one of the ways in which they've represented this is through a series of ads, one ad in
particular where a school teacher writes in and describes what she expects her Saturn
card to be like.
And let me read a section from her, the letter that she wrote in that was featured in one
of their television ads.
Dear Saturn team members who are building my car, my name is Judith and I'm a third
grade teacher.
Last week I placed an order for a Saturn after reading about it in a magazine article.
I liked the whole idea of what Saturn was about.
It's one of those things I try and instill in my kids, so I hope it's true.
It reminds me a bit of a mom and pop operation in the old days where you made a car for this
person and this person was happy with the car they got.
I just wanted you to know that you were building that Saturn with the blue-green exterior and
the gray interior for me.
So you know who I am, I'm enclosing my school picture.
I'm looking forward to my new car.
I'm sure if everything I've read is true, I won't be disappointed.
And then in the ad, what they do is they take this letter and they attach the photograph
to the letter and they put it on the chassis as it's going down the assembly line.
And as the car is being built, all of the workers look at this and they read the letter
and they see who this car is for.
And so it's creating, perhaps just virtually, but it's creating a relationship between the
producers and the consumers, something that's lost in mass-produced industrialized commodified
production.
And this is very important.
It's a very important marketing tool for Saturn to have this sort of relationship.
They've also had very successful Saturn days during the summer where thousands of Saturn
owners come to the plant and meet the workers who are building their cars, re-establishing
a personal relationship between consumer and producer, something that, again, is lost or
was lost during the height of industrial capitalism.
And part of what this does is it acts to decommodify products.
The school teacher, she's not buying just any Saturn.
She's buying a Saturn that was built especially for her.
Sure it's on the assembly line.
Sure it's just like lots of other Saturns, but there was a personal touch.
The workers knew who they were building this for and there was a personal relationship
there which acts to decommodify the product.
Again, think about original art being the ultimate anti-commodity.
And this is like a little piece of original art, the workers doing personalized touches
to this Saturn to make it just for our school teacher, Judith.
And we've seen a move in what is called the late capitalist economy, and this really
starts in the 1970s and accelerates during the 80s and 90s with the advent of globalization.
In late capitalist consumption we see more customization, companies targeting smaller
niches, more precise consumer demographics, and really stressing the affective values of
products that they're trying to sell.
Now some have argued, the anthropologist Jonathan Friedman, for example, has argued
that in this late capitalist economy symbolic values, symbolic values have come to replace
or outweigh utility values, material utility values.
Now Friedman argues that this is a very ephemeral base for us to ground our identity in.
We're consuming these products.
In consuming these products, we're building up part of our self-identity.
But in doing so, Friedman argues that this is a very ephemeral base to ground our identity
in, and thus we start searching for products that are more unique, less commodified, and
in some way more real or more authentic.
And as a result, we find all of these ironies, for example, transnational corporations like
Nike selling an idea of authenticity.
Just do it.
Just be yourself by buying a sneaker that was made in Taiwan in a sweatshop and marketed
here in the United States.
Selling an image, Nike is another, is a great example of this.
If you see sneaker ads on television, tennis shoe ads on television, not just Nike, Reebok
and others as well, they're not telling you anything about the product at all hardly.
And a rational view of economics says that advertising is supposed to tell us about the
price, supposed to tell us about the quality, supposed to help us make rational decisions
when we go shopping.
But lots of ads these days, especially tennis shoe ads, don't include anything about the
product.
They're selling an image, they're selling an idea, they're selling a lifestyle.
And this is what Friedman is talking about when he says that symbolic values have come
to replace material values very often in this late capitalist economy.
And as part of this, we seem to have this search for authenticity.
We can see it in neighborhood restaurants or restaurants that pretend to be neighborhood
restaurants, TGI Fridays, Applebee's in places like this that are part of large chains, but
they try and individuate themselves.
It's just like the corner restaurant that we used to have in the good old days.
The problem with this, with saying this, with this claim that symbolic values are more
important than material values is that it's very often hard to separate the two.
So we could see the, the surgeons and interest in micro brood beers, for example, in recent
years as a quest to reclaim the authentic.
I don't want to have a mass produced beer.
I want to have something that's made in small batches that somehow is unique, that when
I drink it can say something about me as a person having this refined taste.
But we can't separate the symbolic values here from the material values.
Maybe the micro brood beers taste a lot better.
So maybe there's a material reason, a real utility reason why we would choose those.
But you can't separate that from the fact that drinking a particular micro brew also
represents you in some way to the rest of the world.
You're consuming a symbolic value at the same time you're consuming a material value.
So maybe micro brews are single malt scotches.
The same argument would apply to single malt scotches.
There's a lot of cultural capital involved in knowing just exactly what scotch you want
to drink, what part of Scotland it's from, how much peaty taste is in there, how much
salt water taste or wine.
The same thing goes for wine.
There's a lot of cultural knowledge behind choosing a particular kind of wine.
Now some wines taste better than others objectively.
But of course we learn taste as well.
This is part of our cultural capital.
We learn the more sophisticated taste that we may exhibit to the rest of the world.
So it's hard to separate consuming symbolic values in wine or in micro brews or in scotches,
whatever it may be, from consuming the material values of those objects as well.
Now a great example of the decommodification of products comes from coffee.
Coffee started out as a drink of the elites.
In Europe in the early days, when coffee was first trickling into Europe, it was the drink
of aristocracy, of royalty.
And then over the years it filtered down to the masses, becoming what Sidney Mintz has
called the ultimate proletarian hunger killer, a great drink for the masses who are working
in factories.
Little coffee in sugar or a little tea in sugar, it's cheap, has a lot of calories,
and it has caffeine to keep the workers going.
So it started out as an elite beverage, a decommodified beverage as we will, something
that's a luxury product that was unique in many ways.
And then it became a mass product of workers.
Over the years consumption of coffee increased up through about the 1950s, and in the 1950s
coffee consumption leveled off and then began to decline slightly in the 1960s.
Production during this time was highly industrialized and coffee became highly commodified.
Coffee was coffee was coffee.
A few big companies controlled the market, General Mills, Procter and Gamble, Nestle
and so forth, and they would blend different sorts of coffee together to create a blend
that was palatable to the widest segment of the market.
So not having unique coffees, but trying to make the blandest or the most acceptable
coffee for everybody.
And then by the early 1980s, smaller coffee roasters had come back on the scene and retailers
were trying to distinguish types of coffee, to decommodify it, to not, coffee isn't coffee
isn't coffee.
Now you can go to your neighborhood coffee store and you can buy Kona or Blue Mountain
or Kenyan AA.
You can buy organic coffee or whole coffee or fresh coffee.
You can buy different styles of coffee.
And in doing this, we've tried to decommodify the coffee market.
I don't just drink a coffee.
I drink a double Kenyan latte or whatever the languages that they use at Starbucks these
days.
It's decommodifying this product that was at one time a perfect example of a homogenous
commodity.
The same thing has happened in other markets as well with chocolate, with wine and so forth.
So I would like to conclude by applying some of these to contemporary U.S. culture and
U.S. cultural economics through the eyes of a French scholar, the French scholar Jean
Baudrillard.
And he has said that in the late capitalist system of the United States, that substance
is nothing and image is everything.
And it goes back to this observation by Friedman that symbolic values have become more important
than material utility values.
Baudrillard argues that in late capitalism, we define ourselves more by what we consume
than what we produce.
Generations ago, we would have defined ourselves by what we produce ourselves.
And today, we define ourselves more through consumption.
And this leads us to try and consume authentic and real products, not just the mass produced
homogenous products of the industrial age.
And in this process, Baudrillard argues, that we've come to value reality so much that
we produce products that he calls hyper-real, hyper-real.
So hyper-real products are things that are more real than the real thing, more real than
the real thing.
Now what does that mean?
For example, reality television.
Reality television isn't really reality.
But in watching it and consuming it, we take it to be reality.
And we want it to be representative in a way that reality often isn't in real life.
It's the same way with Disneyland.
Take Disneyland, for example.
You could go to Disneyland and take a swamp tour instead of going to Southern Louisiana
and taking a swamp tour.
You go to South Louisiana, the weather, it might be hot, the mosquitoes might be out,
you could see an alligator or you might not see an alligator.
There are all of these chances that you take in the real world to experience a swamp tour.
You go to Disneyland and you take their swamp tour and it's going to be perfect every time.
The alligator is going to jump out of the water at just the right moment so that you
can snap a photo to take home.
It's more real than the real thing because it's able to fit in all of the iconic elements
that we associate with a swamp tour into the perfect swamp tour.
More real than the real thing.
Las Vegas is another great example.
All of the New York, New York, and Paris and all of the new sorts of casinos, themed casinos
that are being built in Las Vegas.
We could also see the architectural, the urban planning movement called New Urbanism as representing
this as well, as trying to recapture a romantic view of what communities used to be like way
back when.
Perfect examples of this are Seaside, Florida, for example, where they filmed the movie The
Truman Show.
Celebration, Florida, which is a wholly owned development of Disney outside of Orlando,
Florida.
They're very strict and in these new urban developments, they have alleyways in the back,
sidewalks in the front of the houses.
Every house has a front porch and it's mixed use.
You can walk to the grocery store.
There's a town square in Celebration, Florida, for example.
You can walk to the grocery store.
You can walk to the chemist shop, whatever it may be.
The idea is that we can recapture a sense of community that we've lost in this country
by creating these very often gated communities that combine front porches and sidewalks and
the kids can be out front playing around and all of these things.
They're more real than the communities that they are mimicking were.
They're creating something that's hyper real.
And finally, I could raise the example of artwork and the decommodification of or commodification
and decommodification of artwork as seen in the work of Thomas Kincaid who calls himself
the painter of light.
Now Thomas Kincaid sells original artwork and you remember original artwork is the opposite
of a commodity.
But what he also does is he reproduces this art.
He makes lithographs of his original art.
So you would start out with a non commodity original art and then you would make a commodity
by making reproductions of this.
But then Thomas Kincaid makes this more complex still because he employs teams of whom he
calls illuminators.
And they'll go back through and on the reproductions they will touch up with oil paint sections
of the reproductions.
And so then it makes it not a commodity anymore.
You started off with an anti commodity original art.
You commodified it by making reproductions of it and then by highlighting them you take
it back out of this commodity chain as well.
And so Kincaid has been very successful at selling these illuminated pieces of art because
they're unique.
And he even sends out his illuminators to his stores to customize art for customers.
And so you could tell someone, oh I really like this print here and I'll take it but
I want you to touch up, add a little bit more red to the sun or add a little bit more white
to the wispy smoke coming out of the house or whatever it may be.
Now it's too easy and it's too elitist to simply critique modern American consumption
patterns.
We should see these as being culturally relative just like we've looked at cannibalism and
other aspects of culture in other places around the world.
And it's important to keep in mind that this is morally no better or no worse than other
forms of consumption.
It's easy to take pot shots at this kind of hyper-reality.
But if people are enjoying it, it's fine and this is just a reflection of American society
the way it is today.
And at the moment of consumption there's a sincerity to these acts that we have to take
seriously and not be ironically distanced from.
And this is applying this notion of cultural relativity that we've applied to other cultures
around the world to ourselves here at home.
