Hi, my name is Yvette Puentes. Welcome to my channel Multiverse. Today I have a very
special video for you. I recorded it when Roger Penrose was visiting my group here in Nottingham,
and we're talking about gravitational waves, their discovery by LIGO, some controversies
around it, and some solutions or ideas that Roger is putting forward with respect to that.
So before we go into it, I wanted to thank my very dear friend Nacho Retali, who makes music for
movies. He made this small piece of music, especially for my channel, so I could use it as
an introduction. So Nacho, thank you very much. That was a very nice generous gift. And I also
wanted to thank Leo, my son, for his help editing, and well, I hope you all enjoy it. I guess you're
familiar with my guest today, Roger Penrose, and we're going to, he's been visiting for a week.
We're here in my office at the University of Nottingham, and we decided it would be interesting to
discuss a little bit what's happening with LIGO, because there's a very interesting controversy
going on, and maybe you want to say something about it. Well, shall I give you my story about
the talk? So I gave a talk in Vienna, and it was probably what, a year and a half ago?
I think so, yeah. And I had an idea that I was trying to describe about dark matter particles.
Now, dark matter is the main constituent of the matter in the universe. Forget about dark energy.
Dark energy to me is just a term in Einstein's equations, which gives you this expansion that
we seem to see the exponential expansion. The dark matter is really out there, and it's invisible,
well, it's invisible rather than dark, really. And it's the main constituent of the universe.
I have to forget 70-something percent of the material in the universe. Now, nobody really knows
what it is, but I was giving this talk in which I described an idea of mine, which I've been playing
with some while, a bit like your multiverse, but it's a different kind of multiverse, where you see
the current view of the universe is it starting with a big bang, expands for a bit, and then it
starts to do this, what's called exponential expansion. Well, they're supposed to be a little
bit right at the beginning, where it had what's called inflation. And I never liked the idea
of inflation, because it seemed to be such an artificial theory, but I don't want to talk about
that now. It's just to say that in my picture, this beginning of the universe, so-called, was not
actually the beginning. It was the continuation of the previous, I'm calling eon, rather than using
the word universe, because to me the universe is this succession of eons, one after the other.
Our eon began with a big bang and goes on till we get to this indefinitely expanding
universe that we seem to be starting to see. Now, the idea is that you, in the picture that I present,
you can squash down infinity, and it makes a kind of boundary, obviously a time if you like,
it counts as time infinity in the ordinary way you measure time, but you can squash it down,
so that time becomes a moment in a sense, and that moment becomes the big bang of the next eon.
Okay, I don't want to talk about this here, but I was talking about that in Vienna, and in this scheme
the dark matter, this mysterious dark matter, has to be there. That is to say, there has to be a
substance, which is the main constituent of the universe, each time you cross over into the next
one. But since you don't want to have this dark matter, whatever it is, continuing and building
up each time, each time, each time, from eon to eon, it has to decay away from the origin in
the big bang to the remote future. And as it decays, it decays into gravitational signals. Now,
these would be very unusual signals, if you were able to detect one, and we would be like a blip
like that, or in a galaxy, any galaxy, pretty well any galaxy has loads of dark matter in it,
this dark matter, each one of the, but I call it the little particles, which make the dark matter,
I call them aerobands, because there was a god or a pre-god or something called Erebus,
and it would seem to be, he was a god of darkness, so I thought that was quite appropriate. Anyway,
so these aerobands have to decay one by one, blip blip blip, but when in a whole galaxy,
there would be crowds and crowds of them all coming out at once. Okay, so I imagine there were
two kinds of signals, one would be the close decays of these aeroband particles, when I say
close, I mean in our solar system, something like that, and if you had the right kind of
gravitational wave detector, these would be sort of like a blip, blip like that, just one instant,
but in a distant galaxy, there will be hordes of them coming out, and you might detect them.
So at the end of my talk in Vienna, I said, well, maybe you could see these
in the gravitational wave detector, and then I thought, well, maybe they've already seen them
in LIGO, but they're all in the rubbish bin, they just throw them out because the signals
aren't the kind they expect to see, and I think it was the same day, or maybe the day after,
when you told me about this controversy between the people in Copenhagen, there's a group
in Copenhagen, in Denmark, where there's a man called Andrew Jackson, whom I met and I knew
slightly, and he and his colleagues had claimed that the LIGO signals, there's something a bit odd
about them, because you see, there are these two detectors, one in Livingston, and what's the other
one, Livingston and... I almost forgot. My head in a moment, but anyway. There's two detectors.
And they're a thousand, I don't know, a thousand miles apart, something like that.
So as this gravitational wave signal comes in, and it travels with speed of light,
it hits one detector and then the other one, and so there's a slight change,
very, very tiny delay between one and the other. So if they see the signal in one of them, and then
they see the signal in the other one, they can tell something about what direction it's coming from,
that's the idea. But then what the Copenhagen people did, is they looked at what's called the
noise. Now you see, the noise is the kind of irrelevant stuff, it's the crack hole you might
hear, there's not supposed to be anything to do with the experiment, it might be a lorry driving
the road and down the road and making a little glitch on their machine. But the thing is that
what the Copenhagen people did was that they looked at the same time delay as the honest
signal, apparently. What the story is, the official story is, that this signal represents
black holes in some distant galaxy, which are spiraling around each other and then finally
squalowing each other up. And when they do that, there's this big burst of gravitational waves with
a very special kind of signature. And the idea is that the people at LIGO know this signature,
and if they see some signal, which looks like that, they'd say maybe that's a black hole
squalowing each other up, gravitational waves coming to us, and then they have another detector,
the other one, and the other one sees it a little earlier or a little later, and this gives them
some idea of where the signal's coming from. But the Copenhagen people, Andrew Jackson and his
colleagues looked at the noise, that's the sort of irrelevant crackle, and they found that in the
noise, you found correlations between that one detector and the other. So it means, is something
going wrong? And I think the, all this controversy that's going on is the Copenhagen people are
sort of saying, well, maybe there's something wrong with the LIGO detection, and after all, you...
Yeah, and that created tension. On one side, well, the LIGO consortium are sure that they detected
gravitational waves, while the Copenhagen people are also very, a very, a group with a very good
reputation, and they're also very certain that they've done the right analysis, but of course,
their conclusions contradict, and that has generated a lot of tension. A lot of very bad
feelings. But Roger has some idea that could somehow bring peace, and that's why we wanted to
make this video, because the thing is that the two groups in a sense could be right,
and those correlations that are observed in the noise could be something much more interesting.
They could correspond to actually real physical events happening out there in space, that they're
just not the typical signal from a gravitational wave, but it's a signal coming from a different
effect. So you have a proposal of what it could be, but in a sense, it could be also
something new. I think that's the thing, that what they seem to be seeing is something different
from what anybody expected. And therefore, the LIGO people thought, well, it's got to be gravitational
waves from black holes or something like that. And the Copenhagen people aren't saying that they
know what it is, but there seems to be something else going on quite different from the black hole.
But I mean, you can imagine that, because think about, we don't have any instruments to see
outer space, we don't have the telescope, and suddenly we build one, and we observe,
and we see things, and probably because we're not even imagining what we could be seeing,
and that's another interesting topic to discuss, we don't really understand what we're seeing.
We're just, maybe we're seeing, I don't know, a galaxy, but this does not fit with our ideas
of what would be out there. So we don't understand what we're seeing. And you can think about the
same thing with a microscope in which we construct a lens, and then we look into that. And we also
didn't have ideas that, I don't know, bacteria could exist, and we see these things that look alive,
and we're like, we don't understand that either. So I think that it's amazing that now we can,
for the first time ever, get signals and information about the universe through gravity,
but we are, we have to kind of admit, and we are at that state in which we just put the telescope
out there for the first time, and that not all our predictions are to be, you know, sort of
known, and that there might be a lot of stuff going out there that we don't know.
But that's why your ideas about detectors could well come into their own, because that's,
maybe, yeah, you have a different angle on it, you know, specifically looking for
what LIGO is looking for, it's just a more general question.
But anyway, this controversy, so what's the story? So you were giving good talk,
and you said that this could be happening, and that maybe LIGO was...
I could have thrown it out into the rubbish bin, because it was not of interest.
Yes, but then on Facebook I saw, you know, the controversy arising a lot from Savina,
who made a blog about it, and so on, and then I told you, look, look, look into that, and you
thought that the signals looked very much like what you were expecting them to look like, which are
very sharp, sort of... Well, there are two kinds of things, which apparently they, there's both a
puzzle, sharp, instantaneous blips, but then the other thing would be some kind of a
randomish kind of signal due to huge numbers of these decays going on in some distant galaxy.
And it would be the second thing, which maybe the Copenhagen people would picked up,
because whatever the black holes are doing, they're in the same galaxy. So if that galaxy is spewing
out these Erie von Decay signals, then you would get that with the same time delay as the actual
event. But nobody sort of picked up on this, partly because I didn't have the theory worked
out properly. Yeah, which is necessary. Well, the controversy between the Laigo
community and the Danish group became very... I didn't realize what was going on still, yeah.
Yeah, so that's, so that's the newest thing why we're making this video, right? Because somehow
there was the controversy, but then there were new announcements of gravitational waves,
and we assumed that that just clarified the situation, that maybe there was something funny
in this first event, and then all the other events. I think there's been five so far, right?
So that the following events would just confirm that the Laigo detection was right and so on.
However, we were very surprised to see a few days ago or a week ago or so on that in the
front cover of The New Scientist, this issue was raised again. And again, Sabine Hosenfelder
read it and wrote a very interesting blog on it, and we just heard a podcast on it as well.
And it turns out that there's been in these next events, the Danish group has also analyzed the data,
and they claim that they actually don't see the signals, right? I think what they're saying
is that you, let me just, see in the Laigo project, they have this detector, what is it,
four kilometers in two directions, and the point is that they know what they're looking for,
that is saying black holes running into each other, and there's been a lot of work calculating
exactly what kind of signal you would see from that, so they look very specifically for these
signals and see all over the data, oh, there's one. And what the Danish people are worrying about,
quite reasonably, is that there might be all sorts of things going on, and with a huge number of
different possibilities, just because it happens to match their signal, that may not mean anything.
Because you're already looking for, you know what you're looking for, it's basically, you know,
if you're looking for crocodiles, you'll see crocodiles, because that's the shape.
But in a sense, you can't do anything else, right?
I think you're right, that's the trouble.
That's the best you can do.
That's the best you can do, and I think they're probably right.
You see, in a sense, I think they're both right.
I think so, yeah, so that's the thing is that we kind of feel that they're both right. I mean,
Roger is excited because he thinks this could be connected to his, you know, proposal, and of
course I would be very happy if that's the case. I'm excited because I think it could be
something, hopefully that but something else as well, just coming from out there.
I mean, we can expect from such a new instrument and such a sensitive instrument
to see the unexpected. So I think it would be nice if more people out there
in the community would help by analyzing the data again, and perhaps considering the possibility
that there is something out there different that does not follow the same pattern of gravitational
waves, but perhaps that could have some, you know, like spikes like the ones that you're
proposing. And I actually see it like a really exciting time, and maybe this controversy that's
been a little bit painful, maybe turns out to be on something very nice and unexpected,
and a deeper understanding of our universe.
It's a new window, what a telescope, into the world, and you shouldn't have preconceived notions
as to what you're going to see. Well, you can have a few, but you should be ready to be surprised.
I think that's the point, is because Andrew Jackson and his company are arguing, well, look,
you have definitely know what you're looking for. I mean, you think that's what we're looking for,
and if you see that, that's great, and if you don't see it, well you, but then already have
a preconceived notion of what they're looking for, which is the only way they can find it.
Yes. So that it is, as you say, inevitable the way they suffer from this problem.
Yes. So Roger, why not to finish? Why would you tell us, like if you would invite other
groups to make analysis, what do you think they should be looking for?
It was my bias point of view. Yeah, it was your bias point of view.
Well, I would say, look, you will see correlations for pretty well any galaxy, I mean,
maybe it's got to be a certain distance away in a certain size and all that, but like the ones that
they've already seen the correlations, and just take a time delay, that galaxy, what would the
time delay between the different detector speed for that galaxy, what would it be? And each of those,
you try and see if the noise is correlated. And is it correlated more for a galaxy or not?
I mean, nobody's done that analysis. I don't know, but anybody is, apart from the Covenhagen
people who have repeated what they, well, I do know actually. No, and that's what they were
urging people to do, right? Because one of my colleagues, Mrs. Christoff, was there. Oh, yeah,
you should say that, that's interesting too. And he looked to see if the Covenhagen analysis was
right. And he said, yes, we see the same effect. So it does seem that there is a signal in what
they call the noise, which is probably a real signal. Yeah, that's exciting. And I would say,
pretty well any galaxy, big enough, not too far, or I don't know exactly. I mean, I need more
parameters to see what I have to expect. I don't even know quite what to expect from my theory,
because there's some unknowns. But if they start to look, one could fix those unknowns.
Exactly. Well, that's what you want to learn from the experiment. And then, you know, you
want to have this interplay between theoretical predictions and then what you observe and go
back. So again, going back to the microscope or telescope, you would have some very rough idea
what to see in the microscopic world. And then you see things that you didn't expect. And then
you have to go and do some theory. You just have a relent and you saw these creatures. Oh my
God, that must have been a scary move. I guess I don't know what I would make if I did something
like this and I suddenly see something moving. It must be like a real shock. I guess so. But you
thought he didn't have any idea who it caused diseases. I think he just thought they were lovely
little creatures. You know what would be super scary? I think that's better than the other way
around. You put a telescope like that and then you see a big creature right out there, right?
This is nicer with a telescope, like going towards, yeah.
Yeah. Well, I think that's a bit of a lie. Yeah, I think so. No, no, no. I'm just saying that would
have happened. Like, you know, I think we're in love with it. It didn't. And it's more in the
microscopic world. Yeah. Okay, so I think we have some work to do. Yeah, I guess we do.
And Noah, I just wanted to thank you for doing this video with me.
My absolute pleasure.
That my son, Lea, will experiment in editing.
Oh, I see. Oh, that's what he does. I thought he was going to look at me.
I'm glad.
Get rid of your detectors and have a look at the sky.
Oh, well, we can do that.
I guess you need to work with him.
He's interested in doing some editing and design and things like that. So we let him see what he
does with this. Oh, great. Okay. Well, thank you. Thanks and see you soon. And if you want to make
some comments on other things you would like to hear about, just let us know and we can do a video on that.
