What's up, everybody? Welcome to another episode of Conversations with Tom. I am here with
Daniel Schmackdenberger. And dude, you were the guy that showed up on my feed when I started
researching the end of the world, which is a pretty fascinating thing to become known
for. And I'm super curious, how did you you you've touched so many different things from
the neurohacker hacker collective and self optimization, and actually creating businesses.
How did you end up getting so deep into civilizations and how they fall apart?
What a good civilization is and how to improve things in our world, I'd say was my interest
since I was young and kind of the center line. So how to improve.
How young are we talking?
Well, I was very fortunate to be homeschooled growing up and homeschooled in a way that's
closer to what people would call unschooling now, where I didn't have a fixed curriculum.
So I got to study what I wanted. And so seeing the things that seemed like the biggest problems
in the world and finding out why are these things like this was actually what got to
be in my curriculum. So now are were you taught by your parents or did they have give you
access to actual teachers?
My parents facilitated and sometimes I'd go to a public school or a private school for
a while, but they were very actively engaged in how I was processing the information. And
then other times finding tutors and other times just working with books. It was before
internet so I couldn't Wikipedia things, but we could certainly use books and encyclopedias
and what was their logic? Did they not like school? They didn't think it was going to
be a good education. What was the reasoning?
Yeah, they were kind of educational philosophers intuitively and had the sense that kids ask
lots of questions. They have a deep curiosity in school, mostly doesn't facilitate their
questions. And so when the kid asks, why is the sky blue and why is fire hot and what
are emotions and whatever questions they ask, they're actually very deep questions that
if you want to address, why is the sky blue? There's atmospheric science, there's understanding
the wavelengths of light, there's understanding the nature of our solar system and astronomy
and what a sun is. And then there's the neuroscience and optics and eyes. And there's like a lot
that goes into it that naturally starts to unfold that helps people understand a lot
of topics and also interconnected rather than fragmented way. If you follow the curiosity,
that most parents and also most teachers don't know how to answer those things. And so then
I was going to ask, how did your parents answer that? Like if my kids asked me and not that
I have kids, keep in mind, but if my kids were to ask me a question that I didn't know the
answer to, I'd be like, yeah, let's get you to public school real fast because I don't
want to keep answering these questions. So did one of your parents stay home?
Yeah, both of them worked to work from home as much as they could to be pretty available.
And if they didn't know the answer, then it was, let's go see how to figure that out.
And so that would be, you know, going to the library and pulling out cards to find the
right book, pulling up encyclopedias. Also, something even better was them asking me,
why do you think it might be? How do you think it might be? So my answer was not instantly
just defer to outside authority was to take the interest and facilitate my own thinking
on it, but then to not just stay there because the answer I come up with might be totally
gibberish, but to investigate. So it was facilitating interest and facilitating the process of learning
how to deepen the knowledge and deepen the interest as it goes. And of course, as you
learn some things, you become aware of how much other adjacent stuff that's interesting
you don't know is. And so if you do that, and you don't force the kid to focus on and
memorize stuff with fear of punishment that they have no interest in, then you don't break
their interest in life and you actually facilitate deep end interest and people tend to become
good at things they really care about.
That yeah, that is a powerful thing when I think about part of getting good is building
desire and if you can capitalize on something that you're already on fire for. And I've
heard you talk about this in the perspective of how you create that next civilization,
you likened it to an iPhone's like you don't have to convince people to get excited about
technology, like it works and it brings some benefit to your life. And so people just
adopt things that they're really into. I'm super curious. So you, I think you have a
brother, right? Or by coincidence, there's a guy on the board of one of your companies
with the exact same last name. Is it just the two of you or are there more? So what's
the age difference three years younger?
So how did your parents handle that? Was he just sort of forced to come up to your level?
Did they split it up and talking to one of you at one time and the other than another?
Like I said, they had kind of intuitions about things that were wrong with society that related
to how we developed humans. And that kind of was a sense of how to do education differently,
how to do parenting, how to do family differently. But it was very experimental. They actually
called our family a guinea pig for four of us and as an experiment. And it didn't have
the benefit of studying Montessori and Waldorf and lots of other systems that had figured
some things out. So there were a lot of mistakes that could have been prevented, but there
were also the benefit of they were in their own kind of authentic inquiry and interest.
It happened that my learning style and Nate Lee worked with what my parents knew how to
do better than my brothers did. And so he had a bit of a rougher go because I think they
expected his path would be more similar to mine. And it took a little while for them
to figure out that he had a very different set of interests and learning style. He ended
up excelling at entrepreneurialism and political activism and things that were not my areas
of focus once he kind of figured that out. Do you have kids? I don't. So that would have
been interesting to see like how you handle that. Have you given a thought to how the
way that you came up and the fact that it wasn't crushed out of you could be systematized
and could be something that could be rolled out? I thought about that quite a lot of course.
So what is that in terms of the ideal school system? What does that look like?
I think it's less to think about it as an ideal school system and as a civilization because
by the time the kid goes to school, they've already been profoundly imprinted, right? By
the time they're five or six years old and they're going to first grade or kindergarten
or wherever it is they start, they've already fully learned the language in which they think
and all of the ways that that language predisposes patterns of thought. They've already learned
the beginning of emotional dispositions and social values and lots of things. And then
obviously if the educational system has to prepare kids for the workforce, so we think
about economics as it is, then it has to do certain things that are not necessarily what
would make them the healthiest, happiest people if it's preparing them for a workforce. As
the workforce changes through technological automation and peak resource issues of the
planet and AI automation and other things like that, obviously the role of education
gets completely recontextualized. So instead if you were to ask, how would we redesign
civilization from scratch that included the thing we call education but also we mostly
evolved in small bands and villages where we didn't just have two parents that were
influencing us. We had a whole crew of people that we had pretty deep connections with,
sub-Dundar kind of connections. Is even the nuclear family within a very large city metropolis
where you don't know hardly anyone else but have interactions with lots of people and
then the mostly have huge numbers of superficial interactions via online social media platforms
like what does that do to develop humans? So this question of ontological design, we
build environments whether it's schools or economic systems in the nature of the incentive
of economics. As long as my ability to, as long as the forest I go and enjoy the forest
gives me no economic advantage but if I cut it down and commoditize it gives me a lot
of economic advantage, the economic system itself, the perverse incentive in the economic
system is conditioning value systems in people. And whoever does better at getting the value
systems that go along with the economic incentive system will end up getting more power within
the system and thus continuing to evolve the system in the direction that benefits them
and the other people do well with it. So if you think about it.
Let me ask you so that I can make sense of the worldview. So everything that gets designed
has a goal in mind. So when you first started talking I thought that your punchline is going
to be sort of happiness, health of the individual. Is that accurate or is it more the perpetuation
of the species? If you had to say a highest value, would it be that a happy and healthy
populace that, you know, like imagine the movie was it Children of Men where there are
no more kids and so population is basically the world is just ending because they're not
able to procreate anymore. But imagine that but it was like everybody was having a great
time right until the moment they died or a civilization where people are not exactly
loving life but we find a way to get in balance with resources and we're able to go on and
on and on which of those to you is better. I think you set it up to make it obvious that
those are both gibberish desires that a civilization that is in an enduring hell like.
Well, I won't go that far. I'm really trying to find the perfect way to ask a question where I
can find out if it's more meaningful to you to find a way to continue on. And so because I'm
looking for what to optimize for and you can optimize for continuation. You can optimize for
happiness. You obviously I would assume want to do both. But I'm trying to I find it it is very
edifying when you force people to force rank things so that you can't have sort of two number
ones because I I I now spend enough time in your world and sort of where you go. I know sort of
the the ending points of some of the arguments. But I'm super curious as to what is the the big
driver for you in terms of how you think about waking up in the morning and constructing a
civilization.
Optimization theory itself is one of the underlying problems. This is actually super important to
indulge me a moment here. Yeah. If we do the thing you call stack ranking which is an idea that
comes from computer science. If I think about computers and I'm stack ranking trying to optimize
things in a software system that software system is a complicated system as opposed to a complex
system. And I'm going to define those formerly the difference. The software and the hardware it
runs on didn't self organize. Right. We didn't get spontaneous self organization of hydrocarbons
into proto cells and cells. We got somebody did the lithography to make the computer chips. And
there's a blueprint for the hardware and a blueprint for the software. In a complicated system
you'll notice like this computer and the software doesn't repair itself. If it gets harmed it doesn't
self evolve and the phase space of all the things it can do are fully explicated. And it has formal
causation. If I hit this key this will happen necessary institution causation in complex systems
like biology. There isn't a blueprint. The genome isn't a blueprint. It's a generator function to
code new proteins under new environments where you can have it do things that it's never done before
if you expose it to a novel pathogen or a novel environment. Right. So a generator function and
a blueprint aren't the same thing. The in a in a complex system also it does self heal and self
repair. It does also self evolve. It's a it's different in type. So optimization theory from
complicated systems the metaphor where we thought our mind was a clock when we figured out clocks.
Before that Native Americans might have thought of the mind as an ecosystem. Right. But then we got
a clock now known the mind is a computer. So we pick whatever the metaphor that we're operating
with is but where the metaphors wrong. It really fuck stuff up. And so it can give you some very
partial insights and also some really dreadful differences. So the definition of a complex
system is that it has some emergent properties beyond what any complicated model of it assumes
that the complicated model doesn't show. So basically if I take a cell and I try to model it
right. So I try to make a software program for how that cell works. The cell will do some things
that that model doesn't do. And as I keep making the model better it'll keep doing some things
that the model doesn't do. That's what we call an emergent property. Right. So what that means is
if I make a model because the my model of reality isn't reality. That's the first verse of the Tao
Tai Ching. Right. The Tao that is speakable is not the eternal Tao. My model of the thing isn't
the actual thing. So if I think the model is the thing and then I try to optimize for the model
where the model and the thing are different. I actually destroy the real thing. Can you put
that into real world example. Yeah. I make a economic calculus. I make an economic system for
humans or these rational self serving agents and they follow specific supply and demand economic
models and laws. I can get more advanced things to be able to look at the laws of how they'll do
with things like derivative black schools whatever but they're basically simple mathematical laws
and say here's how we optimize maximum productivity and generativity for everyone and they don't
work. Right. Like they kind of work and then they also lead to environmental destruction which
wasn't part of the metric set. So this is where I'm why I'm trying to get you to stack ranked
things which is interesting that for you that's where it breaks down for me to understand what
you mean when you say it doesn't work. I have to understand what you're trying to optimize for. So
once I understand because I in the beginning when I first started diving into you I thought OK
this is about optimizing for what all sort of round to human well being but I think there's an
important caveat in there which to you it is sort of beyond critical and I think the whole meaning
and purpose for you is that as long as it is not a hell that continuation is is a critical thing
that you that is sort of behind every word that you say but I'm not sure I'm interpreting that
right. OK. So let's say that we're maximizing for subjective happiness decoupled from objective
measures and so we're going to find some types of states that we can subjectively report on. Well
then the matrix might actually be the best way to optimize for it. Right. Disconnect from any kind
of objective reality outside of brain stimulus and just brain stimulate the fuck out of the dopamine
urgent response and say great we optimize for human happiness and I don't think anyone actually
thinks that's a maximally meaningful world or if we say maximize for the happiness at the individual
level. Well some individuals might be sadists and really get off on hurting lots of other things. If
we say maximize for continuance a continuance that is really shitty. It's like why. What is meaningful
about life that you would want to have continued. So what you're what I hear that you're trying to
ask is what is fundamentally meaningful. What is if we cannot. I won't use the word optimize but if
we can act in ways that benefit different things we can say optimize. But what you're going to end
up seeing is that it's not optimizing a single metric. Let me let me actually make that clear.
Let's say that I value the life of rhinos and I don't want them to go extinct. And then I also
value the life of coral and I don't want it to go extinct. I also value kids that I don't want to
starve in the third world and I also value subjective happiness of poets. Now how many dead
rhinos are worth how much dead coral are worth how many dead kids are worth how much lack of
happiness are worth how many tons of CO2. How do I commensurate those metrics to then be able to say
what my optimization algorithm is going to optimize for. I have to do some kind of waiting. And then
I say well but in the context where the rhinos get below a certain number they're worth more but
then when they get above a certain number they get oh but then I didn't even account for all
the things these soil microbes without which everything dies and I didn't even account for them
in this is now I got to bring soil microbes into it. And then I didn't account for the fact that
subjective reporting will have these biases or miss these things or orient towards addiction. So
whatever my optimization set is there will be things that matter that are outside of it that I
have to continuously bring in. So the optimization is for the evolutionary integrity of the whole or
wholeness itself which is different than how we think of theory of optimization. So do we care
about people's subjective experience. Yes we also care about objective metrics of the quality of
their life like longevity and physical health and things like that. Yes also care about that. Do
they correlate one for one. No there are some very happy people who are crippled and there are
some very physically able people who are miserable. There are some people who are happy who make other
people miserable. And so and do we care about just individual quality of life or also the
relationships. What about happiness versus evolutionary rate. What if we could be happy but
stagnate versus evolve quite quickly but never enjoy the things we were evolving to. And we all
have this in our own life right. Like if do I want to be bettering myself but in a way where I'm
bettering myself because of the driver that I'm a piece of shit who's never enough so I always have
to get better but I never actually enjoy any of it. Or do I accept myself in a way that makes me
complacent. Well obviously neither of those. I want to enjoy what is fully and have my love of
life have me want to keep growing not because of a dysfunctional driver right. So I'm optimizing for
if anything the product of the dialectic of my experience of life now and my ability to experience
life more deeply into the future. Now if I take both sides I say I want to be able to enjoy the
beauty of life as fully as I can now. I also want to be able to add to the beauty of life for
other people. I also want to deepen my capacity to experience the beauty of life and add to it.
Being doing and becoming. And then you say how do we optimize for a virtuous cycle between the
modes of being doing becoming individually and collectively. Now we start to get in the right
direction. So basically this shit is complicated. So when I think about. So you. I don't know how much
you think of yourself as being tied to game B but certainly your name comes up a lot with this whole
idea of game B. It'd be great if you can quickly sort of break down what game A is what game B is
and then what I find interesting is OK. Can what one it do we believe it to be conceivable that we
can actually construct realistically game B by putting systems or whatever it is it's going to be
in place there. But first I think people have to understand what it is and then we can go down the
road of that conversation. So if you don't mind really fast what's game A what's game B.
The term game B was coined by Jordan Hall and the Weinsteins and Jim Rutt and a number of other
people that were brought together at Senefe Institute back in the day to think about a new
civilization that had fundamentally new and better characteristics. And so in contra distinction to
the idea that this thing which is obviously the U.S. civilization today and a hundred years ago in
the U.S. versus Chinese civilization are different but they're all part of a meta system that has
certain system dispositions like environmental destruction is happening across the whole thing.
Wealth inequality is happening across the whole thing. So game A is basically the idea of game
theory which is individual people individual corporations individual races nations whatever
competing against each other in ways that maximize their benefit as much as they can even if it harms
or externalizes harm to other players or the commons. So roughly game A is the civilization
that emerges dominated by game theory game which is basically what we're living in right.
And there is a recognition and I wasn't part of that crew. I made friends with them after they
actually disbanded that thing and then it kind of recycled and I was working on similar things in
a different context. So game B is the idea. What would the game be. What would the kind of game
dynamics or how people show up in play of a game that doesn't orient toward self termination.
So we'd have to unpack about why we would say game A doesn't intrinsically self terminate. What
are the properties about it to say what would categorical solutions to those look like. Yeah.
So I don't know. I'll answer the question at least as I understand it. Basically you have a world
with finite resources where you are incentivized. So whaling is a great example I've heard you use
before. If you capture that whale then you can sell it. You can monetize it. If you it has basically
value to take it out of the ocean has zero value in the ocean. And even if you were to say no no
no I want to live in the world where the whale stays in the ocean. There's somebody else who goes
huh all right motherfucker I'm going to go get the whale then. So now it's like you're going to lose
the whale anyway. So you might as well be the one that takes it. And in a world of infinite
resources you could actually get away with that. But in a world of finite resources as you say it
ends itself eventually. So you will run out of resources specifically because it's not that me
seeing the whale in the ocean doesn't provide any value to me that I call value. I might feel
a sense of all seeing it right. I might feel a sense of interconnectedness or beauty or whatever
it is. But that doesn't increase my game theory at a capacity to do anything. I can't extract and
exchange that value that experiential value. But if I kill the whale and I sell it as meat and I get
that money that I can then go buy weapons or building materials or employ people with that
actually increases my power. So there are kinds of value that are extractable and exchangeable
extractable accumulatable exchangeable that increase power. And there are types of value
that are appreciatable but don't increase power. So those who orient to the power increasing value
end up getting more power and then dominating the system dynamics. So then that creates a race to
do that thing because like you said if I don't kill the whale I am not protecting the whale
because somebody else is going to kill the whale. Now those guys might actually be my enemies and
use that increased economic ability because they're going to feed more people their population is
going to grow and then they're going to come kill us in war. So actually for my own security not only
do I have to now kill the whale I have to race to get them faster than that guy because now we're
in a growth race which also means I'm going to advance wailing technologies to be able to take
way more than I need grow my population base start exporting to other population bases so that I can
get the optionality of money to build other kinds of things with. And so what we end up giving is
being able to see the industrialized fishing mechanisms that we have operating today that
can fish more fish in a single net than maybe all of human history could in a year you know at
previous points of human history and it's like the that kind of arms race multiplied by the
ability to keep increasing the tech and when everybody increases the tech whether it's military
tech you build an AI weapon I have to build AI weapons and counter AI weapons or I lose by default
and then I have to try to get an advantage on you because you probably have some advantage
you're trying to get the secrets I have to spy on you I have to lie to your spies and hide the
stuff and I have to try to keep advancing it but when you're advancing your weaponry and so am I
and I'm advancing it relative to you you're advancing on the base of what exists you get a
compounding curve which is an exponential curve and we've only recently started to get to the
verticalizing part of that curve it started to go steep with the industrial revolution
and then it started to go very steep with the information kind of revolution so we're just
in that phase of what has really been a process that started since stone tools it was just a very
slow curve in the stone tools thing for a long time now it is in the quickly verticalizing
so the thing is when you look in nature you see well animals compete they don't increase their
competitive capacity rapidly or irrespective of each other right the tiger can't just become
way better at hunting it has a pretty fixed killing capacity and it can only get better
through natural selection which is a pretty slow process but the key is that it's a slow process
that is evenly distributed across the whole forest because the things that lead to gene
mutation in the tiger also lead to gene mutation in the deer and a slightly faster tiger that eats
the slightly slower deers makes the better genes the faster genes in the deer is inbreed together
and so everything steps up together very slowly in the whole environment does what happened with
stone tools is humans were able to increase our predative capacity way faster than the environment
could increase its resilience to it and so we could start extincting species and devastating
whole environments turning them to desert and moving on that was the beginning of something
very different so when we think of social Darwinism where we try to model ourselves as apex predators
we're just not fucking apex predators apex predator theory doesn't apply because in orca can kill
a tuna at a time and it misses most of the time we can pull up a hundred thousand of them in a
fishing net at once and so since the orca can't destroy it whole ecosystems and we can if we
keep modeling ourselves with apex predator theory and having to exponentially increase our
destructive capacity exponential destruction whether in the form of extraction pollution or
military destruction or disinformation when you start getting into the space of being able to
win through information warfare ends up destroying the commons so one thing i want to i want to put
a fine point on that you just said that i i've heard you say this before and i've missed until
just now is what's causing that ever escalation is because you're doing that in concert with
people who are essentially your enemies so like with ai it it almost certainly will be a winner
take all game because if somebody can beat you by a month and for a computer that's like a hundred
years worth of learning um you can see how just being the first is they're going to be the victor
and so now you've got the sort of ever escalating desire to either protect yourself or to monetize
and thusly the tragedy of the commons um so this is part of the reason that i was trying to figure
out sort of what you value most because for me everything comes down to if you want if you want
to build a business i will speak in those terms which i understand very well you have to have a
goal you have to know what you're trying to accomplish and the clearer the goal the more
likely you are to hit it and if you don't have a clear goal then you're just sort of steering by a
vague sense of what you want to accomplish and it's going to become very difficult but there are
what i call the physics of being human and the what i'm obsessed with is humans are a certain
kind of way there you're having a biological experience your brain is a certain way it processes
data in a certain way and whatever you do has to align with the reality of what humans are like and so
so going to game b and thinking about constructing that and building something it's like when you
were describing how interconnected everything is how complicated it is um it really gives me pause
about like thinking about Jesus man to really do something it is going to be it's going to be really
fucking difficult and when i when i go back through and look at the people that were a part of the
game a game b conversation it's like i'll be very interested to see if ideas keep coming out and
they're iterative and we find a way to actually migrate to an entirely new approach i mean it
would be a new financial system it would be new architecture at every conceivable level of society
and my first question is what are we aiming at like what what is it that were i i want to say
optimize but i know that that um trips something that i don't fully understand yet but what are we
steering towards i can give you a very concrete set of examples that will make this make more sense
let's take covid and say when we're the cdc or the white house or the wh or whatever institutions
are trying to respond competently to it what should our goal be what are we trying to optimize for
well let's say we pick the goal of optimizing for the least deaths from covid
okay so we will definitely institute quarantines and contact tracing and a bunch of things that
will decrease total transmission well there's a chunk of that that we did that led to the
breakdown of the supply chains for food and we're still in the middle of that rolling catastrophe
and the news cycle has moved on to other parts of the rolling catastrophe so we aren't paying
attention to it but when we wanted to stop travel because the virus can travel with stuff right
well that meant that we stopped the the shipment of pesticides to areas that completely depend
upon pesticides for their agriculture so northern africa and um parts of the middle east got covered
when the worst locusts in recent history because they didn't have pesticides and they lost a huge
amount of crop we stopped the flow of fertilizer to places in india and other areas that make the
food supply for hundreds of millions of people and they lost crops we also stopped the ability to
ship food from where they were to where they need to get so huge amounts of them just rotted we were
actually culling animals right killing thousands of pigs and millions of chickens and whatever
when people are going hungry in other parts of the world because we couldn't send them to mcdonald's
if people weren't going to mcdonald's we didn't know how to supply chain route them on the other
side and so we just were dealing with no change in demand no change in supply and a complete break
of the food system right now we damaged the food system in a way that pertains to about two billion
people. COVID could have never killed that many people so if we're optimizing for don't
that like the least people died from COVID we can destroy the world or we
so that's the example of what i'd call a second order effect right the it wasn't the or an unintended
consequence or an externality the the solution that we implemented to a narrowly defined problem
or optimization goal caused a worse problem so when we define our goals in very narrow ways
like make maximum amount of money from the thing i can do the whaling and destroy the ocean right
but is that what you hear me saying because i'm not i i'm not saying it needs to be narrowly
defined i'm saying what is like what is that as as somebody who is really fucking thoughtful
about this topic how do you think about those second order consequences third order consequences
like that crazy biome of interconnected things now now that how do we think about the interconnectedness
how do we think about not one thing that matters but all the things and the relationships between
them and then think about how to make not just individual choices but whole complexes of choices
that benefit all those things and the relationships is how we start to think about it properly and
it's a much higher level of complexity of thinking so when i think about uh covid goal think okay
well we want to minimize the total number of covid related deaths all right but
there are people who can die and i mean there are people who can get it and not die but have
permanent disabilities in terms of damage to heart or lung or kidneys or whatever we'd also
like to do something with that preventing icu overwhelm was actually a really critical goal
before prevent total number of deaths because the death spike would go up radically so you have to
think about upstream ones well downstream ones but then we start to think about okay let's make
sure that in doing that we don't damage other things significantly so when people are on quarantine
how much does domestic violence go up what happens to addiction patterns for kids who don't have school
and just have six months of solid screen time what happens to an economy where we you have 40 million
jobs that go that are lost now we see a lot of violence we always see more violence whether it
was systemic racism as the trigger or other triggers when we always need more violence when
people are out of work yeah right so you aren't being met by a system they don't stay complacent
with the system that's failing so if you think of this as like four or five dimensional chess like
where where is the human animals capacity to deal with this like are we actually going to be able
to get people to think in that many ways we're already failing to do it with covid do you think
that that is when i go back to the physics of being human i begin my hypothesis is i'm not sure
i'm not sure that we'll be able to i take a i take a very optimistic view of most things but on that
one who building a brand new civilization without people first having to suffer a level of intolerability
seems tough seems tough to get them to to believe the things that they would have to do to leave
the whale in the ocean or whatever you know example we're going to use um do you have thoughts around
how we give a simple enough narrative that people can latch on and understand okay cool i get what
we have to do here for the most part we aren't even trying to think about second or third order
effects currently like it's not even a thing we try to do do you think nobody's thinking about it
or the people aren't listening because it's not sexy like when i think about what's going on right
now so with everything that was shaking down with um the death of george floyd and how everything
sparked off that i started like really looking into i didn't want to just say some bullshit to
say bullshit like i wanted to actually understand like really truly what's going on so i end up
seeing this discussion about the difference between martin luther king jr and malcom x and
martin luther king jr had a meta narrative which was religion it was about unity
but he was measured and i mean he was very passionate obviously when he spoke but it was
like this sort of calming soothing thing about bringing people together whereas malcom x was
black power there was energy there was aggression it was tapping into that anger that was right there
below the surface there was nothing counterintuitive about it and so he was able to really get people
motivated and rallied and i thought that's interesting like when you think about human animus
there's something that pisses you off and it gives you the energy i mean literally the world was
burning last week and you gave people just a little bit of a justification to tap into that
there is something about tapping into that aggression that level of animation there's an
intoxication to rage and when you can even just nudge people a little bit into that you get that
so my thing is i hear people talking you're talking about this crazy eloquently but is it giving people
that sexy level of animation to to to get visceral to tap into something that's aggressive and and
that feels so powerful i think about the house that i'm in right now it probably took about a year
to build and i could take it down with a record ball in minutes or fire it takes 20 plus years to
grow an adult human i can kill him in a second it's easier to break shit and the motivational
complexes that break shit and the motivational complexes that figure out how to build complex
things aren't the same so yes there's power in can you give me a little bit about what the motivations
are you you've talked very well about human motivations status seeking like earlier when
you mentioned power i almost stopped you because i wanted you to actually define what is power
why do we give a shit i think it would help people it would help me i want to understand
what is the difference specifically in those motivation types
i can't stay enraged for all that long and a certain amount of time i can stay enraged long
enough to break this house but i couldn't stay enraged long enough for that to be the motivation
to build it that's fucking yeah and the rage wouldn't be the right frame of mind for me to
learn the structural engineering to make the blueprints or to try to evolve metallurgy to be
able to make bigger buildings that had better trusses that requires a very different frame of
mind that is doing planning over a longer period of time and for the most part the limbic process
you're describing and the prefrontal process i'm describing are inversely proportional in the brain
the degree to which you're in one is the degree to which you are mostly not accessing the other
and so what kind of motives are useful for what kind of goals is an important question
and to the degree that we want to build things that have complexity long term we have to be
able to access the places of our mind and capabilities that can think long term and
complexity can we nudge people in a direction
okay i that's actually a great question that i want to take in a slightly different place
can we nudge people in a direction it's a very interesting question which is
so who is the we that would be doing the nudging and who is the people that
some we is saying we want to influence them we want to we want them to think and feel
differently and change their behaviors for some goals we have that they may not have
can how can we change their goals and change their behavior and manipulate their emotions
you do you want me to answer that question
sure so this is uh exactly what i have given my life to which is um i for
a long time i tried to help my mother change and my mother smoked my entire life morbidly
obese she's amazing and i want her to live as long as humanly possible and i as i say you can
lead a horse water but you can't make them drink and then people say folks i'm making them thirsty
and i'm like oh my god this is all amazing yes i just need to make my mom thirsty this is going
to be amazing make her want change and i realized i can't and now it may be that i just suck and
i'm not able to find that thing in her so it got me obsessed so i people that are that have
followed me will have heard this many times forgive me but um i really i had at my last
company had a thousand employees group hard as hell in the inner cities like fuck crazy shit
and shot my sister shot in the heart with an ak-47 in my front yard i held my stepfather
while he bled to death from a gunshot wound to the head another kid hit under a car well his
best friend had to hold his intestines in from a point blank uh rain shotgun blast i mean it's just
story after story after story is insane so i started thinking okay how do i help them make
change some people you can just tell them think like this act like this they do it it's radically
transformative it opens up avenues of learning and growth and and it's amazing but i'll say
that's about two percent of people at least with my skill level 98 percent do not they hear the
information they may even get excited about it might be spiritual entertainment but they don't
do anything and so over the course of a month like i remember so many of them would show up to a
book club not put on by me put on by other people they would get amped up but then they
wouldn't read the books they'd stop showing up so it was just like it it it's just so short-lived
so i started asking myself the question no bullshit what would it take to give somebody a growth
mindset even if they were antagonistic to a growth mindset and i thought okay if i can solve for that
which by the way i have not but if i can solve for that somebody who doesn't want to change not only
doesn't they're not apathetic they're actively opposed to changing if i can find the magic
sequence of things of words of whatever to get that person to be like oh my god like i can actually
do something i can learn i can express myself whatever but now i'm moving in a positive
direction where before i was moving in a negative direction so it is i have come to the conclusion
with my desires and skill set that storytelling is the way to do that so i think a lot about
nudging people like how much can you shift the pop culture narrative in a non-sinister way
but to have a kid so the more i looked into it the more i realized yo i need to hit kids at
the age of imprinting i'm not talented enough to do this with adults that are truly antagonistic
but if i can actually get somebody who is at that stage where they're a sponge they're drinking
things in and i can introduce them to characters ideas thoughts the way that yoda led me to the
dao djing which i've heard you talk a lot about i became obsessed i self identified as a daoist
but all because of yoda so it was like when i read the first page of the dao djing i was like oh
my god this is yoda so it was like i was so instantly connected to it so that has given
me that obsession to be like maybe you really can nudge people like maybe you really can
plant these ideas at the right time and things from there will blossom i don't know if i'm
high on my own supply or if that's actually real but it gives me so much hope that that's why i'm
keen so i am the the sort of we of like i'm well intended but maybe there's a second or third
order consequence and i'm about to fuck everybody up i i'm very open to that but well intentioned
the goal is to give an what i think of as an even playing field i'm a game aid person i'm super open
i want somebody to show me there's a better way but i'm i'm sort of locked in game makes
i don't know any better i'm i'm again happy to admit that that's just part of an evolution
and i'm stuck there but i'm i'm at game aid trying to find a way to get more people to
play game a well in a way that is supportive and uplifting to other people but that is the
we and the people that are antagonistic are the they that i'm trying to nudge in a positive
direction through story do you think the chinese communist party wants to nudge the worldview of
people in the us in particular directions yes through influencing media and what happens
to social media yes do you think russia does yes iran turkey north korea do you think they all
want another i would assume you study project mockingbird which was when the cia start influencing
hollywood was when hollywood started to become a very powerful force and it's like oh shit we need
to make sure these memes do the right things and predispose particularly when the counterculture
movements started to take off and they were parts of it that were dangerous to us interest because
people protesting against vietnam and some of those ideas needed to be shifted
so how do we use emotionally compelling things that use narrative because our evolutionary
biology works with story well to be able to control humans for the purposes that we care about
is a very ancient story we just have much better tools to do it now and i would say that narrative
warfare the war between controlling what people get emotionally riled up about so that they serve
an agenda of whoever it is that's creating the narrative warfare and they don't even realize
it and think it's their own agenda because they're being nudged narrative warfare and
the medic warfare and info warfare is the brunt of the unconventional warfare happening in the world
i would say that it's fair to say that today and this is easier for people to hear today than it
would have been three months ago because cities are on fire in the places where we didn't expect
cities to be on fire and because the upcoming election in the us currently stands that no
matter who gets elected a solid third of the population will think it was stolen the democrats
are freaked out by that by the way stealing it and the trump supporters are set up to think the
dems are trying to steal it so whether anyone steals it or not a third of the population will
think it was stolen so what the fuck happens from that so either you get massive violence
or if you don't get massive violence those who want to steal elections now know fully that
they can with no repercussions and how do we actually create the confidence both in the
integrity of the elections and everyone knowing it when the information landscape is as fractured
and the narrative landscape is as fractured as it is okay so what i would say is that we are in
world war three currently that's a bold statement it's not a kinetic war meaning bullets it's an
unconventional war have go go read the doctrines on unrestricted warfare that uh chinese communist
party and pl a published or unconventional warfare that us published 99% of war isn't kinetic
it's economic warfare it's narrative and info warfare it's cyber warfare it's political and
diplomatic and supply chain um and trade warfare and kinetic is kind of the last part that we'll
back it up kinetic used to be a bigger percentage of the story than it is now because we didn't
have powerful cyber attacks and we couldn't do narrative warfare as powerful as we can now because
social media is just fucking amazing for being able to control mines um detour on that social media
will control mines and move people into war even with no one wanting it to as a okay
so if you haven't had uh tristan harris on the show or discussed with him the issues around
facebook algorithms and twitter and uh tiktok is even worse you should but i'll do the very
brief version here you on facebook the total amount of info published on facebook no one
could ever possibly look at so your news feed you can scroll for a long time and not see it all
and it represents almost no percentage of what's on facebook so when you see facebook and when i
see facebook we think we're seeing the world we're not seeing the world we're seeing a very
carefully curated ai algorithm curated world now facebook wants to expose you up front to
enough of the things to see your likes and see your hover patterns of your mouse because once
your mouse is hovered enough and once you've liked a couple hundred things it can predict what
you will like better than your spouse can and it's important to understand that the kind of
ai's that are optimizing the social algorithms are better than the ai's that beat gary kasparovic
chess yeah that's nuts and he's so much better at chess than you are at anything at controlling
online right and he knew he was at war and you don't even know when you're going on facebook
that it's not just a tool that you're using it's an agent that wants to control you that's using you
and so what happens is its desire is to maximize the knowledge about you that it can sell to marketers
and to maximize your time on site that it can sell as attention to marketers
so you will spend more time on site when your limbic system gets hijacked than when
your prefrontal cortex that remembers your goals and that you don't want to spend that
much fucking time on facebook stays engaged so this stuff that scares you and enrages you
and elicits your greed and your horniness will make you spend more time on site
than the things that make you think complexly about stuff and so what ends up happening is people
whatever it is that would emotionally get them which appeal to their current biases is what they
get more of and they get driven in more extreme directions in all directions so the right gets
more right the left gets more left and you get both antifas and doggaloo's coming out of it
as the without any political goal at all really fast i've heard people say boogaloo i don't know
what it means a particular alt-right group that identifies accelerationists that want civil war
in the us that believe they're ready that they'll win that it's eminent and so they want to accelerate
the movement towards civil war to get on with rebuilding the country why are they called boogaloo's
long story there's a bunch of names boogaloo's hawaiian shirts started as big igloo boys but
um memes coming out of 4chan okay but they go from 4chan to facebook now um so it's important
to understand that this algorithm that's happening on facebook it's also happening on twitter and
instagram and tiktok and youtube why'd you say that tiktok is the worst
as the social media platforms evolve they're evolving to be able to appeal to younger audiences
more effectively in competing against the other one so whatever is the most addictive that gets
them to engage the most is what it gets optimized for on the supply side right if i have an mba
and i'm running a company i know that i want to maximize the lifetime revenue of a customer
i also want to maximize the total number of customers so multiple the number of customers
multiplied by lifetime revenue is my desire so on the supply side there's nothing that would be
better for me than addiction of my customers to my product and then being able to make the
widest population addicted possible right and this doesn't just happen with social media this
happened with fast food fast food is extract the most addictive things from food from an evolutionary
perspective salt fat sugar mix them together in the right combinations and with palatability
remove all the nutrients so that it doesn't even fill you up so you keep eating it and
you you have what's called a hypernormal stimuli right you get a bigger dopamine hit from that
than you ever would from a salad and then the salad doesn't you get no joy from where you would
have before because you're actually desensitizing to normal stimuli through normalizing hypernormal
stimuli which is why when you watch enough porn you can't eroticize with normal women right and so
porn and fast food and social media and are all basically optimizing towards hypernormal stimuli
because from a supply side it makes me more money i maximize lifetime revenue and the people have to
keep coming and getting hit and what will appeal to everybody well social media knows that we're
social primates and that we're lonely and that what we want to spend all our time doing is looking
at other people's faces and like seeing other people and engaging and yet real interactions are
vulnerable and difficult so to be able to take the part of the interaction which is where i get a
like on the thing i posted and i get to see the photoshop versions of their faces and then other
limbic hijacks and be able to optimize for that remove all the nutrients of actual authentic human
interaction that's what you get and so each of the new platforms that has to emerge in the presence
of the existing platforms has to offer some new hypernormal stimuli yeah the social media is is
something that so it's weird because i've built my business around social media if you'll grant me
i guess that youtube falls into the social media category which is my primary focus but that's
rapidly become the only one that i really spend a lot of time on as just an individual
there is something about the way that it the the endless scrolling like if i do it enough
when i fall asleep i have this sense of like motion almost but like a very disquieting sense of
motion almost like a fever dream if you've ever had a fever dream that just fucking loops so i was
oh man i can't i can't keep doing this so yeah that the what is happening to
minds especially of kids with the change in social media like i'm i'm always wary of being like
you know the old funny daddy who like oh kids today but when i the thing that freaks me out i
want you to imagine a world with vr porn and a device that moves in conjunction with what you're
seeing in the vr porn that of course is affixed to the more sensitive bits that you have and when
i think about i i'm not kidding daniel i wouldn't have graduated high school certainly not with a
gpa that i did i i if my parents left i would have had that out so fast like the when you can
construct different people different partners every time that you go in like exaggerate um
different features like uh peak shift which i'm sure is something that you know about
like you can just peak shift something until it is dysmorphic and your your brain is actually
wiring to that thing and when i think about like one of the recommendations that i have for couples
if you want like so my wife and i've been together almost 20 years and my recommendation to couples
is always yo you need to have more sex i can just tell you right now like if you want a good long
lasting relationship the neurochemistry that cocktail that you get from intimacy is crazy
but if you've been living in a vr world that is like your brain has wired to it it is normalized
to it and then so that was the first one that i sort of put my finger on it was like oh i'm glad
i don't have kids because that one really fucking scares me like hey parents i used to joke like all
the time with people that i knew that had kids like man when your kid's 14 this shit is going to get
weird like where technology is going it is going to get weird and if you don't think
that there are repercussions for that like man it is that one's worrisome but now as i back into
just social media in general and what what it must be like to be 12 or 13 i remember as a kid if
you were going to get um sort of gossip bullied they might spray paint something on the bridge
that we all drove under to get to school and that was like the height of oh man like you just got
burned but now that people can create an anonymous account and gang up on somebody at the school
that is so gnarly have you ever come across the term stochastic terrorism never so if you read
sun sue or you read the 36 stratagems or any kind of text on military theory and it doesn't
have to be chinese can be anywhere uh get the enemy to weaken himself is always one of the
high principles and so if you can see that there's internal dissent within a people or a culture
or corporation or whatever and you can increase that internal dissent great right if the goal
is to be able to win game a competitively relative to them because you're competing for the same
scarce resources whether it's global control or actual physical resources or whatever else
so stochastic terrorism you've got groups of people who are very disaffected who find each
other online in a four-chan group or an eight-chan group or in a facebook group or in a chat room
of various kinds and talk about um hating blacks or hating whites or hating police or hating whatever
it is or hating the kids at school well if i am a state actor or a non-state actor or a non-state
actor jihad terrorist or whatever i can make fake sock puppet accounts go in there and egg them on
right share more stuff that pisses them off and gets them upset tell them what a hero they'll
be if they do it and it's what we call stochastic terrorism because i don't know exactly who will
do what harm at what point but i'm increasing the statistical likelihood that more people will do more
harm and if the goal is to be able to delegitimize the enemy or weaken them or whatever that's so
easy right that's so easy that never used to be easy like that as easy as that is it's also easy
for any intelligence agency to just watch where the groups of people that are talking about stuff are
and be able to share more interesting stuff to see what people are thinking as honeypots for
information sharing so the thing about the arms race is that the tools escalate right but we don't
have even distribution of the use of those tools and as a result the total asymmetries get more
severe and the whole idea that this increased tech that right now i have a computer that gives me
access to more information than presidents had 10 years ago if i know how to use google searches
and that my phone has super computing power if i use amazon cloud or that's mostly just silly
because yes it's true that that tech has decentralized capacity in a way but nobody's
using their phone to use amazon cloud for super computing capacities to do what groups do with
supercomputers or not that many people are using that they're just fucking scrolling facebook and
getting their mind hijacked and thinking they believe things that they that they wouldn't believe
otherwise right or thinking or having emotions or whatever where they're being nudged for agendas
other than what is good for them or and so when there's so much information right oh these bricks
showed up in the protest well they were put there by the cops to uh incite people to riot so the
cops could use violence now they were put there by the far right and to blame on antifa no they
were really put there by antifa no they were put there by soros they were put there by chinese agents
they were put there by organized crime they were how does it fucking make sense of it right
look at your speed and depending upon who you've curated you get one of those things if you try
to do a good job you'll get all of them you'll get overwhelmed in bail right so either you'll get
limbically and cognitively hijacked into nonsense and be certain that it's true and be willing to
go take that enraged action on it or you'll just be overwhelmed have no idea um so when there's so
much info and so much dis info and there's so much noise and so little signal but the signal
there is is disaggregated i don't have all the signal in a place well aggregated for actionable
intel access to info isn't what empowers you the ability to info process to parse the signal from
the noise aggregate the signal have actionable intel well people don't really have that equally
if you think about a top tier quantitative hedge fund and their ability to do ai empowered
high speed trading with information that comes from lots of private intelligence agencies and
big data analysis and the ability to front run other large ones with algorithmic warfare in dark
pools on derivatives compared to your ability to understand the market and try to invest we're
talking about so many orders of magnitude difference that you have no ability at all to play their
game when i hear ray dahlio talk about that and he's like look you're trying to to play a game
that i'm spending hundreds of millions of dollars to play and you can't win and he i i've met him a
couple times and he seems like sincere like i really think he's trying to keep people from putting
their hand on the stove and getting burned but it's like he has that peak behind the curtain of
just the like you said that that description he's living so my question becomes how are you making
sense of all this like you're a just a ridiculously intelligent person you can obviously process data
very very well so the average person maybe can't do exactly what you do but i think it would be
edifying to hear what you do i would love to say things the average person can do perfect
average person is a term that doesn't actually make any sense to me i don't know average people
but something that anyone can start doing progressively more if they want to to understand
the world better and the preface for that is if my map is wrong and i'm trying to navigate
i'm not going to get good results right so i my ability to make good choices is depends upon
my values what i think is a good choice which you were asking about earlier but also depends upon
what i think the actual reality is in the state of play and then what i think the effects of
particular actions will be does it do the thing i want does it invoke a counter response of the
other side that is that i'm trying to do something against it's more intense does it create second
and third order effects that are worse so like strategy 101 if you aren't factoring counter
response right you have a goal you whether it's black lives matter or it's climate change whatever
if you recognize that your goal is not shared by everyone and you aren't factoring counter response
you aren't doing strategy you're just being emotionally hijacked into playing a game for
reasons you don't even understand if you aren't factoring second and third order consequences
you're probably making the world worse and so that all means you need to slow the fuck down
now this doesn't mean inaction it means the possibility of effective action now feeling
effective and being effective aren't the same thing truth and so people have to get off the
addiction of wanting to feel effective and actually step back and say wait wait do i even
know where what i'm going towards do i understand the lay of the land do i understand the various
forces and do i have a path that makes any sense at all so our ability to do choice making well
depends on our ability to sense make well which is why controlling people sense making is the
heart of the war that's happening and the forces that are so this is an important thing in terms
of narrative and info warfare when you ask what is power power in a game a sense is power over other
people and there's a lot of ways of getting it some are more evil than others slavery is a particularly
bad example but the economic servitude of i can employ you and when i'm employing you you are
an extension of my will you are no longer doing your own will that's still an example of how do
i get power over people to enhance some goal that i have right and when we look at left right it's
power of that political party to control as many people as possible to get them to vote away
so there's the power over the left and right against each other and their power over their basis
to then be able to have power as a nation over other nations and of classes over other classes
and those types of things right because ultimately if i didn't have other people that could do
shit on my behalf i couldn't do that much stuff like if i have to make everything with my own
hands i can't do that much stuff so if i want to do more stuff i'm looking at how do i get
more people to be able to do that okay so when we start to realize that
rather than try to control people's behaviors directly influencing what they feel and what they
think and what groups they're engaging in that will ongoingly use group think to affect what they
think and feel is a much more powerful way than the brunt of the warfare of the power game becomes
control the hearts and minds of people now when you're talking about making more yodas
you aren't trying to control the hearts and minds of people to do your bidding you're trying to say
how do i nudge them in a direction where they will become more sovereign and self determining as
opposed to become more part of my in group so what i would say is that that is trying to use
the tools of power to actually make the game of power less pathological which is a legitimate
thing to do and a good thing to do typically the tools of power if if i have asymmetric power over
somebody else and i get a lot of benefit from that i have the capacity because of that asymmetric
power to continue to get more of it and i have the motive to so um any business is not just focused
on providing the thing they provide but increasing their capacity to do stuff and some places that
will be omnipositive and in some places it will be driving externalities i we celebrate because
we just cornered the market which mean we drove a lot of people out of business and they can't
feed their kids and we manufactured demand for people to want shit that they didn't want before
that doesn't actually make them happier now i'm following all of your logic but how do people
employ this to actually make sense that makes sense yes okay
understanding these things already will help
that's why i was starting to bring it up when you understand more about
that the as much more capacity as the top level economic players have than you the top level
narrative players and information players also do and they're engaging in that and you realize that
people's minds are the battlefield and also the treasure that is trying to be achieved and also
the weapons right and so it's important to be like oh wait to what degree am i a sovereign
self-determining agent to what degree am i thinking i'm a sovereign self-determining agent
that is actually being influenced in ways i don't even recognize dude this is scary man
this is like some your mind has been hijacked and you are now acting in the interest of somebody
else i don't know why but that just really hit me as you were explaining that like are my ideas my
own um there was a band back in the 80s called creams rike and they were the first people that
really got me to think uh critically so i i definitely owe them a debt of gratitude um and
they had this whole concept album around this guy that was controlling people's minds by basically
getting them addicted and then helping them clean up but then like hey i did this for you so you're
going to do this for me um it's really terrifying when you couple that with what you were saying
about social media and how you've been essentially groomed to push they've pushed you in a direction
that you started right depending on what you hovered over and what you clicked on like some you
are very involved in this process but the them optimizing right second and third order consequences
them optimizing for time on site um the ability to leverage you to a marketer um but to do that
they're optimizing you in a very specific direction um and that that is allowing either
bad actors state actors algorithms whatever to hijack your emotions your limbic brain to get you to
do whatever like that's just scary like when i think about the the thing about what's kicked
off with the riots like protesting i love i'm all for it um when it kicked off into like looking
out my window and seeing things burning it was like that's where i go okay like you that shit
that gets really scary really fast and when you get into the weeds of like the complicated
who's actually breaking the windows who's actually setting the fires and the the sort of swirl of
very difficult to parse apart things presents itself to you that's where like understanding
how to begin to extract the information how to learn about something that you don't know about
there was a lot of pressure to speak out and i was like i'm not saying
shit until i understand what's actually going on and even just going into that and beginning
to realize okay this is a big world this is complicated there's there isn't a party line
like it's being presented there are a lot of different thinkers across sort of every statement
that's being made there's somebody that disagrees with it quite vehemently so my strategy for that
and i'd be super curious to to hear what you think on this so i've got what i what we talked
about earlier the physics of being human so any any data point that i take in has to jive with
what i know is true about humans and the way that humans act and think and process and when i see
people just repeating memetic statements over and over and over it's like odds are that's not
an original thought for you because you're just repeating the same thing um and then also looking
at both sides of the argument so it's like i know how algorithms work because as a person with a
youtube channel like you have to understand how it works to make sure that your stuff is
getting presented to people so you learn real fast what the algorithm likes what it doesn't
you learn what the algorithm is using as a barometer of whether this is something that
should be pushed out more so you pay attention to that stuff so i'm like i know if i watch
this type of voice i'm going to get more of that type of voice so then you've got to actively
seek out the other side and there's been so many times when i'm like whoa like that's brilliant
coming from you know side a and then whoa this is brilliant coming from side b and so it's like
until i get a sense of like the edges right okay this is edge case over here this is edge case over
here now i actually understand filtered through what i know to be true of the way that the human
mind works now i think i'm beginning to understand this thing and i can begin to sort of try out my
own ideas and that's what i do then the next thing so i've taken in all this data the next thing i do
and i my poor family one of the coolest things to come out of quarantine has been we now i do these
weekly calls with different people and i try out ideas on them and i'm like yo this is how i'm
thinking about this what do you think and i begin to realize where oh shit i thought i understood
this but like my own logic is breaking down and in having to articulate it i realize sort of where
the edges you know of my ignorance are and that helps me then okay this is where i need to go
research i need to figure this out more um but i don't have a particularly um useful way of going
oh shit that was all false propaganda to begin with do you have a way of like are there certain
outlets that you trust how do you build trust maybe that's the easiest way trust around information
i would say that
the idea that there are any authorities that i just trust enough that i can cognitively
offload the process of coming to belief to them is not a real thing currently
and that if you think about legitimate authority whether whatever's seen as legitimate authority
for a while it was the christian church or um government or then uh the academies and the
you know the great ivy league institutions and they're supposed to be the bastions of what is
true what's fucking powerful so everyone who wants power has maximum incentive to try to
capture and co-opt legitimate authority towards their purposes and so you start funding the
research institutes to research certain things and not others and even if so i can easily manipulate
statistics to say most anything i want is i can cherry pick data out of very large data sets to
say everything's getting better everything's getting worse or whatever it is that i want to say um we
can of course do false methodology and lie but we can even have information that is totally true
that is misrepresentative and will guide people in the wrong direction because let's say
i have a phase space of information that's all this information but i'm intentionally only doing
research on this area over here and publishing a bunch of research so the preponderance of data
points to such and such because there was an uneven distribution of what got funded based on
those dollars came from somewhere and they're seeking return on investment and so certain things
are going to be more useful a patentable pharma drug is going to get more research dollars than
a plant-based nutrient that no one can patent to ever be able to pay the money back so the
preponderance of data will say nutrients don't work as well as pharma drugs do but the preponderance
of data is gibberish um in that particular case and then also what metrics was it looking at well
it didn't cause any negative side effects because we looked for these four side effects well the
body's pretty fucking complicated you can cause lots of side effects that are outside of those
who you measured for so as soon as you understand the process of legitimate authority having a
maximum incentive to get co-opted then you start understanding okay this idea that i can offload
the cognitive complexity of the world to an authority where i can continue to have a child
like consciousness and find the parent who will tell me how the world is and what to do
stops being a desirable goal and the desire to take the responsibility to make sense to
increasingly make sense of the world myself now that doesn't become solipsistic where i think
i'm not going to pay attention to people who've spent a lot of time studying but let's say i'm
looking at covid and i'm looking at the topic of viral origin did it come from a wet market
naturally zoonotically did it come from gain and function research accidentally or intentional
bio warfare or let's say i'm looking at conferred immunity well getting it confer immunity so we'll
reach herd immunity we're getting it confer immunity for some people but not others or for a short
period of time where it will not actually create enduring herd immunity or will it create ade
and antibody dependent enhancements where then one of the normal coronaviruses will kill you next
time you get it nobody knows i can tell you from looking at the research the answer to that is not
known and so all the stuff on sweden's about to reach herd immunity or this or like is all just
people overextending what could actually be known so one of the key things is being able to identify
what things do we have high confidence on based on what process and what things do we not have
high confidence in just acknowledging that so that's a question i'm always asking what are the
knowns and what are the things that we know we don't know or at least we and the knowns are never
100 percent certain right there's some Bayesian confidence margin less than a hundred percent
but i can say high confidence based on this process but i'm still open to new data and then
here's the area of unknown so i want no certainty at all here because any certainty at all even a
hunch can bias me in terms of what i pay attention to so i just want to say i don't know do you try
to eliminate even your hunches like do you try to run all the hunches you try to what i try to run
all of it i see so if i say there's a virologist who thinks or an immunologist who thinks one thing
we will get immunity and someone else thinks we won't based on different ways that they're waiting
data so do i pay do i think that experts who spent 30 years studying a field and are smart no things i
don't that i should listen to that is different than like what a tv personality who doesn't know
anything about it things yes so i like to find experts who disagree but that seem earnest as
opposed to seem like they are doing some piece of propaganda and then i like to see the dialectic
where i think possible you're gonna have to tell people what a dialectic is how does it different
how is it different from a debate so yeah this is an important topic i saw you and eric
winstein discussing this a bit so dialectic is the idea that you can have a couple different
perspectives that each have some truth value in them but maybe neither of which are the whole truth
and that rather than a debate where the idea is one of them is true one isn't and there's going to be
some kind of rhetorical warfare and then someone will be the winner at the end there's a co-exploration
coming from different perspectives to see can we actually find a higher order truth together
dude this i i'm super obsessed with this so the the idea of trying to find a higher order truth
that this is you want to know what really grinds my gears the fact that do people not give a
shit about what actually works like i swear to god people just want to be right and as somebody who
used to be stuck in that loop i get it i have empathy i fucking have empathy but man everything
in my life changed when i stopped trying to be right and i started saying because my thing was i
and trust me when i get the example i'm about to give you is like game a to the max
but when i was younger my focus was entirely on getting rich but i wasn't acting i wasn't acting
like i wanted to get rich i was acting like i wanted to be right and so there was a day where
they collided and it was like i was arguing for an idea in the business because it was mine
and it was a voice in my head saying you know this is wrong this isn't going to work this is
going to move the business backwards but i needed to be right and so i kept fighting for it i ended
up getting my way my partners left and i was like the fuck am i doing like i know that what i just
convinced them to do will move us backwards so do i want to be right or do i want to be rich
and finally i realized jesus man if i could build myself a seam around something else
then i could actually achieve my goals but if i was focused on just being right that i was never
going to get where i wanted to go and when i look at the screaming that's happening right now
i i don't think it ends in actually improving the situation i don't think that by the rhetoric
that i'm seeing about like defunding cops and all that that we're actually going to get to
the beautiful place that i think people want to get to so it's like you're not going to be able
to figure out how to actually solve the problem unless somebody can propose hey let's defund the
police okay rad let's look at that um hey no this is what we need to do over here cool let's look at
that like when you can actually stop and look at it you can get to the goal but like i said at the
beginning most people don't know what their actual goal is they can't state it and then on top of that
they're so worried about being right or sticking to the party line or whatever that they're they're
not in this dialectic where you're bringing like um lincoln with his team of rivals i was like that's
so powerful in a business i i go way out of my way to make sure that my team challenges my thinking
that if you're an intern challenge me if you think i'm saying something stupid fucking tell me
because i might be actually being stupid and i have so much on the line all i care about is the
truth and that's like one of those things it will be better for you you will be happier if you focus
on actually getting what you want but it is it's one of those things man the physics of being human
by default people want to be right by default doesn't mean that they can't switch it up and
change but jesus by default people want to be right there's this ted talk this woman gave
this one of my favorite ted talks and i think it's called on being wrong it was a she was describing
a book she had written which was studying the psychology of human's experience of being wrong
and she asked the audience um what does it feel like to be wrong and people said embarrassing
shameful whatever and she goes no that's what it feels like to find out you were wrong it feels
like to be wrong is to feel right right typically we're we actually think we are right about stuff
we're wrong about that's what it feels like is righteousness and so you were fortunate in that
you knew you were full of shit right that was actually fortunate most people when they are
righteous and adamant and filled with you know passion and certainty actually think they're right
that's much more dangerous because then it becomes harder to reflect on what the fuck am i doing
do you think they have unease or they are are are there people who truly have no sense
okay so means live in complexes that create world views that are self-perpetuating and
self-reinforcing so let's say we take a particular fundamentalist religious memeplex
and there's a bunch of different ideas there's ideas about if i die in holy war then i go to heaven
and there's eternal life and there's hell and so i've got both i've got all of the evolutionary
biology on punishment motives plus reward motives plus authority motives plus the desire for certainty
plus in group stuff plus the desire to not be out grouped right it's appealing to every level
of mazlo's hierarchy every emotional aspect of evolutionary biology but then you've got core
memes you've got supportive memes you have protector memes like a whole football team
and the protector means are anything that would fuck up believing that there is a way to deal with
it right so doubt comes from the devil and will make you burn in hell forever and faith is the
highest virtue which basically says critical thinking is evil and creates maximum limbic
fear for you so the prefrontal cortex that would try and do the critical thinking will
end up stimulating the amygdala to shut off the prefrontal cortex and so that's actually a very
neurologically advanced protector meme complex to make sure that the thing that could get you to
question if all these beliefs are actually unfounded gibberish won't be effective against you and
so most worldviews have protector memes built in and so that even if I'm feeling uncomfortable
I have a way of rationalizing it do you so I've heard you talk about this before and I thought
this was so brilliant how do you go from Jesus saying all the lovely things bringing people together
to fighting the crusades in his name like how you do the mental gymnastics do you know like
what was the protector meme in that meme complex that allowed people to pull that off
when the SS troop were being tried in the Hague for war crimes after World War two
I don't remember the the exact way the questions were phrased but they were being asked questions to
determine to try to understand the phenomenon of what happened how Germany that had been very
actual liberal before moved into that place and also the likelihood for those people to
commit similar actions again and so they were asked all the questions specific to the situation
they were in but then they were asked general questions of the type did you believe everything
you were doing was right and one of the things was so fascinating was something like 90 percent
of the Nazi said no I didn't believe everything I was doing was right I did at the beginning
when we were hearing about what an oppressed people we were and the bad people that were
trying to oppress us and the Jews seemed to be rich when we were poor as fuck in the Weimar
Republic and had to be selling our kids into slavery and like it seemed like they were
doing it consciously and we were just standing up for ourselves and so originally I did but
then we started to get into places that were really fucked up and so 90 percent of them said no I
didn't think it was all right then they're asked did you ever try and stop and a hundred percent
of them said no I never tried to stop and then when they were asked why they would quote German
phrases that had been drilled into their heads they were basically officers orders and if I
if I went against this I'd be put in the gas chamber it would and I wouldn't have made any
difference like the whale thing if I don't do it somebody else will right and I have my kids to
deal with and I didn't have the power to stop it and the and yet 90 percent of the people actually
felt that way right so the same was true with the Inquisitions or the or the Crusades or the
and it's even true today of if you grow up in a very religious area
what is what happens if you give up on the religion right so we know what the punishment
for apostasy and fundamentalist Islam is but if you grow up in Utah in a strict Mormon area and
you give up on Mormonism then you get excommunicated depending upon how they relate to it you lose all
of the benefits your in-group completely destroys maybe the idea that you're going to lose heaven
and all those kinds of things so people believe things less because they are true and more because
they are useful than they realize useful and staying in the group staying in the good graces
meeting some need mostly people believe things because it seems like it will meet some need for
them or believing something else will damage that need and then they rationally backfill
epistemology but they didn't do epistemology to come to the belief they emotionally came to
the belief and then they backfill epistemology so rationalizing is the opposite of being rational
being rational is not starting well said being rational is starting with I don't know let's go
through the process let's try what are all the hypotheses what is the evidence for all the
hypotheses rationalizing is I jump straight to belief and now I'm going to try to create backfill
rational for it and pretend that that's how I got there I'll give you actually a really
interesting example one of the things the political left in the US likes to do is make
fun of the political right for being stupid you can see this with Bill Maher or other kinds of
comedians and it's part of their narrative warfare strategy feeling superior through
being more educated and whatever right and the political right has its methods of narrative
warfare and so I'm not commenting on the rightness or not of the underlying ideas but the weaponry
that's being used and nobody wants to feel really stupid and so you actually stay in group by laughing
at the people who are on the out group as opposed to defending the people who are so obviously stupid
that you're obviously stupid if you would even sympathize with them at all right so that's actually
appealing to very not rational things in group out group desire not to seem stupid
in the name of higher intellect so it's very tricky and sophisticated so there's a
left comedian who went to some Trump rallies recently and interviewed Trump supporters and
made a compilation of how utterly stupid Trump supporters are now of course he didn't include
any of the places where there are Trump supporters that are well educated and have good philosophy
and there are other ones that will show right oriented people going to a bunch of left or
Antifa people making them look like other idiots so they'll both use that tactic right so of course
the first thing we have to see is as we're laughing at the dumb Trump supporters in this thing it was
cherry-picked for that purpose of all of the people to then give the sense that that was ubiquitous
that they're all that dumb right okay so you watch the thing and it's actually impressive how
much these people have rejected there's actually pride around anti-intellectualism within this
population there's a particular part of the right that has a anti-intellectual pride and so
they the guy is you know saying very basic things about government or how bill becomes a law or
whatever intentionally like showing how stupid the people are that they don't know the basics of
politics and there's certain of wrong things and whatever and then tries to take it further and
says if if Trump used the n-word would you vote for him yeah I'd still vote for him if he whatever
and they ran different things and at one point it said something like if Trump said that everyone
needed to start fucking pigs would you vote for him yeah I'd still vote for him and what it was
trying to say is that guy who says yeah I'd still vote for him is saying my mind is not open to new
ideas right like my mind has closed to new ideas I have already made my decision I'm going with
it so you have to say what made him get there well one of the things that's actually insightful
is he he intuited in some place that he couldn't make sense of what was going on and the pundits
were talking it was above his head and that they were trying to use intellectualism and
data and statistics and whatever to say things that felt like they were gonna fuck his world up
that weren't in his interest right that seemed against his interest and so he basically said
I know my mind he's not this sophisticated but subconsciously I know my mind is a battleground
of people more sophisticated than me who are gonna try to convince me what is true but I don't think
they have my interest in mind so this Trump guy it doesn't matter if it's true or not I actually
feel safer being on his side in a world that feels like it's in war he feels more like me and he
feels like he might win and I don't want the susceptibility of people trying to confuse me
to be possible so it's very interesting to see how the that anti intellectual thing was actually a
compensating weapon of intellectual weapons being used to control people in ways that they
could tell weren't fully in their interest that that's really interesting and this is where
their cognitive distribution to make it sound fancy the fact that sadly not all minds are created
equal it's like man when you have like when I look at people that are clearly smarter than me
I'm just like dude this is um deeply problematic to try to make sense of what they're saying and to
engage with what they're saying it is uh I get it man I feel for people when it you you can tell
you're being moved around the board like a chess piece and you're not sure like where the trap is
coming from but you know that there is a trap coming uh and hold on one second because I have an
alarm going off um all right sorry about that I am uh normally uh I don't film this late so I
didn't even think to check my bad um so yeah when you've got somebody that is just you know
outperforming you and you can feel that you're being moved around that chess board it is so
disconcerting um that I can see how people would end up shutting down and so this is why we like
debates is we think okay that guy is saying something that I seem to disagree with but
he's smarter than me I want to put my smart or candidate up to battle with him right and the
higher angel of our nature is wanting to actually understand by them going back and forth and them
being smart enough to come up with the counters that we wouldn't have known the lower angels of
our nature is just watching a dog fight and that's why you'll see Sam Harris eviscerates
Noam Chomsky or whatever those titles of titles that go around it's really those people when
they're watching aren't trying to learn they're trying to and that's why you'll see in a debate
the people who are very very strong fans of one of the people are sure that person won at the end
on both sides so all in all his mind really moved because that's actually not appealing to the higher
angels of their epistemic drive but the lower angels of their desire because this is the thing
there isn't some way at the end to determine which one is actually right clearly so the guy who's
making the arguments of the people who resonate with the type of arguments he likes his arguments
resonate with him is true and the other one don't resonate is true and ultimately my sense of truthiness
is kind of a felt sense dude let me tell you as somebody who does a lot of public speaking I
will tell you right now that I can move an audience by changing not what I say but how I say it and
I learned very early on that by putting time and energy into getting good at the performative layer
of a talk made a huge difference and so when I was young I wanted to be a stand-up comic and so I
spent a lot of time in front of audiences I spent a lot of time practicing like what I was doing with
my face modulating my voice and it is it is a little it's exciting when you feel like you're
doing things for the right reasons but it's a little unnerving when I think about like
charisma goes a long way man just by the way that you make somebody feel they always say you
don't remember what somebody did or what they said you remember how they made you feel and so if you
can make somebody feel good if you can hype them up and I tell audiences all the time and this is
sort of the core friction of my life is I have what I call a two-hour declining arc of influence
so if you if you get me in a room with somebody my whole thing is get me in the room if you get
me in the room I will fucking make somebody feel something I can be very persuasive when I really
believe in something and I'm really passionate because I can bring that out and I can energy
infects other people and so you can infect them with your enthusiasm you can get them hyped up
but as soon as I walk away it's like it that sense of like because I try to give people the
sense that they can do it right whatever it is like you can do it you can make it come true and
let me tell you and I know that when I walk away that feeling begins to wane and so it's like how
do you get beyond just the the ability to whip people into an emotional frenzy and actually get
them to think critically to form an opinion to say okay I actually think I understand how these
pieces work together and then it's like you can begin to form your own opinion then you can you
know how to move through the world but otherwise how to do that for your listeners right now
how to please how because similar this conversation might have some impact on them for like a day
maybe right but the moment they have scrolled their Facebook feed they've forgotten about it
and they're now fully inundated with other things and so how why would why do we bother doing this
at all so if someone is feeling a particular kind of resonance and inspiration they have to take
some actions it will keep feeding or nurturing that and so let's talk about a few things people
can do because when you're in the room with them whether it's just that you're giving them better
information or you're emotionally influencing them they're influenced by what they're around
and so if some but then when you leave they're influenced by whatever they're around next
what you're trying to do is make them have more of a internal locus of control to be more self
influencing well the the kind of influence I would say illegitimate power in a game b sense
illegitimate power is where I am trying to influence people towards my agenda perpetually
legitimate powers where I'm trying to influence them to be more self directing
which is basically what a good parent or a teacher is trying to do is to increase someone's
capacity to make their own good sense making their own good decisions and whereas to the degree
that I'm trying to convince them what to think that aligns with an agenda I have that is a
you know game theoretic thing that will then produce counter responses of other people who
want to convince them of some other thing but as people are seeking to become more
self determined the first thing is to recognize how much you are not self determined to recognize
how much the information streams coming into your eyes and ears and who you're around influences
and start changing that one of the best acts of self determination is to change the things
other than you that are influencing you and so we talked about the problem of social media
if you care about your own well-being enough you'll just quit social media your own well-being and
your ability to understand the world and you'll start finding sources of news that are better
than social media that aren't ai curated for limbic optimization for you but that you're curating
based on what seems to be good information and you'll find left sources and right sources and
sources from other countries and whatever to try to make sense of stuff if you are going to stay on
social media there are some things you can do to do a better job which is let's say that you are
politically aligned in a direction you're left aligned go find all of the right thinkers and
follow them and join a bunch of those groups if you're right aligned do that with the left
whatever your particular perspective is and find the ones that seem to be the most
actually smart and earnest and then unfollow all the stuff that seems to be
salacious and not well researched so that your feed becomes the smartest stuff from all of the
perspectives and if this is working you'll become less certain about everything you'll know that it
is working because you will know more than you knew before and you'll be less certain whereas
right now you know less and you're more certain yeah that i think that's really powerful and
the thing i i'm really obsessed with this idea i want people to understand that what i normally
say is skills have utility but information has utility and man i don't care from where on the
political spectrum an idea comes from if it's real if it has real world implications and it
lets me move towards a goal that i have i'm gonna take it and i i i actually cannot understand
anything else so it's they're they're powerful and this all came for me because of building
businesses like when your house is on the line you don't have time to worry about whether you
thought of the idea or somebody else thought of the idea or somebody you like thought of it or
somebody you don't like thought of it it's just like jesus dude i don't want to go home and tell
my wife that we have to move out because we lost the house like that was such a real thing for me
and that kicked me into just a and i had already been sort of marching down that path but that
kicked me into a whole another level of like i just need to know what works man i need to know
what works i have a goal i need to know what's going to move me towards that goal and it also it
felt better like there there's a sense of relaxing because i'm not trying to posture i'm not trying
to campaign i used to say all the time and unfortunately i was wrong about this but i used
to say all the time to people just be good because you can't campaign and convince people that you're
good now the sad reality is you actually can you can bamboozle a lot of fucking people with a lot
of words but being good itself is going to take you a lot farther and getting people interested
in that like gamifying in themselves like okay cool i want this curated feed that is bringing
me a diverse array of opinions so that i can actually function and if people got into that idea
of functioning the the goal here is to function it's to actually be useful to be able to so i
define power very differently than you but the way that i define power maybe it's just the wrong
word at least for this conversation is power is being able to close your eyes imagine a world
better than this one open your eyes and actually have the skills to move towards that to make that
real and i have become so obsessed with that idea that it helps like that becomes almost the
filter by which i make sense of the world like if i really think about like what's what's one of my
highest level filters it's like i only do and believe that which moves me towards my goals and
if you're good at choosing your goal then you suddenly become open to any good idea from
wherever even if it contradicts like i came into it thinking one thing but like whoa that's actually
real that's actually going to take me it's not something i ever thought like i never thought
that and i don't know enough about game b to know if like i'm behind it or not but it's like
hey if game b ends up being the most real thing and there is a way to deal with the just freakish
amount of complexity and that we actually can consciously build something that moves us towards
that and it becomes a my values would definitely be sustainability human well-being like those are
sort of inextricably connected wanting the human race to go on long after i'm here wanting people to
struggle but struggle well so that they can be tough and be resilient like those are all things
that to me seem inherently good more than say happiness or something like that which is very
transient but like seeking out the things that will actually get me there and the process of
iteration and at the risk of just completely derailing on tangents here that to me that sort
of mixture of like iterate get it out there try be sincere in the pursuit of what's actually
going to move you towards your goal like that is you know if i had magic fairy dust that could
sprinkle on people to get them to act in accordance with that i think they would be happier um and
it certainly would lead to a better world in my estimation this is interesting and at the at the
risk of opening a very big can of worms um did do i remember right that you said that it isn't
necessarily true that improving the individual will improve society or am i misremembering that
it is not necessarily true that improving some subset of individuals in a particular
way will improve society like okay someone getting better at violin is improving them
it's improving their skills um someone getting better at warfare is improving their skills
so is society the result of the quality of the members yes but are the members also the
result of the quality of the civilization systems like the education and the economics and the
culture and the governance that help condition and develop them also yes so it's not just bottom
up individuals to society or just top down the quality of society evokes different things from
the individuals there's a recursion there um so i but i don't think there's a tangent there i don't
want to go down i want to go back to something you said a moment ago when you were talking about
the desire to be right and how problematic that was and when you let that go ego in that way
makes you very easy to control um because all i have to do is appeal to your desire to feel
right and i can control you i can give you information that i've taken more time than you
have to process to frame it up that will make you feel right and i can pick what you believe
i can also inflame you into emotion by attacking your sense of rightness or whatever so having a
fragile ego that wants to seem right and that is fragile identified with certain positions
makes you very very vulnerable to control so that's an important thing having a mindset where
anything can be brought up and your identity is not attached to specific belief structures
the belief could change and you don't crumble as a result of it makes you much more resilient
yeah resiliency is um is one of those things from an intrinsic standpoint that if people
want that in themselves and they're actually willing to put that to use um you can begin to
get anti fragile and anti fragility uh in terms of building a new society i know is a
is going to be a pretty important thing do you think that we have any ideas that could actually
because so anti fragility for anybody that's never heard the phrase before the more you
attack at the stronger it becomes so what on earth would that look like at the societal level
it is a failure of imagination for me i can't imagine it
capitalism has been anti fragile um as a system of resource distribution and etc it
it has continued to evolve its capacities so we went from say barter to
uh exchange mediated by currency to fiat currency to fractional reserve fiat currency
what were the attacks upon it that made it stronger well if one capitalist group say another
nation or whatever was trying to advance their overall share of the pie relative to another one
they kept each strengthening their underlying capitalist base becoming better at extraction
exchange those types of things um when communism was emerging as an alternate system it increased
its capacity to be productive and defend itself and whatever so that's an example of anti fragility
you were asking earlier how does someone go from the forgiveness of jesus to the
to the crusades there was a belief system christianity that continued to get stronger and by
stronger it meant as it was attacked by other religious ideologies or political ideologies
it was increasing its and this is actually interesting because anti fragile is not always
good because sometimes it just means the thing is getting better at warfare um
i actually want to bring up the trump campaign uh has elements of anti fragility
so whether it was stormy daniels or the russia um issue or the impeachment his base actually got
stronger through each of those and so one of the things that the left has not recognized they failed
to recognize the anti fragility and that they were lobbying attacks that would lose but would
actually strengthen and so that's actually an important thing to recognize because if something
has become anti fragile and you think it's bad and you're going against it you have to think
in a different way um and actually i'll use trump as an example here of the thing you were mentioning
around um listening to diverse opinions so we we know that uh he's a different kind of president
and the politically trained ones that have been there before uh whether people think that he is
saving the nation from the corrupt evil deep state or whether he is destroying it to create
his own evil dynasty um is one of the classically polarized things that people have a hard time
grounding enough they ground it in the thing that resonates is true to them without
seeing the other things but i think everyone knows he's been effective at a particular thing
um i know a couple people who have been who worked with him closely been on the security council or
you know in his uh advisory board who've said the same thing about their experience working with him
in the presidential or said one same thing i found very interesting is that where most of the presidents
previously had positions that were fairly consistent and predictable bush did kind of bush things and
obama did kind of obama things and they got people around them that had a similar ideology and that
had for some period of time right the obama democrats before they were obama democrats were
clinton democrats they were of a certain type and same as bush republicans um trump got people who
were mostly not of that of a particular lineage system and he got people who disagreed with each
other vehemently and so if he would bring patreus into a room and bannon into a room together to
talk about china because they both knew more about it than he did and he knew that but they
disagreed vehemently then what they what i was told would happen in the room is that he would
invite a group of people in without giving them any advance notice of what they were going to talk
about so they couldn't prepare how to manipulate whole thinking so he got their extemporaneous
real sense he brought in people who disagreed he would ask a question without giving an indication
of what he thought he'd keep a poker face on the whole time to not indicate that what he believed
and he would just keep asking questions and have them fight it out and and he would actually sit
there quietly and listen for a couple hours and once he had heard enough then he still wouldn't
tell them what he thought he'd go straight to twitter because he didn't care if they agreed
with him or not he cared if his support base did and twitter gave him an instant way to communicate
with the support base and get real-time analytics based on the big data analysis of the twitter feed
of whether what he was saying was coalescing his support base or not wow and so that is an
effective technology where what he's doing is listening to different viewpoints now what he
was listening for is not necessarily what is true but what will be effective for coalescing my support
base um but he also had much more direct communication with people and much faster feedback now also
when you don't have a position kind of like bruce lee said about martial arts right when you don't
have a fixed form when you don't have rigorous positions you can take the position that is
coalescing the support base empirical more which is both terrible and wonderful depending upon
what your goal is whoo man so yeah this is i'm i'm i'm not surprised by this conversation given
that you are the person i came across when researching the end of the world and how civilizations
crumble um dude the way that you are taking the entire ecosystem of things that have to be taken
into consideration uh into consideration it is it is very interesting i'm going to be watching you
very carefully uh with what you continue to put out in terms of game b and how we move forward
intelligently i think we're in a super weird time um but dude thank you for coming on the show
thank you for and maybe you would warn me against this but thank you for being a part of my sense
making apparatus uh i will not take you literally i will definitely look things up uh and form my
own opinions but man you definitely fall into the category of people that i think are saying things
in a rational way um a metered way that makes a lot of sense to me so word thank you it's good
to be here it's fun to have a conversation with you dude no joke uh hopefully we will connect
again soon and uh thanks again everybody if you haven't already be sure to subscribe so i can
fuck up your algorithm and until next time my friends be legendary take care
the decisions we make in the next 20 years 20 30 years are going to have
enduring consequences of the sort that previous decisions did not we need to figure out how
the problems that could that could threaten our extinction won't extinct us we need to
figure out how to avoid an anarchic society we need to figure out how to avoid it this
topic society we need to do all this in a span of it's say a couple decades
