Hello, my name is Vyasa Levitches. Welcome to this course on the great turning points
of modern history. Those particular discoveries, inventions, political upheavals, or great
ideas which have transformed the history of the world since 1400. As we begin our examination
of these top 24 transformative moments, let's begin with a turning point that was a turning
point precisely because it did not happen, but perhaps could have. Imagine how much of
world history, right down to our own times, would have been entirely different if this
imaginary scenario had actually taken place. It's the 1440s, a half century before the
voyages of Christopher Columbus to the Americas. A huge fleet of enormous ships, far larger
than any ever launched by the European kingdoms, approaches the forested American coast. This
could be the moment when the hemispheres of the globe, east and west, previously largely
isolated from one another, are united in this one great historical encounter. On the
deck of the largest ship, the flagship of this huge navy, directing this moment of global
history stands a huge man who entirely towers over others on the ship. But what sets him
apart even more than his stature is his unflinching, focused, stern gaze. He is the Chinese Admiral
Cheng He, and he commands this vast Chinese naval expedition, which will lay claim to
what seems to them a new world, bringing the Americas into the cultural orbit of the magnificent
Ming dynasty, ruled over by an emperor who enjoys the favor of heaven itself. And then,
in the centuries to come, the ancient civilization at which China represents will overspread
the North American and South American continents in a dynamic process which will shape all
a following world history. Eventually there may be no need for the smaller European kingdoms
like Portugal, Spain or England to set forth and explore the oceans now that they've been
so completely overshadowed. No need for a Christopher Columbus. And then in the centuries
that follow, all of the global international system, as it evolves, will depend on the
fortunes of the Ming dynasty in China. An emerging global civilization will be founded on the
basis of Chinese Confucian values. And centuries later, this very lecture you're listening
to right now might instead be delivered in elegant learned Mandarin.
But this did not happen. We will examine shortly the background and reasons for this turning
point that did not turn.
We should really begin by asking, what is a turning point? How can a turning point be
defined? Well, a turning point marks a decisive moment which shapes later developments. If
it had not happened, or it happened differently, matters would have taken an entirely different
course in history. For the purposes of our course, to make that very tough call concerning
what are the top 24 turning points of modern history, I want to add this further emphasis.
We will choose those crucial moments which have jolted how vast parts of humanity have
viewed their world. We'll zero in on those moments when how humans perceive their world
has been radically changed, when their entire world view has been upset and transformed,
when their mental map of their world is reconfigured.
Whether covering a turning point in technological change, like the invention of the printing
press or the atomic bomb, or political history, like the establishment of nation states as
essentially the default mode of world politics, or of social transformation, like the abolition
of slavery, or the recognition, finally, of women's right to vote, and many, many other
turning points, in each case will focus on the impact that this had on the world view
and general outlook of contemporaries. What they hoped or feared would be the effects
of this turning point. This, of course, does not mean that in every case the thinking of
each and every living person at the time was changed in the same way, or that everyone
saw a newly transformed world in exactly the same terms. Human beings are far too complicated
for that. Often, indeed, older worldviews still persisted and lingered. Our focus here
will be on how turning points were lived and experienced by large aggregations of people
on the ground, so to speak. And on this score, there's a very hopeful and positive note
that comes out of our course. We'll see how, in spite of the repeated shock of the new,
human creativity in adapting to new worlds is astonishing and ultimately very hopeful.
Thus, the turning points this course covers are not the same as merely the greatest events
of history. Rather, most profoundly, these are the moments of true change in world view.
Another useful point to note is that this course specifically looks at how these turning points
have shaped the modern world since 1400. This raises a key question. What is modern? What
does that mean? As opposed to the ancient or pre-modern? What is modernity? Modernity
is a notoriously slippery concept because, obviously, what is modern now will soon become
the past, as time marches relentlessly forward. The very word modern, in fact, simply derives
from the Latin word modo for just now, in distinction to the past. Yet, the concept
of modern is often applied to an entire historical period, starting about when our course begins,
the 15th century. Most often, attributes of modernity are thought to include the growth
of technology, the autonomy of the individual, a recourse to experimentation and science
instead of trusting the dictates of tradition. It includes new concepts of popular sovereignty
and equality, and also a new interconnectedness on an increasingly global scale. In a fascinating
history entitled The Birth of the Modern World, historian C. A. Bailey adds another
quality, arguing that, quote, an essential part of being modern is thinking you are modern.
Modernity is an aspiration to be up with the times. It was a process of emulation and borrowing,
end quote. So modernity as a process involves a mindset that stresses novelty and breaks
with the past. Indeed, consider this beautiful paradox. The very concept of a contingent turning
point that could have gone different ways, the organizing theme of our course, is itself
very modern. The term turning point was apparently first used in English in 1836. So an awareness
of change is ultimately what marks modernity. In our course, we will seek to trace how the
attributes of modern life as we know it have grown up and developed by looking closely at
shifts over time in what are seen as the true sources of authority. What makes an authority
legitimate and trustworthy? Here, we'll argue, is a key defining attribute of modern life,
the concept of change as progress and thus a source of authority. In a modern society,
contingent progress possess authority, they are looked to, they are invoked, and they're
hoped for. What a contrast with traditional societies where time hallowed ways were authoritative.
These societies would say, we do this in this way because that is how it has always been
done. In a traditional society, newness was not a recommendation or considered a merit.
Something that was new was on the contrary immediately suspect just for that reason. Now
in fact, traditional societies in the past in reality were never unchanging or frozen,
but they were marked by this reverence for tradition. Even when something new was introduced,
it would be presented as a revival of an earlier practice, a positive return to the original
good old days. By contrast, in modern societies like our own, progress is sought in the new,
that which is cutting edge, the latest thing or the next big thing. Think of the constant
refrain of advertisements, new and improved. We want to ask in this course, how and why did
this shift take place? From novelty as something that's suspicious and dubious to the new as
desirable and good. We'll investigate this. We will seek to follow how this huge total
inversion came to pass through each of our turning points with growing intensity. Now
coming back to our turning point that did not happen, what's the background to this
fascinating story? By the start of the 15th century, China had thrown off its earlier Mongol
ruling regime and a new dynasty had begun, the Ming Dynasty, which would rule all the way until
1644. The name of the dynasty Ming meant brightness to contrast its rule with the dark unhappy recent
times. And so from their capital in Beijing and their splendid new forbidden city there,
the Ming emperors ruled over what they considered the central kingdom of the world, backed by the
authority of 4,000 years of continuous Chinese culture. A key concept that undergirded the
authority that was exercised in China was a particular idea, the idea of the mandate of
heaven. This was a concept that went all the way back to the fourth century BC and had been
introduced and elaborated on by Confucian scholars. The mandate of heaven meant that when a ruler
or a dynasty ruled in accord with the laws of harmony that were all throughout nature, the
virtue of the ruler would produce prosperity, well-being, order, and a government that was good
for the people at large. Naturally, by contrast, rulers whose misrule violated the mandate of
heaven would bring down social disorder and natural disasters, floods, famines, and plagues,
and they wouldn't rule for long. After the disruptions that had just passed under the previous
Mongol rule, the Ming dynasty prized above all stability and order, deeply Confucian values.
The name of the emperor Jungle meant perpetual happiness, that's what they hoped for. At this
time, Ming China had the most wealth and population of any economy in the world, and the prospects
looked good. China, in a word, was the superpower of its times and knew it. Think for a moment of
the worldview, the image of the surrounding world that all of this implied. Chinese leaders thought
of their realm as complete, self-sufficient, not needing anything from outside. The rest of the
world was the periphery as they saw it. And indeed, at the time, China presented a dramatic
contrast with Europe. China was an advanced Asian civilization, while European civilization remained
in many ways relatively rough-hewn and primitive by comparison. This had already been true in the
days of Marco Polo when he made his journeys a hundred years previous. So this conviction
of the centrality of China was expressed in many ways. Among them was the way in which commerce
with other neighboring countries was presented in China not as trade with foreigners, a mutually
beneficial exchange, but instead as a form of tribute that was being sent to China,
which would then be answered by magnanimous generous gifts in turn, but not in exchange.
Merchants were not highly valued in Confucian tradition, nor was commerce.
The Ming dynasty, it needs to be said, was not isolated and intellectually incurious.
On the contrary, the printing of books, and especially of a famous huge encyclopedia,
the Jungle Encyclopedia, attest to this fact. The Emperor Jungle had commissioned this encyclopedic
work as a summation of all knowledge as known in his realm. The earliest rulers of the Ming dynasty
also were venturesome. Emperor Jungle fought against the Mongols and invaded Vietnam to bring
it back into the Chinese orbit. And most dramatically, the Emperor did this. He ordered his great
Admiral Cheng He to launch a series of great voyages across and around the Indian Ocean.
From 1405 to 1433, this man, who would later be called by some the Chinese Columbus,
traveled far and wide. Who was he? Well, in fact, what we know about him is disappointingly
fragmentary, but here it is. Cheng He was born in 1371 in troubled times. At that point, his name
was Ma, and he was from the Muslim minority in Yunnan, in southwestern China. His father and
his grandfather had both carried the title Haji, which in Muslim civilization honors someone who
has made the Hajj, the pilgrimage to the holy site of Mecca, which is a religious duty for the
faithful. So perhaps from the very beginning, this boy had travel and the crossing of vast
distances right in his bones. But the man who would become that great Chinese Admiral grew up
far from any sea. As a 10-year-old boy, Cheng He was captured by the armies of the First Ming
Emperor, who at that time were fighting against the Mongols, whose rule they had overthrown.
The young boy was taken into the imperial court, his talents were recognized, and there he was
castrated. He was to serve as a eunuch official, part of the ruling elite of the imperial household.
These eunuchs were the advisors to the emperor, trusted because it was assumed that after their
castration their loyalties would lie only with the emperor. Not having the ability to establish
families of their own, the eunuchs would, at least in theory, have no other rival loyalties
or attachments that would distract them from the service of the emperor.
At the court, Cheng He became a close advisor to the son of the First Ming Emperor,
and that son would go on to become Emperor Yongle. Unlike other eunuchs who remained small in size,
Cheng He grew into an imposing figure. He's supposed to have been seven feet tall and
powerfully built. Some records say that his voice was as loud as a huge bell.
So now, at the orders of his emperor, Cheng He sailed on seven great voyages throughout Asia.
The first of these voyages took place in 1405, the last in 1433. The fleets sailed to Malacca,
Java, Sumatra in Indonesia, Thailand, Sri Lanka, Siam, India, the Persian Gulf, the Red Sea, and
East Africa, down to Somalia and Zanzibar, and perhaps even to Kenya. They covered and retraced
a distance of 9,000 miles and visited more than 30 countries. These fleets must have been imposing
to sea. They had many smaller boats, but the great features of these fleets were the great
treasure ships, some 400 feet long, making them longer than an American football field,
with up to nine masts, watertight bulkheads, many cabins, and multiple decks and huge crews.
By contrast, Europeans at this point had nothing that could compare. These treasure ships were
the largest ships on the seas until the days of the Industrial Revolution,
indeed the largest wooden ships ever put to sea. The largest of these Chinese treasure ships is
estimated to have weighed 7,800 tons, making it three times bigger than contemporary European ships,
and indeed remain so for the next three centuries. All of those famous ships of Columbus could have
easily fit inside the storage areas of just one of the great treasure ships.
Each trip involved some 300 ships sailing in a fleet, with about 30,000 participants involved.
Now by contrast, when the Portuguese explorer Vasco de Gama sailed in this same area later,
it was with four ships and about 170 men. The Chinese crews of the treasure fleets
included doctors, translators, especially for Arabic, a language of commerce in the area,
astrologers, astronomers, and even pharmacists. The ships employed the compass to navigate,
and the great ships were accompanied by many others that were in a supply function,
junks with water and rice, combat ships, and troop transports. The ships are said to have
even had floating gardens that were maintained to provision the vast force as it sailed.
The voyages had many different purposes, but common to all was the projection of an image of
power through the region. To vindicate and impress on everyone the claim to China's centrality
and the Yungle Emperor's authority. The earlier voyages may also have been charged with another
mission hunting down a rival claimant to China's throne who had fled abroad.
Chenghe also took time to suppress piracy in the strategic Malacca Strait area,
that seaway between Malaysia and Sumatra and Indonesia between the Indian Ocean and the Pacific,
which then, as now, is one of the key geopolitical points and shipping routes in the world.
Most of all, the voyages visited country after country on a diplomatic mission.
Receiving tribute and bestowing gifts in exchange. The aim of these missions was not
to impose one faith, in contrast to the European explorers that we'll discuss later. In fact,
Chenghe placed stone monuments to commemorate the visits that he made, like one in Sri Lanka,
which invoked each of the major religions of the area, Buddhist, Hindu, and Muslim.
Local rulers from foreign countries would sometimes be brought to China
aboard these ships to honor the emperor on official visits.
Just imagine for a moment what the impact of one of these visits might have been for a local ruler.
In fact, suppose for a moment that you are that ruler. You've been minding your own business,
concerned with the many details of administering your kingdom. You're certainly aware of Chinese
civilization far away though it might be. Because, after all, individual Chinese merchants have been
making regular trips to bring desirable goods to your kingdom. Then, one day, without any
advance word or warning, on the ocean horizon appears a fleet of Chinese ships, so vast and
numerous that it looks more like an approaching monsoon. And it's sailing directly towards you.
The eunuch admiral commanding this fleet will arrive at your court with greetings
and gifts of silk and other precious things, but the message of China's power and prestige
that was communicated by your just seeing that fleet for the first time will always be unforgettable.
Then, in 1433, these great voyages stopped. This seems a tantalizing moment. What if the
fleets had continued and had ranged even further? What if they had rounded the southern tip of
Africa and had continued westwards to discover the American continents? Or what if they had
headed beyond Java eastwards to come at new worlds in that way? The author, Gavin Menzies,
has claimed precisely this in his book entitled, 1421, The Year China Discovered America.
He claims that the Chinese landed in present-day Oregon and also has argued that Chinese fleets
visited Australia and also Italy where they touched off the Renaissance. Now, almost no
historians agree with this argument, but it sums up the tantalizing sense of global possibility,
what might have been. How do we explain this mystery? Why were the voyages discontinued?
First, the imposing figure of Cheng He himself passed from the scene,
dying of illness on the seventh voyage, on his way back home in 1433. A tomb exists today
in his hometown of Nanjing, the old capital, but it's empty and for a long time was all
but forgotten. Oddly enough, the memory of Cheng He endured in some overseas Chinese communities
where he came to be revered as a god, so in that way at least he achieved a kind of immortality
after all. But even more than the matter of the fate of this one eunuch admiral,
the project of the voyages fell victim to what we might call office politics,
the bureaucratic infighting of the imperial court. There, a professional civil service class of
Confucian scholars, who studied classics that were already 2,000 years old, was engaged in a
conflict with a class of eunuchs who handled Chinese commercial relations and at stake
was control of the agenda of government. The Confucian scholars claimed that the travels
were a waste of funds and lives, and in this dispute the scholars won, the voyages were called off.
The Great Fleet was left to rot in place in the docks. One story suggests that these bureaucrats
to prevent anyone in the future reviving the idea of the voyages even went so far as to destroy
the records of Cheng He's travels in 1477. They went further. By 1500, the imperial government
declared that anyone who built a ship with more than two masts able to travel far would be condemned
to death, and in 1525 the government went further and just made it illegal to build any ship to
sail the high seas. Admittedly, economic pressures may have played a role in some of these decisions
as well as internal improvements within China made domestic trade more profitable than speculative
overseas commerce. But this leaves us with a deeper haunting question. Why did the voyages
not go further afield as part of a larger campaign of discovery? The reasons for this have everything
to do with the theme of authority which we'll pursue throughout this course. From the start,
these voyages were not about exploration or the discovery of new lands, not about the scientific
collection of specimens or mapping of territories. In fact, they covered routes that already were
familiar to many private Chinese merchants and traders. The real point of the voyages was to
spread awe, to communicate what we today would call China's soft power, the glory, the impressiveness,
and the riches of Chinese culture, which the imperial Chinese elite saw as central to the
world as a whole. The expeditions were not about finding something new, but about confirming something
that was already known, the universal authority of the Chinese emperor and China's civilization.
As a later official history put it, the voyages had happened because the emperor, quote,
wanted to display his soldiers in strange lands to make manifest the wealth and power of China,
end quote, to make manifest, to announce to the world with authority, to make clear to one and all.
As Cheng He prepared for the seventh voyage in 1431, he actually set up a stone monument
which explained his travels from his perspective. Let's listen to his words.
The voyages, he said, had been about spreading the influence of the Ming dynasty, which, he said,
has unified the lands within the four seas and under the canopy of heaven. From the edge of the
sky to the ends of the earth, there are none who have not become subjects and slaves.
The voyages of the fleet went so far afield into remote regions that they met foreigners whose
languages needed what Cheng He called double translation. Their language needed to be translated
into another language that was known to Chinese translators and only then into Chinese. So these
were people far afield. Such barbarians who did not recognize the superiority of the Ming and their
civilization had to be captured and persuaded otherwise. One particular passenger of the
treasure fleets makes vividly clear that the voyages were about the assertion of authority.
That was an African giraffe that was brought back to China as tribute. Actually, there were
several of them. When they were displayed in China, they seemed marvelous and exotic but
not fundamentally new or unprecedented. Learned scholars in China said that these were in fact
an animal already known from Chinese myth, the miraculous Chilin. It was said to be a kind of
Chinese unicorn with a horn, the hoofs of a horse, the tail of an ox, and the body of a deer,
and skin that was dappled with spots. This rare beast, the Chilin, would appear only at times
of good government when the emperor ruled so as to bring order and prosperity. So the Chilin
was a sign of the mandate of heaven. An official of the Imperial Academy addressed the emperor on
this topic, quote, the ministers and the people all gathered to gaze at it and their joy knows no end.
This, meaning the Chilin, shows that your majesty's virtue equals that of heaven. Its merciful
blessings have spread far and wide so that its harmonious vapors have emanated a Chilin as an
endless bliss to the state for a myriad, myriad years. Oh, how glorious is the sacred emperor
who excels both in literary and military virtues, who has succeeded to the precious throne
and has accomplished perfect order and imitated the ancients, end quote. Who wouldn't enjoy praise
like that? The voyages had been thus about authority, and now that the imperial Chinese
authority was so dramatically proved by the favor of heaven, the mission was accomplished. And yet,
turning back those treasure fleets left a power vacuum in the Indian Ocean, which would in short
order be filled by the Portuguese, then the Dutch, then the British. This was a turning point that
could have happened, but did not, with decisive consequences down to our own times. After examining
this turning point, the did not turn, we direct our attention to one that did, the fall of a great
and seemingly permanent empire in our next lecture.
