Let me ask you a fascinating and rather strange question. What is the sound of a civilization
as it collapses? What sound does an empire make when it comes crashing down?
Imagine that we are standing on the ramparts of an ancient imperial city. It's a spring
day in the year of 1453, and below us are uncountable, shouting, surging crowds of
enemy soldiers who are massing for an attack on our city. High above those frenzied masses,
we are standing on great thick walls that are already a thousand years old. Until now,
the walls have always held, repelling siege after siege, attack after attack. But shortly,
we will hear a new sound, louder and more frightening than any we have heard before.
The booming thunder of siege cannon, beginning to pound, shatter, and then breach these great
walls. That rumble of great cannon we hear in the distance announces the true end of
the Roman Empire.
Now many educated people think they know about the fall of the Roman Empire. Long ago, at
the start of the medieval period, they believed that the glory that was Rome collapsed when
in 410 the Visigoths sacked Rome, or in 455 when the vandals sacked Rome again, or when
finally in 476 Germanic tribes slouched into the imperial capital in Italy and simply deposed
the last Roman emperor in the west.
Those bare facts are true, but the real story is much more complicated and actually comes
much later. The real end of the Roman Empire as a whole actually happened a thousand years
later at the dawn of our modern age, with the fall of the great imperial city of Constantinople
to the Ottoman Turks. Today, this is the city of Istanbul in Turkey, and in 1453, it was
the focus of a dramatic turning point.
Part of our difficulty in recognizing that this was the true fall of the Roman Empire
is that later historians impose the name on the surviving Roman Empire in the east that
was not used by those people themselves. Historians called it Byzantium and refer to the Byzantine
Empire. The name comes from an older Greek name for the settlement that had stood on
that spot before. But in fact, the so-called Byzantines at their time called themselves
Romans. Long after the Roman Empire in the west had fallen, the survivors in the great
Roman Empire in the east thought of themselves as the true remaining Romans, even though
they mostly spoke Greek. They saw their state as, self-evidently, the real Roman Empire.
Constantinople had been established in the year 330 by Emperor Constantine, not far from
where legendary Troy had once stood. Constantinople was to be the Roman capital of the east, and
so it remained. It was set on a crucial pivotal geopolitical spot, the meeting place of two
oceans and two continents. This one spot straddles Europe and Asia, and the Turkish Straits, also
called the Dardanelles and Bosphorus, link the Black Sea and the Mediterranean Sea. These
were key places in the horizons of the ancient classical world. Whoever ruled this city seemed
to bestride much of the known world. But all this came crashing down in 1453 as the
last remnants of the Roman Empire in the east crumbled and fell. Why did the fall of Constantinople
matter? In what sense is this a turning point of modern history? The reasons are threefold.
First, the end of the Roman Empire, the glory that had been Rome, would continue to haunt
modern consciousness and echoes into our own times. Our very word empire from the Latin
word imperium means authority, the ability to command. As we already suggested in our
previous lecture, this theme of authority and how it changes will be a recurring theme
in our course. The seemingly universal empire of Rome had been, in its day, a key source
of political and symbolic authority. When it was gone, what would now replace it?
Second, the fall of Constantinople would prompt repeated desperate bids to inherit
the mantle of universal empire, reaching into modern times. It would be an abiding dream
of men of destiny to revive the glory that had been Rome.
Third, and finally, the collapse of this Christian empire in the east redrew the world's political
map in really fundamental ways and touched off as a result the European voyages of discovery
that would lead Columbus to what for Europeans was a new world.
So what did this glorious capital look like as the turning point of 1453 approached? An
essential fact to keep in mind is that by 1453, one's great Constantinople was in
very bad shape.
Centuries before it had flourished. Imagine for a moment what its streets and market squares
had been like when it was at its height. Here, where trade routes crossed, you could hear
a multitude of languages of Europe and Asia. Walking in the alleyways, you could smell
exotic spices imported from far away, wine of the very choicest vintages. Throughout the
city were splendid churches, with dark interiors glowing with gold and rich icons and crosses,
and you could hear the chanting of monks and smell the wafting of incense. The imperial
palaces radiated power. They were, in a way, dreams of marble and gold and silk in the
imperial purple color.
But all that was before. By 1453, this picture was much reduced and much poorer.
The last two centuries had not been kind to Constantinople. In a terrible irony, in
1204, a Christian crusader army had actually sacked Constantinople, fellow Christians
devastating a Christian city. The Venetians, whose navy had brought the crusaders on this
mission, engaged in a massive pillaging of relics and art from Constantinople. Today,
tourists in Venice admire the bronze horses atop the Basilica of St. Mark, but few know
that those horses were robbed from Constantinople.
Next, Constantinople faced the onslaught of the Ottoman Turks, a new force who swiftly
conquered the Eastern Roman Empire's lands in the Near East, until eventually, Constantinople
was reduced essentially just to its city limits, a capital without its empire.
In these crises, Constantinople could not really hope for help from the West, because
doctrinal questions and theological disputes had separated the Western Latin Christians
from the Eastern Orthodox Christians in the so-called Great Schism of 1054.
The Ottoman Turks, for their part, were determined to capture this splendid city. Their nickname
for it was the Golden Apple, the Ultimate Prize. Like New York, the Big Apple of our
times, Constantinople, the Golden Apple was seen at the time as the ultimate metropolis,
the ultimate object of desire.
Given all this, it was clear that eventually the city must fall, and the real wonder is
how long it had held out, given its deeply weakened state.
The young Ottoman Sultan, Mehmet II, and his armies, began their siege on Easter Monday,
April 2, 1453. Inside the city walls, Emperor Constantine XI was determined to hold out
even if the situation was hopeless.
Afterwards, this would seem like an eerie symmetry that the last emperor, like the first
emperor who had established the city, were both named Constantine. It was like a destiny
coming full circle. But there were other events that were feared at the time as bad omens
for the city. There was a lunar eclipse, there were mysterious dense fogs, and people were
horrified to see strange lights dancing above the church dome of Hagia Sophia during the
night.
The siege once had began, lasted for eight weeks. The city's defenders strung a huge
metal chain, floated on barrels across the entrance of the harbor, the Golden Horn. The
defenders hunkered down behind the huge thousand-year-old walls of their capital and waited. 7,000 defenders
were matched against some 80,000 invaders.
Outside the city was mustered the huge Ottoman army, which in fact even included some Christian
forces who were fighting with the Ottomans as allies. The elite of the Ottomans were
the Janissaries. The Janissaries were what we today would call shock troops, who as boys
had been taken from their Christian parents in the Balkans under Ottoman rule, had been
converted to Islam and then conscripted into the Ottoman army, where they were a kind of
super-soldier.
One other figure would be decisive as well, and that was a Hungarian artillery expert
by the name of Orban, who gave the Ottomans their dreaded new weapon, a monster cannon
using gunpowder. Gunpowder, with its explosive potential, was actually a Chinese invention
from around the 9th century. But knowledge of gunpowder had reached Europe around the
12th century. Once this technology was perfected by people like Orban, it would devastate the
certainties and the traditions and the way of life of the medieval age. Think of the
Middle Ages, and one of the first things that probably would leave to mind for us are castles,
those immense, strongly fortified structures that were the power bases of their day. Artillery
would change all of that, as the shattering of the walls of Constantinople was about
to demonstrate.
The young artillery expert, Orban, at first offered his services to Constantinople. His
native Hungary was a Christian country after all, so there was this religious affinity.
And for a while, Orban worked for Constantinople, but then the money to pay him ran out. So
Orban went over to the Turks because they offered him a better salary. Nothing personal,
better financial incentives.
Now, Orban the professional artillery master constructed a monster cannon, the largest
yet seen that would be used to pound the ancient walls of Constantinople. The cannon was 27
feet long, and it was able to shoot a 1,500-pound stone ball at the defenses of the beleaguered
city.
When this huge artillery piece was actually cast and constructed in far away Adrianople,
it had to be hauled, physically moved, more than a hundred miles to be moved up to the
besieged city. Hundreds of Turkish soldiers and teams of oxen dragged it there, moving
two and a half miles every day.
When it finally had been dragged and put into position, the site must have been awe-inspiring,
and clearly very bad news for the defenders of Constantinople. With deafening thunder,
the cannon fired. In fact, the cannon could only be fired seven times each day, because
it needed to be cooled off in between, otherwise it might explode. But in addition to this
monster gun were many other smaller cannon that continued the bombardment that had begun.
This was the sound of a military revolution, making stone walls and towers and battlements
largely obsolete.
The defenders were delighted when some reinforcements from the West actually did arrive in spite
of the theological differences. These reinforcements came from the Italian commercial city-state
of Genoa, and among their number was an expert in fortifications. That Genoese fortifications
expert, in fact, remarkably helped the Byzantines to rebuild or reinforce crumbling parts of
the city wall by night after they had been pounded by cannon during the day. So during
the night, the damage of the day would be made good. Further Genoese ships actually
managed to break through the Ottoman blockade and reach the harbor, bringing reinforcements
and supplies.
But then, in an amazing military feat, the Ottomans actually lifted some of their own
ships out of the water, and rolled them over land and surrounding mountains for some two
or three miles, using logs as rollers by brute force transporting them over the terrain.
Then, they set the ships down on the water on the far side of the chain that had been
drawn across the harbor. The Ottomans had circumvented that famous defense.
To demoralize the defenders and to stir fear inside the city, the Turks also impaled prisoners
within sight of the walls. The Byzantines responded by throwing Turkish prisoners to
their death from the ramparts.
Through it all, Emperor Constantine refused to surrender and rallied both local inhabitants
of the city and Latin Christians from Venice and Genoa, who were merchants who had worked
in the city, all fighting together in defense of the beleaguered metropolis. And in fact,
the defenders gathered for shared worship at the beautiful church of Haya Sophia. In
a way, this was a truly remarkable moment within a crisis. After centuries of doctrinal
division within Christianity, in this besieged city, in its very last days, ecumenical unity
had appeared at the last moment. But even this could not stop the inevitable.
After long weeks of siege, after the relentless pounding of the cannon that had been set up
and directed by the Hungarian professional Orban, the walls at last broke.
The Ottomans' elite forces, the Janissaries, raced in to exploit the breach, and the defenders
started to fall back from the walls. The city was about to be taken. Emperor Constantine
did something dramatic. He shouted out to all who could hear, the city is lost, but
I live. And with that, he tore off the emblems of his imperial rank, what marked him as the
emperor and, like an ordinary soldier, rushed into the thickest part of the fighting, and
he was never seen alive again.
The city of Constantinople fell on May 29, 1453. Mehmet's forces sacked the city and
sold the surviving inhabitants into slavery. The Sultan Mehmet entered Hagia Sophia, what
had been a church, and now turned it into a mosque. Geometric designs were painted over
the famous mosaics of Hagia Sophia, and verses of the Quran were placed where earlier holy
icons had been hung. Henceforth, the victor of this siege would acquire a new nickname.
He would be known as Mehmet the Conqueror, and he would also be called the Sultan of
Ruhm, that is to say the Sultan of Rome, of the lands of the expired Roman Empire.
In the rest of Europe, the news of the fall of the city took some time to spread, given
what communications were like, how slow they were in those days. In fact, given the confused
situation of war, news of the capture of Constantinople only reached Rome in Italy more than
a month after it had happened. But when the news did spread in the West, it was met with
shock, disbelief, and a growing sense of horror. Some contemporaries simply refused to believe
it, as if the news must be wrong. Others accepted it, but were certain that this must be reversed.
It must be changed, and in fact fascinating rumors circulated that sort of reinforced
the strength of this conviction. Such rumors are worth considering because they tell us
deep truths about what people at the time were feeling, fearing, or wishing. Let me
offer two examples. Because, as I've mentioned, the Emperor Constantine had rushed into battle
without insignia, his body was never identified after the fighting. And as a result, legends
circulated that the Emperor Constantine did not die, but had miraculously been saved,
and had fallen into a mystical sleep. And the rumors continued, even now the Emperor
Constantine is sleeping in a secret underground chamber under the city gates of Constantinople,
waiting for the chance to reclaim his empire. Another legend referred to the Church of Haya
Sophia. This story concerned priests who were in the middle of holding Christian services
as the siege reached its climax. These priests, according to the legend, were not done with
their service as the Turkish warriors broke into the church, and the priests didn't
see. Instead, they were somehow absorbed into the walls of the church. Someday, the story
ends, those priests will step out of the walls to complete their rituals after a hiatus of
hundreds of years.
Here we confront a big paradox. A skeptic might say, in what sense was this really a turning
point? Constantinople was already far gone, even before the arrival of the Turks. We can
be on recognition compared to its earlier glory days as the Eastern Roman Empire. Its fall
was inevitable, really only a question of time. But this is the crux of the matter. Apart
from the historical event itself, its effects, especially on how it was viewed by contemporaries,
were shattering. Contemporaries had become used to the notion that Constantinople was
always under threat, perpetually in crisis, and yet it always somehow survived.
Until now. There were three main results of this turning point in how the world was seen,
with consequences that do endure to the present.
The first result is that after this final fall of the Roman Empire, much of the world
would be haunted by the ghost of the memory of what Rome had been, what it had once achieved
and represented. Rome had been a universal authority, the archetype of what an empire
was and should be, and indeed it still is the archetype. Think of the Roman neoclassical
architecture of government buildings in Washington, D.C.
In this earlier age, thinking about the implications of the fall of Constantinople was based on
a medieval concept, that of translazio imperii, the transfer of rule or authority as an organizing
principle of history. This transfer of empire resembled the Confucian idea of the Mandate
of Heaven, which we saw with the Ming dynasty in our previous lecture.
European scholars looking out at the world at the time concluded that all of history
was based on a succession of empires, one following on the other based on divine favor
and divine will.
When an empire had played out its role, or had lost what in Chinese tradition would have
been called the Mandate of Heaven by misrule, a new empire would arise to take its place.
So in this scheme of history, the empire of Babylon had given way to Persia, Persia had
given way to Greece, and Greece gave way to Rome.
So now that Rome was gone, what new power would follow?
And here's the essence of this lecture. The gap, the vacuum left by the fall of Rome as
Constantinople in 1453 fell was the turning point.
So the second result of this moment was to be a further effect of recurring bids to inherit
the universal empire.
Most strikingly, as we saw, the Ottoman-Turkish sultans saw themselves as new Roman emperors,
the legitimate inheritors of Rome.
Indeed, they called themselves the sultans of Rome to announce this claim.
In fact, Mehmet the Conqueror, after he had captured Constantinople, next made plans to
capture Rome in Italy to complete his victories.
Now, as it turns out, he did not capture Rome in the West and finished this continuity.
It was just too big an ambition. But what if he had? How different European history and
the history of the world would be today?
In a way, for the city of Constantinople, the eagerness of the new Ottoman rulers to
assert the fundamental continuity with what went before was lucky.
Because instead of just fading into oblivion as a heap of ruins, the city actually and
dramatically revived under Ottoman rule, again becoming a center of authority, trade and
commerce, and assuming once again a pivotal position.
Eventually, the city came to be popularly known as Istanbul, which may be a Turkish rendering
of a Greek phrase, meaning to the city, Istinpolin.
But officially, it still retained its name of Constantinia until the end of the Ottoman
Empire after World War I. It only officially became Istanbul in 1930.
The long-standing dream of inheriting the Empire also was deeply influential in Russian history.
For Russia had received its Orthodox faith from Constantinople.
This spiritual and historic link was expressed in the potent idea of Russia as the Third
Rome.
As Constantinople fell, Russian monks announced to the Tsar or Emperor of Moscow that the
First Rome had fallen, the actual city of Rome in Italy, and now Constantinople, the
Second Rome, had fallen as well.
This meant that now the power of Muscovy would be the Third Eternal Rome.
The marriage of Tsar Ivan III to a niece of the last Byzantine Emperor was also intended
to strengthen this claim.
The idea of the Third Rome soon took on a messianic fervor and endured for centuries.
The Russian coat of arms of the Russian Empire or of the Russian Federation today shows a
double-headed eagle, which had earlier been the emblem of the Byzantine Empire.
That desire to be the Third Rome led to a durable impulse in Russian foreign policy,
the striving to capture Constantinople, or as it was called in Russian Tsargrad, or Caesar
City.
So over the centuries, Tsars and Tsaritsas, especially Catherine the Great, would make
this goal one that they would pursue, a spur to the expansionist impulse that has impelled
Russian foreign policy to grow in the following centuries.
Not only the Tsars of Russia were moved by the dream of standing at the end of the line
of succession of the Roman Empire, many others would find this to be an ambition that deeply
stirred them as well.
In the German lands, the Holy Roman Empire, as it was called, or the Middle Ages, claimed
to be the successor to Rome.
Later, in the 19th century, the French leader Napoleon, as he swept across Europe, set about
creating a grand empire, also outfitted with Roman symbols.
In a way, it was perfectly apt that Napoleon thought about how he could capture Constantinople
as well.
When Russia suggested to Napoleon that they could trade some territories and Russia could
take over Constantinople from the Turkish Empire, Napoleon refused.
He announced that whoever holds that city of Constantinople has the key to global power.
It is the empire of the world, he said, adding, ultimately, the question is always this.
Who shall have Constantinople?
He wanted it for himself.
It was a geopolitical pivot point of great strategic power.
As late as the 20th century, the dream of Rome endured.
The German dictator Adolf Hitler, in his attempt at a world empire, also looked back at Roman
models.
His Nazi stormtroopers stretched out their arms to give the Romans salute.
His Nazi empire, which was expected to last a thousand years, also was outfitted with
neoclassical architecture that evoked those days of Roman power.
So ultimately, memory of Roman glories has been a spur to many different ambitious leaders
and groups throughout modern times.
Finally, the third result of the fall of Constantinople was the redrawing of the world maps in the
minds of men.
The decline and fall of that great imperial city contributed to a movement that was already
taking place in Europe, the Renaissance.
Older history textbooks used to claim a simple formula, that Greek-speaking scholars, writers
and intellectuals, had fled Constantinople as it fell, taking with them, their most treasured
possessions, ancient classical texts, and that these texts fired the Renaissance, that
passionate movement to revive classical models and humanistic learning.
Actually, historians point out now, the picture is far more complicated.
Cannae and realistic intellectuals had actually been leaving Constantinople long before 1453,
in the disaster of that year.
They'd been transferring texts and their personal knowledge a long time.
It's estimated that of the 55,000 texts of ancient Greek writings that we possess now,
about 40,000 of them come to us by way of Constantinople.
The texts that Byzantine scholars brought with them to the West didn't so much cause
the Renaissance, which had already been going on and earlier had emphasized Roman literature.
What their Greek texts did was to feed a second wave of Renaissance activity, which was based
on the rediscovery of Greek texts.
And most important of all, was that the Greek scholars who arrived in the West taught the
Greek language to the Italian humanists and enriched their understanding.
Further, the fall of Constantinople presented a geographic problem for Europeans.
Trade routes with the Orient, which had run through the Byzantine Empire, were now in
the hands of the Ottoman Turks.
These routes were not entirely closed because trade continued, in part, helped by the merchants
of Venice and Genoa trading with the Turks.
But the desire of Europeans to outflank the Turks and to find alternate routes for trade
would spur European voyages of discovery, including the voyage which led Columbus to
what was for him a new world and will be the subject of a coming lecture.
This drive to outflank the Turks also had a strategic and religious dimension which recalled
the Crusades.
The key geopolitical location of earlier authority, Constantinople, had been lost and the religious
and political imperative was to find a way around that fact the end of the Roman Empire.
The loss of Rome had created a gap in the mental map of the world and that gap was the turning
point.
In this lecture, we have seen the trauma that the loss of Constantinople produced at the
start of the modern period.
It produced a ferment of ideas, anxieties, fears, and hopes that marked the age.
These would also be reflected and amplified by a new technology, the printing press, and
we will explore that in our next lecture.
