In our previous lecture on the fall of Constantinople to the Turks in 1453, we started by asking
what the sound of a civilization falling was like.
In this lecture, let's move forward by just two years to 1455 and ask, what sound does
a communications revolution make?
For the answer to that question, let's stroll through the city of Mainz, Germany, in the
beautiful Rhineland, in the Holy Roman Empire.
Mainz is not a huge city, but a rich and important one, with some 6,000 inhabitants.
At the center of the city is a great imposing cathedral in the Romanesque style, and next
to it the lively and bustling marketplace.
Around the cathedral are many streets and narrow alleyways, monasteries and convents,
and a welter of businesses and private homes.
Inside one of these medieval buildings is a former goldsmith with the amazing name Johann
Gensfleisch zur Laden zum Gutenberg.
We'll just call him Johann Gutenberg.
He is deploying his secret invention, one that he's been working on for years while
keeping it jealously hidden.
That invention is the printing press, equipped with movable type, and he and his skilled employees
are printing sacred texts.
The sound of a media revolution, then, is like this.
It's a ratcheting sound, followed by a click, click, click, as the press moves up and down,
as paper is put in and removed, in a cascade of words such as the world had never seen
before, and which will grow and grow into a flood of publication that has never stopped
since.
What we are hearing is a turning point, which some have called the single most important
transformation in the modern world.
From this beginning, the printed word launched the modern media.
Even today, in the days of blogs and online publications, we still talk about the work
of journalists as the press, and treasure what we call the freedom of the press.
Also growing up at the same time, enabled by this new technology, were modern mass audiences
for ideas, literature, art, for information of all sorts, from the practical to the fanciful.
Moreover, we'll examine in this lecture how the print revolution supercharged and
added more force to movements that we're already well familiar with, that have shaped
our modern world, the Renaissance, the Reformation, and the Scientific Revolution.
Even more basically, we'll trace how the printed word changed concepts of authority,
what was seen as true and trusted.
Some have even argued that print changed fundamentally how we perceive the world.
Back in 1962, Marshall McLuhan published his book, The Gutenberg Galaxy.
He followed his off-quoted coinage that the medium is the message.
And following that phrase of his, McLuhan saw print as having defined the modern world
until the present day.
He saw this as a transition point when electronic media were ushering in what he called a new
global village.
So these are really vast claims made for print, but to really appreciate and sense the depth
of the print revolution, we need to survey and understand what came before, what the
change replaced in other words, what was the world like without print.
In the beginning was the word.
The word spoken and remembered.
For the ancient Greeks, their goddess of memory, Nemocene, was the mother of all the other
Muses.
In classical as well as in medieval times, much effort was devoted to training one's
memory.
These were the so-called arts of memory, like mentally conjuring up a memory palace in
your head, which would allow people to categorize and recall small bits of information that
they had stored in different places of this imagined structure.
This is a world very foreign to us, that of memory, because we're used to looking things
up and not having to rely on memory.
The philosopher Socrates had already had misgivings in his day about the effect of our being able
to rely on the written word.
He predicted that writing would create forgetfulness in learner's souls, because they will not
use their memories.
They will be left, he worried, with the show of wisdom without the reality.
And for all these misgivings, the written word remained the preserve of elites in society,
those who had the special knowledge of writing, especially clerics and monks.
These written texts were preserved on scrolls of papyrus or vellum, animal skins.
In the monasteries, cathedrals, and universities of the medieval Christian world, moreover,
these texts were not recorded in the ordinary, everyday language, the vernacular, but in
a holy, special language, Latin, which further narrowed access to the learned, possessed
of Latin skills.
The libraries of the monasteries were repositories of rare, sometimes unique texts.
If a copy needed to be made, this was done in a special place, the scriptorium, the room
of the scribes, where a monk would reproduce as closely as possible the original text he
was copying.
But inevitably, this yielded a product with its own slight differences, and very often
errors.
Yet, such copying was seen as a holy labor, and many men devoted all of their lives and
their eyesight to this task.
Some of these copies could be beautiful products, think of the famous book of Kells from around
the year 800, and its ornate, twisting, Celtic decorations.
But even in this timeless work of copying books by hand, there were changes.
It wasn't unvarying.
A crucial transformation, largely complete by the start of the Middle Ages, involved
the shift from the ancient use of scrolls to the use of a codex.
A codex is the form that our hard copy books use today.
Pages not rolled up as in a scroll, but folded or stacked between covers.
Some historians of the book even argue, provocatively, that this shift to the codex was more significant
as a change in book usage, even than printing.
They argue that the shift to the codex reduced the wear and tear that was inevitable in unrolling
and rolling scrolls, gave easier access, and was all around more efficient as a way of
reading.
Book selling also was becoming much more of a full business in the later Middle Ages.
Stationery shops opened up around the young universities that were arising in medieval
Europe from around 1350, and there, scribes would produce copies of needed texts on an
individual basis, what we today would call print on demand.
What was a constant in all of this, however, was the laborious and long process of the
actual copying.
A scribe would, on average, only be able to produce at most several pages a day.
So this, this was the world of the manuscript, literally that which is written by hand.
So who then was Gutenberg, and how did he change all of this?
Remarkably, we actually know very, very little about a man who has been frequently called
by historians the most important man of the second millennium.
What we do know about him actually comes from records of his legal disputes in the Rhineland,
and this in and of itself is suggestive.
He was a man of business, a practical man who was at law, an entrepreneur who was trying
to perfect a new mode of production.
Gutenberg was born probably in 1394.
He came from a notable family in Mainz, he was part of the elite, and became a skilled
goldsmith.
In the process, learning technical skills that he would later use for his special invention.
He worked on the printing press for many years in Mainz as well as in nearby Strasbourg.
It took him a long time to perfect the new method and get it just right.
For his invention, he brought together separate elements into one process.
These included the printing press itself.
Print presses had been around for centuries to press olives, or to press grapes, or to
make paper, or to bind books, or to imprint designs on cloth.
Another crucial element was movable type.
Prints made by wood blocks also had a longer history, but individually cast type that broke
down the component parts of text into the elements of the alphabet was newer.
To produce these in huge quantities, and to make them interchangeable so they could
be reused, Gutenberg created a special hand mold to produce individual type in a method
that resembled the minting of coins.
Finally, Gutenberg also perfected a special oil-based ink that would work best with these
methods to print on paper or vellum.
There had been precursors to these methods.
In China, for instance, block printing had been common since the 8th century.
It included the paper money that Marco Polo had observed in his travels.
And yet, the complexity of rendering Chinese characters, or ideograms as they're called,
in movable type was a serious obstacle.
There also had been printing in Korea, for instance.
But Gutenberg seems not to have known about these Asian advances as he said about his
own project.
He called it by a euphemism, das Werkte Bücher, the work of the books, a deliberately vague
and veiled phrase that he used to hide the innovation that he was working on.
Gutenberg did initiate some others into the secret as a way of getting them to invest
into his project as financial partners.
One such person was Johann Fust, a prosperous merchant in Mainz who bought in to Gutenberg's
proposal.
They went into business together.
It seems likely that Gutenberg's business model involved religious authority.
The Catholic Church had been in a state of turmoil for centuries already, rocked by the
Western schism of 1378-1417, a period of turmoil within Christendom when rival popes at one
point in fact three rival popes asserted their claims to be the spiritual authority over
Christendom.
Even after a council had settled the matter, the unity of Christendom seemed to many at
the time an uncertain thing, and reformers called out for more internal unity and cohesion.
What better way to achieve unity of religious practice and belief than being quite sure
about the texts that were being used, especially the Bible, so that all of them would be uniform,
proper and approved, authoritative.
The cathedrals and monasteries of Europe would be the perfect market for an invention like
the printing press, demanding improved and recognized printed texts.
So now Gutenberg set about printing the Bible and other texts besides, always with a practical
view to the market.
These productions included pamphlets that spoke to the great issues of the day.
They included, for instance, a papal proclamation calling for a crusade against the Turks who
had just taken Constantinople in 1453, as we discussed in our last lecture.
Other printed products of Gutenberg's included indulgences.
These indulgences were special official forms issued by Catholic authorities in exchange
for acts of penance and a monetary payment, and these indulgences were believed to release
the buyer from sins.
Funds from these indulgences were to be put to a special purpose, the crusade against
the Turks.
Gutenberg also produced a special Turk calendar, as it was called, with monthly calls for crusade
against the Turks.
I'm sure that you start to see the pattern that's forming here.
The first productions of print responded to the trauma of the advancing Turkish power
which had just toppled Constantinople.
Other early printed products included playing cards as well as images of saints.
Then in 1455, just as Gutenberg hoped that he was about to make a commercial success
of his printing of the Bible, which was then underway, his partner, Johann Fust, lost patience
with Gutenberg not repaying him his investment and took Gutenberg to court, where, as a result
of the trial, Gutenberg lost all of his equipment and Fust took over his business.
This was shattering, and yet Gutenberg seems to have reconstructed his process and resumed
printing.
His work included the ambitious encyclopedia called the Katholikon, the Book of Universal
Knowledge.
Gutenberg died in 1468 in Mainz, unheralded, largely unknown by contemporaries, but eventually
remembered in spite of being such a shadowy figure for the change that he had introduced.
But if Gutenberg the man was not appreciated or recognized at the time, the results of
his invention were enormous.
In our own times, the historian Elizabeth Eisenstein has called this phenomenon a print
revolution, and that term seems very apt.
Let's examine the ways in which this was a turning point.
Printing revolutionized the speed and range of distribution of texts.
Now, a text that might have taken several months to produce by hand copying could be
delivered in 500 fresh copies in one week.
Potentially the age of the best seller had arrived.
Historians also estimate that costs came down as print proliferated, so a printed book could
cost one-eighth of the former price in the handwritten version.
So in a real sense, this implied a certain democratizing of access to texts, which earlier,
as we'd pointed out, had been the province of religious institutions and limited access.
Eventually public libraries would become available, the first one in Florence in 1571.
Book selling now grew and grew as a business, most brilliantly on display at the famous annual
Frankfurt Book Fair, which in fact still operates today after having been started over 500 years
ago as Gutenberg was developing print.
The result would eventually be the creation of a large reading public, a mass audience
for the printed word in the form of books, newspapers, journals, and pamphlets.
Gutenberg's invention in fact went further.
It also contributed to the preservation of texts, and their fixing, one might say, in
a new way.
Hand copied texts, as we pointed out, had all been different, even in the work of the
most careful transcriber, all different.
Printed texts instead were increasingly, if not perfectly, standardized.
It became possible, for instance, to offer an index which made printed texts searchable,
we would say today, in a way that manuscripts had not been.
Printers also promised that their texts were purged of scribal errors, that they were carefully
proofread and examined, and thus, they suggested, closer to the originals.
So the possibility of a more faithful transmission of ancient authoritative texts was real.
Thus for instance, we see the introduction of something that hadn't been around before,
quotation marks, which was a sign of the new care that was being given to textual detail,
to getting it exactly right.
These first stages of printing have actually impressed themselves on our language up to
the present, even into the days of email and URL addresses.
One example of an early convention that developed then that we still follow today is when we
speak of lower case letters, or upper case letters, even for email addresses.
In fact, these terms refer to the actual cases or boxes from which typesetters took the
type they needed, upper case from an upper box, lower case from a lower box.
The social changes that were provoked by printing, in addition to democratizing access, involve
the creation of new forms of community around the common reading of printed texts and the
discussion of their new ideas.
So it was that a new kind of person, the intellectual, arose, no longer necessarily a cleric or
someone in religious orders, but someone who communicated with others on the basis of shared
interests, ideas, reading, and writing.
This very often international network of intellectuals went by many different names in the centuries
that followed.
It was a kind of virtual community.
It was sometimes called the learned commonwealth, at other times the republic of letters, and
it was, in a sense, a kind of homeland for readers, a homeland of the mind.
Printing shops and book shops were key gathering places for such people, and printers took
on the role of being public intellectuals.
A splendid example would be, in the American case, Benjamin Franklin as a printer and public
intellectual.
From its German origins, printing spread at a fantastic rate in Europe, and then quickly
worldwide.
By 1465, German printers had introduced printing to Italy, and began a great wave of printing
of classical older authors, Cicero, Caesar, Livy, and Pliny.
In Venice, it was the work of ancient Greek authors, specifically, brought by intellectuals
before the fall of Constantinople that became sort of a famous specialty product of Venetian
publishers.
Paris had its first press in 1470, Krakow in Poland in 1474, Moscow in Russia in 1555.
And so it was also that the level of production also increased exponentially in a veritable
print explosion.
It's estimated that by 1500, in all of Europe, some 40,000 individual titles had already
been published.
Also by that year, 1500, it's estimated that there were already some 20 million copies
of printed books in Europe.
At the same time as this turning point was so vividly visible, it was not a total turning
point.
In fact, innovators of the printed word, those who were publishing these new texts, worked
to reassure their contemporaries that in some ways what they were doing was not so new,
not so radical.
Some printers specifically chose to call what they were doing artificial writing, instead
of using some new technical term, because artificial writing sounded more familiar, more in continuity
with earlier familiar practice.
Similarly, printers tried to make their new books look like traditional manuscripts.
They followed scribal design, for instance, having two columns on a page for ease of reading.
And the work of scribes did not vanish overnight either, and this is a fascinating thing to
observe.
A suggestive statistic is that today we have in archives and libraries still nearly as many
manuscript texts from the half century after the invention of the printing press as from
the half century before.
The printing press didn't wipe out handwritten texts.
The prestige of beautiful handwritten texts still endured, especially at the high end
of the market, because more status attached to the hand-copied text as more exclusive,
more rare, and thus more valuable to the discerning customer.
So the change didn't come all at once, and there were unsuspected continuities.
Subscribes actually worked at copying printed books in order to meet demand, strange as
it is to think about that.
So how did contemporaries view printing?
Their reactions were actually quite mixed.
Some were enthusiastic and called it a divine art, because printing promised to spread religious
doctrine more consistently, uniformly, and authentically.
Others, probably including many scribes whose livelihoods were being undermined, saw print
as something from the devil.
There's one legend from this period that really is suggestive of this, and it concerns
Gutenberg's business partner, the guy who sued him, Johann Fust.
It is said that some people suspected that Fust had supernatural powers, because he was
able to suddenly appear with texts produced with magical speed.
This particular legend seems to confuse Fust with another legendary German figure, Dr. Faust,
a scholar who, in his legend, fired by boundless ambitions, sells his soul to the devil to
win total knowledge.
So this confused linking of Fust and Faust, whose names obviously are very close, suggests
that some people at the time were made nervous by the new potential of the mass-produced
and printed word.
And there seem to be plenty of things to be anxious about in this area.
Print was not flawless, even if printers did make claims for the accuracy of their works.
One very famous case in England of an accident in printing was the 1631 book, the so-called
Wicked Bible, in which the printers accidentally rendered the Seventh Commandment as,
Thou shalt commit adultery, they accidentally left out the knot.
They were fined severely by the king who was very scandalized, and unsold bibles were confiscated,
but the remaining ones have turned into treasures for bibliophiles and book collectors.
They fetched huge prices.
And not only holy texts and first-class literature were printed, a lot of trash also poured forth
to meet popular demand, along with many pirated and plagiarized texts, because centuries would
still have to pass before laws of copyright were introduced.
Among the biggest outcomes of this turning point were the later Renaissance, the Reformation,
the Scientific Revolution, and the growth of national communities.
The effects of these well-known movements are with us still.
The Renaissance and the intellectual movement of humanism predated the printing press, but
was supercharged by its potential.
The concern of humanists with regaining and reviving classical knowledge was helped by
the sudden new availability of classic texts.
So here's a really nice paradox.
A new technology helped revive antiquity, older learning, and its authoritative writings.
A half-century after the invention of printing, it also supercharged the Protestant Reformation.
In 1517, the Catholic priest Martin Luther announced his famed 95 theses, calling for
changes in the church, not least the abolition of indulgences, like those that Gutenberg
had been printing.
Now here's the key point.
For centuries past, there had been repeated calls for reform and change within the church,
and slowly such calls had either been accepted or ignored.
So what made this movement different and soon tremendously successful?
In this case, instead of the reform message just evaporating, the new invention of the
printing press actually worked to disseminate Luther's impassioned writings with fantastic
speed and directness and force.
Luther's arguments had an electric effect and found an eager response throughout Europe.
The eagerness with which Luther's message was greeted was astonishing.
At this time, German printers were printing a million books a year, and one-third of those
were written by Luther.
So Luther was really the first modern best-selling author.
Little surprised by 1600, about half of Europe was Protestant.
In a sense, the fit between medium and message was perfect.
Luther's message of sola scriptura, or scripture alone, as the true source of legitimate authority,
worked very well with the new power to print scripture for the masses.
The spiritual significance of print was thus understandably very deep for Protestants,
who stressed always how vitally important it was for all believers to read the Bible
themselves as God's direct word.
Reading that word in an unmediated way as a source of direct authority meant being individually
responsible for one's own salvation and one's own relationship to God.
The printing revolution thus was key for the Protestant movement, as it meant that
access to the Bible, now mass-produced and readily available, was possible.
So what began as reform within the Church led to a break within the Christian community
itself, pitting Protestants against Catholics.
Each side used the printing press to argue for its beliefs in a propaganda war of leaflets,
and there was also much burning and banning of books that were judged heretical.
The ensuing divisions within the Christian community were at first marked by stunning
violence in religious wars and slaughters, and the confessional divide endures to this
day.
Without print, the reformation would perhaps not have lasted.
More specifically, the scientific revolution, which introduced new knowledge about the observed
natural world, was also sped along by print.
Conventionally, one of the launching texts of this movement is seen as the astronomer
Nicholas Copernicus' work in 1543, published just as he was dying.
In that work, the astronomer argued that the earth revolved around the sun, not the other
way around.
Traditional cosmology would need to be rethought, and once this was done, many other traditional
conventions were being thrown into doubt as well.
Finally, printing also shaped the linguistic communities that we know and belong to today.
To cater to mass popular audiences, printers moved beyond the Latin of learned texts to
print in vernacular languages, the everyday speech of people.
In the process, they standardized these languages, giving them a form and fixity that they had
not had before.
Luther's German Bible, for instance, did this for the German language.
In England, William Caxton published the first book in English in 1475.
It was a collection of stories about ancient Troy, near the spot of recently fallen Constantinople.
And for that book, he chose to use the dialect of London, a choice that echoes into our present
day usage of English.
Historians also argue that the new medium of print created a new sense of national community.
Putting together, whether newspapers or novels, allowed people a new sense of belonging to
what historian Benedict Anderson has called an imagined community of the nation, united
linguistically and by print, people who one might never meet in person, but to whom one
felt one was bound to and linked.
So considerable were these changes, that after centuries of disregard and rival claimants,
Gutenberg was again recognized as a key historic figure.
Statues were erected to him in his native Germany, and today, in Mainz, you can visit
a great museum bearing his name in his hometown.
A vast digital library of public domain books is called the Project Gutenberg, honoring
this man about whom we unfortunately know so little.
Of all the changes this turning point unleashed, let's conclude for the purposes of our course
by underlining that rich paradox at the heart of early printing.
Researchers announced that they were offering ancient authoritative texts, accurately transmitted,
cleansed of the errors of scribes, at the same time old and new and improved.
Paradoxically, in the pursuit of ancient wisdom, newness could be desirable, and it might in
the process unexpectedly open up new worlds, as would be the case in the journeys of Christopher
Columbus, which we'll consider in our next lecture.
