Christopher Columbus was a man with a dream, and on October 12, 1492, at 2am in the morning,
that dream seemed to have come true.
After weeks of sailing across the Atlantic, one of his tiny fleet of ships spotted something
ahead in the darkness, and then the dim outlines of the land appeared before them.
At this point, Columbus had to call a halt to the sailing until dawn would break and
they could really see what it is they had encountered.
Can we imagine a more frustrating or difficult wait that lay ahead?
Then finally dawn arrived, this proved to be the first durable contact with the American
world.
But that's not what Columbus thought was about to happen.
That was not his dream.
On the contrary, Columbus was convinced that he had arrived in Asia, off the coast of Japan
or of China.
Columbus' venture was founded on a series of misunderstandings.
So there's a deeply significant insight here.
Some discoveries are made while searching for something else entirely.
Without meaning to, Columbus initiated an event that has been called the most important
historical turning point of modern times.
The beginning of the binding together of the globe.
Not just politically and culturally, but also environmentally, in ways that were deeply
productive and deeply shattering and destructive at the same time.
A process indeed which continues to work itself out into our own day.
We're not even always sure about what to call this event.
It was a discovery for Columbus, but not a discovery for the peoples of the Americas
who obviously knew where they were.
This for that reason now often call this by the more neutral term, encounter.
And it was a world changing encounter.
But we need to ask, what was Columbus thinking?
What was going on in the minds of Columbus and his contemporaries at this world historical
moment?
This is another way of asking what the cosmology or mental map of the European explorers, merchants
and scholars was at this time.
The very first thing one has to do is to refute the later myth that was spread by the American
writer Washington Irving that claimed that benighted contemporaries thought that the world
was flat, and that among those many, many people only the brave and visionary Columbus
who ventured forth revealed that the world was round.
The reality is that almost no educated European thought that the world was flat at the time.
Washington Irving and others propagated this story because they wanted to build up a heroic
image, a rendering of Columbus as hero and as rebel that would establish him as a man
of science, resolutely modern, and always struggling against what Irving and others condemned
as the outmoded religious orthodoxies of the Catholic Church.
In the process of building up this image, however, these partisans of Columbus actually
severely distorted both Columbus and his contemporaries and what they were thinking.
Instead, in fact, ancient authorities back to the days of the great classical Greek philosophers
had understood the world as a sphere.
The Greek philosopher Eratosthenes, for instance, in the second century BC, not only understood
that the world was round, but even went on to construct an ingenious experiment that involved
measuring the sun's rays that yielded a remarkably reliable estimate of the true circumference
of the world.
Likewise, the work of the man often considered the father of geography, Ptolemy, in second
century Egypt, also used this spherical model and sought to find ways of representing the
Earth's curvature on maps.
And this understanding of the world as a sphere had endured.
Among their badges of office, for instance, medieval kings and queens were shown holding
a scepter and an orb around representation of world rule, held in the palm of their hand.
Another key representation of the medieval worldview was a particular kind of chart or
a map.
These maps were called mape mundi, or maps of the world, of which more than 600 survive,
and they offer us a view in on the psychology of the worldview of contemporaries.
These were not accurate, scientifically determined outlines of geography that were rendered in
map form, but rather renderings of the world in spiritual terms, drawing on information
from ancient authorities, especially holy scripture.
Most often, such maps took the form that cartographers called T-O maps.
They're called this because their appearance is just that, the letter O with a capital
T inside dividing the world into three sections.
Above these directions, traditionally, east was seen as most important and was placed
at the top, unlike our present convention of placing north at the top of maps, and this
makes the reading of these older maps a little bit confusing to modern eyes.
What this meant was that above the top of the letter T was Asia, with Europe below to
the left and Africa below to the right.
In these maps, the spiritual center of the Christian faith was Jerusalem, the focus of
the drama of salvation for all mankind, and so it was most often placed at the center
of the map.
The Garden of Eden, lying somewhere unknown to the east, surmounted these maps as a whole.
And then, once these features had been put in, other features could be filled in as well,
from the news of travelers, or from tradition, or even from imagination.
So for example, details from the fabled voyages of Marco Polo could be worked in to some of
these medieval maps.
Often included as well were the haunting rumors that persisted for centuries that somewhere,
either in Asia or in Africa, there lived a mysterious Christian king known as Prestor
John.
Prestor in this case simply meant priest.
Priest John, a king who could aid and battled Christendom in its standoff with Islam.
In the cosmology of medieval Europe, this world, from its central location, was in turn
surrounded by the universe, which was made up of seven spheres of the outer heavens.
And this notion of there being seven spheres of the heavens in which celestial bodies move
is the origin of a phrase that we sometimes still use today about being so happy that
one is literally in seventh heaven.
That meant being in the highest transports of delight in the most perfect outer spheres
of creation.
So if this was Columbus' mindset, worldview, and expectations, how did they lead to a voyage
that encountered the Americas?
Columbus himself lived from around 1451 to 1506.
He was Italian, born in Genoa, a great seafaring republic of northern Italy.
From youth, Columbus gained considerable experience in travel.
He worked as a sailor on voyages to Africa, to England, and even to Iceland.
He almost didn't make it in some of these voyages.
At one point he was on a ship that sank off of Portugal, having been attacked by the French.
But this very wreckage that he survived was fortuitous, because he landed in Portugal.
And that tiny kingdom of Portugal was actually the center of expansive voyaging at just this
time.
The Portuguese had begun their own tremendous explorations of sailing down the coast of western
Africa.
They were probing southwards, ever southwards, to find some access to the spice trade.
Remember that the fall of Constantinople had placed older trade routes in Muslim hands.
The aim of the Portuguese was to find a way to the east and its riches and its spices.
Inspired, Columbus set about educating himself to learn in order to become part of this venture.
He had not had much formal schooling before, so he focused his own individual energies
on gathering all the information he could about a great project, but one that differed
from the one that Portuguese were imagining at the time.
His project was to sail in the opposite direction, westwards, to reach Asia, and to encounter
and meet its alluring treasures, the riches of Japan, China, and India.
Predictably enough, the stories of Marco Polo were Columbus's constant companion, and
he read many other compendia about fantastic travels.
They inspired him in his mission.
Columbus was also fired by a religious self-understanding.
He developed in the process of thinking about this mission a sense of himself as having
a divine calling.
He felt that he would be a bearer of Christianity to other lands, and in fact, the literal meaning
of his first name, Christopher, was the bearer of Christ.
After the reverses of the failed Crusades, and after the fall of what had remained of
the Eastern Roman Empire with Constantinople in 1453, Columbus felt a calling to somehow
turn the tables geopolitically, to find new riches and new convert populations in other
lands which would allow the Christians to regain what had been lost, to regain the lost
Jerusalem, and this motivation would stay with Columbus to his very death.
Finally, the last element that enabled Columbus to envision his venture was, paradoxically,
a fateful, and as it turns out, decisive geographical mistake.
Many contemporaries argue that in theory it should be possible to reach Asia across the
Atlantic Ocean.
But they also argued that the vast distances of that empty sea were so great that such
a voyage would be impractical or perhaps even impossible.
Keep in mind, no one in the West at this point knew of the intervening American continents.
I should add that the Scandinavian Vikings had already earlier reached the northern part
of North America, but at this point their voyages had been almost entirely forgotten.
The result was that they envisioned a vast empty space between Europe and Asia across
the Atlantic far too great for a human voyager.
Columbus, by contrast, disagreed.
He calculated that the distance between Europe and Asia across the Atlantic was actually
much, much shorter.
And he did this calculation of his by a series of really very optimistic and hopeful leaps
and bounds of logic, as well as using any citation he could from ancient geographic writers.
What he did was to cherry pick those facts that agreed with his theory and work them
in to his sense of mission.
All of these elements gave to Columbus the inner conviction that he needed to be a salesman
for this journey to the Indies, that is to say the East, Asia, by sailing west.
From 1484, Columbus tried and tried and tried repeatedly to convince someone to be his patron.
He tried the monarchs of Portugal, then the monarchs of Spain three times, France and
England, but in all cases was rebuffed in spite of their being at first some initial
interest.
Columbus' timing, it turns out, was terrible.
Soon after Columbus started this agitation campaign for a patron, the Portuguese sailor
Bartolomeo Dias had arrived with exciting news that he had rounded the Cape of Good
Hope in Southern Africa, showing a clear eastward path to India.
This news made the whole project that Columbus was suggesting less urgent, except for one
thing.
The Portuguese discovery did something to stir the rival impulses of Spain, which now
thought that it might be worthwhile to find out whether Columbus' plan was practical,
and sort of emboldened them to risk the resources that were necessary to find this alternate
route.
Thus, after eight years of pleading, finally, Queen Isabella of Spain agreed to fund Columbus
and his project was launched.
As Columbus sailed from Spain, a crusading spirit was raging in that kingdom.
With the fall of the last Muslim kingdom in Spain, Granada, in early 1492, also this
brought the completion of the Reconquista, the reconquest of Spanish lands from Muslim
rule.
The most Catholic monarchs, as they were called, of Aragon and Castile, Ferdinand and Isabella,
celebrated.
And on the very day when Columbus sailed, the monarchs expelled the Jews of Spain as
a non-Christian religious minority as well.
At the age of 41, Columbus now set sail with three ships from Spain on August 3, 1492.
His fleet was tiny.
Three small ships, nothing like the great treasure fleets of Chenghe some 50 years earlier.
The voyage was an uncertain one.
The winds driving the crew westwards were so brisk and energetic that the crew feared
not as many people think in popular accounts that they would fall off the edge of the world.
Instead, they were more simply afraid that they would be driven out into the vast open
space of the Atlantic and never able to reach home again.
Columbus was actually driven to a deception.
He actually kept two different ships' logs, and he did this in order to calm his crew
by underestimating in the official log the actual distance that they had traveled, lest
they become too anxious.
And finally, after 33 days of tense sailing, the ships on October 12 cited land.
Columbus was now convinced that he had finally reached Asia, and he stayed convinced.
Even though Columbus had landed in an island of the Bahamas and then afterwards visited
Cuba and what is today Haiti and the Dominican Republic, he remained sure that he had found
his goal of reaching Asia.
When he surveyed the plant life of these islands, for instance, he concluded that clearly these
were Asian plants and Asian spices.
Even though the Arabic-speaking interpreter that Columbus had brought along could not
communicate with the local people they encountered, which probably would have happened if he'd
reached Asia, Columbus nonetheless, in spite of the evidence, called them Indians, denizens
of India, a name which has stuck to the present day.
After three months, the expedition headed home, and Columbus wrote a letter to his royal
patrons announcing his success and promising many more successes soon.
This letter soon became public and was printed.
It became an early bestseller with its announcement of a new path to the Indies.
Over the next 12 years, Columbus made three more trips across the Atlantic, always convinced
that he was in Asia.
Even when on his fourth voyage, he landed on the mainland of the continent in what is
today Honduras.
Columbus died in 1506 in Spain, sure that he had fulfilled his dream to the very last.
It would take some time longer for contemporaries to actually realize and figure out what it
really was that Columbus had in fact found.
And it is for that reason that we do not call these continents Northern and Southern Colombia
today, but rather call them the Americas.
That name came from the sailor Amerigo Vespucci.
Vespucci was Italian, born in Florence, and at different times in the employ of Spain
or Portugal.
We don't really know much about him, but he seems to have made several trips across
the Atlantic about a decade after Columbus.
Like his precursor, Vespucci was concerned above all with that key question, access to
Asia.
Vespucci died in 1512, and today America bears his name, not just one continent but two continents.
But this naming of the Americas was not his own doing.
He did not deliberately steal the glory and name the place after himself.
In reality, the naming was something of an accident, and it shows the growing authority
of print, which we discussed in our previous lecture.
When Vespucci's return to Europe, he wrote some letters to friends about his travels
and what he'd seen.
Then someone, we don't know who, but it apparently was not Vespucci himself, used text from these
letters to fabricate a new document, a sensational account of what Vespucci had found.
This text was entitled Mundus Novus, the New World, and it appeared in print around 1502.
What the title itself already conveyed was that the continent across the Atlantic was
not Asia, but a previously unknown landmass.
At this point, a German geographer who had been trained at the University of Freiburg
in the Black Forest in Germany, a geographer by the name of Martin Waldseemüller, was impressed
by his reading of this new geographic account.
Waldseemüller and his colleagues in a small printing establishment in the Vosges Mountains
in northeastern France incorporated the insights that had been written about in this text and
used them to create a new map of the world as it was then known.
Waldseemüller, in this new map, named the new lands after the Latinized name of Vespucci,
his first name, Amerigo, Americas, but rendered them in a feminized form as America.
The Waldseemüller map that resulted is really quite mysterious.
It also shows the outline of South America on the Pacific side, which had not yet been
charted.
Historians still don't really know how this is possible.
Perhaps it was just a conjecture or an educated guess.
The new map, published in 1507, was a blockbuster.
And as a result, the name given to the continent, America, came into popular usage.
There's kind of a footnote here.
After publishing that map, Waldseemüller had second thoughts.
He had regrets about whether the choice of name for America was really appropriate.
And he tried to rescind it, but it was too late.
Once in print, the idea and the name of America had taken hold.
So we see here that the process of print was really showing its vast power.
The physical fact of the meeting and travel between what came to be called the Old World
and the New World was in fact a huge environmental turning point, which has been given the name
of the Columbian Exchange, the mixing of people, deadly diseases that devastated Native American
populations, crops and animals, goods and trade flows.
The term Columbian Exchange was first coined by the historian Alfred Crosby in a book by
that name in 1972, subtitled, Biological and Cultural Consequences of 1492.
The result of this exchange amounted to an environmental revolution, the most important
of human history, it's been claimed.
One of the first consequences was the sweeping through Native American populations of epidemics.
Diseases that Europeans had acquired immunities to, which devastated the populations of the
Americas, typhus, diphtheria, malaria, influenza, cholera and especially smallpox.
As Europeans traveled and lands new to them, epidemics preceded them, often wiping out
more than half the people.
By 1650, it's estimated that 90% of the Native American populations had died.
This produced a depopulation of millions that destroyed traditional societies, sapped their
powers of resistance and really helped the European conquest and eventual European immigration.
Syphilis, by contrast, may have been a disease that headed in the opposite direction, but
there's still some debate on this question.
It's probably also necessary to note at this time that the importation of illnesses was
not somehow intended by Columbus and other explorers, or necessarily unique to him.
Recalling the very start of our course, when we spoke of the voyages of Cheng He and mentioned
speculations about where further voyages might have taken him, perhaps to the Americas,
the same would have applied.
If Cheng He's fleets had made landfall on the Pacific coast, a similar wave of epidemics
from Asia would have been seen, and we might instead be speaking of the Cheng Hui in exchange
rather than the Colombian exchange.
Another vast dimension of this phenomenon involved crops and animals, and went both ways.
European crops and domesticated animals like horses, pigs, sheep, and cattle were introduced
to America, in the case of horses actually reintroduced, along with weeds and pests like
the everyday dandelion.
While American species like potatoes, tomatoes, and corn, or maize, entered the European diet,
enriching it to the point of enabling a huge growth of population in the centuries to follow
because of these improvements.
Not just European diets were affected, the sweet potato, for instance, contributed, it's
been argued, to the doubling of China's population in the next three centuries.
Of the elements of this exchange, and especially telling one to focus on just for a moment
is the potato.
It was new and a very productive crop from the Andes.
As potatoes were able to grow in soils that traditional European wheat could not thrive
in, the potato became a staple of European agriculture, essentially doubling the European
food supply.
This was especially so in places like Ireland, until disaster struck from 1845 when the potato
blight hit, creating a famine.
What most people do not know is that the Irish potato blight was in turn also a product
of the Colombian exchange, transported to Europe by ships that brought guano bird droppings
essentially as fertilizer for European fields.
As a result of the Irish famine, two million Irish fled in desperation, many of them to
the United States.
Columbus's American discoveries prompted further exploration in an accelerating process of competition.
The lure of expansion and treasure was great and grew stronger.
In 1519, Ferdinand Magellan, a Portuguese mariner in the employ of Spain, set out on
an expedition that traveled around the globe by 1522, revealing the Pacific and the full
extent of the territories between.
Spanish conquistadors toppled the Aztec and Inca empires with astonishing speed.
This conquest and carving up of new lands also had, from the first, another tragic dimension,
the Ancelantic Slavery.
As an ancient institution, slavery had a long, long history worldwide.
Columbus, on encountering the Indians, already had surmises about enslaving them and took
captives himself.
Later, when the use of Native American slaves did not suffice, Africa was drawn in.
The African slave trade, originally run by Africans and Arabs, now successfully was
built up by the Portuguese, Dutch, and English as they carried Africans and bondage across
the Atlantic for plantation agriculture.
This cruel trade, over the centuries, until the mid-19th century, would involve the forced
movement of between 12 and 15 million Africans it's estimated.
In terms of how this new expanded world was viewed and how authority over it was understood,
we need to note a remarkable fact.
As the contours of these new discoveries came into sharper focus, the kingdoms of Portugal
and Spain turned to the Pope to help divide the world among them.
With papal mediation, a line was drawn across the Atlantic, and then extending on the other
side in the Pacific.
With Spain assigned all the possessions to the west of the line, and Portugal assigned
newly claimed lands to the east.
The Treaty of Tordesillas of 1494 drew the line west of the Azores Islands.
Later discoveries show that part of South America bulges out beyond that line, which
meant that the vast lands of Brazil fell to Portuguese rule, essentially by coincidence.
Stop for a moment to let this all sink in.
What a vivid testimony to religious authority in the Christian West, that this is how the
appeal went to a religious authority to the Pope.
But we also need to note that times were already changing, and other European kingdoms did
not just passively accept this division of the globe.
Instead, a fierce competition would break out over this question of who was to control
newly discovered territories.
Harder to pin down, but still important, was the intellectual impact of what was considered
the New World.
Human ideas of the New World paradoxically presented it as either better than the old,
or inevitably debased and inferior.
For some observers, this was essentially a New Eden, populated by so-called noble savages,
people who were living in harmony with nature.
For others by contrast, the Americas and Americans would never quite measure up, would always
be second class, would always be seen as uncultivated, barbarous, and at best sort of
cheap imitations of the old world.
In general, the very existence of the New World in some ways undermined the traditional
authority of the ancients and of classical thought.
The ancient authorities who were supposed to be authoritative had not even known about
the Americas, they had been incomplete in their knowledge it was revealed.
Clearly, their explanations of the world were not comprehensive and had to make room
for new facts, like the sudden appearance of entirely new continents.
Nor for that matter had the Bible revealed this New World, a fact that could be very
disturbing to readers accustomed to its authority in describing all of creation.
So this discovery of Columbus became the lasting archetype of a stunning encounter, and yet
we've seen it was not what Columbus had set out for.
This was an example of what's called serendipity, meaning finding something other than what
you're looking for.
The origin of this beautiful and poetic term serendipity actually did lie in the mysterious
East Columbus was seeking.
A Persian fairytale told of three princes of Serendip.
Serendip was the Persian name for today's Sri Lanka at that point called Ceylon.
Incidentally, Serendip or Ceylon lay in the Portuguese part of the world as carved up
by the Treaty of Tordesillas with Spain.
So this was in fact part of the very prize which the Iberian kingdoms were dividing up
among themselves.
In this Persian fairytale the three princes of Serendip were always making unexpected discoveries.
So this phenomenon has come to be called serendipity.
The next time you find yourself or someone else using the term, take a moment to remember
the remarkable lineage of that word.
Ultimately, Columbus may not have reached the Asia of his dreams, but he did find serendipity.
Obviously, Columbus was not the only one to be enchanted by dreams of the East.
Continuing his yearning for the riches of Asia, a whole new group of merchant adventurers
organized into the English East India Company would likewise seek the East, and in the process,
also serendipitously, invented the modern corporation, as we will see in our next lecture.
