In our times, military metaphors abound in the business world, as we say that companies
battle for market share, advance into new markets, or retreat.
But what if these were not just metaphors?
What if companies actually went to war?
Imagine, for instance, the troops of McDonald's fighting against the armies of Burger King,
or the Coca-Cola Navy sailing forth to attack the Pepsi fleet.
Yet that was the reality when the first multinational corporations were founded, around 1600.
We speak today of corporate raiders, but that's actually what the reality was at the start.
We speak of trade wars, but indeed world commerce was shaped by the clash of companies.
In this lecture, we examine the founding and astonishing growth of the English East India
Company.
I should note that after 1707, when England and Scotland were united to become the United
Kingdom of Great Britain, it became the British East India Company.
Here I will refer to it as the East India Company, or by its acronym EIC.
We will see how it beat out its main rivals, first the Dutch East India Company, and then
the French East India Company.
This turning point, the founding of the East India Company in 1600, put Britain on the road
to establish an empire on which the sun never set.
It also saw the birth of the modern corporation, stock shares, and the commercial binding together
of the globe.
Globalization, a phenomenon much discussed today, is in fact not new, but quite old,
and this was a key moment in that ongoing process.
Profit, and trade, and capital would assume crucial authority in new flows of goods, people,
and wealth.
Just as with the voyage of Columbus, it all began with dreams of Asian riches.
Around the time of Columbus, you will recall, Portuguese mariners had set off to the East,
in the opposite direction from Columbus.
They had felt their way down the west coast of Africa, trying to find a way around the
continent to head towards what were called the Indies.
There, they sought riches in the form of spices.
Preserves made the preserved meat of Europeans palatable, made the food interesting, and were
a great exotic prize.
Pepper, cinnamon, ginger, cloves, nutmeg, and mace, all could bring great wealth and
in some cases were literally worth their weight in gold.
But Europeans knew little of where these exotic wares came from.
They came from the mythical Spiceries, or Spice Islands of the Indies.
The Portuguese headed off to search for these locations, eventually reaching the routes
followed by Chenghe fifty years before.
In 1488, they rounded the Cape of Good Hope at the southern extremity of Africa.
The path to the Indies was open.
All that the Treaty of Tordesillas in 1494 had assigned these mysterious regions to
Portugal.
In India, Portugal established the Goa trading colony on the west coast in 1510, and the Portuguese
held this for some 450 years until independent India annexed it in 1961.
The Portuguese then headed further east to the Spiceries, the Indonesian Archipelago,
a collection of 13,000 islands, chief among them the Moluccas in what today is Indonesia.
They were known as the Spice Islands.
Among them, for instance, the Bandas were the world's sole source for cloves and nutmeg
and mace, only to be found there nowhere else.
The Portuguese established forts and trading posts in these islands, asserting their monopoly,
total control.
The Portuguese traded with China and with Japan, so that ultimately the small country
of Portugal was building a vast trading empire across Asia and Africa.
In a historic turn, Portugal's traders had successfully outflank the Islamic states which
had controlled the trade in luxury goods from the east, but now soon other powers from Europe
would seek in turn to outflank the outflankers.
These new powers were the growing maritime countries of northern Europe, especially the
English and the Dutch.
A global trade war ensued in the years around 1600.
The English and the Dutch advanced on the east following the principle that even though
there might be peace in the current time in Europe, there was no peace beyond the line
as the phrase went, in these more exotic locations, east of the Azores or south of the
Tropic of Cancer.
Moreover, as Protestant countries, England and the Netherlands totally rejected the
papal decision that was embodied in the Treaty of Tordesillas and also brought their religious
motives to the struggle against Catholic Portugal and Catholic Spain.
There was certainly plenty of hatred to go around.
In 1588, the English under Queen Elizabeth had just defeated the Spanish Armada that
was sent against them and they took the initiative at sea.
The Netherlands, meanwhile, had revolted against Spanish rule in 1566 and continued a long,
long war of independence that lasted until 1648.
So now the English and the Dutch combined piracy with trade ventures.
Indeed, this was the great age of piracy.
The English also attempted to discover another passage to Asia, either across the northern
most reaches of Russia or across the top of North America, with not market success.
The Dutch headed straight for the Spice Islands on their own and one of their mariners made
a fascinating discovery, the wind patterns across the Indian Ocean known as the Roaring
Forties.
If you could catch those winds, you could achieve accelerated travel to Indonesia.
Following these winds, the Dutch found local populations who welcomed them, eager for competition
in the trade with Portugal.
Among those early Dutch ships that returned from the perilous voyage to the Indies, they
made great profits.
One indeed, one ship, made a 400% return on investment.
Now predictably, with profits like this, soon swarms of ships were heading off to the Indies,
both Dutch and English, to get a share of that wealth.
Their competition touched off a hot commercial war that would last two centuries.
The vehicles for this competition and trade were chartered monopoly companies, in essence
the first multinational corporations.
Because a trading venture was too large for one investor to finance on his own, resources
would be pooled in companies.
And indeed, the word we use today, company, originally simply meant a group of people
who shared bread, who ate the same bread, compagno.
To make the risk worth taking for these tremendous rewards, European monarchs encouraged these
companies by giving monopolies to these ventures, so they alone would be able to fulfill this
role.
There would be many such companies.
In England alone, there was the Muscovy Company trading to Russia, the Virginia Company trading
to North America, and the Royal African Company.
The Dutch had not only the Dutch East India Company, but also the Dutch West India Company,
which worked in the Americas and founded New Amsterdam, today's New York, and carved
out a huge share of the Atlantic slave trade.
To exploit the East Indies, there were also other companies, the French, Danish, Swedish,
Austrian, Spanish, and even Scottish East India companies.
What made these companies a real advance in commerce was a financial tool, the notion
of limited liability.
Earlier, a handful of merchants who cooperated on some speculative venture formed a partnership.
If it was a success, they would divide the profits.
But in case of failure, let's say a shipwreck, the partnership, and thus the partners individually
would be held liable for the losses, which could lead to a businessman being entirely
bankrupted, losing everything as a result of this speculation.
By contrast, with limited liability, when investments were pooled in joint stock, an
investor might lose, but only the sum that had been invested, not all of his personal
fortune.
As this practice developed over time, the stock that grew up would be devoted not just
to one voyage, but to the larger business of the corporation on a much longer term basis.
So our turning point, which got this whole process rolling, involves the founding of
the East India Company in England on New Year's Eve 1600, a group of London merchants met
and planned how to break in on this profitable Indies trade, and then with their plan in
hand hurried to the royal court.
On December 31st, 1600, Queen Elizabeth formally granted these 218 merchants a royal charter
for 15 years in their capacity as the company, the governor and company of merchants trading
into the East Indies.
They were allowed a monopoly on trade east of the Cape of Good Hope, and then essentially
left to their own devices.
The company would have to defend itself.
It was given the right to punish so-called interlopers, those who were trying to sneak
in and violate their monopoly, and the company in general would have to seek its fortunes
as best it could.
The business model of the corporation, which we sketched earlier, took time to develop
in the EIC.
The first voyages after 1600 were called separate voyages, because each was individually financed,
made great gains, and then the investments plus profits were returned to the investors.
But then, after 1612, joint stock voyages took their place, so the whole process became
more regular and more efficient.
English ships successfully made their journeys and established a special trading station
known as a factory, that's where our current name for a manufacturing center comes from,
in Java at Bantam in 1602.
From 1610, the English established more stations on the Indian coast for trade as a way station
on the way to the real prize, the Spiceries.
But it's at this point that we need to consider the initially far bigger and richer rival
of the EIC, the Dutch East India Company.
In Dutch, this is called the Verenigte Ost Indische Kompanie, and it went by its acronym,
the VOC, which has been called, in fact, the first global business brand, because those
initials, VOC, appeared on their buildings, their ships, and their coinage.
The Dutch company was founded just two years after the EIC, but soon built up a huge lead.
The Dutch company had capital resources ten times bigger than the EIC.
Its power reflected the tremendous wealth and success of the Netherlands, or as they
were known at the time, the United Provinces or the Dutch Republic.
At this point, the Dutch had done something amazing.
They had created the most commercially oriented society in the world.
The Dutch had grown rich on trade even as they fought for their independence in rebellion
against Spain.
In a later lecture, we're going to discuss these achievements more fully.
So here, let me just note that this was the Dutch Golden Age, from around 1570 to around
1720.
The VOC was ahead of its rivals in its organization and its financing.
This was a key to its success.
It was the first to establish permanent share capital.
It was the first to issue stocks and drew in a great number of investors from many different
parts of society, the high as well as the lowly.
The Dutch government gave the company the right to make war or peace, and even to sign
treaties on behalf of the Dutch state.
The company itself was directed by the 17 lords, with representatives chosen from the
different cities of the United Provinces.
The VOC eventually built up a huge fleet of some 150 merchant ships and 40 warships.
It had about 50,000 employees, including a private army that was stationed worldwide.
In all, the VOC would send about a million Europeans to the east in order to help with
their trading activities.
Only about a half of them survived.
It was a dangerous occupation.
The great headquarters of the VOC in the east was the city of Jakarta in Java, which
the Dutch had fortified and renamed Batavia in 1619.
Batavia is a classical Latin name for the Netherlands.
By about 1650, it's estimated, an astonishing figure, that the VOC controlled half of all
of Europe's foreign trade.
At first, the English and the Dutch, as they worked to outflank the Portuguese, were able
to coexist in the Indies.
But this rivalry soon tipped over into open war.
As the Dutch established their own spice monopoly in the Banda Islands, they increasingly
and naturally saw the English as rivals and decided that they needed to be excluded by
force.
As one of the Governor-General's of the Dutch East Indies put it in a report that he wrote
back home to the 17 lords of the VOC, he said,
"...your honors should know by experience that trade in Asia must be driven and maintained
under the protection and favor of your honor's own weapons, and that the weapons must be
paid for from the profits from the trade, so that we cannot carry on trade without war,
nor war without trade."
These tensions finally boiled over in an infamous international incident, the 1623 Amboyna Massacre.
On the island of Amboyna, today Maluku, Indonesia, English and Dutch company outposts lay very
close to one another, and in fact they looked out suspiciously at each other.
The island was a key prize for its precious clove plantations.
At one point Dutch traders from their trading post spotted a Japanese mercenary who was
working for the English who they thought was skulking about suspiciously.
They arrested him and tortured him, until he declared that the English were preparing
a surprise attack on the Dutch.
The Dutch surprised their English neighbors and took them captive, subjecting some of
them to water torture, and extracted many other improbable confessions and then executed
ten Englishmen.
When news of this got back to Europe, the English erupted, and the story was told and
retold emphasizing Dutch cruelty and rapacity.
A battle of pamphlets ensued in the press with titles like A True Relation of the Unjust,
Cruel and Barbarous Proceedings Against the English at Amboyna, which included woodcuts
of the torture scenes to inflame passions even further.
The Dutch responded with pamphlets of their own, defending their actions.
This incident had two important results.
It fueled English-Dutch tensions which tipped into wars, and it also led the EIC to reorient
its business.
Mutual hatreds led to a whole series of Anglo-Dutch wars.
This included the Anglo-Dutch wars of 1652 to 54, 1665 to 67, 1672 to 74, 1780 to 84.
You get the idea, there was a whole series of this, a constant animosity.
Curiously, this English antipathy towards the Dutch is still imprinted in the English
language.
In fact, in some expressions whose origins are obscure to most people even if they use
them.
Thus, for instance, to speak of a Dutch treat means splitting the cost of something, which
allegedly was characteristic of the cheap and miserly Dutch enemy.
While the phrase Dutch courage means kind of an artificial resolution or courage that's
been fired by alcohol, masking underlying cowardice.
To call somebody a Dutch uncle used to mean somebody who is unhelpful, super critical,
completely ungenerous the very opposite of what a true loving uncle should be.
Another outcome of this series of wars was the English capture of New Amsterdam in 1664.
They renamed it New York.
The other outcome of this violent reverse in the Spice Islands, the Ambuena massacre,
was that the EIC turned away from the Spice Islands to concentrate on trade in India.
Which until this point had been more of a way station for them on the route to the east.
In India, the EIC expanded its trade in goods like pepper, indigo, raw silk and raw cotton,
as well as textiles like silk cloth and calicoes, and salt peter, a chemical potassium nitrate
that's needed for the production of gunpowder.
Now at this point, the main power in India was the Mughal Empire, ruled by the descendants
of the Mongols, hence the name Mughal, who had swept into India from the north in the
16th century.
One of the Mughal emperors built the Taj Mahal in Agra from the 1630s, one of the greatest
architectural monuments of the world.
But by the 1700s, the Mughal Empire in India seemed in decline, and the EIC found itself
in a competition to pick up the pieces, competition with a new rival, the French East India Company.
Throughout the preceding century, the EIC had continued to evolve.
This was a period that saw tremendous and even shocking change in English politics.
A civil war had raged between the king and parliament in the 1640s, ending with the beheading
of King Charles I. A Commonwealth had been established under Oliver Cromwell, and then
the monarchy had been restored in 1660, and then in 1688 the glorious revolution had
seen the overthrow of another king, and then in 1707 Scotland and England had been united
to form Great Britain.
Through all these changes, the EIC survived, sometimes barely.
Jealous merchants from towns other than London argued against its monopoly, and the renewal
of its charter at regular intervals and its monopoly were often in doubt.
But across these changes of regime, the company did get its charter renewed.
It was experiencing success.
The directors used considerable cunning.
When a rival company was permitted in 1691 that would cut in on their trade, the EIC
bought a share of its stock and infiltrated it from within, then absorbed it.
A constant tool in gaining rechartering was the use of gifts or bribes to gain support
from the monarchy and the parliament, and all this came on top of the customs revenues
which the company's trade was bringing in and that were most welcome to the state.
Indeed, just surviving led the EIC to grow, especially from its new base in India.
The EIC built up an effective and efficient administrative apparatus.
The company itself was led by 24 directors, who conducted administration by committees,
and the overall chairman was elected by the stockholders of the company.
Below these top officials were different ranks of officers of the company, called servants
of the company.
Their ranks went all the way from the most junior, called writers, up to the post of
senior merchant.
The servants were not paid large salaries, but instead when they were posted abroad,
they were allowed to engage in trade on their own.
And this could produce new fortunes, but also complicated incentives and loyalties given
this dual role of servants in foreign lands.
Armed East Indian ships were formidable presences on the seas, carrying the goods of the EIC,
tremendous cargoes of porcelain, cotton and silk cloth, tea and coffee.
The company's famous flag was a large red and white horizontal striped flag with a British
flag in an upper corner.
Hmm, does that sound familiar?
What other flag do we know that has horizontal red and white stripes?
Obviously, the United States flag, which in early versions was almost identical to that
of the company.
So formidable was the EIC as a corporate personality that he was even jokingly spoken
of as if it were a person and called John Company.
The formal title was The Honorable Company.
Then unexpectedly, it grew even larger, taking a quantum leap with its assumption of political
rule in India.
The EIC in India contended against the French East India Company, which had been chartered
in 1664, and which had established its own bases in India, in Chandramagore, in Bengal,
and Pondicherry, near Madras.
The rival companies trained and deployed private armies, recruited from the local population
called sepoys.
They increasingly involved themselves in Indian politics, favoring one or another prince.
The key role here was ultimately played by a larger-than-lifesize figure, Sir Robert
Clive.
In unruly and unpromising youth from Shropshire nobility, Clive was sent by his family to
India to make something of himself as a lowly writer at the age of 18.
Some historians believe that he suffered from bipolar disorder, which was evidenced in exalted
highs and corresponding lows of depression.
In these local wars, Clive took on a new military role, and achieved fame, and rose with meteoric
speed through the company's ranks, gaining the honorifics Heaven-born General and Clive
of India.
Most famously in 1757, he defeated a far larger army of an Indian prince, the Nawab, who was
aligned with the French at the famous Battle of Plessis.
Clive's thousand English troops, along with 2,200 sepoys, faced an opposing army of 50,000
with war elephants and cannon at the battle site north of Calcutta.
Clive, however, had used his negotiating skills to get the military commander of the Nawab,
his enemy, Mir Jafar, to actually agree to change sides during the battle, and this
tipped the outcome.
After this famous victory, Mir Jafar was named the new Nawab of Bengal, and he ruled with
a British patronage.
Bengal, the richest province in India, now was under the control of the EIC, which ran
its taxation and civil administrative systems.
What a spectacle, a private company taking over a country.
In coming decades, the Indian holdings of the company would expand even further, and
this would form the basis for the British Empire.
Even like Clive, who made new fortunes as adventurers in the employ of the EIC, were
nicknamed Nabobs, after the Mughal name for a governor.
Nabobs were sort of cartoonish figures, examples of new voracious social climbing and ambition.
Some may recall in American politics how Nixon's vice president, Spiro Agnew, once referred
to intellectuals as nattering Nabobs of negativism.
The company had severe critics in its home country, scathing about its corruption and
abuses, including Adam Smith.
This economist argued against monopolies as an impediment to the kind of free trade
he saw as most productive.
Edmund Burke, the parliamentarian and father of conservative thought, condemned the damage
that was being done to Indian traditions, and the corrosive effects that the new wealth
of the Nabobs, who returned to Britain, was having on British society.
In the final analysis, the turning point represented by the founding of the EIC back in 1600 went
on to produce new global connections, based on the authority of trade and profit.
By the end of the 18th century, the EIC outpaced its Dutch rival by diversifying its trade
beyond just spices to include commodities like textiles and especially tea, which became
a central feature of British life.
The daily ritual of tea time was a global one, yet had tragic dimensions.
That tea from China would be sweetened with sugar from the West Indies, cultivated by
slave labor.
Fine China, like that produced by the Wedgwood Company, was part of a ritual that testified
to these global connections.
Similarly, as another example of connections, today, curry is considered the national dish
of Britain, part of this dynamic interaction.
The lives of some of the servants of the EIC were also global in dramatically new ways.
One man who prospered in company service was Elihu Yale, an American born merchant born
in Boston, who became the governor of the Madras settlement in India.
In 1718, Yale College was named in his honor because of the gifts he had made to that institution,
and even today, Yale's are also known as Elihu's.
When Yale was buried in Wales, his tomb markers stated that he was born in America, bred in
Europe, traveled in Africa, and married in Asia, and it was now hoped was in heaven.
This sort of global life spanning continents was a new testimony to early globalization.
So too, but in a different way, was the life of a man named, nicknamed, Walking Stuart,
who was once a great celebrity, but now is forgotten.
John Stuart was a London-born youth, who was sent out as a humble writer to Madras in India
in 1763, but he fell out with his employers in 1765 and had had enough.
He decided he wanted to go home, so he set out to walk back home.
He walked through Persia, through Turkey, Ethiopia, North Africa, Russia, and Europe
until he finally reached London.
He's supposed to have been the human being at that time who had walked the greatest distance,
and later it's said that he even went on an additional walking tour of the United States
and Canada.
In London, he was a famed eccentric, dressing exotically.
He was tall and lean, a vegetarian who ate only one meal a day, and always scribbling
mystic poetry.
An urban legend from London claimed that he was able to be in several places at once because
you'd meet him on your way there and then meet him again headed in another direction.
In 1822, when he died, his obituary said there must have been at least three of him because
he was everywhere.
He even appears in the poetry of Wordsworth as a mysterious traveler.
As he walked, Stewart meditated and created a distinctive personal philosophy.
Stewart argued that we all have no one fixed identity, but rather our lives are like a river,
with everything constantly being formed and dissolved, with everything always existing
in relation to something else.
His personal philosophy underlined connections in a world in motion.
Also he had apparently fallen out with the EIC over what he saw as a pretty important
human issue.
The cynical oppression of the Indians exploited without the foreigners, the English, being
interested in their languages or cultures, Stewart felt.
Here was a very modern awareness of a new globalization as well as a critical perspective
on the phenomenon of globalization.
This lecture examined a turning point in building economic structures, the multinational company.
Next we'll move to examine the building of political structures for international peace
in the 1648 Treaty of Westphalia in our next lecture.
