Many people have a passport.
We dutifully show it when we cross borders.
But do we take a moment to stop and think about what it really means?
In fact, that passport is visible proof of how our world is organized now, divided up
into different territorial units.
In this modern state system, at least theoretically, these units are sovereign, meaning that they
possess their own authority.
They have supreme and independent rights, like the right to control their territory
and make you show your passport in order to enter their territory.
In this respect, states are equals on the international plane.
This is the world we know, and it almost sometimes seems like the natural or default
mode of international organization, the sovereign state as a political powerhouse, the actor
on the international stage.
Indeed, this concept is written into the United Nations Charter of 1945, which declares the
organization is based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all of its members.
Or think of watching the Olympic Games, where we see teams of athletes representing their
individual countries march in following their individual national flags.
But how did this international order come into being?
It was not always so.
In this lecture, we will examine a key turning point in international politics with a global
impact.
This turning point came at the end of the long and traumatic Thirty Years' War in Europe
in the year 1648, a war that itself came at the tail end of about a century of religious
slaughter and warfare in the Western Christian world.
The peace settlement that ended the Thirty Years' War, called the Peace of Westphalia,
pointed international politics in a new direction.
This international order has been called the Westphalian System, denoting a system of sovereign
states interacting with one another.
Now, probably very few people think to themselves in their daily lives, well, here I am, living
in a Westphalian international system, but it is worth thinking about what this means,
as in fact, it's one of those hidden assumptions that actually structures our world up to the
present, whether we're aware of it or not.
In our course on turning points, then, this is a different kind of turning point than many
others we've seen.
It is one caused not by willed or creative invention or discovery, rather it's a turning
point that came out of sheer exhaustion, the exhaustion of religious warfare.
As a result, earlier appeals to religious authority and politics were downgraded.
Increasingly, the initiative would pass to new monarchies and some republics as the source
of authority.
In terms of how contemporaries view the world after this turning point, what their mental
maps look like, increasingly the world appeared to be one of states in a shifting balance
of power, instead of being subjected to one overarching universal authority.
Let's consider in turn how authority had been understood before this point in Europe,
then view the horrific impact of an age of religious warfare, and then assess the piece
of exhaustion itself and its unexpected results.
Much of earlier history is a contrast to our current model today of divided sovereignty
and divided authority.
Instead, the ideal that had great appeal at the start of the modern age was that of universal
authority, often expressed in empire.
For much of human history, empire has been a more common form of political organization
that people have lived under more common than a nation state or a republic.
Just look back at the lectures from the start of our course.
We recall China's Ming Empire, the central kingdom, which was supposed to embody order
and the mandate of heaven, and thus was seen as globally central and authoritative.
Or the Roman Empire, surviving in the east in Constantinople until 1453, continuing the
glory that was Rome.
So too in the European Middle Ages, authority was seen as divinely sanctioned and universal
in its claims and reach.
This link to the divine gave tremendous legitimacy.
Now that was theory, the general mindset.
Practice would be much more complicated and messy, inevitably.
In this period, church and state were intertwined in Europe, because both appealed to the source
of divine authority, and this would lead to conflicts.
Two institutions in the Middle Ages in particular had shown this earlier, the pope of the Roman
Catholic Church and the Holy Roman Empire.
The church and the imperial state were intertwined in a vivid way that would be unfamiliar to
us in the present.
The emperor often controlled who became pope in Rome, while only a pope could crown a holy
Roman emperor, making his rule official.
Who would dominate in this relationship?
Both sides sought to inherit the authority of the Roman Empire, which had expired in
the west by 476.
During the 11th and 12th centuries, as part of one of those frequent movements for reform,
a series of popes made large claims to temporal authority, creating what's been called essentially
a papal monarchy.
So for instance, in 1075, Pope Gregory VII had announced that the Roman Church was founded
by God alone, and that only the pope can with right be called universal, and went on to
claim that the pope had the right to depose the emperor.
These claims led to the so-called investiture controversy with the Holy Roman Emperor,
in which ultimately the emperor backed down, but not very sincerely.
In the 12th century, the Roman Catholic Church was at the very height of its political and
secular power.
When new monarchies arose to challenge that power, especially the king of France, Pope
Boniface VIII in 1302 announced a ringing assertion of papal power in the papal bull
labeled unam sang tam.
He declared, the temporal authority ought to be subject to the spiritual power, and
if the earthly power errs, it shall be judged by the spiritual power.
Now ironically, this very expansive statement came just at the point when the pope's position
had become untenable, because French soldiers arrested the pope.
Later popes were pressured to rule under French supervision in Avignon.
Rival popes claimed authority as well.
At one point, there were three rival popes at once.
Such scenes did much to damage the political credibility of the papacy.
The Holy Roman Empire had its own claims and its own problems as well.
This institution had been founded when Charlemagne was crowned by a pope in Rome in the year
800 to revive the glories of the Roman Empire in the West.
The name Holy in Holy Roman Empire conveyed the spiritual power that was ascribed to this
Christian Empire.
Theoretically thus, the Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire was to have primacy over all
other kings and princes in the rest of Christendom.
Symbolically he might have, but in practice the Holy Roman Empire had weakened and weakened,
shrinking in its borders mostly just to the German lands.
The throne of the Empire was not hereditary, but rather an elected office, which gave a
lot of power to the nobles who periodically elected the Emperor.
At a time when kingdoms like England, France and Spain were trying to centralize, this
state, the Holy Roman Empire, remained a futile jumble of overlapping and multiple principalities,
kingdoms, free cities, territories of bishops and of monasteries, and noble estates, many
of them tiny in size.
There were more than 300 of these units, an incredible diversity and decentralization.
So the Holy Roman Emperor could make vast symbolic claims to authority in Europe, but
those claims would be hard to enforce with this kind of power base.
No wonder that later comedians would announce that the Holy Roman Empire in fact had been
neither Holy nor Roman nor really an Empire.
So in contrast to the papacy in the Empire, in the early modern period, monarchs of new
centralizing kingdoms were on the rise, and they were not shy about reaching for religious
legitimation themselves.
So the monarchs of Spain called themselves the most Catholic monarchs, the kings of France
called themselves the most Christian monarchs, and the English kings were known as the defenders
of the faith.
Now add to this mix the explosive impact of the religious division of Christians in Europe
with the Reformation.
Since the onset of the Reformation, the breakdown in the theoretical unity of Christianity.
Religious wars were racking Europe, and even extended to other parts of the globe where
European explorers or traders ventured and ran into one another.
This sort of religious warfare was not what Luther had expected at first when he had launched
his message of religious reform within the Catholic Church in 1517.
At first the struggle was a rhetorical one, carried out from pulpits expressing different
points of view, and especially in print using the new power of Gutenberg's printing press.
In weeks of Luther announcing his 95 theses, printed copies were flying all around Germany.
Luther's writings were mass produced.
And then the opponents of Luther in the Catholic Church produced their literature in turn,
and one saw a war of flyers.
In German the word for a flyer is Flugblatt, literally a flying sheet of paper.
And these flyers, circulating throughout Germany, often decorated with vivid illustrations
and easy to post on walls as handbills, really accelerated and increased the temperature in
the debate.
The debate then became even more complex when divisions appeared in the camp of the reformers,
as Calvinists urged a doctrine of predestination disagreeing with the interpretations of the
Lutherans.
Then faithfully this theological debate in print erupted into warfare, and one saw the
scandalous spectacle of Christians killing Christians over points of doctrine.
Germany was among the places hit first as sort of the ground zero of this ferment, a
country divided between Catholics and Protestants.
Protestant princes banded together to fight against the Catholic emperor.
The war ended inconclusively, but the emperor was forced in sort of a ceasefire to acknowledge
the Lutheran princes' right to exist in Germany.
This happened with a so-called piece of Augsburg in 1555, which established as official the
formula of in Latin, cuius regio eius religio, whose rule that person's religion.
The prince gets to determine the religion of his territory.
A prince could choose which faith, Catholic or Lutheran, to establish officially in his
lands.
Calvinists, by contrast, were not recognized.
And those who were of a different faith could convert or could emigrate.
This severe formula at least gave a temporary respite for some decades before conflict flared
anew.
This was next in line.
There the French wars of religion lasted from 1562 to 1598 and included horrific atrocities
like the famous Saint Bartholomew's Day Massacre when thousands of French Calvinists
were murdered in Paris.
Religiously inflected war also erupted in the Netherlands, which had been under Spanish
rule.
The Calvinist Dutch population rose up in revolt against their Catholic Spanish rulers
in 1568.
And this was the start of the so-called 80 years war for independence for the Dutch,
which they finally only achieved in 1648 at the Peace of Westphalia.
So religious war and crusade were in the air.
Even the disastrous launching of the Spanish armada against England in 1588, which failed,
was seen by the Spanish as a kind of holy fight or crusade against English heretics.
Then the Thirty Years War broke out in earnest in the Holy Roman Empire and the German lands
in 1618.
You'll be relieved to hear that I will spare you a blow-by-blow account of this grinding,
unending, and ultimately indecisive war.
In her classic history of this war, British historian Dame Veronica Wedgwood called it
the outstanding example in European history of meaningless conflict.
And if you know something about European history, you know that that's really saying something.
So let me just offer a brief overview.
The war started absurdly with imperial messengers being thrown out of a window in Prague by
Protestant leaders in Bohemia who were defying their Catholic emperor.
This is the famous defenestration of Prague, the throwing out of a window.
The messengers, by the way, miraculously survived this ordeal.
And then the war was on, spreading from Bohemia into the German lands proper, as Protestants
and Catholics rallied to their princes, and war was engaged.
In the first years, things went so well for the Catholic emperor that he must have been
exultant, thinking that perhaps his universal claims to authority might not be so impractical
after all if things continued to go this way.
But ironically, precisely because the emperor was doing well, other outside powers got dragged
in to balance him.
The kingdoms of Denmark and Sweden entered the war as Protestant champions to save their
co-religionists fighting against the emperor.
But increasingly, something strange was happening.
What had started as a religiously motivated conflict mutated, and over time became something
less coherent, rather than a religious conflict with clear lines, more of a multi-sided battle
royale.
The exhibit A for this is that Catholic France also entered the war, but not on the Catholic
side.
They entered the war against the emperor and against Spain on the side of Protestant allies.
Eventually, more than 200 states, great and small, were participating in the Thirty Years
War.
The war grew ever more muddled, with the Dutch-Spanish war folded in as well.
And the conflict even extended beyond Europe worldwide.
For instance, there was fighting between the Dutch and the Spanish in Brazil, and a Dutch
admiral actually captured the famous Spanish treasure fleet in harbor in Cuba in 1628 in
a great victory.
And the war went on and on and on.
So let me state the obvious.
To many ordinary people caught up in this war, the claims and counterclaims, political
as well as religious, seemed increasingly meaningless when set against their own experience of suffering.
The German lands were destroyed thoroughly in this man-made disaster.
Germany became the playground for huge mercenary armies, fighting no longer out of conviction
but rather for whoever would pay best, and living off the land, plundering, pillaging,
raping, and killing.
These mercenaries, by the way, did leave one tiny cultural contribution which endures
into our own times.
In fact, men's neckties originated with Croatian mercenaries who wore colorful cloths knotted
around their necks.
And in parts of Europe to this very day, neckties are sometimes still called cravats, which simply
means a Croatian or something in the Croatian style.
In this war, some million soldiers took part, and it's estimated that about a third of them
died.
But keep this in mind.
The civilian losses were far greater.
Historians are still having a vigorous debate today about just how hard Germany at the center
of all this was ravaged by the war.
But even if you take current, lower estimates, that still puts the number of deaths at about
15 to 20 percent of the entire German population of the time, over three million people.
Some areas were hit harder than others.
When Swedish armies captured the hometown of Gutenberg, Mainz, that city lost 40 percent
of its people.
The city of Augsburg lost half its population.
Many cities were occupied repeatedly, over and over again.
Most notoriously, when the besieged city of Magdeburg, held by the Protestants, was captured
by the Catholic imperial forces, the population was put to the sword.
So there's no wonder that one anonymous German poet sighed with a deep, deep anguish that
we can still hear in his verses today that the houses are burned out, the churches are
destroyed, the villages are looted, the food has been eaten.
One sees the cities, the hopes of the land in flames.
No one can recognize any more the splendor of the land.
Understandably, a great and general longing for peace grew.
Because the war was not decided by one final and conclusive victory that gave decisive
victory to one side or another, this would need to be ended by a piece of compromise.
And obviously, it would need to be based on principles other than the religious orthodoxies
that had sparked the conflict to begin with.
So negotiations opened in the West German land of Westphalia in 1643.
It was an area of mixed Catholic and Protestant population.
But oddly enough, the negotiations coincided with fighting.
The fighting continued even as talks were going on, which complicated the discussions
immensely.
You can imagine this.
If one side was winning, it was a lot less likely to make concessions and vice versa.
So strangely enough, war-making and peacemaking were going on at the same time.
The negotiations took place in two separate towns, Munster and Osnabruck.
These towns were diplomatically exempted from any further warfare.
The Empire's negotiations with Sweden took place in Osnabruck and the negotiations with
France and Spain in Munster, running in parallel.
Around 200 rulers and thousands of diplomatic officials participated.
These delegations could be huge.
And in fact, the Swedes brought their own personal shopper, just to have him along.
And the negotiations dragged on for five years as well.
In part, this was because it was unprecedented.
Nothing quite like these negotiations had ever happened before.
This was a peace congress for all of Europe to establish a pox generalis, a general peace.
Diplomatic ceremony and etiquette, questions of who had precedence over whom in entering
a hall, for instance, were symbolic matters reflecting authority that this age took very
seriously.
So the first six months were taken up with these precedence questions.
For instance, the representatives of the Dutch Republic scandalized some old-fashioned
diplomats by insisting on being called Excellency, just like the representatives of kings.
This seemed outrageous to conservatives.
Such disputes inevitably prolonged the negotiations.
Crucial, however, is to notice that this conference was not presided over by a universally recognized
authority.
It was not presided over by the Holy Roman Emperor.
After all, he was one of the parties to the war.
Nor were these negotiations presided over by the Pope, because the Pope refused to recognize
agreements with the Protestants, who in turn rejected his claims to authority.
What a contrast to the way in which we saw in an earlier lecture, the way in which Spain
and Portugal had called on the Pope to settle a political question, to mediate their Treaty
of Tordesillas in 1494, after Columbus's voyages, essentially to divide up the world.
The claims to authority of the Emperor and the Pope clearly were not central to these
proceedings.
So, what new order did emerge?
The treaties that were arrived at confirmed that rulers of territories would have superiority
in all matters, religious as well as political, in their own lands.
The religious compromise of this treaty essentially repeated the formula of the Peace of Augsburg
of 1555, almost a century ago.
This must have been a sad thing for keen observers to recognize.
There had been all this war and suffering, and the result was essentially something that
had been arrived at about a century ago.
In fact, the new formula did recognize some changes.
The Calvinists, for instance, were included in the settlement.
The settlement also guaranteed the ability of religious minorities to the practice of
their religion in territories, so it already represented a gesture towards recognizing the
rights of minorities.
In general, these treaties moved towards sovereign independence for territorial rulers, as a
practical solution, not as a theoretical model.
The United Provinces, and Switzerland, were recognized as independent, and within the
Holy Roman Empire, the princes of the empire were given the right to make peace or war
at will, just not to make war against the emperor.
All of this further weakened the remaining structures of the Holy Roman Empire, as did
the loss of German territories to France and Sweden.
In many ways, Germany would remain a power vacuum until it was nationally unified later
in the 19th century.
So it's not a coincidence that Adolf Hitler and the Nazis would later often rant about
the Thirty Years' War and the unjust peace of Westphalia as Germany's humiliation that
must never be repeated, and then, of course, the Nazis went on to bring about just such
a disaster themselves.
The negotiations were followed anxiously by a general public, and this further showed
the impact of the print revolution.
The first newspapers were started in Germany in this time, and they reported to a wider
public how the peacemaking was going.
The treaties were finally ceremonially signed on October 24, 1648.
What actually happened when news spread of the peace?
How do you end a Thirty Years' span of war?
In Prague and Bohemia, today the Czech Republic, where the war began, the church bells rang
and rang and rang in long, deafening peals of joy.
In Germany, in countless villages and towns, assuming of course they were still standing,
special celebration feasts were organized.
Commemorative coins and prints featured one symbol in particular, the dove with an olive
branch, a symbol for peace that's still current today.
But the good news traveled very slowly to places that were further away.
In the Moluccas, the Spice Islands, the Dutch actually beat the Spanish in a great battle
in 1649, a year after the treaty had been signed establishing peace because none of
them had yet heard the news from Europe.
When Pope Innocent learned of this treaty, he condemned it.
In the papal bull entitled Zelo Domus Dei, he declared it, quote, null, void, invalid,
iniquitous, unjust, damnable, reprobate, inane, and devoid of meaning for all time, end quote.
That's a pretty harsh review.
He didn't like it.
But this protest does not mean that the treaty produced a new secular politics, some sort
of total break with the past.
In fact, the opening text of the treaties started with the pious and shared hope, quote, that
there shall be a Christian and universal peace and a perpetual true and sincere amity, end
quote.
Religion remained important.
So, what was the ultimate significance of this turning point?
First, the Westphalian international system, as it's been called, involved the recognition
that world politics would not be under the rule of one universal authority, whether the
Pope or the Holy Roman Empire.
Instead, there would be a constant shifting dynamic interplay of states seeking to preserve
their sovereignty and their own advantage.
The negotiators had not aimed to create a new world around a new model.
If you spoke to them about the Westphalian model they were creating, they would not have
understood what you were talking about.
Rather, they were seeking a pragmatic solution.
And yet their pragmatic solution pointed towards a new conception of international order and
authority.
Now, the worldview of contemporaries increasingly saw international politics not in terms of
a divinely ordained hierarchy, but rather in terms of balance, the interaction of these
sovereign states.
The concept of the balance of power would be a key model for how the world works politically
up to our own times.
Just check the front pages of newspapers.
Some scholars today ask whether we are now moving past the Westphalian settlement.
Some examples.
The European Union involves seeding or pooling individual countries' sovereignty to achieve
a more perfect union.
Or another example, the Internet and the forms of community that can be built in cyberspace
are no longer territorial.
So where does that leave the sovereignty of the territorial state?
Other scholars pose questions about sovereignty itself.
It excludes outside interference of other powers and domestic issues.
But what happens when a sovereign state uses its powers to abuse people under its control
or to commit genocide?
May outside powers justifiably intervene?
Or is there, in fact, as some have suggested, a duty to intervene and to protect?
These kinds of questions are urgent in our own times and are still being worked out.
Second, this turning point was not one that was carefully and consciously planned.
The most immediate priority for the negotiators was just ending the torment of their continent,
to craft a piece of exhaustion and end the scandal of doctrinal slaughter.
The changes that they introduced happened not for abstract theoretical reasons, but out
of pragmatism.
So the piece of Westphalia was not the singular moment where all of this happened at once.
Whether it started a movement towards sovereignty.
The movement towards sovereignty as a model predated 1648 and continued afterwards.
This was not the case of an absolute and clean break, but it was nonetheless a turning point.
At the ground level, for ordinary people, this new model of territorial sovereignty
brought authority closer to their own lives, but only slowly and over time.
To begin with, the main emotion of everyday people was simply relief that the war was
over at last.
Third, and finally, the piece of Westphalia had lasting effects as a precedent for later
peacemaking.
Obviously, the piece of Westphalia did not end future wars, but it did give a template
for how to negotiate.
The very institution of an international peace congress could now be duplicated and was at
the negotiations for the Treaty of Versailles after World War I, or in countless summit
meetings in our own times.
The desire for peace, and the will for peace that had been powerfully demonstrated in 1648,
remain relevant.
Also very relevant for peacemaking was the intellectual shift that the horrors of war
produced.
The very notion of using violence to impose and enforce religious truth became increasingly
delegitimized.
Yes, wars continued, and religion remained important, but this shift was an important
and necessary one to begin.
In this lecture, we surveyed a vital turning point that, unbeknownst to most people today,
still shapes how we live, how international politics are done today.
That's big.
By contrast, we'll consider the discovery of small worlds, especially a scene through
the revolutionary power of the microscope during the Dutch Golden Age in our next lecture.
