We usually think of Paris in such positive terms, a capital of style, the glamorous and
sophisticated city of light, alive with sparkling new ideas, dynamism, elegance, and all that
is true, but long ago it was also something else, a capital of censorship and the shutting
down of ideas.
Consider this scene from 1746 in bustling downtown Paris.
We stand at the Place de Grève in front of the City Hall.
This is where public executions take place, in front of a vast crowd of jeering, cheering,
and enthusiastic onlookers.
We stand in just such a crowd today.
We smell a fire that has been lit and hear crackling flames, and then a hush falls on
the crowd as the city's hangman steps forward.
He raises up a pamphlet high in the air and then with a grunt he tears it in half, then
tears those pieces, and then the pieces of those pieces, and finally throws all of the
tattered shreds of paper into the fire.
This was the fate which the authorities of the city of Paris had ordered for a pamphlet
mildly entitled Philosophical Thoughts that was critical of traditional religion.
Its young author, Denis Diderot, was not burned that day, but he would spend time in prison
and lived in fear of official persecution.
Unlike the Dutch society we discussed in our previous lecture, France in the early 18th
century was not marked by toleration and openness.
The tone had been set decades earlier by the Sun King Louis XIV, the very model of an absolutist
ruler who proclaimed, I am the state.
He revoked toleration for Protestants and punished critics of his rule.
France was a place where so-called heretics could be executed for their words and ideas.
Nevertheless, over two decades, Diderot and fellow writers went on to produce a daring
major printed work, The Enlightenment Encyclopedia, that proved to be a turning point for modern
history.
From 1751 to 1772, Diderot and his fellows worked to produce the Encyclopédie, subtitled
A Systematic Dictionary of the Sciences, Arts and Crafts by a Company of Men of Letters,
with Denis Diderot and Jean LeRond d'Alembert as editors.
It was not the first Encyclopedia, or Comprehensive Reference Guide, but nonetheless it was decisive
and led to profound changes in the worldview of contemporaries which we associate with
the movement of the Enlightenment, a general movement to replace tradition and faith with
reason, science and the ideal of useful knowledge.
The avowed aim of the Encyclopédie was nothing less than to, quote, change the way people
think, end quote, the most ambitious change of all.
This was not a new technology.
Rather, it was a use of an earlier revolutionary technology, Gutenberg's printing press, for
an ambitious project of making accessible and useful all of human knowledge.
The world might be comprehensively knowable and accessible.
This project of making human knowledge useful helped speed the Industrial Revolution.
Accessibility was key.
The Encyclopédie aimed to reach all of humanity as a potential audience.
This was in stark contrast with pre-modern ages when a class of clerics or scribes held
secret knowledge, or when a guild of artisans held the secrets of their craft or trade.
Looking forward, there are parallels also in our own times as the Internet and the instant
availability of information is held up as an ideal.
And the great promise held by both the Enlightenment and the project of the Encyclopédie was,
in a word, progress.
In our examination in these lectures of shifting sources of authority and the advent of that
problematic thing we call modernity, this was a decisive moment.
Where earlier ages had looked to the authority of the past, now progress in the future was
invoked to shift authority to the future itself.
To put this project into context, we should note that there had been many earlier Encyclopedias.
Obviously, the idea of collecting all known things in a comprehensive way is very attractive.
An astonishing Chinese version actually appeared in the time of the voyages of Chenghe during
the Ming dynasty.
This was called the Yongle Encyclopedia, and when it was completed in 1408, it was the
largest Encyclopedia of the Age.
Thousands of scholars had worked to produce more than 22,000 manuscript rolls in what
was to be a complete collection of all of Chinese literature and texts.
Among many other such ventures in the Christian world was a notable Encyclopedic work in Latin
that Gutenberg had published with his early printing press, the Katolikon, or Universal
Dictionary.
The Enlightenment reinforced what we might call the Encyclopedic urge to catalogue, to
classify, and order by means of reason.
In the 18th century, there were more than 50 such Encyclopedia projects, but the Encyclopédie
stands out, apart from all of these, for reasons we will discuss.
For starters, none of the other Encyclopedias started with a fistfight.
In 1745, a rich Parisian publisher named André Le Breton had hired a young Englishman
who was in Paris to translate a two-volume English dictionary for him so that it could
be published in French.
Breton was so enthusiastic about the project that he invested money in it.
Then, later, he learned with horror that after a long time almost nothing had been done.
The young Englishman turned out to be both very lazy, and also endowed with very bad
French skills, and these were both very negative traits in a translator.
In fact, the young man didn't even own a copy of the book he was supposed to translate,
so it's not really surprising that he'd made so little progress.
Furious out of his mind at learning of this, Breton went after the Englishman, and worked
him over with his hands and with a cane.
Afterwards, the young Englishman tried to sue Le Breton for this assault, but the court
sided with the publisher, feeling he'd been provoked.
Now, Le Breton had to worry about saving his project.
With three other partners, he approached a young writer of talent in Paris, Denise
Diderot, to undertake the work in cooperation with a young mathematician d'Alembert.
In short order, however, the project morphed, changing into something quite different and
incomparably more ambitious.
Instead of just a translation of an English text, why not produce something original and
strikingly new?
The investors were intrigued, they agreed, and so plans went ahead.
Now, as was customary at the time, the book was to be sold not at bookshops, but by subscription.
The subscribers receiving the promised multiple volumes as they were produced until they had
the full set.
At a time when print runs were small, this project, by contrast, garnered many subscriptions,
some 4,500 in France and across Europe more generally.
As you can see, this was an international audience, in fact, more than half of the subscriptions
for the project came from outside France.
As the work progressed, additional volumes became necessary, more than had been promised
in the original prospectus for subscribers.
And in fact, later, one set of subscribers tried to sue for breach of contract given
that the final product cost much more than they had been told to begin with, but they
also were not successful in their lawsuit.
Eventually, there would be 17 volumes of text and another 11 volumes of illustrations.
The scope was vast.
The Encyclopédie had 72,000 entries and more than 2,500 plates of illustrations.
This was the largest reference work and publishing project of its time.
It was read by individuals, families, by reading clubs and societies, and all of them took
in its message of enlightenment.
So what was this exciting and new set of ideas called the Enlightenment?
The first thing to note is that the very name Enlightenment proclaimed that a new age was
dawning, setting it off by implication from the alleged darkness of the past.
Beyond this, one slogan of the Enlightenment as a movement was, dare to know.
What might humans not achieve if only they dared to use their reason and use their rational
faculties?
The Enlightenment was an intellectual, social, and political movement that aimed to take
the scientific method, as exemplified by Levenhoek in a previous lecture, out of the laboratory
or out of the scholar's study and to apply it to all spheres of life.
The imperative was to break with the past in order to create possibilities for progress,
to reject old ways, those habits and traditions of the past, to make anew on the basis of
reason.
Reason, science, and utility or usefulness were the watchwords of Enlightenment thinkers
or philosophes, lovers of knowledge, as they like to be called.
These values were opposed to traditional revealed religion, which the philosophes considered
to be organized superstition and fanaticism.
Inspired by Newton's discoveries and the image of a world machine that obeyed natural
laws, many philosophes were dais.
That's to say, they believed not in Christian dogma, but that a supreme being existed who
ordered the universe and then stepped out of it, like an absent watchmaker.
His work would continue to work on the principles he'd laid down.
And then the implication was that the business of rational beings was to understand the scientific
truths that were encoded in the world and on the basis of these laws to improve and
perfect human existence.
This would be the enchanting promise of human progress.
The Enlightenment then was offering a comprehensive explanation of how the world worked and what
it all meant.
It was in a sense the first of the modern secular ideologies, later to be followed
by liberalism, nationalism, socialism, fascism, the whole series of isms that have shaped
the modern world.
The movement was international, but was strongest in France.
Enlightenment ideas permeated the Encyclopédie through and through.
The very word encyclopedia conveyed a particular vision of the world.
Enlightenment meant that the world was knowable.
The several parts of the word encyclopédie were from Greek, from kiklos, or circle on
the one hand, and pedea, or knowledge, so that an encyclopedia, this is what the word
meant, was a chaining together of what is known.
An establishing of connections and interrelations.
The editors of the encyclopedia were convinced all knowledge is interconnected.
And by a splendid coincidence, this very assertion is also one of the aims of our course,
to show connections and history.
Beyond this assertion of comprehensive knowledge, the Enlightenment message also was encoded
rather than out in the open.
Diderot and his friends needed to be quite careful.
They were writing under censorship.
Books that were printed in the Netherlands, famous for their freedom of ideas, could afford
to be open, but this project was set in Paris of all places, under the eye of the authorities.
In fact, it's often been pointed out that anybody who now goes to the library and reads
the original encyclopédie expecting to discover wild revolutionary statements in the text
is going to be very disappointed.
Instead, these radical thoughts were smuggled in, or only slyly hinted at.
Consider, for example, the explanation that the editors gave for how all human knowledge
was structured.
They offered in the encyclopédie a diagram of all of the branches of knowledge.
Knowledge as a tree, essentially.
And different branches were astronomy, geology, zoology, applied sciences, the humanities,
and so on.
Remarkably, they called this their world map, or mape-monde.
Well from our lecture on Columbus that the mape-monde had been cosmological depictions
of the medieval worldview.
This was the Enlightenment's version.
This was a cosmology or worldview of the Enlightenment, and to look closely at the diagram reveals
a subversive message.
In the tree, religion, early resource of authority, is set somewhere way out in the outer branches
of the tree, next to the branches for superstitions, fortune-telling, and black magic.
What in earlier centuries had been a supreme authority was being set aside by the philosophes.
The alphabetical order of entries, rather than grouping them by topic or by some other
principle, was in fact both democratizing and systematic, and the editors were really
pleased by it.
But it had some challenges.
It meant that the editors would have to have a comprehensive plan for all of the volumes
from the outset so that they wouldn't miss particular topics.
Especially subtle in telling was how the editors used cross-referencing as a tactic.
That had not been common in earlier reference works, and they used their cross-referencing
in a way that was deliberately subversive and ironic.
It was really a form of sardonic commentary on what their true, hidden opinions were.
To give the most famous example, consider the entry in the encyclopedia on cannibalism.
The cross-reference to cannibalism directed readers to other entries in the encyclopedia
for the Christian sacrament of the Eucharist, which for many Christians was the partaking
of their Savior's body and blood for salvation.
Beyond such veiled subversive meanings, the explicit message of the text did have huge
implications.
That message was that practical trades and crafts were noble and useful, and that usefulness
was a source of authority.
The fact that Diderot himself was the son of a master craftsman clearly shaped his strong
conviction.
As Diderot wrote, too much has been written on the sciences, not enough has been written
well on most of the liberal arts, almost nothing has been written on the mechanical arts.
That meant for Diderot that useful people were being demeaned and slighted.
As he exclaimed at a later point, what bizarre judgments we make.
We require that people are usefully occupied, and we despise useful men."
The implications of this conviction were vast.
The encyclopedia would feature in its pages craftsmen and artisans and technical experts,
and would have very little to say about kings and warlords and saints.
In fact, the encyclopedia had no biographical entries.
Throughout the text, especially in ironic comments, contributors added criticisms of
this status quo and of established power whether that power was religious or political.
They carefully scorned despotism or a divine right of kings, arguing in favor of a reformed
political system where a monarchy would be sensitive to its subjects in society but they
never called for revolutionary overthrow.
Raising up the dignity of craftsmen and workers would mean lowering the exalted social positions
of aristocracy and clergy and careful readers saw this.
To dignify usefulness as a virtue, the writers of the encyclopedia sought to capture in their
pages the techniques and secrets of the trades of artisans.
To do this, they visited workshops and consulted with the tradesmen to get the details just
right.
Many detailed and careful engravings in the encyclopedia also showed artisans at work
and celebrated their productivity and their usefulness.
Ironically, some of these very guild craftsmen who were being observed by encyclopedia writers
resisted giving away their secrets of the trade.
They feared the spreading of this knowledge.
Another first-rate demonstration of how utility was celebrated connects up with an earlier
lecture of ours on 1492 and the Columbian Exchange.
That key example of the transplantation involved in the Columbian Exchange, the potato.
Let's look at what the entry for potato had to say about what was still at this point
a rather new and unpopular root vegetable for Europeans.
The encyclopedia did not praise the potato's taste.
It said that a potato really was not very enjoyable, kind of tasteless and starchy,
and not much improved no matter how you cooked or prepared it.
Also, it was said to cause flatulence.
So this was clearly not a very ringing endorsement.
But the encyclopedia still concluded that the potato was useful for those who wanted
nutritious and healthy food to fuel work, and thus was a very suitable dish for peasants
and laborers.
Another shocking aspect of the encyclopedia was its unapologetic novelty.
In earlier times, even innovative thinkers would harken back to the past, to the classics,
to make a claim for authority.
Call the Renaissance a rebirth or a recovery of classical knowledge.
Or remember how the earliest printers following Gutenberg had sought to present even this innovation
as something in continuity with handwriting, artificial writing.
By contrast, the editors of the encyclopedia insisted on the modernity of their project,
its fundamental discontinuity with the past.
In his introduction, Diderot stated that only this age, his time, could have produced such
a thing that, quote, it could only have been the endeavor of a philosophical century.
This age has dawned.
It takes more intellectual daring than earlier ages had had to produce such a product.
Diderot also declared, quote, all things must be examined, debated, investigated, without
exception, and without regard for anyone's feelings.
We have for quite some time needed a reasoning age when men would no longer seek the rules
in classical authors, but in nature, end quote, shocking sentiments.
Who was this man who announced such new claims so boldly?
Denis Diderot was born in 1713 in Langre, out in the French provinces, into a lower middle
class family.
His origins actually did much to shape his outlook and agenda.
His father was a master cutler, but had hopes for his intelligent son to advance in life
by entering the Catholic Church as a cleric.
So the father sent his son to Paris to be educated by Jesuits and to make a successful
career he hoped in the Church.
Instead, once in Paris, Diderot set out to become an independent writer, a man of letters.
He married, against his father's wishes, but this relationship soured as he pursued
mistresses.
Diderot's first works were translations of English philosophical and scientific works.
His own early independent writings, as we saw at the opening of the lecture, were not
well received by the authorities, especially for his criticism of Christian religion.
This man, who had been on the path to the priesthood, instead turned decisively against
Christianity.
As the years went by, his atheism became stronger, and he avowed a materialistic view of the
world.
One of his essays provoked the authorities, and in 1749 led to his being imprisoned in
the fortress of Vincennes for three months.
Later, Diderot would write philosophical novels, plays, treatises on drama, and art criticism.
He grew increasingly fierce in his condemnation of European imperialism and slavery as great
crimes being imposed on the rest of the world.
But we must not forget that the encyclopedia was emphatically not a project of one man,
not just Diderot.
Diderot's co-editor to begin with was D'Alembert, the illegitimate son of a minor noble who
went on to become a talented and famous scientist.
These editors recruited more than 160 other contributors, fellow encyclopedists.
They were a diverse group of men, and there were perhaps a few women there hiding under
pseudonyms.
They included priests, aristocrats, middle-class and lower middle-class writers, all participants
in that Republic of Letters that had grown up with the world of the new printing press.
And they were proud of the title, Philosoph.
Let's hear what the entry on Philosoph in the encyclopedia had to say.
Quote, reason is to the philosopher what grace is to the Christian.
Grace causes the Christian to act, reason the philosopher, end quote.
And further, the text announced, while others walk in darkness, steered by their passions,
the Philosoph has reason to light his way.
Contributors to the encyclopedia also included celebrities like Voltaire and Rousseau.
Less well known, but still deserving of mention, was Louis de Jocours, who increasingly and
selflessly carried the real work of the encyclopedia.
He was eventually writing eight entries a day, and some historians estimate that he may have
written about 27% of all of the entries of the encyclopedia.
The encyclopedia had many enemies.
In part, the controversies which it unleashed were deliberate.
The philosophs enjoyed antagonizing those whom they saw as opponents of progress, and scandal
like that actually stimulated even more general interest in the encyclopedia.
But this could be a dangerous game.
Royal orders threatened death for those whose writing or publishing or selling of works were
seen as treasonous.
The Jesuits, who also had their own rival encyclopedia project going at the same time,
urged the Enlightenment encyclopedia with plagiarism and sedition.
The encyclopedia was allowed to continue under the supervision of three theologians who were
ready to censor it at a moment's notice.
And then more controversy followed, until finally in 1759 the French state simply revoked
totally the authorization for this work.
But – and this is astonishing – one key person, friendly to the project, worked out
a way for it to continue being produced.
That person was none other than the French chief censor himself.
He and other authorities looked the other way as work continued.
Why?
Well in part, some of them sympathized with the philosophes, but another motivation was
actually economic.
A thousand printers, bookbinders, and booksellers in Paris were employed by this big undertaking.
And to shut it down would have represented a great economic blow to the city.
Here we see the economic motive at work, as in our lecture about the rival international
trading companies of this age.
When the last ten volumes of text appeared, they bore false publication information alleging
that they had been produced in Switzerland.
Pope Clement XIII condemned the work, and the Catholic Church placed it on the index
of forbidden books.
The Pope ordered all copies of the encyclopedia owned by Catholics to be turned in to be burned.
But few were.
Another exalted fan of the encyclopedia combined support with censorship.
That was Catherine the Great of Russia, the Empress, the greatest of the enlightened despots
of the age.
On hearing that Dita Rowe had fallen on hard times and lacked money, she bought his personal
library and then turned around to employ him as her librarian.
The books were to stay with him in Paris as long as he was alive.
This was a generous gesture.
It was an example of elegant patronage, yet Catherine did not spread the ideas of the
encyclopedia among her subjects.
These ideas were too subversive to be shared in Russia.
So what was the greatest impact of the encyclopedia?
The encyclopedia was reprinted in multiple editions, reaching an estimated 25,000 sets.
And then in addition, scores of pirated and plagiarized editions also followed.
Remember this is the age before copyright, all of which spread the message even further.
The success of the encyclopedia inspired an English language project, the Encyclopedia
Britannica.
In our own times, in 2010, the Encyclopedia Britannica published its last print edition
going online.
The encyclopedia, interestingly enough, is also available online for you to consult.
Dita Rowe would have been very pleased.
As the thought of the encyclopedia, as he conceived of it, was a knowledge machine.
Today we might say a kind of search engine.
It is probable that Dita Rowe also would have been delighted with Wikipedia as a vast, open,
accessible, encyclopedic project.
In the longest term, the encyclopedia pointed towards the Industrial Revolution, its emphasis
on practical craft, on utility, the improvement of quality, the encouragement of technological
progress, all of these would be key values of that later transformation of economics
and production, the Industrial Revolution.
More broadly still, the encyclopedia announced and encouraged changed views of authority.
Dita Rowe himself had written, No man has received from nature the right to command others.
Any political authority needed to be agreed upon, as in a contract, and it needed to be
rational.
The laws of reason were paramount.
Obviously, not everyone agreed with this understanding of the Enlightenment, or this
reconfiguration of authority.
The Irish-born British statesman and philosopher Edmund Burke, often considered the founder
of conservatism, had his doubts.
Recall from our lecture on the East India Company that Burke had castigated British colonial
rule in India for destroying ancient customs and ways of life.
He worried also that in Europe, the abstract theorizing and universal principles of the
philosophes threatened to dissolve in irony and the cold light of reason, those attributes
of society that are not founded on reason, but are still valuable, ties of tradition,
feeling, conviction, and faith.
Similarly, the German Enlightenment thinker Johann Gottfried Herder feared that the universalizing
tendencies of the Enlightenment that he was participating in could devastate cultural
diversity, that mosaic of a thousand different ways of being human, different languages,
literatures, and ways of life.
It could all be melted down into one universal culture, and that he thought would be a loss.
The debate would continue, and the debate still continues, down to our own day.
For his part, Diderot, towards the end of his life, actually believed that he had been
a failure, that the encyclopedia had not succeeded in becoming what it might have been.
Why?
When the encyclopedia was nearly completed, he was devastated to discover that his publisher
had actually secretly toned down some of his controversial entries, and this colored how
he viewed his entire project.
And yet, the impact of the encyclopedia was enormous.
When Diderot died in 1784, his last words were, the first step towards philosophy is
incredulity, not to believe.
This was a radical message.
Testing everything was necessary.
In the decades to come, when empires and kingdoms were tested, in part by the ideas of the encyclopedia,
the result would be revolutions.
We will consider one of those, the American Revolution and the Constitution it produced,
in our next lecture.
