History, like lightning, can strike twice in the same place.
It's 1787, and it's a beautiful fall day in the city of Philadelphia.
On this very spot, where earlier the American Declaration of Independence had been signed
back in 1776, now another crucial event has just taken place of even greater importance.
Delegates from the states have gathered, and throughout this summer they've worked to
put the young nation on a sounder footing by writing a new constitution which will replace
the weak and ineffectual articles of confederation.
By September 17th, 1787, they were done, and prepared to present their plan to the public.
One of my very favorite historical stories starts right here.
That day, the elderly and world-famous scientist and Enlightenment philosopher Benjamin Franklin
is leaving Independence Hall along with his fellows after months of hard work.
Franklin's health has been poor, but he has suffered through all of those long debates
and discussions about the future of his country because he feels it's worth it.
As Franklin steps into the street, a lady shouts out to him,
Well, doctor, what have we got, a republic or a monarchy?
Benjamin Franklin turns to her slowly, and with that characteristic sly smile of his,
he replies, A republic, if you can keep it.
To me, this story is perfect.
It shows awareness of the new, a sense of the noble and modern achievement of creating
self-rule.
Indeed, self-rule is what a republic means, from the Latin res publica, the public or
common matter.
And yet, Franklin's quip also has a keen sense of historical precariousness.
The outcome is not certain.
So we can ask, how did the Americans keep their republic?
Actually, the best place to start is to ask why anyone would want to keep a republic.
In the worldview of the 18th century around the world, republics were mostly seen as
not desirable or even natural.
A republic, to most sophisticated thinkers, meant a form of government that was small,
weak, and in the end, temporary.
Republics contrasted sharply with the apparent power and superior organization and authority
and the sheer glory of absolutist kings and queens.
In ancient times, the Greek city-state republics had fallen.
The Roman Republic had become an empire.
Italian city-state republics of the Renaissance had also collapsed.
The Commonwealth of Poland and Lithuania, a veritable republic for aristocrats, was
infamous at this time for being too democratic to survive.
Even the Dutch Republic, whose golden age we discussed in a previous lecture, had been
a dynamic and strong mercantile state, but now was in terminal decline politically and
economically.
And the Swiss Confederation was too small and remote to really be held up as a model
generally for everyone.
So in a word, republics seem faded to failure.
That makes the story of this lecture all the more compelling.
The American revolutionaries challenged these assumptions and overthrew them.
After winning independence, they set about building for themselves a republic that would
stand the test of time.
To do so, they constructed, through debate and compromise, a new constitution that separated
powers, balanced contending interests, and proved flexible enough for the future of a
growing nation.
What was envisioned by the revolutionaries was authority based on popular sovereignty,
not on the will of one arbitrary ruler.
This was to be a government of laws, not of men.
But, and to me this is a beautiful paradox, in order for this new constitution to survive
and become established and cemented in a sense, this government of laws and not men actually
needed the right man to serve it.
That indispensable man was George Washington, who really had to invent the role of being
father of his country and president.
The American Revolution and the building of that durable constitutional order launched
a very new, modern political project, the republic based on popular sovereignty, government
of the people, by the people, and for the people we might call it.
At the deepest level, the project of popular sovereignty was a new turning point that was
built on top of an earlier turning point which we examined in a previous lecture.
That is, the movement towards sovereign states from the piece of Westphalia of 1648.
As the American experiment evolved, many thinkers and political leaders worldwide were transfixed
observing this daring undertaking.
In our next lecture, we will consider another event that also pointed in this direction,
but turned out very differently, the French Revolution.
American and French events went in radically different directions, establishing two different
models of popular sovereignty for the future with global effects into our own day.
These crucial events, just a few years apart, had factors in common.
They shared a common origin in a world war.
The impact of the printing press electrified both, and they were inspired by Enlightenment
ideas, though not always the same ideas from that movement.
And also, some people were actors in both sets of events.
In our lectures, we'll observe some of those lives that bridged the revolutionary processes.
So how did it come to pass that English colonies in North America found themselves in revolt?
Paradoxically, the revolt was sparked precisely because the colonists thought of themselves
as Englishmen, with full rights of Englishmen.
Only very slowly, over time, would a self-understanding of being something new and different Americans
finally arise.
And the basis for that distinctively American colonial identity actually had been laid decades
before, even if slowly and gradually and unconsciously, by three particular factors.
First, from the time of their foundings, the American colonies had largely been left in
a state of what we might call benign neglect by the British administration, rather than
being subjected to really centralized oversight.
As a result, practices of colonial self-government grew vigorous.
The second base involved religion.
Many settlers in the colonies had immigrated, motivated by the desire to escape the authorized
and officially established churches of Britain and elsewhere in Europe.
In the time from 1700 to 1750, many colonists in the Americas also were swept by a spirit
of dramatic religious revival that later was called the Great Awakening.
The Great Awakening emphasized the individual experience of conversion and piety as a way
of life, much more than fine points of doctrine and the rules of church authorities.
This also had a political dimension.
It was a call, as the Great Awakening would have suggested, a call to self-administration
in spiritual life as well.
John Adams, who was one of the crafters of the American project, later in retrospect
argued that this had been key.
He made a bold claim about his experiences, quote, the revolution was affected before
the war commenced.
The revolution was in the minds and hearts of the people, a change in their religious
sentiments of their duties and obligations, end quote.
The Great Awakening led to the third key factor, the growth in the American colonies
of education and general literacy.
After all, to read the Bible and to directly receive its authority demanded schooling even
on the frontier.
It was this learning which would make the American colonists receptive to political debate in
a new, and we would say very modern, way.
The immediate cause for the colonial revolt lay to a great extent in the Seven Years War
of 1756 to 1763.
In the United States we refer to this as the French and Indian War.
This war pitted Great Britain against France with their respective allies in what was really
a world conflict.
It in fact has been called the first truly global war, since clashes took place in the
Americas, in Europe, in India, and in Africa, and for that reason it's also sometimes known
as the Great War for Empire.
Yet this world war actually started in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, or rather around the spot that
became what is Pittsburgh today.
There, British forces and the Virginia Regiment, led by a young colonial officer named George
Washington, clashed with French forces.
They were contending for the key strategic location at the Ohio River.
The war now spread globally, to the colonial possessions of France and Britain, from West
Africa to Newfoundland.
In an earlier lecture, we actually had already discussed a key battle of this war.
That was Sir Robert Clive's victory in 1757 at the Battle of Plessis against the allies
of the French.
This was when we were following the British East India Company and its capture of Indian
lands.
The war concluded finally in 1763 with a great British victory.
France was humiliated, losing most of its overseas empire.
Britain, at a stroke, had gained territories in India, Canada, and Florida.
Britain's world empire now loomed internationally, with a power not seen since the days of the
Roman Empire or China of the Ming Dynasty.
It was the leading colonial and naval power worldwide.
Yet the expenses of this war would lead to crisis.
Ironically, Victoria's Britain would now have to pay a dear price for its success.
On a personal level, there was another irony.
This victory dashed the fondest hopes of young George Washington, and that was his dream
of becoming a British officer.
The British army simply ignored him.
He was an imposing young man, who towered over contemporaries standing at six foot two.
He was marked also by a special kind of dignity of bearing and immense self-control.
He also had, inside, deep driving ambition which he kept very gracefully concealed.
Washington's family were from the gentry of Virginia, but that kind of background mattered
very little to the great nobles in London, for whom he and other Americans were really
rustic bumpkins from out in the provinces without the needed connections at court.
So a man who might have become a servant of the British global empire instead grew alienated,
and eventually Washington became its nemesis.
The results of the Seven Years War were felt keenly in the British North American colonies.
The colonists now, after victory, felt far more secure, because the French threat had
been removed.
Just now, however, the mother country, Great Britain, called upon the colonists to share
the costs of victory and of empire.
The expense of the war prompted the British central government to launch attempts at overall
fiscal reorganization, and these reforms provoked the colonists.
Washington's debt had actually doubled from 1756 to 1764, not least because of the expense
of maintaining security in the colonies.
Those costs had grown five times over.
So from the perspective of British imperial administrators in London, why couldn't the
American colonies be more like India?
In India, the British East India Company was turning a wonderful profit rather than draining
the British treasury.
In 1765 thus, a new tax called the Stamp Act was imposed by parliament on the American
colonies.
All printed materials would now need to bear a special stamp showing that the fee for this
tax had been paid.
This measure obviously antagonized one group in particular, the printers and writers of
the colonies, and they turned out to be very dangerous enemies to make.
Also galvanized were many colonials who objected to the principle of what they called taxation
without representation.
So colonial merchants organized what we today would call boycotts of British goods to protest
this and other taxes on sugar and other imports.
The protesters organized themselves into secret groups that were called Sons of Liberty to
coordinate opposition and demonstrations against these imperial policies.
Now, in fact, the stamp tax was never effectively collected and ended up being repealed.
But parliament still insisted that it had the right to legislate for the colonies.
British troops were sent out to the colonies in increasing numbers, and this produced clashes
with the colonists like the 1770 Boston Massacre.
A key moment in the unfolding process actually involved tea and the British East India Company
whose growth we followed in a previous lecture.
The British East India Company was experiencing at this point an economic downturn.
So to help the company, Parliament in London passed the Tea Act in 1773, which granted
to the East India Company a monopoly on the sale of tea in the American colonies.
This tea would sell at very low prices, as the company had a large backlog to sell off,
and a small tax would be imposed on that cheaper tea.
The result was that tea, now sold by the East India Company, would be even cheaper than
the smuggled tea, which many Americans drank at the time.
Ironically, the colonists focused much more on the imposition of a new tax that they had
not been consulted on on tea and the institution of a trade monopoly, which they felt outrageous.
Colonial threats meant that the great ships, the East India men vessels of the company
that arrived in American ports were not even allowed by colonists to unload their famous
tea chests, except in Boston, where the colonial governor insisted that the shipments would
be unloaded.
So on the night of December 16, 1773, some 130 Sons of Liberty, dressed up as Mohawk
warriors, boarded three ships, and threw all of the tea into the harbor.
Tea worth some one million dollars in today's money, and yet, no one was killed.
No one was injured.
This was symbolic violence and a challenge.
This Boston Tea Party, as it was christened later, was a call to wider revolt.
But even at this point, few colonists were actually driving for full independence.
Most of them, on the contrary, actually wanted what they saw as restoration of their rights
as Englishmen, and indeed, there were numbers of leading British political figures in London
who sympathized with the American colonists.
A key example was the Irish-born parliamentarian Edmund Burke, whom we've mentioned in earlier
lectures.
He had spoken out against the way in which imperial policies in America were, he felt,
antagonizing naturally loyal subjects.
Earlier he had criticized the East India Company's rule in India.
And these themes of not trying to impose direct, intense management from outside were really
the same.
Burke argued against what he called a rage for regulation and restriction.
But instead, at this juncture, British authorities decided to take a hard line with the colonists.
When British troops were sent to disarm colonial volunteer militias, real fighting broke out.
They're ensued in American Revolutionary War, lasting for eight years, from 1775 to 1783.
But even then, it took 15 months before the Americans actually issued their Declaration
of Independence.
Many colonists still wanted recognition of their rights, not total separation.
This may be the symbolic meaning of the early American Revolutionary flag from which the
current Stars and Stripes flag has evolved.
Those red and white stripes appeared on earlier banners of the Sons of Liberty to symbolize
the individual colonies.
To them was added, in the upper left corner, the Union Jack emblem of Britain's flag.
This so-called Continental Union flag, as we recall, was nearly identical to that of
the British East India Company.
But the real meaning seems to have been a hope for reconciliation somehow.
However, this led to confusion.
When the new American military commander George Washington hoisted the flag, his British opponents
apparently believed he was in the process of surrendering.
So soon the British emblem in the corner was replaced by the more familiar Stars on
a blue field.
It was especially the power of the printing press that moved the colonial cause towards
the goal of independence.
In January 1776, the British political agitator Thomas Payne, who had come to the American
colonies, published a pamphlet that changed history.
Payne was recently arrived, but took up the American cause with enthusiasm.
And with typical radicalism, he pushed it further than many Americans were at the time.
His booklet, entitled Common Sense, argued for American nationhood and national identity,
and also urged independence from the British Empire.
According to Payne, this American venture of independence would be proof that the world
can be made anew because, as he put it, the cause of the Americans was the cause of human
liberty worldwide.
Now, significantly, recalling the effect of the Great Awakening, the irreligious Payne
actually used religious appeals to his audience and his pamphlet, arguing that royalty was
really a form of idolatry, an abomination before the Lord, using simple and very direct
language.
This booklet had a huge readership and a galvanizing effect on opinion in the American colonies.
And so, in July 1776, a Declaration of Independence, authored by Thomas Jefferson, was presented
to and accepted by the Continental Congress in Philadelphia.
It was an address to the world at large, from a decent respect to the opinions of mankind,
to explain the reasons for this break.
This revolutionary text cited what it called self-evident truths of equality and inalienable
rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
Governments, it continued, are established among humankind by the consent of the governed
to secure those rights, and when those rights are violated, the right of the people is to
institute a new government.
This reasoning actually derived from a key figure of the English Enlightenment, John
Locke.
In his 1690 text, Two Treatises of Government, Locke wrote of there being a political contract
between a people and the state or government, but it was a conditional one.
This relation between people and government had to respect the innate and natural rights
of individuals, otherwise they had a right to rebel, and that time had come.
It needs to be noted that not all colonists agreed with this statement.
In fact, a real civil war raged within the colonies, as some one-third of the colonists'
favored independence, a third remained loyal to the crown, and the third in the middle
simply sought to keep out of the way of this conflict.
The war dragged on, as General Washington's forces contended against the British.
Washington kept the army together by the tremendous force of his own personality.
He displayed at all times Olympian calm and confidence.
At other times, when it was necessary, he was capable of staging carefully timed explosions
of his famous temper.
Europeans who were enthusiastic for the American cause came to join their effort.
Among their number was the Marquis de Lafayette, who arrived in America in June of 1777, and
soon was almost an adopted son to General Washington.
After the American victory at the Battle of Saratoga in 1777, Lafayette was able to help
arrange for more aid from France, which now saw a tremendous opportunity to finally gain
vengeance for its defeat in the Seven Years' War against Britain.
France signed an alliance with the Americans, and it was joined by other rivals of Britain
from Europe, such as Spain and the Dutch Republic.
Their motivation was not some love of democratic ideas, but rather the dictates of power politics.
Dutch loans also provided funding to the Americans.
It's fascinating to think that some of that wealth that the Dutch East India Company had
amassed since we first encountered them in previous lectures now went to this project.
This aid was decisive.
French and American forces finally trapped the British at Yorktown in 1781, and the war
was finally concluded with a Treaty of Paris in 1783.
Even though the war was over, 1783 was still a perilous moment in American history.
American officers were embittered at not having received their back pay from Congress,
and some of them actually began to plot to seize control.
This threatened to become the one and only military coup in American history.
Hearing this news, Washington traveled to the camp of those officers in Newburgh, New
York, and passionately counseled them not to revolt, to remain loyal.
When his arguments did not convince, Washington prepared to read a letter from a congressman
promising help to the officers to make sure that their back pay was paid.
In order to read this letter, Washington pulled his spectacles from his pocket.
He almost never wore them in public.
And as he did so, he added, Gentlemen, you will permit me to put on my spectacles, for
I have not only grown gray, but almost blind in the service of my country.
When he said this, the officers were thunderstruck by his simple words and simple gesture, and
some of them were actually moved to tears.
Immediately, all talk of military revolt stopped.
The force of Washington's example and character had won out.
And then there followed an even more forceful proof of Washington's character.
The victorious colonies now faced the daunting task of building a new nation.
At this point, there were some who hoped that Washington would become the American king,
or would rule as a dictator.
Instead, in December of 1783, Washington went before Congress and officially resigned his
military duties, returning to private life.
This was a crucial act of abstaining from power.
In this, Washington was imitating a classical Roman example, that of Cincinnati, an aristocratic
Roman general, who had saved Roman war and then immediately gave up his dictatorial powers
to return to his farm.
When the British King, George III, was told of Washington's act, he said some words that
were very powerful.
He announced, if he does that, he will be the greatest man in the world.
One needs to pause here and think about this deeply.
Washington showed restraint when he might have seized power.
A childhood illness had apparently left Washington unable to have children.
If that had not been the case, would the thought of establishing a dynasty perhaps have tempted
him?
This is a counterfactual that we cannot answer.
But what did happen, Washington's self-denial, in the name of his country, was a great gift
to the young nation.
The United States that emerged from the conflict was, however, a very weakly structured union
of 13 sovereign states.
It really should have been called the disunited states of America, because they were bound
together only by the very weak Articles of Confederation, without a federal executive
or judiciary, without the power to tax, dependent on voluntary contributions from the states,
and really unable to keep order, as was made abundantly clear by a farmer's revolt in
New York known as Shay's Rebellion after one of its leaders.
As all of these flaws became ever more evident, many felt the need for some new model.
So a new constitution was drafted in 1787 in Philadelphia.
Washington presided over the convention after being unanimously chosen for that role.
The convention was supposed to discuss reforms to the Articles of Confederation, but rose
to the greater task of building an entirely new framework.
It did so in really remarkable secrecy, so that leaks would not imperil a really wide-ranging
and productive internal debate, all of this under the intellectual leadership of James
Madison of Virginia.
Most of the delegates to the convention were lawyers, and this gave the constitution its
very strong emphasis on procedure, its insistence on being a government of laws, not of men.
Its compromised character was also patent in how the interests of small and large states
were balanced by the creation of a House of Representatives on the principle of representation
by population, and a Senate where each state had equal votes.
The constitution was ratified in 1789.
It established a federal system with power that was separated between three branches
of government.
It also featured crucial checks and balances, and a separation of powers, not centralization
of authority.
A Bill of Rights added to the constitution further enumerated protections that would
do the individual.
This was the product of a vigorous debate between the Federalists and Anti-Federalists.
The very possibility of amendments to the text of the constitution also gave crucial flexibility
for the future.
The American Revolutionary Settlement was beset with contradictions, as in the case
of continued slavery.
This was a most compromising compromise.
Nor were women half the population allowed to vote.
And yet, the constitution was remarkable for its time and endures today as the first constitution
adopted by a large state and the oldest written constitution still in operation in the world.
In 1789, Washington was chosen as the first executive, again unanimously.
As he served two terms, Washington really needed to invent, on the spot, the role of
president.
He was literally our unprecedented president.
Take something as simple as how the president should be addressed by others.
John Adams suggested this version.
His Highness, the President of the United States of America and Protector of their
liberties.
But instead, ultimately, the simple and more austere title of President of the United States
was used.
In Washington's tenure in office, by his example, and in his farewell address in 1796, Washington
always stressed that faithfulness to the constitution would ensure that Americans would keep their
republic.
Increasingly, and by a long process, citizens would identify themselves not by their state,
but as Americans.
Modern national identity, based on the ideals and ideas of the Declaration of Independence
and the Constitution, not on kinship lines or ties or ancestry, is really a unique and
continuing experiment.
At this time, another experiment in politics, the French Revolution, was also unfolding
across the Atlantic, and we turn to that in our next lecture.
