In this lecture, we consider the French Revolution, which began in 1789.
It started with high hopes for restructuring the state and reforming society, but then plunged
into a reign of terror, which consumed both those who were judged to be enemies of the
people as well as many former revolutionaries themselves.
And then, when the extreme violence had finally burned itself out, a new dictator appeared,
such as the world had never seen before, a new-made man of the revolution, Napoleon
Bonaparte, who seized power and turned what had been the French Republic into the French
Empire, and then set out to conquer Europe and perhaps the world.
A key legacy of the French Revolution would be the increasing intensity of warfare.
First the wars of the French radicals, as they sought to export their revolutionary ideology,
and then Napoleon's compulsive campaigns of conquest moved the modern world towards
ever more total warfare that would involve civilians and entire societies.
How had it come to this?
How had a movement for liberation from the Ancien Régime, the old way of doing things,
and from arbitrary royal authority gone so wrong, producing a trajectory that led finally
to a despotism bigger and bloodier than the one that had come before?
In our previous lecture, we considered events that had taken place just before, the building
of a revolutionary United States, and those compromises that went into constructing a
durable model for a constitutional republic, all of this cemented by George Washington.
What a contrast this was to events in France.
In this lecture, we'll see how these revolutions, both of them aiming for the new and modern
political model of a republic with popular sovereignty actually diverged radically, setting
up different trajectories for political modernity that still resonate today.
Yet there was so much that linked these events on opposite sides of the Atlantic.
To begin with, ironically, French intervention in the American War for Independence to help
the colonists also helped to bring on the crisis in France that unleashed revolution
there.
That revolution would be far more radical and more violent.
In essence, France was increasingly caught in a systemic crisis of the state.
That state was headed by a monarch, King Louis XVI, who in theory was absolute, but who was
actually ruling over a state that was in the process of seizing up, and a society that
was seizing.
France had been almost constantly at war for over a century, and military expenses consumed
three quarters of the budget.
The expenses, especially of intervention in the American conflict, contributed to this
financial emergency, which was added on to the losses of the Seven Years War, that World
War that had been started by George Washington in 1754 around what is now Pittsburgh.
The royal debt had doubled in the reign of Louis XVI.
Yet in this old regime system, the aristocracy paid no taxes, and the burden fell on the
classes below them.
At the same time, society was an intense ferment, with traditional authorities subjected to
ever more corrosive criticism since the time of Diderot.
A popular underground press was hurriedly producing a whole torrent of pamphlets that
denounced the king, his court, and what they judged to be its profligacy at a time of economic
crisis.
Such anger especially focused on the queen, Marie Antoinette, who was denounced as a foreigner.
She was actually an Austrian hopsberg.
She was judged to be a luxurious and lustful hypocrite, and she was depicted in the most
pornographic terms.
Here was the medium of the printing press showing its power to destroy, to corrode authority,
and to inflame passions rather than always necessarily leading to reason, debate, and
enlightenment.
In desperation at this crisis, King Louis XVI summoned a so-called Estates General in
1789 to approve new taxation.
This was a representative body that had not met since 1614, that's a break of 175 years.
But now, once it had been called, it developed a momentum of its own.
Representatives of the common orders gained new confidence politically and started making
new demands.
Soon, the non-aristocratic representatives of the Estates General declared themselves
to be representatives not just of their class, but of the people at large, and resolved to
write a constitution.
Their slogan was liberty, equality, and fraternity.
Now King Louis XVI was either too irresolute, too tired, or perhaps too unwilling to shed
blood to shut down the Estates General.
So he resorted to a half measure, ordering that the meeting hall in the Versailles Palace
complex where the Estates General were debating should simply be locked.
When the delegates turned up and discovered that their meeting hall was locked, they simply
went next door to a nearby indoor tennis court, and there, angry at the clumsy royal gesture,
they took what came to be called the Tennis Court Oath.
By the way, this is what I love about history.
You just couldn't make this kind of stuff up, the notion of a world historical political
event taking place on a tennis court.
The representatives vowed that they would remain together until they had written a new
constitution, whether the King approved or not, and this was a pivotal moment in the larger
turning point of the French Revolution.
It turned out that the King's weakness was provocative.
Now that the National Assembly had challenged traditional royal authority outright, the
King gave in.
Everything was in flux.
Everything seemed possible now.
The National Assembly was joined by some like-minded aristocrats, including the Marquis de Lafayette,
who had returned from America years before and now would be hailed as the hero of two
worlds and of two revolutions.
Yet these days of revolutionary change were also haunted by a strain of fear that would
run throughout these events.
When rumors spread that the King was massing troops to put down the revolution, the Paris
mob intervened by storming the Bastille fortress on July 14, 1789, bringing royal authority
down.
The Bastille prison, long feared, now only housed a handful of prisoners, and there were
actually plans for tearing the prison down.
But its symbolic status as a representation of despotism and absolute rule made it a target.
The armed crowd gathered around the prison and fighting broke out.
The commander of the Bastille, the Marquis de Lonaise, tried to surrender, but now passions
ran high.
When the fortress was overrun by the Paris mob, de Lonaise and his surviving men were
disarmed and taken prisoner, then paraded through the streets of Paris, and then hacked
to pieces with swords and knives and bayonets before being shot.
The crowds dragged their mutilated bodies through the streets, singing, and the head
of the Marquis de Lonaise was carried on a spear above the crowd.
Much worse would follow in the so-called Reign of Terror as the revolutionary dynamic deepened,
but it has to be said that elemental, furious violence was there from the beginning.
Acid hatred directed against the old regime and those who were viewed as the privileged
classes.
Now authority was up for grabs.
In the countryside, manor houses and mansions were burned as peasants laid claim to the
land.
At the National Assembly, however, hopes ran high.
In August 1789, in one memorable night, that body abolished feudalism on August 4th and
the privileges of the old regime.
On August 26th, it issued the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen.
Its text had been proposed at first by the Marquis de Lafayette, and it was to a large
extent modeled on the American Declaration of Independence and bills of rights of American
states.
But even so, there were contrasts in which ideals were emphasized, which would take the
central pride of place in the new authority that was currently under construction.
The Enlightenment inspiration which informed the French Revolution came most from a contributor
to Dina Rose Encyclopedia, the philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
Rousseau was a Swiss from Geneva of lower class origins and a thinker who took the Enlightenment
in new and more radical directions.
Rousseau was a deeply strange man.
He was a lover of mankind in the abstract while sending his children to orphanages so
that they wouldn't interfere with his work.
In his 1762 book, The Social Contract, Rousseau argued for popular sovereignty, embodied in
what he called the general will, in which individuals find their highest fulfillment
and are subsumed.
Indeed, in a chilling phrase, Rousseau argued, if individuals disagreed with a general will
and what was best for them, they might have to be, quote, forced to be free, unquote.
For the French Declaration of Rights announced, law is the expression of the general will.
The new state was being established and Lafayette, as a prominent figure and hero, was put in
charge of the National Guard, but shortly he was to experience worrying doubts.
Just two months later, the Paris mob was on the move again.
They marched the 12 miles from Paris to nearby Versailles, where the royal palace lay, and
they surrounded the royal family.
Lafayette arrived with troops, he feared violence, and he hoped to shield the king and his family.
The mob, however, marched the king, queen, and their children back to Paris.
At one and the same time, the king was to be a head of state and a hostage of the revolutionaries.
The revolutionaries also turned on the church.
This policy was another significant contrast to what had taken place in America, where
free exercise of religion was enshrined in the Constitution.
In France, at a stroke, all church property and land was taken away by the government,
and priests were also subordinated to the state, turned into civil servants.
The effects of this nationalization were explosive.
Because most clerics refused this new measure, a civil war was in the offing.
The state was centralizing its authority, perhaps unconsciously imitating the royal
absolutism that it had replaced.
Internationally, reactions to the French Revolution were mixed.
Some praised it as the beginning of a new age of mankind.
For example, English writer William Wordsworth described his enthusiasm.
Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive, but to be young was very heaven.
Some American revolutionaries were proud of a movement that they felt was following
the American example.
Thomas Paine, earlier active in the American Revolution, actually moved to France to be
a part of all of these exciting events.
The British parliamentarian Edmund Burke, however, had darker premonitions about what
he feared might happen next.
These he published in 1790 in a book entitled Reflections on the Revolution in France.
He predicted that this revolution, with its abstract, rationalist ideals and total determination
to tear down what came before, would end in cataclysmic disorder, and that this anarchy
would soon be followed by a dictator who would step in to pick up the pieces and impose control.
On the night of June 20th, 1791, the French royal family had finally had enough and made
a break for it in disguise.
This was the head of state trying to escape his own country, but the king was actually
recognized the next day as they were escaping and the family was arrested.
The king turned out in an odd way to actually be a victim of the printing press.
The fact that prints had shown portraits of the king meant that he was recognizable far
away from Paris out in the remote provinces.
In the past, this would not have been the case.
King would have been a remote and vague, unrecognizable figure to most people in the
rest of the country.
So now the royal family was brought back to Paris in disgrace.
A new constitution of 1791 was enacted, creating a constitutional monarchy, but unrest was
accelerating fast.
Revolutionary France now went to war with the other monarchies of Europe in 1792 because
of fears that they might try to restore the French monarchy.
Fears grew that the foreign armies were winning and would restore the old regime.
So on August 10th, 1792, the Paris mob stormed the Tuileries Palace in Paris.
In the palace, the royal bodyguards, the famous Swiss guard, were massacred, torn to
pieces, beaten to death, their bodies dismembered, and spiked onto poles that were carried through
the streets and finally burned in bonfires.
Their red uniforms were carried aloft by the crowds as bloody red banners of revolution.
The king and queen and their family were kept alive for now.
In September 1792, France was declared a republic.
The monarchy was abolished.
This was also the month of the September massacres.
And prisoners who were already held in the overcrowded jails of France, especially priests,
were killed, forced to run the gauntlet of men wielding swords, bayonets, knives, and
axes.
This was not just a swift execution.
Cheering crowds looked on, exultant as torture prolonged the torments of the doomed prisoners
who were judged to be traitors.
The crowds showed a fury and hatred that really resembles the later genocides of the modern
age.
And then, as if this were not enough, the violence really got going and became systematic
in what came to be called the reign of terror, lasting ten months from 1793 to 1794 and costing
tens of thousands of lives.
The revolutionaries executed the king, then the queen.
A committee of public safety now ruled France.
It was dominated by Maximilian Robespierre, known as the incorruptible.
Under his stern guidance, the committee advocated what it called revolutionary terror, which
it defined as prompt and total justice that would produce a republic of virtue.
Total revolutionaries very proudly accepted the label of terrorists.
They saw it as a good thing.
Thousands were sent to their deaths on the guillotine, a killing machine that was praised
as humane and really a kind of embodiment of enlightenment utility.
It was actually asserted that the condemned only felt kind of a rush of air on the back
of the neck and then nothing, so a humane tool of execution, allegedly.
In areas which revolted against the revolutionaries, like the city of Lyon or the Vendée region,
the mass murder that followed was ruthless and energetic as these revolts were put down.
It was on a scale far bigger than the individual guillotine.
Grape shot from cannon were used to mow down crowds of prisoners who then fell into freshly
dug mass graves.
Barges full of men, women and children were sunk in rivers in what the radicals jokingly
called revolutionary baptisms.
Chemists were even consulted on how it might eventually be possible to produce mass death
by the use of poison gas, anticipating later genocidal horrors.
Even revolutionaries came to be suspected.
Lafayette, increasingly aware that he was distrusted by the Committee for Public Safety,
escaped the country going into exile.
The international revolutionary Thomas Paine was actually arrested by the state, perhaps
because he had humanely pleaded that the king should not be executed but simply sent into
exile.
All this was in the service of obliterating the old regime and creating a new, purified
modern society.
The revolutionaries sought to decristionize France, replacing religion with a cult of
reason as they called it.
So the Cathedral of Notre Dame in Paris had its altar deconstructed and was ceremonially
consecrated as a temple to reason.
A new revolutionary calendar, starting with the year in which the Republic was declared
and abolishing Christian holidays, expressed this sense of a historical break that the
revolutionaries were seeking.
This was to be a definitive modernity, a decisive advance in human history that left
tradition and earlier belief far behind.
At long last, the terror burned itself out.
The ringleader, Rob Speer, was actually betrayed by his own associates who had started to be
afraid of him, and he was executed in turn in 1794.
Very aptly, the revolutionary Saint-Just, famously called revolution, a mother who devours
her children.
There was pain as it turns out, escaped that fate, but only barely.
He had perhaps been only hours away from being guillotined when the terror finally ended.
The Republic itself was ended in 1799, when a young general who posed as the defender
of the new regime instead declared his own military dictatorship.
That was Napoleon Bonaparte.
He wasn't French, he was of obscure Corsican origins, but the revolution and its wars allowed
him to rise as a military and political genius.
Concentrating power in his own hands, Napoleon in 1804 crowned himself the Emperor of the
French.
The symbolism of this act, of Napoleon actually putting the crown on his own head in a grand
ceremony in Notre Dame Cathedral, was vast.
In earlier ages, when monarchs claimed to rule by divine right, a pope would have been the
one to crown the Emperor.
Now by contrast, at this ceremony, the pope was relegated to the sidelines.
He sat off to the side looking on resentfully.
Napoleon was announcing in this way the power of the individual, or at least of this individual
himself.
Napoleon was literally a self-made emperor.
He rode the revolution to power, surfing on the tides of history.
Sometimes Napoleon called himself a son of the revolution.
At other times, he simply stated, I am the revolution.
Napoleon's power lay in his military success, and he could never get enough of that success.
Like Washington, who was marked by restraint, Napoleon's ego and ambition were total.
Napoleon, moreover, was able to exploit a military revolution that was taking place
at the same time, which had been inaugurated by nearly constant warfare.
From 1792, when the French revolutionaries declared war on the monarchs of Europe, until
1815, when Napoleon's finally defeated, Europe was all but constantly at war for almost
a quarter of a century.
This must have seemed like another 30 years war, almost.
The French revolutionaries had done something new in military terms.
In 1793, the Committee of Public Safety declared what it called the universal mobilization
of the French nation, the Levé en masse.
Everyone was to be drafted.
Men were to do battle.
Women were to produce for the war effort.
And even old men were supposed to stand in public places giving patriotic speeches.
If sovereignty belonged to the people or the nation now, then everyone was involved in
the war, whether a soldier or a civilian.
Moreover, if the nation had sovereignty, it could make demands on ordinary people that
far exceeded what monarchies had required in the past.
The French armies that were sent into the field were huge, the largest scene in Europe
until that time, and they were actively motivated by patriotic ideology, not just passive obedience
to kings or princes as in the past.
In these new armies, promotion would be based on merit, not on whether you had aristocratic
background.
And it was this promotion by merit that would allow men of genius like Napoleon to shoot
up through the ranks.
This new power was vividly demonstrated in a famous event, the cannonade or artillery
battle of Valmy.
For four hours, dedicated but often inexperienced French soldiers rained shells down on a professional
army made up of royal forces from Germany that was advancing against them to restore
the monarchy in France.
As the French fired their cannon, they sang their fierce national anthem, the Marseillaise,
and shouted, Vivre nation, long live the nation.
The French won this battle, defeating some of the best professional soldiers in the world.
The French had fought with conviction.
Their enemy aristocrats said that they fought like cannibals.
The great German poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe was actually at Valmy and witnessed this famous
cannonade.
And he concluded, here and now a new era of world history is beginning.
Old authority was defeated by a new revolutionary authority.
The French revolutionaries also invaded neighboring kingdoms to spread their ideas and claim that
they came as liberators.
Their slogan was, war with all kings, peace with all peoples.
But these conquests, like the later ones of Napoleon, actually touched off a chain reaction
of nationalist resistance against the French.
So that in the German lands, in Spain and in Russia, nationalist volunteers rallied
to fight guerrilla warfare against their supposed French liberators.
The wars of nations turned out to be far bloodier than the wars of kings, and this was a sign
of things to come.
With the impact of ideology, war was becoming more total, increasingly involving entire
societies, not just professional soldiers.
Napoleon's wars cost some six million lives until he was finally defeated at Waterloo
in 1815 by the Duke of Wellington.
Interestingly enough, the Duke of Wellington had started his career as an officer in the
British East India Company's private army.
As we have seen in this and the previous lecture, these revolutionary events, the American and
the French upheavals, were both linked and contrasting events.
Why were they turning points in modern world history?
Their significance is such that it still felt today.
They offered both alluring ideals as well as cautionary lessons and contrasts.
On the one hand, a model that sought balance through separation of powers.
On the other hand, a vigorous impulse to centralize and concentrate authority.
These revolutions changed modern politics.
As they both challenged monarchies, their claims to establish the sovereignty of the
people were a milestone and really opened the way to a new kind of modern ideological
politics.
Whereas absolute kings had claimed their authority from God, almost all regimes since these
revolutions have tried to argue that they represent the people.
Even tyrannies have to make this claim to present themselves as somehow not totally
illegitimate, claiming that they de facto rule in the name of the people.
And certainly, Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union claim to do so.
As a result of this emphasis on the people, as the source of authority and sovereignty,
entire modern ideologies came into being, whose proponents argued that their belief
systems would serve the people best.
It has been said that ideologies in the modern age have taken the place of religious worldviews
of the past, offering comprehensive explanations and a meaning to life.
Among these modern ideologies, liberalism emphasized individual freedoms economically
and politically.
Nationalism, the claim of belonging to a national community, which was powerfully championed
by both American and French revolutions, would be very potent in the 19th and 20th centuries.
And in spite of repeated prophecies that nationalism is in decline, it seems to be going very strong
now.
Karl Marx, harkening back to the French Revolution as what he saw as a necessary historical stage,
drafted socialism and communism, presenting these as scientific programs for future progress.
As we already saw, reacting against the French Revolution, Edmund Burke launched modern conservatism.
On the other side of the political divide, the energies and dynamism of the French Revolution
have made it a kind of template for radicals to explore the possibilities of upheaval.
But the French Revolution also established a recurring tragic pattern.
Radical revolt leading to anarchy leading to tyranny.
This turned out to be the pattern of the Russian Revolution of 1917.
When the Russian Emperor's rule was overthrown, democratic forces couldn't consolidate a
new system, and Lenin and Stalin and their comrades were able to take power for their
Bolshevik or communist regime.
Similarly, in Germany between the two world wars, the German Emperor's throne was toppled,
but the German attempted democracy was undermined by economic collapse and a loss of confidence
until the Nazis managed to come to power.
As this model suggests, in times of crisis, there are often would-be men of destiny, like
Napoleon, wading in the wings.
One famous anecdote about the long-term consequences of the French Revolution deserves some kind
of mention.
This story goes like this.
In 1972, when US President Richard Nixon made his famous visit to communist China, he asked
the Chinese Prime Minister, Zhou Enlai, what he thought of the French Revolution.
Allegedly, Zhou famously replied, it's too early to tell.
This story became famous because it seemed to illustrate the long-range thinking and
visionary quality which great political leaders and thinkers are supposed to have.
Now, unfortunately, this story is untrue because actually what was going on was a misunderstanding.
It seems that the Chinese Premier was referring to the quite recent French student demonstrations
in Paris of 1968, so only a few years in the past, not all the way back to 1789.
But in spite of this, the story took on a life of its own, and it actually captures an important
insight.
The reverberations of those revolutionary claims to the authority of popular sovereignty are
with us still, and continue to work themselves out in the politics of our world.
A more immediate impact of the French Revolutionary ideas came in the New World, with a great
slave uprising in Haiti in 1791, led by Toussaint Louverture, who claimed for his people the
rights of man and citizen.
Influenced by French Revolutionary ideas, the National Assembly in Paris, challenged
to actually live up to its own ideals, abolished slavery in all French territory in 1794.
Napoleon would later reinstate slavery.
These facts point to another global movement for liberation, the abolition of slavery,
which we'll consider in our next lecture.
