In this lecture, we will examine a turning point involving an international drug war.
When we hear of a drug war, we usually think of a government fighting against smugglers,
and drugs, or narco-terrorism. But can you imagine the mightiest world power of its day,
fighting a war against another government in order to open it to the drug trade?
This is what happened in the Opium War of 1839, when British forces assaulted the
Chinese Empire, imposing the drug trade from outside. Ironically, all this came just a year
after the abolition of slavery in the British Empire. China, and then later Japan, like
so many other countries around the world, were now confronted with the full power of
European imperialism. For China, this was a true turning point. Earlier, at the start
of the modern period, China had seen itself as the central power of civilization, something
which the voyages of Cheng He symbolically charted back in the 1430s. Now China found itself
subjected. This was a hugely traumatic reversal. All at once, the self-understanding of being
a universal empire was completely overthrown. Instead of being supreme, or even sovereign,
China was humiliated by being forced to sign treaties that demonstrated its unequal status
in international relations. More than a century of turmoil followed. But this also proved
to be a world turning point, because it showed the authority and destructive power of imperialism
as an international force in the 19th century, a century which otherwise prided itself on
its progress and civilization. How had it come to this? It actually all started with
tea, just like the American Revolution we discussed in a previous lecture. Tea, of course,
is a much milder stimulant than opium, but it held Europeans, and especially the British,
enthralled. Tea first arrived in Britain from China around 1645. Initially, it was an unbelievable
luxury that only the richest in the royal court could afford. A century later, by 1750,
it was tremendously popular among the middle classes. By 1800, it was a craze which extended
throughout society. Think of all the tea culture that has evolved around the drink, the British
afternoon tea ritual, the ever-present offer of a cuppa. Exotic Eastern drinks also deserved
exotic Eastern dishes to be served out of, especially the famed, thin, translucent and
graceful China, that is to say Chinese porcelain. In the Golden Age of the Dutch, Delftware,
instantly recognizable for its blue and white colors, was a local homegrown substitute for
the astronomically expensive porcelain that was imported from China. In England, the Wedgwood
brand, still manufactured and sold today, had been founded in 1759 by Josiah Wedgwood,
a potter to the Queen, who you'll remember also was active in the abolition movement,
and had produced its iconic image of a slave appealing for human rights. Wedgwood combined
classical styles with the mechanized productivity of the New Industrial Revolution, and in the
process he made what had once been a luxury available to ever-broader parts of society.
The oceans of tea that were drunk from such teacups were also sweetened with sugar from
the plantations of Barbados and Jamaica, unless you were one of those abolitionists boycotting
the sugar product. Here we observe already a global economy in action, bringing together
in England tea from China with sweetener from the Americas. From 1700, the increasingly
globalized economy was a traffic in commodities that had once been luxuries, but now had come
to seem necessities. These included sugar, cotton, coffee, and especially tea. By trading
in vast quantities of these, the British East India Company had outcompeted its earlier
rival, the Dutch East India Company, and its earlier spice monopolies. These commodities
were hard, or in fact impossible to monopolize effectively. The EIC created special ships
for their tea trade, great clippers that were built for speed, outfitted with custom-made
chests that sealed in all of those fragrant tea leaves for the long sea journeys. So even
as prices for tea dropped, the EIC was positioned to make huge profits by transporting ever-larger
quantities and economy of scale. And the British Royal Treasury loved it, imposing
a hundred percent import duty on tea. Now as we saw in our lecture on the American Revolution,
this sort of an import duty was a great incentive to smuggling, and it was attempts by the crown
to crack down on the smuggling that led to the Boston Tea Party. In the 1790s, the EIC
was doing a vast business. It was shipping 23 million pounds of tea every year to Britain
from China. The British East India Company traded with China for tea through the one
open trading port, Canton. Foreign merchants were not allowed permanent residents, but
they were confined to this one trading station, and then they had to leave it once the five
month trading season was completed until next year. This policy enforced on trade spoke volumes
about the structure of China under the Qing Dynasty, a mighty empire of more than 300
million people. From 1644, around the time of the Peace of Westphalia in Europe, which
we discussed in a previous lecture, the Manchus from Manchuria had conquered China. They displaced
the Ming Dynasty, which had sponsored the voyages of Chenghe way back in the 1400s at the start
of our course. But after they conquered China, the Manchus found that China conquered them.
Even though the Manchus were a distinct nomadic warrior people, like the Mongols, they were
soon absorbed into Chinese civilization. Under their dynamic rule, China expanded,
adding Turkestan, Burma, Tibet, and moving into Nepal. The Manchu Qing Dynasty limited
foreign trade to the Portuguese station at Macau and to Canton, today known as Guangzhou.
As in earlier ages, trade was understood as a form of tribute from the far-flung parts
of the less civilized world converging on China. As during the Ming Dynasty, Chinese rulers
claimed to hold the Mandate of Heaven, and the Emperor was known as the Son of Heaven.
This exalted status was confirmed in diplomatic rituals, the kowtows, or formal prostrations
of foreign dignitaries who bowed to the Emperor, and also in the tremendous cultivation of
brilliant scholars, artists, and government officials.
As the EIC sought to trade with China to buy all of that tea, a major problem arose. The
British and other Europeans, it turns out, had little that China actually wanted. The
Europeans had some success with selling clocks or music boxes as sort of exotic goods or
curiosities, but you could only export so many of these.
In 1793, the British made an official request for a permanent trade representative to be
based in Beijing to increase trade. They also sent British products that they hoped would
impress the Emperor. This included carriages, cannon, a hot-air balloon, and even some wedgewood
china pottery. Now, the Chinese response to this trade mission and its request were tremendously
revealing. The Manchu Emperor replied in these terms,
Our celestial empire possesses all things in prolific abundance and lacks no product
within its borders. There was therefore no need to import the manufacturers of outside
barbarians in exchange for our produce. But as the tea, silk, and porcelain which the
celestial empire produces are absolute necessities to European nations and to yourselves, we have
permitted as a signal mark of our favor that foreign companies should be established at
Canton so that your wants may be supplied and your country thus participate in our
beneficence. Thus, the EIC had no choice but to rely on paying with silver for tea.
This was another one of those great global trade currents we've talked about. A vast
flow of silver went from the minds of Mexico into international trade and thence to China
to pay for tea. It was at this point that it dawned on officials of the Honorable Company
that actually there was one product that was in demand in China which they could supply.
That was opium, grown in the territories that the EIC ruled in Bengal in India. The opium
poppy, known by its Latin name as papa var somniferum, the sleepbringer, had long been
known in the classical world. If cut, the buds of the poppy bled out tears of a narcotic
substance which congealed into cakes and made a powerful drug.
Opium was a remedy against pain and fever. It brought relief. It was chewed in India
and drunk in liquid form in England as laudanum. If abused, it was very addictive, it could
bring dreams, visions and respiratory failure. Due to this recognition of its power, someone
like Karl Marx would later denounce religion as the opiate of the masses using this powerful
image. Opium's power attracted romantic poets like Samuel Taylor Coleridge who fell into
dreams of the Orient when under the influence of opium. These were dreams like those that
had possessed Columbus back in 1492. He focused on the realms which Marco Polo had once traveled
in. And under the influence, Coleridge composed an entire poem in 1797, probably the most
famous drug-induced work of art. This poem began, in Xanadu did Kubla Khan a stately
pleasure-domed decree. Coleridge's trance, however, as he was writing this poem, was
interrupted by a knock at his door, and the poem's alleged perfection was shattered.
But the poem contained mysterious and prophetic words. Coleridge wrote in his opiated dream
that Kubla heard from afar ancestral voices prophesying war. And this turned out to be
exactly true. Opium did lead to war.
Opium had been known long before in China, already in the 8th century AD. Unlike in Europe
however, by the 19th century Chinese opium users were smoking opium, rather than taking
it in smaller doses. This practice of smoking opium is actually tied in with the Columbian
exchange which we discussed in an earlier lecture, especially with the introduction
of tobacco. Tobacco mixed with opium was probably first
traded by the Dutch in Taiwan, where they had a trading post in the 1660s. Later, Chinese
users shifted to simply smoking opium on its own in special long pipes. This way of ingesting
opium made it even more potent and addictive. So the Chinese emperor declared the opium
trade illegal in 1729, in 1796, in 1799, and then again in 1800. As you can see, it wasn't
working. Disregarding Chinese laws, the EIC increased
its trade in opium because it felt that its very existence as a company was embattled.
Back in Britain at this point, powerful voices like Adam Smith were calling for free trade,
a maximum of capitalist activity without artificial barriers of import and export taxes or of
royal monopolies. Adam Smith promised that this would be a benefit to producers, merchants,
and consumers alike. As such ideas gained steam, the EIC lost its monopoly on trade
in India in 1813, but it still retained a monopoly on China trade until 1833. So for
now, opium was a great boon to the EIC. The company grew opium in its Bengal plantations
in India, then shipped it eastwards, but once it arrived in China, they disavowed it to
create a deniability however weak. Once on the China coast, the EIC ships sold the opium
to private dealers who then sold it in turn to local smugglers. Bast fortunes were made
by dealers like Jardine Matheson and Company, which is a firm still thriving today but no
longer dealing in opium. American merchants were involved as well. Clipper ships carried
this trade, vessels built for tremendous speed with narrow hulls and huge sails. Of these,
the Kutty Tsar in Dry Dock in Greenwich, London can still be viewed today. Eventually, the
EIC sent new steamboats on these routes, adding the power of the industrial revolution to
the process. On the receiving end, it is estimated that in China, about half of men and a quarter
of women were users of opium. Not all of them were addicted, but it still gives us a sense
of the big scale of this traffic. As a result, the balance of trade with China actually reversed.
Instead of silver flooding into China to pay for tea and silks and other exports, by the
1830s, Chinese silver was flooding out to pay for opium. At this point, in the late 1830s,
more than 30,000 chests of opium were brought in, each containing some 150 pounds of the
drug. This was a different kind of triangular trade, encompassing Britain, India and China.
Back in 1433, when the Ming Empire called off Admiral Cheng Hu's journeys, it was the outcome
of a bureaucratic struggle within the state. That's what happened in this case too. The
events that led to the opium war involved bureaucratic infighting and actually attempts
at reform. The Chinese Empire, apparently monolithic and seemingly self-sufficient, was
actually internally torn by tensions between the Manchu ruling class and the masses of
Chinese subjects, repeated revolts and a governing apparatus that really had lots of inefficiencies
and corrupt officials. To correct all this, a reform movement arose which touched off
a crisis. A group of Confucian scholars calling themselves by the poetic name the Spring Purification
Circle argued that renewal was needed because otherwise the Qing would lose the mandate
of heaven. Increasingly, it was opium that seemed to be a central symbol of things that
were going wrong in China. It sapped the energy of the state. It produced lassitude
and laziness, and it drained away the vigor of what should be a virtuous ruling elite.
The Emperor Dou Guang, who actually had earlier been an opium smoker himself, now acted. In
1839, he put Commissioner Lin Sishu in charge of Canton, which is where the Chinese traded
with foreigners. Lin was a follower of the Spring Purification Circle and had a reputation
as an official who was competent and dynamic. He now announced vast and simple plans for
fighting opium. Execute the dealers. Give users a one-year suspended death sentence so
they could kick the habit in one year, and if they did not, it had their heads cut off.
Lin also wrote a very brisk and business-like letter to Queen Victoria of Great Britain.
In it, he abraded her for the sheer hypocrisy of selling a drug in foreign lands which he
said was illegal in her own kingdom. Lin was actually wrong about this, as we saw it was
legal and used in Great Britain. Lin finished his letter by ordering the queen to acknowledge
receipt of his letter and to report back to him on what she was doing to stop the opium
trade. Now, given the Victorian sensibilities of Queen Victoria, it's probably just as well
that she never got this forceful letter. Next, Commissioner Lin demanded that the British
merchants in China turn over their opium stores to him. If these were confiscated, the dealers
understood they would lose fortunes, they would be ruined. So the British superintendent of trade
in Canton got involved. He was Captain Charles Elliott, a former Royal Navy officer who actually
earlier had been part of the West Africa Squadron that patrolled those waters to stop the slave
trade as we saw in an earlier lecture. Elliott was personally opposed to the use of opium and trade
in opium, but he was also charged with protecting British economic interests. So his next bureaucratic
move was decisive. Elliott convinced the British merchants to give the 1,700 tons of opium that
they had to Lin, promising that the merchants would be compensated. Lin had all of this opium
destroyed at the coast in a dramatic scene, as the drug was trampled underfoot in special trenches
and then sluiced out into the sea to cleanse China of this pollution. After tension grew with the
British mercantile community, Lin soon cut off their supplies of food and water. Elliott now had
British ships sent in with an ultimatum to Lin, and when that ultimatum was refused, British ships
fired on Chinese war junks. War had broken out. The British government dispatched gunboats and
British Marines, all which arrived at Canton. Among these was a tool of war which went on to
demonstrate the power of European imperialism, especially when supercharged with the advances
being made in the Industrial Revolution. In the Industrial Revolution, steam engines had
multiplied the power of technology. This tool of war, fittingly, was a steamboat called the Nemesis.
It was an iron steamboat, the first ocean-going steam warship built by the EIC. It was 184 feet
long. It weighed 660 tons. It was powered by two mighty engines, and it was heavily armed. Now,
because of its shallow draft and engines, it could actually chug right up to the coastal cities and
fortifications, even if the winds were blowing in the opposite direction. The role of this warship,
the Nemesis, points towards something dreadful that lay in the future, the destructive power of
industrial warfare, that would be fully revealed in World War I and World War II, when the force
of industry and technology would completely overshadow the human element, no matter how heroic or
determined. In quick order, the Nemesis blasted the Chinese coastal forts at the Pearl River and
sank Chinese war junks that were about half its size. The Chinese had nothing comparable. This was
the advent of what we still today call gunboat diplomacy, in which technologically advanced
firepower deployed by imperialist powers could redraw the world map. Given the British advance,
which eventually captured Shanghai, the emperor dismissed his reformist officials and acknowledged
defeat. China signed the Treaty of Nanking in 1842. Quite circumspectly, this treaty never actually
mentioned opium, but everyone understood that the continued trade in opium was really the heart of
the matter. The treaty opened more treaty ports to Britain. Shanghai, Amoy, Fuchiao, and the island
of Ningbo. It also allowed British and other merchants to live within Canton rather than
being quarantined outside it, and also ceded to the British the island of Hong Kong at the mouth
of the Pearl River, with a natural harbor that was wonderful for trade. Hong Kong grew into a
massive trading and military outpost of the British, and was only returned to China in 1997.
Crucially, this treaty also formalized what was called the extraterritoriality of these bases.
Foreigners were not to be subject to Chinese courts. Instead, they were to be subject to the
jurisdiction of the imperialist powers. In a word, the sort of sovereignty that had been established
increasingly through the Peace of Westphalia was to be denied to China. Other European powers soon
gained the same concessions. Adding insult to injury, China was required to pay the costs of the war
and to compensate for all that opium that had been destroyed by Commissioner Lin.
To celebrate this victory, an entire Chinese war junk was brought to Britain for the great
exhibition of 1851 to be shown off. Now, this was ironic. It was brought as a spoil of war.
But think back, if Cheng He's voyages of the 1430s had continued, that junk might have come as a
conqueror. It should be noted, as a testimony to Victorian reformist zeal, that not everybody
in Britain celebrated this as a victory. Some condemned this war as an outcome of immoral trade.
They decried the hypocrisy in celebrating your own sovereignty while denying that equality
to other states. As one anti-opium crusader declared, we stand convicted before the nations
of the world, as well as before an omniscient deity. As a government and people actively and
legally engaged in the perpetration of murder and desolation, we are all involved in the guilt
and participants even by our silence in a sin. There would shortly be more to question and condemn
because they're followed a second opium war. British officials in the so-called treaty ports
had in fact been looking for a long time for a pretext to revise the earlier agreements.
They found the pretext in the story of a ship named the Arrow, which was owned and run by Chinese
smugglers and pirates but had been registered officially as a British ship. Even though its
British registration had lapsed, it still flew the British flag when Chinese authorities seized
it in 1856. The British government then sent another expeditionary force and it was joined
by a French force which had been sent because of the execution of a French missionary. This force
quickly occupied Canton. The following treaty of 1858 officially legalized the import of opium.
It opened ten more treaty ports and allowed Europeans, especially missionaries, to travel
into the interior of China, which they hadn't been allowed before. When Emperor Shenfun had
second thoughts and tried to back out of the treaty he'd just signed, an Anglo-French expedition
actually battered its way into Beijing in October 1860, and just to teach the emperor a lesson,
burned his stately pleasure dome, the Imperial Summer Palace.
Along with the artworks and furnishings that they looted, British officers also grabbed an
Imperial Pekingese dog and gave that dog to Queen Victoria of Britain as a present. The dog was
given the apt name Lute as in loot and pillage, battered the Chinese emperor back down, and made
further concessions, and further indemnities were paid to secure peace. This was clearly a time of
crisis for China in which the foreign depredations were just one part of a larger emergency situation.
An even greater challenge to the Imperial throne came from the Taiping Rebellion,
which raged from 1851 to 1864. The Taiping Rebellion was a massive revolt against Manchu rule,
led by a religious visionary who claimed that he was Jesus Christ's younger brother
and called upon to reform society. This revolt was finally suppressed in 1864,
and the staggering death toll is estimated at 20 million or more, completely surpassing the
bloody losses of the American Civil War at the same time. Such crises were shattering to Chinese
society, and prompted young Chinese intellectuals to engage in what they called the self-strengthening
movement. The problem they would confront was the same as countless others among people subjected
to Western imperialism. How to fight back and throw off outside control? How to achieve sovereignty?
The greatest signal success in this challenging task came in Japan. Between the two opium wars
in China, it seemed at first that Japan would be subjected to the same treatment as China had
received. Instead, Japan created its own modernity, borrowing Western technology and ideas. In a
coming lecture, we'll trace how Japanese success was another global turning point. Another symptom
of the inner stresses and latent weaknesses within imperialism came from the heart of
the British Empire in India in 1857. There, local troops recruited by the EIC in India,
the so-called seapoys, rose up in massive revolt, which started to grow into a larger
uprising throughout the country. This has been called the Indian Mutiny, or by some,
the First War of Indian Independence. British control was restored only with difficulty and
massive bloodshed. One conclusion that was drawn from this experience was that
Indian territories that had been run by the EIC now had to come under direct British government
control. Thus, 258 years of company rule in India were ended. The company itself was finally
dissolved in 1874. Just think about it. The East India Company had existed for 274 years.
That's longer than many other states or kingdoms. But even if the East India Company was gone,
China's humiliations continued. In 1894, China was defeated by Japan in a war over Korea.
When Chinese nationalists rose up against foreigners in the so-called Boxer Rebellion in 1900,
an international military force arrived in Beijing, including Britain, France, Japan,
Russia, Italy, Austria-Hungary, Germany, and the United States. This expeditionary force
crushed the Chinese movement with massive violence. This proved that even if the imperialist powers
competed against one another, they could cooperate to repress resistance. So what were the long-term
consequences of this turning point? The opium wars may vividly clear the massive power of imperialism,
especially when reinforced by the Industrial Revolution. By 1914, three quarters of the globe
were seized by European powers, and the British Empire loomed above them all, an empire on which
the sun never set, with a quarter of the world's people and land. These wars, and many others,
swelled the self-confidence of European and other imperialist states, but disguised for a time
the great internal weaknesses of imperialism. From the perspective of China and other societies
that had to bear the brunt of this violence, this turning point was psychologically devastating.
An earlier civilizational sense of superiority and centrality in the world was with abrupt
speed replaced by a sense of weakness and humiliation. These reactions continued to echo
in world politics down to the present day a consequence of imperialism. But at just this
time, the confident 19th century of progress, there arose another challenge, an intellectual
challenge. The ideas of Darwin probed the origins of the human race, what it meant to be human.
This challenge will consider in our next lecture.
