Imagine a world historical turning point that began with an idea that needed more than twenty
years to mature.
As a young man, the path-breaking scientist Charles Darwin was on a round-the-globe scientific
journey that would lead him to the discovery of the theory of evolution.
In the Galapagos Islands, in 1835, Darwin heard a British colonial administrator say
something that haunted him afterwards.
That official said that you could actually tell which island a tortoise came from by
the shape of its shell as they were different.
Darwin asked himself, why should this be so?
Only afterwards did Darwin also realize that this was true of the finches that he had collected.
Darwin's trip did not have one flash of discovery that made everything clear, but rather left
him with a set of intuitions and suspicions that would take twenty years to ripen.
This was the slow course of a thinker of bold, wildly ambitious and controversial ideas,
the theory of evolution, and the concept of natural selection.
How is this a true turning point?
Some have called Darwin the most controversial scientific thinker ever.
His concepts completely overturned how humans saw their relation to the natural world, embedded
in it, inextricably part of it.
Also, as we will see with special clarity in this lecture, historical turning points
are often not the first word or the last word on a subject.
In this case, Darwin was actually preceded by many other thinkers who had speculated
on evolution, that is to say, change over time by creatures that adapt to their environments.
And after Darwin introduced his ideas, many others took that concept in directions that
he would not have endorsed.
Darwin's turning point underlined and reinforced two sources of authority that had been growing
in importance throughout the modern period.
These were the authority of science and the authority of progress.
We've already encountered them in our previous lectures on Levenhoek and the broader scientific
movement of which it was a part, and in the lecture on the Encyclopédie and the Philosophes,
who saw reason, utility, and progress as the moving spirit of a new enlightened age.
Probably no age has believed so confidently in progress as the Victorian age, named after
the British Queen Victoria, who ruled for most of the 19th century from 1837 until 1901.
It's precisely in this period that people who had been called natural philosophers
now came to be called scientists.
The authority of science replaced the earlier authority of a literal reading of revealed
holy texts or theology in explanation of the material world.
And we observe one other fascinating attribute of Darwin's turning point.
It actually came in two episodes, like a rocket with two sections.
In his excellent study of Darwin, Peter Bohler concludes, quote, the Darwinian Revolution
falls into two distinct stages, the conversion of the Victorian world to evolutionism and
the revival of the selection theory in modern times, end quote.
Many of Darwin's contemporaries eagerly accepted the idea that evolution was a form of progress,
as it confirmed their status as those beings which all creation had worked to achieve.
But Darwin's idea of natural selection to a great extent actually accented randomness
and chance, not some predetermined working out of a preordained blueprint for progress.
It would take roughly half a century more for scholars to really absorb this insight
and create what we today call the modern Darwinian synthesis or modern genetics.
At the start of our course, from the early 1400s, the authoritative word on the natural
world and where it came from was scripture.
In the Christian world, this meant the account of creation given in the Bible understood
literally rather than as a symbolic rendering.
In Genesis, God creates everything in six days, heavens and earth, day and night, skies,
seas and land, all the creatures, and then man and woman.
In fact, one bishop in 1650 worked out the date of creation, the precise date, by counting
backwards from the time spans listed in scripture and pinned down the precise date.
It was, he announced, just before Sunday, on October 23, 4004 B.C.
So in this understanding, creation had taken place once and for all, with species and creatures
fixed as it were, set in ideal types and unchanging.
But quite a few thinkers in the following centuries questioned this account of a fixed creation.
Search thinkers instead spoke of transmutation, the arising of new species.
Indeed, Darwin's book, Origin of the Species, in later editions actually included an appendix
which listed those before him who had thought along similar lines, and by the fourth edition
of his book, there were 38 men on that list.
Not least among them was Darwin's own grandfather, who had written in 1794 of all animals developing
from common origins, and over time winning new characteristics and continuing to improve
down to the present day.
Another precursor was the French zoologist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, who announced his theory
in 1815.
Lamarck argued that offspring could inherit improvements that had been willed and achieved
by their parents.
The most famous example of this concern, giraffes, which Lamarck theorized had generation
by generation stretch their necks out ever further and further to reach remote leaves
on trees, and these characteristics had been passed along.
To show that many had actually thought about evolution as a theme before Darwin, let's
purely at random choose an example of someone we discussed in an earlier lecture.
The French philosopher Denis Diderot, the editor of the Encyclopédie.
If you'll recall, we mentioned that one of the messages of the Encyclopédie as a project
was that all knowledge was interconnected.
Diderot, in his personal philosophy, went further and underlined how much all the world
was interrelated.
According to Diderot, what we see about us now is not a permanent state of things, but
just a snapshot of a world that's constantly in flux and constantly changing, emerging
from formless origins, rising up and flourishing or going extinct across vast uncountable oceans
of time.
And this is a process, according to Diderot, continuing of its own volition without a creator
or an original maker.
Species like individuals have their birth, maturity, and then die out to be succeeded
by new species.
This for Diderot included human beings who in millions of years might become something
unrecognizably new.
These ideas, very dangerous for the time, found a rather guarded and oblique expression
in the Encyclopédie.
For example, the entry in that work for animal in the first volume stated, nature advances
by nuanced and often imperceptible degrees.
More practically, natural philosophers or scientists as we would call them today were
starting to notice the fossil record which showed extinctions, creatures in other words
that no longer existed.
The name dinosaur, for instance, meaning great lizard or terrible lizard, was coined
in 1842.
So it seemed increasingly clear to thinkers that the world was not fixed but constantly
changing.
And so then the question arose, how does it change?
One school of thought, the so-called catastrophists, argued that intermittently the earth is shaken
by huge disruptive events like the Biblical Flood, and that these in essence shape our
world.
By contrast, other geologists were called uniformitarians because they argued that the
world changed slowly in a uniform, constant manner.
This debate raged.
Here's a suggestion.
The next time you're at a cocktail party to break the ice, turn to a fellow guest and
ask, are you a catastrophist or a uniformitarian?
Clearly, this was a stage of thought where thinkers were increasingly debating the changing
nature of the natural world.
Also, we need to keep the cultural context in mind, just as we did with Levenhoek and
his discoveries of the smallest world during the Dutch Golden Age.
In Darwin's Victorian age, society placed a tremendous emphasis on progress, and this
conviction created a receptiveness in society at large to some version of the idea of evolution.
The Victorian age was especially attracted to the idea of progress that could be achieved
by personal individual effort.
Indeed, one of the bestsellers of this time was Samuel Smile's book, Self-Help, published
in 1859, the same year as Darwin's book, and in fact, it outsold Darwin's book many
times over in their lifetimes.
What Darwin did was to propose a powerful insight into what it was that propelled evolution.
This was natural selection, the notion that nature selects particular qualities that adapt
for survival.
Darwin in essence provided the how and why of evolution.
Charles Darwin was born in 1809.
His father was a noted doctor, whose father in turn, Erasmus Darwin, had been a noted
natural philosopher.
So science was in Darwin's own family tree on his father's side.
His mother, however, also came from a notable family.
In fact, it's a notable family we've already encountered in our lectures.
This was the Wedgwood family, the makers of Wedgwood pottery and china.
Recall that Josiah Wedgwood, who became potter to the Queen of England and founder of the
Wedgwood brand, was in his day an active abolitionist and gave the anti-slavery movement its quintessential
iconic image, the kneeling slave who's asking, am I not a man and a brother?
But in addition to his social activism, Wedgwood also had another set of interests in science
because of its practical uses.
Advances in chemistry could help him in making his pottery, glazes and clays.
And yet Darwin's early career began not very promising.
First he trained as a medical student at Edinburgh University, but he could actually not abide
the sight of blood and whenever he saw it would grow faint.
So at the age of 18 he was sent to Cambridge to train to be a clergyman.
Instead, however, he discovered within himself a fascination for nature and he became an
especially fanatical collector of beetles.
How fanatical?
Well, once he had captured a beetle in one hand and a beetle in the other hand when he
spotted an even more desirable specimen.
So he had to put one of them in his mouth in order to free his hand for the new one he
was about to collect.
At this early juncture, Darwin had a life-changing experience, a journey around the world that
lasted five years.
A botany professor who had worked with Darwin recommended him for a job that had suddenly
become available to be the natural historian on a ship, the Beagle, which was headed for
a cartographic mission under Captain Robert Fitzroy.
Fitzroy was a young 26-year-old captain and his mission was to chart the coast of South
America.
Darwin was 23 and this mission would be the making of the man.
As this voyage began in 1831, we note here an intersection with a key global phenomenon
of the 19th century.
That was British sea power.
British sea power had one dominance of trade in the activities of the East India Company
and Britain took on a role as the world's policemen.
Remember the role of the British Navy, for instance, in quelling the slave trade.
Once aboard the ship, Darwin enjoyed a good scientific library and a full set of encyclopedia
Britannica.
What Darwin could have done without was the nearly constant experience of epic sea sickness.
Yet remarkably, whenever the Beagle reached land, Darwin recovered instantly and in his
scientific fervor set about explorations and investigations.
The trip first took them to South America, to Brazil, where Darwin was enchanted by the
rainforest and was constantly collecting and sending specimens back to Britain.
It was also in Brazil that he witnessed slavery, which was still legal there, and he was profoundly
disgusted by its cruelties.
The trip continued to Argentina, Chile, and in 1835, the expedition reached the Galapagos
Islands, a volcanic archipelago in the Pacific, now part of Ecuador, but then a British possession.
This was an area with astonishing wildlife, including those huge tortoises.
It was there that Darwin heard that offhand comment made by the British governor that
one could guess which island a tortoise was from by its appearance.
Later, replaying the comment in his mind, Darwin realized that the many different finches
on the islands that he had collected must also have had, one time, a common ancestry,
but then adapted themselves to particular unique ecological niches.
The rest of Darwin's life would be devoted to thinking through the implications of this discovery.
The naval voyage went on to Tahiti, New Zealand, Australia, around the southern tip of Africa,
back to South America, and then to England.
When Darwin returned to Britain in 1836, after five years of travel, he was a changed man.
He had about himself a new confidence, and he returned with thousands of pages of notes
and over 5,000 specimens he had collected.
The book that he published about this trip became a great success.
His constant, almost obsessive attention to the minutest observed detail links him to
Levenhoek, Darwin called this trip the first real training or education of my mind.
Darwin pursued his ideas in a series of notebooks where he laid down his evolving thinking,
like the notebook in which he first sketched a tree, remarkably like Diderot's Tree of
Human Knowledge from the Encyclopedia, a tree in Darwin's version that was meant to show
the branching off of species.
In Darwin's original idea, natural selection involved the survival of those specimens which
had traits best suited to their environment.
On his return from this epic voyage, Darwin, however, seemed almost to retire.
He married his cousin, Emma Wedgwood, again from the famous Wedgwood family, and they
had 10 children.
Emma was deeply religious, and immensely patient in constantly nursing her husband through
his chronically bad health.
Darwin, by contrast, professed himself to be agnostic in religious terms, believing that
it was impossible to know of the existence or non-existence of divinity.
But in spite of this difference between man and wife, they remained close and loving.
They lived in what was then the countryside, but today are London suburbs.
In this retirement, there now followed 20 years, which historians call Darwin's delay.
Instead of announcing his theories, Darwin kept quiet.
He had chronic ill health, and this was perhaps a combination of physical and emotional factors.
His woes especially focused on his stomach and resembled what today we would call panic
attacks.
In fact, Darwin kept a pot in his study at home for vomiting as he worked on his research.
He was hard at work in a secret project that in many ways resembles the secrecy that Gutenberg
had maintained as he engaged in his clandestine work of the books.
Darwin gathered information to support his theory.
He gathered a vast set of data based on research on barnacles, peas, pigeons, and many other
living things.
And often he was working with a simple microscope of the kind pioneered by Levenhoek.
By 1844, Darwin had written out an essay with his ideas in largely complete form, but he
still held back from publishing it.
His closest friends insisted that he had to publish it now.
But Darwin replied that arguing in public that species were not fixed but evolved seemed
to him like confessing to murder.
What finally jolted Darwin into publishing his ideas was competition.
He received a letter out of the blue from a younger scientist by the name of Alfred
Russell Wallace, in which Wallace described an idea which was essentially that of natural
selection.
Darwin's friends intervened and informed Wallace that Darwin had been doing this work
in secret for many years, and with great, perhaps even unique grace, Wallace conceded
that Darwin was first.
After this bad scare, Darwin cranked out the book, in which he stated his ideas, in thirteen
months of non-stop work.
And so, finally, in our turning point, Darwin's origin of species appeared in November of 1859.
Its full title was, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection or the Preservation
of Favored Races in the Struggle for Life.
Its first print run of 1,250 copies sold out immediately in the very first day.
In this book, Darwin laid out his ideas in accessible and clear prose.
The key principle is that nature produces more than can survive.
And there are, in all creatures, variations in traits in the larger population, which
then are selected from.
With the unfit destined not to survive, a species is a group of animals that can mate
and reproduce.
Significantly, Darwin did not make humans the central question or even a special case
in this book.
In fact, there was only one mention of humans in the book, the cryptic note that Darwin
provided that light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history.
Like Copernicus, whose theory displaced the Earth from the center of the universe, Darwin
dislodged man's status in this subtle way.
But Darwin insisted that his worldview was actually richer than the traditional one it
replaced.
Darwin declared, quote, there is a grandeur in this view of life, from so simple a beginning
endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been and are being evolved.
Now natural selection did not imply a teleology, that's to say an internally preordained plan,
or the notion that there's a set direction to evolution.
But Darwin himself actually seemed ambiguous on this point sometimes.
He sometimes spoke of improvement, or of higher forms, or of favored races.
Also, in 1869, Darwin accepted a formulation by the philosopher Herbert Spencer from 1864,
the notion of the survival of the fittest, and gave that title to his core chapter.
To many people, this suggested that the fittest was also in some sense the best.
And so they congratulated themselves on being the end point that millennia of evolution
had worked to produce in the great onward sweep of progress.
Epic controversy ensued, as some in this Victorian age very eagerly accepted what they understood
to be Darwin's message while others were deeply scandalized.
The scientific theory spread quickly in this literate society with a mass audience and
mass media.
Some religious figures devoted to a literal reading of scripture denounced Darwin, while
other religious figures argued that his message was compatible with a divinity's steering
evolution.
Younger scientists rallied to Darwin's theory, even though not all of them accepted
natural selection.
Among his champions was the biologist Thomas Huxley, who came to be called Darwin's Bulldog,
a role that he played for 30 years, championing his ideas.
Huxley was one of the speakers at the famous or infamous 1860 debate of Darwin's ideas
at Oxford University.
Huxley defended Darwin, who was not present, against his critic, Bishop Samuel Wilberforce.
Now, the name Wilberforce should ring a bell and be familiar from an earlier lecture.
This bishop was the son of William Wilberforce, that great anti-slavery crusader of a generation
before.
The debate was heated, but not very edifying.
Wilberforce ended by asking Huxley whether he claimed to be descended from monkeys on
his maternal or paternal side, and Huxley replied that he would prefer that lineage to one that
included a bishop who misused his intelligence.
Over time, Darwin's model of evolution gained wider acceptance because it meshed so well
with that Victorian confidence in progress.
In 1871, Darwin published his book The Descent of Man, in which he concluded that humans were
descended from an ancestor who was also the ancestor of monkeys.
Darwin died in 1882, at the age of 73, and he was working up until his last days.
In a signal gesture of honor, Darwin was buried in Westminster Abbey.
His idea of natural selection was only vindicated decades later, as scientists created what
is called today the modern or neo-Darwinian synthesis.
Unknown to Darwin, while his fame was growing, a priest-scientist in Germany, named Father
Gregor Mendel, was researching hybrids and pea plants and following the transmission
of particular traits.
This laid the basis for genetics, yet his work remained obscure until around 1900.
And in the 1920s, experts in population genetics put together Mendelian insights with Darwin.
The discovery of DNA followed.
In 1953, James D. Watson and Francis Crick modeled the double helix.
This forms the basis for our understanding of evolution today.
And in our time, the sequencing of the human genome in 2003 is opening the way for early
diagnosis of illness and early preventive care.
Darwin's theories had an impact that continued long after his death and still echoes today.
His ideas were so provocative that they were taken up by many different thinkers of very
many different political stripes and orientations, often quite removed from science and veering
into politics.
Objections to Darwinism on religious grounds by biblical literalists continued to the present
and came to be called creationism.
The famous 1925 Scopes Monkey Trial in Tennessee saw a school teacher convicted for teaching
evolution and this confrontation continues.
Others furtantly took up what they understood to be Darwin's message and sought to apply
evolution to human society and fellow humans.
This was the so-called social Darwinism and many of its forms would have horrified Darwin.
For such thinkers of social Darwinism, the flip side of evolution promising progress
was the fear of what would happen if natural laws were distorted.
The result might be degeneracy as they called it and social decline.
The opposite of survival of the fittest was then the threat of extinction.
To many, the international arena in this age of imperialism looked a lot like a struggle
for survival between nations, empires and races.
For instance, after the opium wars we discussed in our last lecture, some young Chinese reformers
used the vocabulary of social Darwinism to argue that China had to pull itself together,
strengthen itself or face extinction.
In imperialist societies, some racists argued that evolution proved the superiority of their
race over others, claiming an allegedly scientific basis for their hatreds.
Worldwide, some thinkers argued that society should privilege the best human specimens.
They usually had themselves in mind.
And that society should trample down the weak or the poor as unfit.
Darwin's own cousin, Francis Galton, invented the term and movement of eugenics, meaning
the good or true birth, to encourage social policies to improve the human population and
to discourage the reproduction of those judged less fit.
Eugenics gained worldwide but not universal popularity around 1900.
The United States was in the forefront, with more than 100,000 forced sterilizations in
hospitals, institutions and prisons.
From the 1930s, the Nazis in Germany fused racism and eugenic thinking and put it into
terrible practice, as part of their ferocious determination to build a new and pure kind
of racial state.
Once in power, the Nazis sterilized half a million Germans.
They then moved on to kill some 200,000 Germans by euthanasia, meaning the good death.
First children and then adults.
The Nazis' most determined killing campaign would be their genocide against the Jews,
the Holocaust.
When trains full of people arrived at the ramps at the death camp of Auschwitz, doctors
supervised a selection of the prisoners, some to be gassed at once, others to be worked
to death.
Ultimately, millions of humans were destroyed by those who professed an allegedly scientific
racism.
Clearly, Darwin is not to blame for the Nazis, but it is a frightening instance of ideas
being hijacked for terrible purposes.
Indeed, anxieties remain today about what it all means.
The brave new world of genetic manipulation and human intervention in processes like evolution.
Consider headlines from our own times about cloning or genetically modified food.
It's striking how writers of science fiction have captured so many of these anxieties,
and that's especially the case with a novel from 1895 by H.G. Wells entitled The Time Machine.
This massively prolific British writer was a pioneer of what we call science fiction.
Then it was called speculative fiction, and he was often a prophet of things to come.
He was fascinated by science and had studied biology under none other than Thomas Huxley,
Darwin's bulldog.
In his famous novel The Time Machine, Time Travel Machine, an inventor from the Victorian
Age crafts a vehicle that can zoom him forward to the year 802,701 in the future.
He discovers that human society has been split by evolution into two new species, the beautiful,
frivolous, childlike Eloi who live and play in the sunlight, and Morlocks, a technological
working class living in darkness underground and eating their cousin's species.
The inventor finally escapes this future world by journeying 30 million years into the future
to find mankind extinct and the world dying.
H.G. Wells presented an unforgettable thought experiment on the long-range trajectories
of evolution, and it's striking that he was already not so sure about the blessings
of progress and wondered about where science with its new authority would take us next.
That's very much part of the turning point that we're still working through now.
At the same time, technology was also relentlessly surging ahead, and by 1869 was showing that
it could cut across continents or pull them together, and that will be the turning point
we consider in our next lecture.
