In 1869, several months apart, two events took place that marked a key turning point.
The binding up of the world by modern technology, which now would assume vast significance as
a source of authority, especially in the person of the engineer, the figure who could
make all this happen, who could master nature.
In May 1869, the last spike was driven into the Transcontinental Railroad in Utah.
This marked the connecting of the North American East and West Coasts by an overland route
of train travel.
Six months later, in November of that same year, half a world away, a splendid international
fleet did something which earlier had been physically impossible.
For the first time, this fleet sailed directly from the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea,
along the new Suez Canal in Egypt.
The canal actually embodied a paradox.
By cutting through continents where Asia meets Africa, this engineering fleet helped
bind the world together by communications.
It made the world one as it never had been before.
In what ways was this a turning point?
First, these engineering accomplishments tied the globe together in new ways, speeding
communication and movement.
In the process, accelerating technology did something profound.
It changed how humans saw the world around them by altering how they perceived categories
as basic, as space and distance.
Second, these engineering marvels also increased the authority of science and technology, raising
them to the status earlier held by religious revelation.
This would yield wonderful advances, but also came with perils which we feel into our own
time.
Third, the Transcontinental Railroad and the Suez Canal reconfigured world political
power in new ways.
Taken all together, in 1869 the world map was redrawn by the power of technology.
This process had begun before and would continue to the present, but 1869 was a pivotal year
showcasing the power and authority of technology.
Let's begin with the Suez Canal.
Of the two projects that culminated in 1869, it was started earlier and took longer to
bring about.
From the agreement to build the canal to its completion took 15 years, but it also had
a long prehistory.
The idea of a canal that would cut across Egypt linking the Mediterranean and Red Seas
was very old.
The ancient Egyptian pharaohs had worked on canal projects but on a much smaller scale.
Napoleon, when he invaded Egypt, had ordered planning for a grand canal to open new routes
for French power, perhaps even access to British controlled India.
But the engineer who was researching the project for Napoleon made a crucial mistake.
He calculated that the Red Sea was more than 30 feet higher than the Mediterranean waters
were.
And this created a fearful prospect.
If you cut the channel, it might lead to an epic flooding catastrophe.
So Napoleon's plan was shelved.
But the dream continued, and in this case involves some pretty strange dreamers.
They were from a French group of utopian socialists called the Saint-Simonians.
The movement was inspired by, and took its name from, Claude Henri the Count of Saint-Simon,
one of the founders of sociology.
Saint-Simon and his followers believed that if only older forms of authority, especially
tradition and religion, were replaced by a deliberately constructed new society, a harmonious
human race might finally achieve true equality and progress.
The Saint-Simonians worshipped progress and the new.
In doing so, they built on the Enlightenment's dreams of perfectibility.
Tell our earlier lecture on the Encyclopédie as a quintessential Enlightenment project.
The Saint-Simonians aimed to put this into practice.
Saint-Simon himself preached, the Golden Age is not behind us, it is ahead, it is the
perfection of the social order.
Other utopian socialists shared these millennial hopes.
One by the name of Charles Fouyay actually expected that in a future age of harmony,
the seas would turn to lemonade.
It doesn't get any more utopian than that.
After Saint-Simon's death, his followers continued to dream about projects to advance
their faith, and they found such an enterprise in the idea of a canal across Egypt.
The linking of the seas they felt would have philosophical and world historical meaning.
Saint-Simonians declared that this canal would unite east and west, the feminine and the
masculine, achieving a new harmony.
But attempts to interest the Egyptian authorities in the 1830s by the Saint-Simonians came to
nothing, but the dreams still lived on.
And the man who would finally realize it was a figure who embodied public relations brilliance,
the Frenchman Ferdinand de Licep.
In 1854, de Licep got the new ruler of Egypt, Said Pasha, an old friend of his, to agree
to the project.
First, de Licep hired engineers who recalculated the actual ocean levels, and they confirmed
that no flood would ensue from this project.
And then a new company was founded to undertake the project with international investors.
The company would run the canal for 99 years and would collect fees from the shipping that
passed through.
There are echoes here of the age of the great commercial corporations, the British and the
Dutch East India companies that we surveyed in some of our earlier lectures.
De Licep's project would revolutionize world travel and shipping.
The route from East Asia to Europe would be dramatically shortened, from 11,000 miles
around the Cape of Good Hope in Southern Africa to only 6,000 miles.
It would essentially cut the time to move between Britain and India in half.
The canal company itself was founded in 1858 and in the next year started work from the
south at Port Said.
De Licep now hurried to get investors worldwide for this project.
Most financing came from France.
De Licep was the cousin of the Empress Eugenie, wife of the Emperor Napoleon III, and he used
his social connections to the Hilt.
The canal itself had its own turning point in 1864.
Before 1864, the work was done much like the ancient pyramids had been built by the massive
use of human labor.
But after 1864, giant dredging machines were brought in and their steam engines put the
construction on an entirely new technical basis.
At this point, it was the largest gathering together of mechanical energy up until that
point in history.
From the perspective of the rulers of Egypt, the entire canal project was a gamble.
They hoped to use European technology to modernize Egypt, to stave off further European influence,
to prevent the kind of humiliation that China experienced in the opium wars.
Using European know-how to resist the West was an approach that we will see later taken
in Japan with great success.
In the case of Egypt, the gamble failed and increasing foreign influence followed, but
that still lay in the future.
The 100-mile-long canal was at last completed in August of 1869.
The last sand between the seas was breached and fortunately no global flood ensued.
To celebrate, a grand opening was orchestrated for November of 1869.
The French Empress Eugenie and many other European nobles, including the Emperor of
Austria, the Crown Prince of Prussia and the Grand Duke of Russia, arrived in their own
yachts to be part of a great ceremonial fleet that would sail through the newly opened canal.
The Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi was commissioned to write a great opera, Aida, on a subject
from ancient Egypt, and its later premier performance in Cairo was part of this celebration
of a great historical event.
At the same time, a young French sculptor by the name of Frédéric Auguste Bartoldi
had an idea that he suggested.
That was to build a 90-foot statue of an Egyptian woman holding a torch, and the statue
would be called Egypt Bringing Light to Asia.
Now, even an impresario like Doulaset found this too much and politely declined the offer.
But Bartoldi later produced on the basis of a similar idea, a statue that you know, called
Liberty Enlightening the World, and it was set up in New York in 1886.
We know it as the Statue of Liberty.
At the ceremony in Egypt, a thousand dignitaries were in attendance, and they heard speeches
proclaiming that two worlds, the east and the west, had been united in what they called
a great festival for all humanity.
Doulaset was hailed as a new Christopher Columbus.
In fact, he took this celebrity to heart, and decades later tried to build another canal
in Panama, yet this later project ended for him in disappointment.
Let us instead focus for now on his moment of triumph.
In 1869, the flotilla passed through the canal.
There were actually some anxious moments because, in fact, further work would still be needed
to deepen the canal and to perfect it.
But still, after ten years of building, the canal was finally open.
What happened after this opening made clear the project's truly global significance.
The key here was British attitudes.
At first, Britain was hostile to the idea of a canal.
The canal would stand between Britain and its jewel in the crown, India, which had been
won earlier by the British East India Company as we discussed in an earlier lecture.
If the canal was built, it would become a revolutionary fact.
Contemporaries, in fact, called it a second phosphorus, comparing it to the Turkish straits
between Europe and Asia, which made Constantinople such a geopolitical prize as we saw in a lecture
right at the start of our course.
However, once the canal was actually built, the British found they could not tolerate anyone
else possessing it.
It now became vital to them.
Remember, the canal would cut the time to move between Britain and India in half.
So, when the next Egyptian ruler, Ishmael, son of Said, ran into a financial crisis,
he needed to sell his shares in the canal company.
And the British Prime Minister, Benjamin Disraeli, snapped them up in 1875, and thus gained a
controlling block of shares in the company.
This proved to be a great coup, but it also set off an imperialist chain reaction.
For instance, when there was a coup against the Egyptian Kediv, Britain took over the
country of Egypt in 1882.
Now the entire country around the canal was too precious for Britain to allow anyone else
to rule.
This was declared to be a temporary occupation, but the British in spite of this avowal held
on to Egypt for four decades.
Similarly, as a result, the British were also drawn into conquering Sudan, to the south
of Egypt, once again from the imperative of holding on to the key geopolitical juncture
of the Suez Canal.
All of this left French leaders outraged, as one might expect.
The French reacted by grabbing other territories in Africa, and the so-called scramble for
Africa of imperialist powers ensued.
This was the high imperialism of the 1880s and 1890s, the mostly western imperialist
powers racing to seize the world's remaining territories as colonies.
By 1914, they held three quarters of the world's land.
Back in 1875, considering the continent of Africa, European colonies were less than 10%
of Africa, but by 1895 they were more than 90% of Africa.
In just 20 years, Africa was carved up.
Anglo-French animosity also almost led to the early outbreak of a new world war over
the so-called Foshoda Crisis, now forgotten, which had taken place in 1898 in Sudan.
There, British and French colonial forces blundered into one another out in the wilds
of southern Sudan.
Imagine how world history would have changed if the First World War had been fought not
in the trenches of Europe between the Central Powers and the Allies, but between Britain
and France.
Other heads prevailed and the Foshoda Crisis was resolved peacefully.
Given the importance that the Suez Canal had in launching high imperialism, there's
a kind of almost perfect symmetry to the fact that the canal later played a role in decolonization
in the 20th century.
In 1956, in the Suez Crisis, an Egyptian nationalist regime nationalized the canal and then faced
intervention from Britain, France and Israel.
This intervention failed when both the United States and the Soviet Union, even though they
were Cold War rivals, insisted that this imperialism had to stop and it did.
The era of European colonial power and gunboat diplomacy was ending, but all that lay far
in the future and our later lectures will examine the trend of decolonization more
fully.
Back in 1869, six months before the Suez Canal was opened, came the completion of the first
Transcontinental Railroad in the United States.
It bound together the North American continent in unprecedented ways.
Before, an intrepid Yankee who wanted to go to California would need to make a journey
lasting six months around South America, enduring the rough seas to be found at Cape Horn.
Before, he could take a shortcut by crossing Panama by land, but then he'd have to brave
the dangers of tropical disease before once again getting on a ship to head northwards.
The dream that became a reality of uniting North America by railroad was launched by a
young engineer who unfortunately did not live to see it completed.
He was Theodore Judah, so set on the vision that possessed him that he was nicknamed Crazy
Judah.
Some contemporaries said that building this Transcontinental Railroad would be impossible,
like trying to build a railway to the moon.
But Judah was undaunted, and he mapped out a route through the formidable Sierra Nevada
Mountains and then sold the idea to President Abraham Lincoln even as the American Civil
War was raging.
Or perhaps we should say that he was able to sell it precisely because the Civil War
was raging.
Establishing this route to California would tie the West more firmly to the Union, and
Lincoln signed the Pacific Railroad Act in 1862.
What followed was a race, an economic and engineering competition in earnest between
rival and yet cooperating companies.
From the West, the Central Pacific Railroad Company worked eastwards, while from the Missouri
River, the Union Pacific Railroad Company worked westwards.
The law promised payment to the companies for miles of track they'd laid, and also
gave public land along both sides of the railway to the companies, each of which naturally
tried to maximize their share by speed and any means possible.
This construction faced huge obstacles, treacherous terrain, the heavy snows of the Sierras, raids
by Native American tribes whose lands the railroaders were entering.
The visionary engineer Judah died of disease while his project was underway and was never
to see his dream fulfilled.
Nonetheless, vast numbers of men continued to work on the railroad, many tens of thousands,
and they were very diverse.
They included Civil War veterans from both sides, Irish immigrants, African Americans,
and increasingly multitudes of Chinese immigrants who were subjected to dreadful and often fatal
mistreatment.
In fact, we're still not sure how many died in the project because the records that were
kept on the score were very slapdash.
The workers worked seven days a week, often 14 hours every day, in a pattern that moved
its way across the continent.
First, surveyors worked far ahead, mapping out the route.
Workers moved behind them to level obstacles and to prepare for the laying of rails.
Then the Chinese workers were often given the dangerous job of handling nitroglycerin
to blast the barriers that were in place.
Then the layers of track would move up and set the iron road on its course.
The pace of work was back-breaking.
At the end, a record was actually set for the laying of 10 miles and 56 feet of track
in only 12 hours.
Following the workers were herds of cattle and cooks, as well as dormitories on wheels
for sleeping.
Unsurprisingly, some pretty rough and wild settlements sprang up along the route to cater
to the appetites and lusts of those workers.
These towns were nicknamed Hell on Wheels, an expression we still use today, and included
places like North Platte and Julesburg, Nebraska.
Some sense of the bitter rivalry between the companies headed in opposite directions is
given by the fact that when their advanced parties finally met, they actually passed
one another, because neither side wanted to give up on the incentives of more mileage.
There are in fact persistent stories that some of the units actually fought against
one another.
Finally, after much wrangling and an ultimatum from President Grant to make this work, the
companies agreed to meet up at Promontory Summit, Utah.
On May 10, 1869, the occasion of the joining of the railroad took place and it was wild
and very revealing.
One dignitary who had to come from the east, a pretty slippery financier named Dr. Durant,
was actually late for the occasion at first because some of his own employees had held
him hostage for a few days in a labor dispute.
When he finally arrived, mighty locomotives were drawn up on either side as the last spike
was to be driven in.
This was a solid gold spike engraved with the ringing words, May God continue the unity
of our country as this railroad unites the two great oceans of the world.
The man given the honor of driving the spike in was California's former Governor Leland
Stanford, incidentally the founder with his wife of Stanford University.
Stanford swung and missed, allegedly.
Durant now stepped up, swung mightily, and also is alleged to have missed.
Somehow, somebody finally managed to get the spike in.
I should at this point mention one other detail so that nobody gets up right now after hearing
this lecture and races out to Promontory Summit.
That gold spike was immediately wrenched out and replaced with an iron one, and the gold
spike is preserved at Stanford University to this day.
One other detail is suggested.
The spike and hammer were wired up to a telegraph line, which, when contact was finally made,
with lightning speed conveyed worldwide the news of the uniting of the continent.
Let me take a moment to suggest how these two elements, trains and telegraphs, changed
perceptions of space and time.
Before the first steam trains of the early 19th century in Britain were developed and
improved, people were really limited to moving as fast as a horse could carry them.
Now, by contrast, human beings accelerated, achieving ever greater speeds of movement.
This was a fact, actually, which stirred considerable anxieties.
Was railroad travel at great speeds even healthy or proper?
Railroad accidents were not uncommon, and they could be horrific.
The great writer Charles Dickens was involved in one, but survived.
So even without these derailments, anxieties still spread about the effects of modern speed
on the human being.
Medical experts diagnosed a condition they called railway spine, which involved neural
damage from the jolting and jarring of a rail car.
There were anxieties about what train travel would do to nerves.
But others, by contrast, celebrated the railroad as a vector of civilization and progress.
The American printmakers, Courier & Ives, had a famous print entitled Across the Continent,
which showed the relentless forward motion of the train, out of an urban setting, into
lands that were wilderness, but would not remain so for long.
Other effects of train travel and changed perceptions of time and space are with us still.
One innovation in the United States, as in other countries worldwide, was the triumph
of railroad time, as it was called.
The standardization of what earlier had been very many different patterns of local timekeeping
to one time for all to conform to the schedules of the trains.
Physically, the train station became a veritable temple to the power of railroads.
Entire cityscapes of urban centers were torn down and rebuilt to make way for the rail lines
and their glorious terminals, often a cathedral-like structure of glass and iron, the central station.
Finally, for millions worldwide, obviously, the train offered the chance of long-distance
travel.
Worldwide, railroads became a key means of binding together space into unities.
British India, for instance, was connected with railroads funded by British investment
as a way of securing Britain's hold on the subcontinent.
By 1872, India had more than 5,000 miles of track.
Other states now also rushed to build such vast projects as well.
Russia built the Trans-Siberian Railroad from the 1890s as the longest railway in the world
to link its European West with its Asian East.
Germany sought to fund and dominate a project for the building of a railroad from Berlin
to Baghdad, which made the British very anxious and ultimately poisoned the international
atmosphere leading up to World War I.
I also want to briefly mention the telegraph.
When the United States' Transcontinental Railroad was linked up, it was accompanied
by a parallel line of telegraph wires for instant communication.
This replaced earlier telegraph lines that had been strung across the continent, and
so the legendary Pony Express famously was put out of business in an instant.
The telegraph made worldwide communication possible almost instantaneously.
Think all the way back to our second lecture in this course on the fall of Constantinople.
When that city fell in 1453, news of its capture by the Turks only reached Rome in Italy more
than a month later.
By contrast, when the Transcontinental Railroad was completed, the news reached Washington,
D.C. in mere moments.
Underwater telegraph cables also linked up the world on the eve of the construction
of the Suez Canal and the Transcontinental Railroad.
A submarine cable was run from Britain all the way to India in 1865 and from Britain
to the United States in 1866.
The instantaneous nature of the telegraph made it in a real sense the precursor of the
Internet of today, a topic that will take up at the very end of our course.
These trends of binding the world together all came together in a best-selling novel
inspired by the global changes that were taking place.
This was Jules Verne's adventure around the world in 80 days.
This book perfectly, marvelously captured the spirit of its age.
Verne has been called the father of science fiction, but in this popular classic, published
in 1873, he certainly reveled in science but without having to resort to the obviously
fantastic.
In a sense, what was sensational about this novel was that its story was quite plausible.
During this story, the British gentleman Philius Fogg of London and his manservant set out
to circle the globe on the basis of a bet agreed on at Fogg's Club.
They make the journey with many adventures on the way, using the Suez Canal, then across
British India through Hong Kong, and then on the Transcontinental Railroad across North
America.
At the end, and here I hope I'm not ruining the story for anyone, they think upon their
return to London that they've lost the bet, they've arrived too late, but at the last
moment they realize that in their travels they actually gained a day in journeying across
time zones, so there's a happy ending.
This feat could actually be done, but consider, only two decades before, around 1850, that's
before the Suez Canal and before the Transcontinental Railroad, before the technologies of improved
train travel that we've discussed, this same trip, it is estimated, would have taken
not 80 days, but rather 11 months to complete.
To sum up, 1869 was a pivotal year, binding the world together in new ways.
As we saw in earlier lectures, there certainly had been a commercial globalization taking
place before, that was beginning to draw the world closer in terms of trade and exchange.
This however, was an astonishing acceleration of communication and movement.
It changed how ordinary people perceived the very categories of space and time, and the
heroes of this venture were engineers, and their technological know-how.
This was celebrated, worshipped, lionized, little wonder that mothers at this time hoped
that their sons would become engineers.
If there are any engineers listening to this course, please stand up and take a bow.
Technology and engineers were redrawing the world map in ways that were both promising
and dangerous, as we see increased competition to dominate this new world.
Socially, this swiftly changing globe was about to experience another enormous change,
the first in franchisement of women, at long last starting in New Zealand, in a turning
point that we'll consider in our next lecture.
