In the late 19th century and the early 20th century, determined women demanded the right
to vote, which had always been denied them before.
And they demanded it in ways that were more dramatic and forceful than before.
In Britain, the suffragettes, as these most militant activists were called, engaged in
increasingly dramatic clashes with authority.
They threw eggs at politicians.
They chained themselves to fences and lamp posts in protest.
They smashed the windows of fancy downtown stores and started fires on public trains.
Once jailed, they went on hunger strikes, all of this to call attention to their cause.
And yet, the real breakthrough came by less dramatic means.
Women first gained the vote in New Zealand in 1893 by a sophisticated campaign of argument.
How did this turning point happen, as it did?
In thinking about that often elusive term, modernity, a prominent badge of what it means
to be modern has also been the acceptance of a political and social voice for the individual,
whether that individual is male or female.
Yet the self-evident and crucial step of recognizing women's right to vote actually
came remarkably late, long after the revolutionary developments like the American Revolution
or the French Revolution, which we considered in previous lectures.
For most of human history, half of the human race was mostly excluded from political power
and participation.
In fact, it was only in 1893 that the first national state, New Zealand, legally recognized
women's right to vote.
Other countries followed this first step years or decades later.
In this lecture, we trace how women's votes were achieved.
Women's votes have also been called women's suffrage or franchise, which simply means the
ability to participate politically in representative systems of government.
Today, we might take for granted that this makes perfect sense, but how did it come to
pass at long last?
In essence, two global trends, the demand for women's political voice and the growth
of settler societies intersected to create this crucial turning point, which spread from
New Zealand worldwide.
Let's examine these trends in turn and ask how and why they came together in 1893.
The international movement for women's votes can be seen as beginning in earnest with the
Enlightenment ideas, which emphasized individual freedom and personal sovereignty.
Now, in spite of this core idea and its universality, actually few male Enlightenment thinkers championed
women's rights, so it often would be the role of remarkable women to argue vigorously
for this cause.
One example was Mary Wilsoncraft in England, who in 1792 published A Vindication of the
Rights of Woman, and has been seen as one of the founders of the feminist movement.
In later decades, many activists for women's rights also drew inspiration from the anti-slavery
movement, which we discussed in an earlier lecture, as well as other reform movements
active at the same time.
As the American Revolution was unfolding, and a new American state was being created
in 1776, Abigail Adams wrote to her husband, John Adams, then a member of the Continental
Congress in Philadelphia, with the request,
I desire that you would remember the ladies and be more generous and favorable to them
than your ancestors, she wrote.
If this did not happen, she warned of dire consequences.
If particular care and attention are not paid to the ladies, we are determined to foment
a rebellion, and will not hold ourselves bound to obey any laws in which we have no voice
or representation.
Unfortunately, Abigail Adams' request was disregarded, and the cause would have to be
advanced in other ways.
For a time, from 1776 to 1807, women had the right to vote in the state of New Jersey,
but even these concessions were eroded over time.
At about the same era, as we've seen in an earlier lecture, the French Revolution pursued
a trajectory that seemed to many to be full of radical possibilities for remaking society.
Just as before the outbreak of the Revolution, women had hosted those salons where enlightenment
ideas were actively discussed and where men and women could mix, so the revolutionary events
saw the establishment of new women's clubs and discussion groups like the Society of
Republican Revolutionary Women.
Women were also active on the opposite side of the growing radicalism of the revolutionaries.
Olymp de Gouges, for instance, was both a royalist opposed to the radical revolutionaries
and an activist for women's rights.
Such spirits were disappointed by the Constitution of 1791, which made women merely passive citizens.
Olymp de Gouges was critical of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen, a founding
document of the early stages of the French Revolt in August 1789.
So she wrote her own impassioned counter-argument, entitled, The Declaration of the Rights of
Woman and Female Citizen.
In her text, she argued, woman is born free and lives equal to man and her rights.
The principle of all sovereignty rests essentially with the nation, which is nothing but the
union of man and woman.
And she went on to state, liberty and justice consist of restoring all that belongs to others.
Thus, the only limits on the exercise of the natural rights of women are perpetual male
tyranny.
These limits are to be reformed by the laws of nature and reason.
The very outspokenness of Olymp de Gouges and her independence of mind ended up alarming
the fanatical revolutionaries, and de Gouges was sent to the guillotine in 1793.
The movement for women's rights revived in earnest around 1840 in America.
Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott, a Quaker from Philadelphia, had met actually
in the context of a different movement.
They had met at the World Anti-Slavery Convention in London, which was part of a continuing worldwide
struggle of abolitionists even after the abolition of slavery in the British Empire.
So it was surprising that it was in this reformist context that the two women experienced something
brutal that galvanized them.
They were both refused the right to participate in the Congress as members because they were
women.
It was this experience that propelled them to further activism when they returned to
the United States.
And they helped organize the famous Seneca Falls Convention in New York in 1848 with
300 participants, men and women.
There a ringing resolution was passed.
It is the duty of the women of this country to secure to themselves this sacred right
to the elective franchise.
The convention also adopted a Declaration of Rights and Sentiments, which took the original
words of the Declaration of Independence and adapted them for their cause, like this.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men and women are created equal.
The history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and user-patience on the part of
man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over
her.
The cause that was championed at Seneca Falls also came in a time when women were active
in the movement for the abolition of slavery in America.
In 1851, Sojourner Truth, an African-American who had successfully escaped slavery, delivered
a famous speech in Akron, Ohio at a women's conference.
The speech was entitled, Ain't I a Woman?
And this should ring a bell for us because it was a deliberate echo of the famous motto
of the British anti-slavery movement.
Am I not a man and a brother?
Now there are different versions of Sojourner Truth's speech, which was extemporaneous.
But in the best known version, Truth asked the question, ain't I a woman as a refrain?
While pointing out that this was an age in which there was much discussion of rights,
whether those for those in slavery in the South or women in the North, she pointed out
that she had done the same hard labor as men.
She had suffered as much or more than men while in slavery, and she concluded with a
religious overture that Christ had come from a woman and that, quote, if the first woman
God ever made was strong enough to turn the world upside down all alone, these women together
ought to be able to turn it back, to get it right side up again.
And now the men better let them, end quote.
In the decades that followed, Elizabeth Cady Stanton worked together with Susan B. Anthony
to advance the cause.
In 1866, Stanton stood for Congress and received 24 votes out of 12,000.
In 1872, Anthony was actually arrested for voting in the presidential election.
Together, these women founded the National Woman Suffrage Association.
Women's finally came at the local level in the American Western Territories.
In the Wyoming Territory, women's votes were recognized from 1869, the first modern legislature
to allow it.
When Wyoming became a state in 1890, its leaders insisted that when it entered the Union, it
must do so with women's votes.
To this day, Wyoming's nickname is the Equality State.
Other Western states also recognized women's right to vote.
Utah followed Wyoming by two months, Colorado in 1893 and Idaho in 1896.
Why was the frontier West first in this regard?
The fact that these were areas of new settlement seems to have been crucial, because there,
out in the West, social roles were more fluid, institutions inevitably less fixed and set
in place, and experimentation was often viewed positively.
These frontier states already had women playing very active and indeed indispensable roles
in settlement and the building up of new institutions, especially educational institutions, and so
it's not surprising that women's education was also seen as vital in this regard.
Similarly, a mass movement for women's votes was also evolving in Britain in dramatic ways.
A Quaker, Ann Knight, published the first women's suffrage pamphlet in 1847.
In 1851, the first suffrage society was founded in Britain.
A following generation of women's activists founded the Women's Social and Political Union
and set out to engage in dramatic militant action.
They were led by Cristobal Pankhurst, and they were known as the suffragettes.
This was first a term of abuse, but one that soon gained respect.
They scuffled with the police from 1905.
Let me give a few examples.
Two militants actually smashed the windows on the House of Britain's Prime Minister.
In 1912, the suffragettes organized a spectacular nationwide campaign of window breaking.
They chained themselves to fences.
They set fire to mailboxes to call attention to their cause.
Then they bombed the House of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Once in prison, suffragettes engaged in hunger strikes, which gained further publicity and
eventually sympathy.
Most dramatically and tragically, in 1913, a young activist named Emily Davison came
to the famous Epson Derby horse race.
She timed her action exactly and stepped in front of the horse that was owned by none
other than the British King George V.
Davison was hit with tremendous speed by the startled racehorse and thrown to the ground.
She died of her injuries several days later.
Her funeral procession through London, with 2,000 women activists, was testimony to the
determination of these activists.
In reaction, anti-subragette movements rose up as well, both in the United States and
in Britain.
These protagonists, including both men and women, were convinced that allowing women's
votes would be a violation of natural order and of social cohesion, which they saw as
necessarily relegating women to an entirely domestic sphere.
So, for instance, in 1889, over 100 American women signed a so-called Appeal Against Female
Suffrage, which argued that, in fact, men who might have engaged in abuses in the past
were actually really getting much, much better, remarkably so.
Today we would say that they were evolving, and it promised that men would correct any
abuses without changes in the law on voting.
In some then, the continuing debate on women's vote was a key social issue in the later 19th
century.
And it came to a climax in what, for most people, was really a stunningly remote place,
the settler society of New Zealand in 1893.
Off in the South Pacific, New Zealand literally seemed, to European imperialists, the end
of the earth.
The original settlers of these lands were the Maori people.
Dutch traders encountered these islands in 1642, and that's why they bear a Dutch name,
New Zealand.
Eventually, British colonists moved in.
Colonial governors sent by London sought to balance the needs of new incoming settlement
with the treaty rights of the Maori.
Astonishingly, we've actually met one of these British governors of New Zealand in
a previous lecture.
That was Robert Fitzroy, who had been the young captain of the survey ship the HMS Beagle,
on which Charles Darwin sailed in the 1830s.
Overall, New Zealand was an example of a settler society like Canada and the United States,
where envisioning society in new ways was not just possible, but often seemed existentially
necessary.
Women's votes were achieved in New Zealand in ways that both resembled and diverged from
the more familiar pattern that was seen later in the United States or Britain, where large
movements were organized for the struggle.
In New Zealand, women achieved the vote after eight years of hard organizational work and
did so much sooner than in the United States or Britain.
This had to do with the social context.
In this frontier setting, women and women's work were seen as vital to the establishment
of the new society.
As a result, women's education took on a prominence and a sense of normalcy that were
really quite unusual for the times elsewhere in the world.
Some key examples.
In 1871, the first girls' high school opened in Dunedin, New Zealand.
Soon young women were applying to New Zealand's new universities.
One, Kate Edger, in 1877 became the first woman in the entire British Empire to earn
an undergraduate degree.
Helen Conant did so too and then went on to earn her master's degree.
Others soon followed and by 1893, over half the university students in New Zealand were
women.
Many New Zealanders were in fact proud of the achievements of these young women.
New Zealand women became famous internationally for their independence and carving out a new
way of life for themselves.
Many after receiving education entered the professions or became educators themselves.
Many also excelled at athletic pursuits and what worldwide at the time was still regarded
as a shocking sight, that of the female bicyclist wearing not a dress but bloomer trousers while
riding her bicycle was increasingly quite ordinary in New Zealand.
In 1891 it was even announced that in New Zealand a women's rugby team was being organized.
The key person who organized the women's movement was Kate Shepard of Christ Church.
She had been born in Liverpool in 1848 and then raised in Scotland and had emigrated
to New Zealand with her family.
Shepard was marked by good humor, strength, winning charm and, beneath it all, tremendous
reserves of calm determination.
For instance, she was among those pioneering female bicyclists of New Zealand.
Moreover, Shepard was motivated to action by a tremendous and deeply felt moral conviction.
She declared, quote, all that separates whether of race, class, creed or sex is inhuman and
must be overcome, end quote.
She and other women first became active in New Zealand's temperance movement.
To do something about the abuse of alcohol, which was another common feature of many settler
societies worldwide, wreaking damage on families and society at large.
They were inspired by a visiting American temperance activist and they founded the National Women's
Christian Temperance Union of New Zealand in 1885.
Many activists were congregationalists, baptists and Methodists, but what was really key here
was that there was no doctrinal requirement to join and work in the organization, so ultimately
it drew together women of different backgrounds and convictions for a common cause.
The main historian of women's suffrage in New Zealand, historian Patricia Grimshaw, argues
that the work of temperance was for New Zealand women kind of a vital apprenticeship in the
art of political agitation.
The temperance union with some 600 women members was a first for the country.
It was an organization led by women and a force for women.
As they said about drafting a reform program with temperance in mind, it occurred to many
of these women that the best way of making their voices heard on the issue of temperance
as well as other issues was to secure what had been denied them before, the right to vote.
Kate Shepard was put in charge of the Temperance Union's Committee on the Franchise and Legislation
and now the struggle ensued.
The organization borrowed from tactics we've already seen earlier pioneered in the abolitionist
movement against slavery.
These women wrote tracts and published pamphlets.
They spoke at public meetings and used their informal influence in society as well.
Their meetings were drawing together women of different classes in a really remarkable
alliance.
A tactic that had been most powerful for the abolitionists against slavery was also used
to great effect by the women activists, the mass petition.
Consider here as in the case of abolition, even if one did not yet have the vote, the
very act of signing a petition demanding reform was already a form of having a political voice.
The suffrage activists organized a series of petition drives, the petitions to be signed
by New Zealand women.
In 1891, the first petition had 10,000 signers.
Keep in mind this is from a smaller population.
In 1892, the second petition already had double that number, 20,000 signers.
And then the petition of 1893 had 31,871 signers, which was a quarter of all the adult women
in the entire country.
This was the largest petition ever submitted to the parliament.
When it was brought into the New Zealand parliament and unrolled, it was over 300 yards long,
visually impressive act.
Another tactic, by contrast, was not one borrowed from earlier movements, it was new.
Telegrams were sent.
They were sent to wavering parliamentarians, to bombard them with women's demands using
this new technology.
However, at the same time, opposition to women's suffrage also was being organized.
Some were alarmed by the increasing support shown for this measure.
Some of the opposition was actually sponsored and funded secretly by the alcohol industry
and tavern keepers in New Zealand, called in general the drink trade.
They were anxious, with pretty good reason, about the mobilization that had grown out
of the temperance cause and they wanted to quell it.
These critics asserted that the natural division of society was in danger of being violated
or transgressed.
But if this measure went through, women and men would become, as they called it, unsext
and degenerate.
These are social Darwinist terms, and society would collapse.
As one magazine jibed, when women's rights have come to stay, oh, who will rock the cradle?
When wives are at the polls all day, oh, who will rock the cradle?
Similarly, a politician's speech in parliament avowed, quote, woman's parliament is her
home.
And it is within that sphere that her function lies for making laws for our peace, order and
good government.
I believe that if you transfer her from that sphere to this, you spoil her for both, end
quote.
Some critics claimed that women would vote only as their ministers or priests told them
to.
The anti-suffrage organizations tried to organize a counter petition of their own, but it was
ultimately not very convincing, especially when news spread that free drinks were being
offered to those who would sign such a petition.
In fact, many New Zealand men, including established political leaders of very different political
backgrounds, supported women's right to vote.
Some in fact thought that it would advance the fortunes of their own political party.
So liberals expected women to vote liberal, while conservatives felt that women's votes
would be helpfully conservative.
One sees here that opinions on the subject cut across party lines and made for unusual
alliances on both sides of the debate.
And then on September 8th, 1893, the New Zealand parliament finally enfranchised women over
the age of 21.
And this became law 11 days later so that women could vote in the upcoming parliamentary
elections.
And did they ever vote?
Even before the registration offices were opened, women were standing in long lines
to register to vote long before.
In the election that followed, more than 80% of the women who were eligible to vote did
so.
They were eagerly taking up a right that had been denied them so long, and they certainly
felt that they were making history, as indeed they were.
The effects of the turning point in New Zealand were worldwide.
When New Zealand women gained the vote, telegrams were sent to women's suffrage movements internationally
from New Zealand to share the good news.
And later, Kate Shepard would travel around England, Canada and the United States lecturing
about how this success had been achieved.
Moreover, those first parliamentary elections of 1893, when women for the first time could
cast their ballots, also had a crucial effect.
The very fact of the heavy voting by women refuted a long-standing argument that had
been advanced by opponents of women's suffrage.
And that claim was that most women, in fact, didn't want the vote, were indifferent to
it, and that it was allegedly only a loud and clamorous minority which was pressing this
demand forward.
Worldwide, many people saw New Zealand as a splendid experiment, as an example of progress
taking place before their very eyes.
And many New Zealanders, men and women, were actually tremendously proud of being identified
with a new equal status for women.
The Prime Minister of New Zealand, Joseph Ward, explained, the main argument which weighed
with us was that of right, abstract right.
If the foundation of the government is the consent of the governed, it appears monstrously
unfair that one half of the population should not be represented or have any share in it.
So we see here the trend towards popular sovereignty, increasingly it was recognized, had to include
men and women.
This turning point, however, let's be clear, did not overturn everything at once.
In 1893, New Zealand women had won the vote.
But the first woman in New Zealand was only elected to parliament 40 years later, in 1933.
Nor did all women all vote in the same way as a uniform bloc, but then it was precisely
the ability to choose for oneself politically that had been at stake since the beginning.
Kate Shepard, who had been a prime mover of the cause, and today is to be seen on the
New Zealand $10 bill, reflected afterwards on what they had accomplished.
She said, quote, things have not been turned upside down.
The country has not been brought to dire destruction, nor have all wrongs been righted.
There has simply been an evolution, end quote.
Even with the example of New Zealand, elsewhere around the world, women's votes were slow
to come.
Only four countries and franchised women before the First World War broke out in 1914.
First was New Zealand in 1893, then neighbouring Australia in 1902, Finland in 1906, and Norway
in 1913.
In many countries, the experience of the First World War would have a catalytic effect, because
it transformed views in a way that the suffrage movement's principal arguments had not been
able to do, although their activism had certainly paved the way.
The First World War would be a true total war, in which entire societies were mobilised
for total victory and to stave off total defeat.
It was a war in which industrial warfare made factory production as important as the movement
of soldiers on the battlefield, and increasingly the lines between the war front and the home
front blurred.
Women on the home fronts took on new roles as munitions workers, drivers and clerical
workers.
This total war made vividly clear women's crucial role on the home front, and in many
countries the vote simply couldn't be denied to them anymore after the role they had played
in conflict.
In the United States, for example, President Woodrow Wilson, who had opposed women's votes
earlier, later endorsed women's suffrage as a measure for victory.
In this new context, the 19th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and franchising women
became law in 1920.
Similarly, after the First World War, other countries did likewise, including Britain,
Germany, the Netherlands and the Baltic countries of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.
Elsewhere, the process took longer.
French women gained the vote in 1944.
Switzerland only allowed women to vote in federal elections in 1971, and the last restrictions
on women's votes at the local level in Switzerland were removed only in 1990.
Women gained the vote in Kuwait as recently as 2005, and in Saudi Arabia, by contrast,
women are still not allowed to vote today.
Even as the completion of this turning point, the enfranchisement of half the human race
has not been fully reached yet, its effect has been tremendous.
We've examined in our lectures how each of the turning points relates to what is seen
as the legitimate and authentic principle of authority, and in this case, the authority
of equal rights for women was a historic and profound step, changing how women and men
viewed their world and themselves.
Around the same time, a literal change in viewing the world came with tremendous force, with
the invention of motion pictures and film, and it is this which we'll consider in our
next lecture.
