The
winds are blowing at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. We're walking nearby at the lonely Kill Devil
Hills, part of the Outer Banks Barrier Islands of North Carolina. The cold winds intensify
up to 21 miles per hour. Occasionally, sand from the beach swirls up around us.
It is the morning of December 17, 1903, at 10.35. Just ahead of us, we see a small cluster
of seven people, standing by the side of a strange long contraption, a frame covered
with muslin cloth. Two men are the focus of attention, both dressed with a certain odd
formality in white shirts with dark ties and wearing dark suits. They shake hands,
then one man lies down upon the structure, which vibrates with a pulse of a machine and
then starts to move along a track on the ground. The other man runs alongside the sliding object.
And then, suddenly, to our amazement, the structure lifts up into the air. This thing,
which its inventors call the right flyer, hovers up and up. For 12 seconds, it has been
up in the air and then smacks down into the sand after having traversed 120 feet. Later
flights last longer and go further. We have just witnessed an exhilarating turning point
in human history. As two bicycle engineers on a lonely beach have broken the shackles
of earth for the very first time, achieving that most ancient human dream of steered and
powered human flight, how would you feel at having witnessed this sight?
Today, we have become so used to the routine of air travel that it is difficult to imagine
our way back to the time before, to really feel the wonder that clung to the very idea
of flying. Humans soaring like birds had been declared impossible many times, and yet this
was always a permanent fantasy of the human race.
The heavens were both alluring and forbidding. They were the realm of divinity, not of humans.
From the earliest art, gods and angels and spirits were depicted with wings added to
human-like forms to show their power and transcendence, literally their ability to rise above.
Psalm 55 exclaims, for instance, oh that I had the wings of a dove, I would fly away.
The ancient Greek myth of Daedalus and his son Icarus depicted both the attraction and
the dangers of flying. In the story, to escape imprisonment on the island of Crete, the inventor
Daedalus built himself and his son wings of wax and feathers, and then they both took
off for freedom over the waters of the Mediterranean. In the process, Daedalus warned Icarus to
take a middle course, flying above the waves but not too close to the sun, not too high
because that would melt the artificial wings. But his son Icarus, once he had begun flying,
was just enraptured by the sheer joy of it and flew too high until the sun melted his
wings and he fell to his death. So from the very beginnings, there was a cautionary note
about the entrancing prospect of flying. Over the centuries, in each age, there were
men who were driven by this dream to fly, who sought to recreate bird-like wings to get
themselves aloft after jumping from heights. Predictably, many of these intrepid souls
ended up killing themselves in the attempt. In the 15th and 16th centuries, the genius
inventor Leonardo Da Vinci also had a lifelong fascination with flight, but fortunately he
did not injure himself with such practical experiments. He mused, a bird is an instrument
working according to mathematical law, which it is within the capacity of man to reproduce.
Showing very great prudence, Leonardo advised anyone who did want to experiment with flying
to do so near a lake in order to avoid injury.
Just before the epic events of the French Revolution that we surveyed in an earlier lecture,
two brothers achieved something marvelous in France. These were the Mongolfier brothers,
Joseph and a ten, who had observed a fascinating fact. Lighting a fire under a bag would cause
it to rise. This led the Mongolphees to build the first hot air balloons.
And so at the Palace of Versailles in September 1783, the Mongolphees demonstrated their invention
for the King of France, Louis XVI, in happier days. Their balloon did not take up human
subjects, but instead a sheep, a rooster and a duck. The crowds were astonished. We have
no record about how the involuntary animal travelers felt about this.
Then in November of 1783, with the American scientist Benjamin Franklin watching, the Mongolphees
balloon actually carried two men over Paris. And yet, steering such an aircraft remained
a problem.
In Britain, the engineer George Cayley experimented with gliders throughout the first half of
the 19th century. One of his great advances involved understanding the importance of streamlining
to reduce air resistance. It's said that in 1853 Cayley built a glider and had his
coachman fly it across a valley. The experiment was a success, but the coachman on returning
to Earth is said to have immediately quit his job, complaining to Cayley that he had
been hired to drive, not to fly.
The dream endured among the many engineering marvels of the 19th century. Jules Verne based
a number of stories on this impulse using different imagined technologies in his fiction.
His first popular novel was the 1863 text, Five Weeks in a Balloon, about English explorers
charting Africa from the air. Then his 1886 novel, Robour the Conqueror, told of a heroic
man who had conquered the heavens by constructing a heavier-than-air craft. Verne's famous
1873 novel, Around the World in 80 Days, also featured a balloon journey as part of that
epic global race.
And so experiments with lighter-than-air craft also continued, using hydrogen gas to lift
the vehicles. In the year 1900, the German Count von Seppelin pioneered airships named
after himself. Vividly showing that the quest for flight also had a global reach, let me
mention the Brazilian, Alberto Santos Dumont, who was heir to a coffee fortune, who was absolutely
obsessed with flying. In fact, in his apartment in Paris, he actually ate meals in the air
on a specially designed table and chairs that were six feet high, and the waiter would need
to get a ladder in order to serve this budding flyer and his guests. In 1901, Santos Dumont
flew above and around the Eiffel Tower in a dirigible.
The German engineer Otto Lilienthal in the 1890s further perfected gliders. He produced
graceful bird-like forms from which the pilot dangled. However, Lilienthal turned out to
be one in a long line of aviation fatalities. He died in a gliding accident in 1896. And
it was Lilienthal's crash and his fate that inspired the Wright brothers. Or the Wright
remembered afterwards that flight was generally looked upon as an impossibility. But this did
not deter the Wright brothers, it actually provoked them. As Wilbur Wright somewhat understatedly
confessed, for some years I have been afflicted with a belief that flight is possible to man.
So who were these Wright brothers, who succeeded in the fateful leap where others crashed? The
Wright brothers grew up in Dayton, Ohio. Wilbur and his younger brother Orville together
formed a close partnership. Neither man married, but devoted all of their lives to their shared
work. As Wilbur put it, they even thought together in a sense. Their father, Milton
Wright, was a bishop of the United Brethren Church. And his responsibilities in ministry
meant that he was often away from home and his family. The Wright's mother, Susan, was
of German background, from a family of carriage makers. She was very adept at mechanical challenges
and seems to have passed this trait along to her sons. One day, their father, perhaps
returning from one of his frequent travels, gave the boys a toy. A toy which launched
their life's work. It was a toy helicopter, a fragile construct of cork and bamboo and
rubber bands that twisted rotors that were attached to the toy. In coming into the house,
their father threw it to them. And instead of it falling, it flew and buzzed about the
room as the brothers were called later. The toy didn't last very long in the hands of
energetic small boys, but the memory of that toy was abiding. The brothers had little in
the way of formal schooling, but were fired in their youth by a love of science, much
like the youthful Thomas Edison. As they grew older, the Wrights set up a printing shop
following the invention of Gutenberg. In addition, they also set up a bicycle shop to sell and
repair bicycles, which in the 1890s were all the rage. News of the death of the German inventor
Lilienta in a glider accident galvanized them. They set about studying all that was known
about flying, surveying the work of earlier pioneers. And as they did so, they discovered
something that shocked them. They uncovered errors in calculations of air resistance.
And this fact prompted them not to rely any longer on received wisdom or other people's
earlier work, but to launch their own experiments. The Wrights even built their own wind tunnel
for measurements. A key innovation they arrived at was so-called wing warping, which was intended
to stabilize flight. These inventions came not from a university or an extensive research
institute, but from their own small workshop in Dayton, Ohio. From 1900, the Wrights took
their experiments to a site near Kitty Hawk, North Carolina. There they settled at the
Kill Devil Hills in a rickety cabin. The area had sand dunes for soft landings, or at least
softer than otherwise would have been the case, and the height of the dunes made them
ideal for launching aircraft. But this environment was not mild or pleasant. It could be cold
and fiercely windy, and during the summer mosquitoes were a terrible besetting plague.
Here, on a succession of gliders, the Wrights worked out practically the challenges before
them. Ultimately, they created a bi-plane glider design, with a rudder for steering
and forward elevators to ascend or descend. To all of this, they added a 12-horsepower
engine, which drove revolving propellers, which were essentially wings that spun round
and round to propel the flight. The brothers were men of few words. Inside,
however, beneath that calm exterior, they isolated between confidence and doubt. They
were sure that they were making real progress on their own. And yet, in 1901, just two years
before their triumphant moment, Wilbur had told a friend that he didn't really expect
to see flight achieved in his lifetime. Then, on December 17, 1903, there arrived the scene
we started this lecture with. The Wright brothers invited locals from miles around to come see
this experiment. Only five people took them up on this invitation, but those people witnessed
world history. After tossing a coin to decide which of the brothers would begin, Orville
won and made the first flight. The fact that the Wrights had a lifeguard there to take
a photograph with a camera on a tripod that they had set up in advance meant that the
Wright brothers suspected they were going to succeed that day and wanted it recorded
for history. In that first flight, lasting 12 seconds, Orville fulfilled the oldest
dream. Then Wilbur, his brother, took a turn, covering 175 feet. Then Orville flew again,
traveling 200 feet. Then, on Wilbur's second flight, they had the most success of that
day. Wilbur now covered 852 feet, and this time, Wilbur had been in the air for 59 seconds.
The two brothers telegraphed their father with the news, and the first word of the message
they sent really said it all, success. Both North Carolina, with its slogan, First in
Flight, and Ohio, with its slogan, Birthplace of Aviation, claim to this day for themselves
special status in the history of flying, and they're both Wright because of the Wright
brothers. Back in Ohio, the brothers continued improving their machine. They received a patent
for their plane design in 1906, and later successfully fought off legal disputes by
competitors. In 1908, Wilbur Wright took the show on the road, as it were. He traveled
to France to demonstrate the invention, and elsewhere in Europe.
The French, proud of the pioneering role of the Mongolian brothers, were sure that their
nation would achieve flight first. And so for this reason, the French often mocked the
claims of the Wrights at first, but then actually seeing the demonstration meant believing.
In 1909, the Wright brothers founded a company to build and sell their planes. Wilbur died
in 1912, but Orville Wright lived until 1948. Imagine, by 1948, how much Orville had seen
in the way of their invention being improved, revolutionized, and improved again.
The result of this invention was a veritable flying craze. Huge crowds gathered to witness
this amazing spectacle. When Wilbur Wright flew over Manhattan in 1909, a million people watched him
and thralled. A French journalist who witnessed Wilbur's demonstration of flying in France
put it very eloquently. He said, nothing can give an idea of the emotion experienced,
and the impression felt, a flight of mastery, assurance, and incomparable elegance.
Contemporaries marveled at what they felt was really the beginning of a new age of human history.
Some of them called it the air age. So in a word, to fly was to be modern.
What did it feel like for the first people who undertook flight? Pilots spoke of almost being
drunk on the experience of flying, and yet they needed to be cautious. This was an undertaking
that was full of danger. For instance, in the first half of the year 1911, 30 aviators were killed
in accidents. We also have fascinating testimony from someone who was a passenger on an early
flight and reflected keenly and insightfully on her experience of flying for the first time.
She was the American writer Ida Tarbell. Tarbell was one of the most famous muckraking
journalists of the age. She wrote investigative exposés of the abuses of big corporations and
industry. In 1913, Tarbell wrote up her experiences of flying.
Wearing a silk hood and goggles, she sat behind the pilot as they took off, accelerating to the
fantastic speed of 50 miles per hour. When Tarbell looked down once aloft, she declared,
the surprise of it seemed to stun me. Not that I lost consciousness,
but I was literally lost in amazement at the suddenness and ease of it.
As she and the pilot flew on, she continued, then the whole thing began to go to my head,
and I wanted to laugh and shout. The sense of exhilaration is one that I have never known before.
You seem to have gotten as far above all physical fears as you are above the Earth,
and you have a curious sense of being part of the whole thing.
Tarbell concluded with words that were prophetic. She said,
You will fly one of these days. I shall fly again, I hope. Possibly before we die,
we may both be traveling back and forth to business from country to city in an aeroplane.
How right she proved to be. What she probably didn't expect in all of that initial exhilaration
was how routine and unexciting sometimes even burdens and flying would become for people.
But here was the authority of personal lived experience. Something that had been dreamed of
and thought impossible was now lived, the miracle of flight.
Contests, exhibitions, races, and so-called barnstorming stunt shows became all the rage.
Nations also competed against one another in a race to master the air. The French surged ahead
so that by 1911, the world records for speed, altitude, and endurance were all held by French
pilots. The French founded the first flight training schools and led the world in plane
production before the First World War. It was a French pilot, Louis Bleuil, who crossed the
English Channel in July 1909 and won a rich prize from the London Daily Mail newspaper for achieving
this feat. Little wonder, then, that pilots were idolized. As people who had mastered the
soulless technology of the 19th century, all those machines, pilots became global celebrities like
film stars. The American Charles Lindbergh, for instance, who was nicknamed the Lone Eagle,
was almost deified when he made his 1927 solo flight across the Atlantic covering the 3,600
miles from New York all the way to Paris. When Lindbergh returned to New York, he was greeted by
four million people in a massive ticker tape parade. Even a popular dance was named after him,
the Lindy Hop. Great charisma attached to these pilots, or as they were sometimes called,
bird men and bird women. The most famous of the bird women was Amelia Earhart. She was the first
woman to fly alone across the Atlantic in 1932. And in 1937, Earhart set out to become the first
woman to fly around the world. But her plane was lost in the Pacific, a mystery that's still unsolved
to this very day. Love of flying also drove Bessie Coleman, the first female African-American pilot
who overcame both gender and racial discrimination to earn her pilot's license in France in 1921.
There was even a word that became current at this time that suggests how flight seemed to many people
to be changing what was possible, and this term was air-mindedness. Air-mindedness suggested a modern
willingness to do things in a new way, to explore all of the potential of flight. There were any
number of predictions, including the expectation that in the future there would be a family airplane
in every garage. Air mail, which we today take for granted, or simply ignore entirely due to the
speed of the internet, was at the time a thrilling concept. The first official air mail flight took
place on May 15, 1918, from Washington, D.C. to New York. The pilot, who was not very experienced,
was simply given a map showing Union Station in D.C. and told to just follow the train tracks
north to New York. So, while President Wilson and a huge crowd looked on in downtown Washington,
the pilot took off, circled around, and then headed south. This meant that the first air mail
flight had actually taken off in the wrong direction, and shortly after that crash landed,
so that the mail actually had to go by train after all. The first major U.S. airlines actually
originated as carriers of air mail. The earliest included TWA, American Airlines, United Airlines,
and Northwest Airlines. Later, they branched out into passenger service.
In 1935, there took place, to great excitement, the first trans-Pacific commercial flight,
the Pan-American Airlines flying boat, the China Clipper. The China Clipper actually flew through
the Golden Gate in San Francisco as it headed for China. President Roosevelt's telegram,
with best wishes, really said it best. He communicated, I thrill to the wonder of it all.
As you probably guessed, the name of the flying boat, China Clipper, was intentionally reminiscent
of those ships that had carried tea from China in the age of sail, and the hope was that American
trade with Asia would surge again. In a real sense, aviation was redrawing the world,
making it smaller and more accessible in modern technological ways.
But this modernity also brought peril. The political and military implications of flight
were just as far-reaching. In a word, aviation threatened to upset the Westphalian order of
territorial sovereignty that was launched to the peace of Westphalia back in 1648.
That Westphalian order had established the authority of rule over land or territory.
But who would enforce sovereignty in the skies? When the first airplane flight took place in Europe,
a British newspaper magnate announced that the real news that had taken place that day
was that the English Channel had essentially disappeared. What he meant was, Britain was no
longer safe from the air. Because no sooner had powered flight been invented than it was
put to military uses to rain death down from the skies. This was not only a matter of the
perversity of particular arms dealers and generals at work. In fact, the rights themselves
marketed their invention as a formidable tool of war, and got their first contract in 1908
from the U.S. Army. An air arms race was on. The first use of the airplane for war came in
1911 in the Italian-Turkish war over Libya. Airplanes were used for reconnaissance and then for
bombing. Do the math on this. It took only eight years from the invention to its use for war.
World War I saw both the celebrated fighter aces dueling in the skies as well as the first
beginnings of strategic bombing. More than anything else, it was air warfare that ushered in the
reality of total war. When we speak of total war as a historical phenomenon, we mean industrialized
warfare, not of armies alone on the battlefield, but of entire societies and home fronts in which
everyone, including civilians, is a participant and a potential target. Strategic bombing brought
all of this home, and it terrified political and military leaders and populations at large.
From those first tentative bombings of cities in World War I,
contemporaries drew the terrifying lesson in the phrase of the time that the bomber always gets
through. It was Hitler's air force that pioneered dive bombers equipped with sirens that wailed as
they attacked targets to terrify those who were on the ground. In World War II, Nazi terror bombing
of Warsaw in Poland, Rotterdam in the Netherlands, and London was followed then by round-the-clock
bombing of Germany by Allied air forces and the obliteration of Hamburg and Dresden.
Civil defense sirens, bunkers, crowds hunkered underground with gas masks at the ready. This
is what modern total war looked like for much of the world. Incredibly, one man actually predicted
this development in really uncanny ways. This was a man we've met before, that prolific British
writer H.G. Wells. What today we call science fiction, H.G. Wells preferred to call fantasias
of possibility, an opportunity to imagine and think through the consequences of turning points.
H.G. Wells' novel The War in the Air was written in 1907 and then published as a book in 1908.
And the core thesis of the book was correct and prophetic. The airplane alters the character of
war. With airplanes, war will no longer be fought on fronts, but everywhere, including behind the
lines. No one is safe, no one is immune. And just as war is getting more destructive, Wells argued,
it was also becoming less decisive and ever more meaningless.
Wells' novel follows a humble British bicycle mechanic who witnesses by accident world historical
events. He sees a German air fleet attacking New York and smashing that city. He sees how Germany
ultimately proves unable to master America even after this attack, because even as the government
surrenders, the American people keep fighting below. He witnesses an Asian alliance of China and Japan
in turn attacking the Europeans and defeating them. Finally, as governments and cities collapse,
in this novel, civilization as a whole is destroyed. Wells was in a real sense the
prophet of air war. When the book was republished again during World War II, Wells said bitterly that
when he died, his tombstone should eventually bear the words, I told you so, you damn fools.
But paradoxically, Wells also hoped that air power might be the answer as well as the problem.
Elsewhere in his fiction, Wells speculated that a world government that ruled from the air with
air power could reconstruct all of human society. Wells was convinced that the solution was world
government by scientifically minded intellectuals, like himself. Even this prophet, otherwise so
insightful, proved touchingly naive or innocent in his view of benevolent elites holding overwhelming
power over others. Where are we now, more than a century after this turning point?
How air-minded are we today? Flight is a turning point that's so woven into the lives of so many
people that we take it for granted. It's reported that in 2010, global air passengers topped five
billion for the first time. How routine flight has become. And yet, to fly and arrive hours later
on a different continent still has its effects. Being that mobile can broaden horizons intellectually
and in essence produce a different you, a you that would not have existed without human flight.
In this lecture, we saw the way in which flying redrew the world and really shaped the experience
of modernity. Just a few years after the flight to the Wright Brothers, another event on the ground
reconfigured world politics, when to the surprise of a global audience, Japan, beat a European
and imperialist power, Russia, in a modern war in 1905. This surprise we consider in our next lecture.
