Moving with utmost secrecy in the early morning hours, a Japanese naval force stealthily approaches
its intended target, an important naval base. War has not yet been declared. Japan aims
to catch its enemy by surprise and to strike a decisive, unexpected blow. The stillness
is unbroken as Japanese warships creep closer in, and then the attack begins, with salvos
of heavy guns, the streak of torpedoes, and explosions that wake the unsuspecting garrison.
At first, this story actually sounds familiar. It sounds like December 7, 1941, when Japan
attacked the United States without warning at Pearl Harbor on a date which will live
in infamy, bringing the United States into World War II. But the story we started with
is not Pearl Harbor. Rather, this event came 37 years earlier, on February 8, 1904. This
was the Japanese attack on the Russian Empire's forces at Port Arthur in the Far East. And
it marked the beginning of the Russo-Japanese War of 1904 to 1905, which ended in Japanese
victory. This war was without a doubt one of the turning points of modern world history
as we'll see shortly. And yet, it is little remembered today, in part because it gets
so completely overshadowed by the First and Second World Wars that came soon after. In
fact, this is one of those historical events that gets more important the further we move
away from it in time. Let's consider why.
This war, in which a modernizing Japan beat a European colonial empire, was a turning
point really for three reasons. First, the war started the process that would last the
rest of the 20th century, global decolonization. As countries that had been taken over by imperialist
powers shed outside control to achieve their own sovereignty and independence, seeing Japan
win inspired other non-Western nationalists. Second, this war fought with new weaponry,
revealed for the first time what modern industrial war was like and how destructive it would
be. And yet, in spite of great numbers of outside observers, the wrong lessons were drawn from
this war. Third, this war set the stage for the First
World War and Second World War, as well as preparing the way for the collapse of the Russian
state and the establishment of an unprecedented communist government. In fact, the Russo-Japanese
War did so much to usher in the age of World War I and World War II that some historians
have very provocatively labeled it World War Zero, the vital precursor.
You'll recall from our lecture on the opium wars in China that these ushered in the period
of frantic European imperialism worldwide, the age of gunboat diplomacy. By 1914, when
the First World War broke out, three-quarters of the globe had been seized by European imperialist
powers. One after another, non-Western society was simply overrun.
Yet many resisted fiercely. Some were quite dramatically successful in their resistance,
as when the Ethiopians defeated an Italian expeditionary army in 1896 at the Battle of
Adoa. But the most successful of all societies in fending off the imperial power of the West
was Japan.
The island empire of Japan had closed itself off to outsiders and their influence, trade
and ideas after 1638. Now, this isolation was not total. Some severely limited trade
was still allowed at the port of Nagasaki with merchants of the Dutch East India Company,
the VOC. I'll bet that you didn't think we were going to encounter the Dutch East India
Company again in these lectures, but we did.
From their isolation, Japanese leaders looked on with a sense of horror at what was happening
elsewhere in Asia. In particular, they followed the British opium wars against China and drew
strong conclusions. They saw European powers regularly and hypocritically infringing on
the very ideas of national sovereignty and the equality of nations in a family of states
that had grown out of the 1648 peace of Westphalia.
So while debating how to avoid becoming the next victims of imperialism, Japan's leaders
actually had their hand forced as American ships suddenly appeared off the Japanese coast
in 1853. These were the awe-inspiring black ships as they were called, steam vessels built
for war, belching black smoke as they moved.
The American naval force, led by Commodore Perry, opened Japan to the outside world after
200 years of self-containment. The 1854 Treaty of Kanagawa gave trade concessions. As other
European powers also made demands, a regime of unequal treaties, like that in China, was
set up, humiliating to the Japanese.
At this point, a group of bold Japanese reformers took decisive action that altered what seemed
to be the likely impending fate of Japan. In 1868, they undertook a coup against the
Shogun, the warlord who had held true power and had sidelined the emperor for centuries
before. This event came to be celebrated as the Meiji Restoration. Meiji means enlightened
rule, and a young generation of Japanese rallied to the 15-year-old emperor Mutsuhito as a
symbol of this great national undertaking, to resist outside pressure by adapting Western
successes.
In the new capital of Tokyo, the reformers, by a remarkable act of collective will, created
an extensive blending of traditional Japanese culture with Western technology and ideas
to reach for great power status. Schools were established using French models. The army
was built up on the German model. The navy was built up on the famed British model. In
the armed forces, the earlier warrior class of Samurai were assimilated into the officer
class, and their warrior ethos of Bushido was popularized as a form of general Japanese
patriotism. A constitution was passed in 1889. Rapid industrial growth boomed.
Little wonder that young Japanese were very proud of what they saw. A Japanese modernity.
Not merely a wholesale adoption of the West, their program was summed up in the slogan
Fukoku Kyohei, rich country, strong army. Ultimately, the point of this remarkable movement
was to ensure survival in the age of imperialism by becoming an imperialist power themselves.
Among the selective borrowings from the West was a very strong infusion of social Darwinist
thinking. Summed up in an apt description of international politics, either you eat
or you will be eaten. And the first demonstration of this attitude came with Japan's war against
China in 1894 to 1895, which Japan won with devastating and astonishing speed.
But in seeking its own imperialist expansion, Japan ran up against its first European rival,
Russia. While Britain and France were expanding overseas, Russia had expanded eastwards into
Asia and to the Pacific. In 1860, the Russian Tsar had founded the city of Vladivostok
on the Pacific, a town whose name literally meant Ruler of the East. Soon Russia clashed
with Japan in northeast Asia, especially where their interests collided in northeastern China,
and Churia. At this time, Russia was the most conservative and autocratic of European empires.
In fact, it was so conservative that it had only abolished Serfdom in 1861. But like other
European powers, it saw its own superiority over non-Westerners as self-evident, and it
meant to press its claims to expand in Asia. A physical monument to this will to expand
was the Trans-Siberian Railroad, the longest railroad in the world. Just as the Transcontinental
Railroad was built in the U.S. in 1869, this Trans-Siberian line was meant to secure continental
dominion, and it was also meant to be a competitor to the trade routes that ran through the Suez
Canal. From 1890, the building of the Trans-Siberian surged ahead, from Vladivostok to link with
Moscow and European Russia, running over 6,000 miles. By 1904, it was largely, but not totally
finished. It only had a single track, so movement even at the best of times could be quite slow.
When Japan won its war against China in 1895, Russia worked actively to rob Japan of the
rewards of that victory. Japan had forced upon China a large payment of an indemnity,
and also forced the session of the island of Taiwan and the Liaotong Peninsula in Manchuria.
At this point, Russia, along with France and Germany, pressured Japan into giving up that
Manchurian holding. Japanese were infuriated by what they saw, the way in which their state
was not being treated as an equal in the imperialist competition, and they were even more embittered
when Russia turned around and then pressured China to give Russia a 25-year lease on that
same Liaotong Peninsula and Port Arthur, today Lushun, as an ice-free naval base for Russia.
Southern Manchuria became almost a Russian colony, and Japan feared that Korea, which
it saw as its own area of influence, might be Russia's next target. Russian diplomats
scorned repeated Japanese suggestions that each should politically recognize the other's
claims in the area, so Japan instead signed an alliance with Britain in 1902 and prepared
for war. As the war approached, it was clear that it would be a strange conflict. It would
be fought by modern armies equipped with industrial weapons, but not in Japan or in Russia. Rather,
it would be fought in Northern China and Korea on other people's territories.
The Japanese were not overconfident. The army itself estimated a 50-50 chance of success,
and the navy actually planned on losing half of its ships in this war. To improve its chances,
Japan planned the start of the war for winter, when they knew that bringing Russian reinforcements
by the Trans-Siberian Railroad would be hardest. And so the war began with a surprise attack
on the Russian naval base at Port Arthur. On February 8, 1904, Japan's Admiral Togo
pounced. Shock and surprise were total, as Japanese torpedoes hit two battleships and
the Russian defenders pulled back. On the same day, another Japanese naval force
also attacked Russian positions at the Korean port of Chamopo. They sank two battleships
and landed a Japanese army. Incidentally, Chamopo is the old name for Incheon, where
the American landing took place during the Korean War in 1950. Two days later, after
the dual surprise attacks, Japan declared war on Russia.
The Japanese army landed in Korea, crossed the Yalu River, and advanced into Manchuria.
Soon Port Arthur itself was under siege. Russian efforts were plagued by a run of bad luck,
as when the defending Russian Admiral was drowned when his flagship hit a Japanese mine in the
water. Japanese soldiers surrounded Port Arthur by land and then mounted a series of costly
frontal attacks against the city. In the first of these attacks, 20,000 Japanese soldiers
were lost. In December of 1904, the Japanese finally managed to capture 203 meter hill,
as it was called, a crucial vantage point above Port Arthur. This was an attack that
cost some 14,000 Japanese dead. In January of 1905, with the situation hopeless, Port
Arthur finally surrendered.
Just after the Battle of Mukden commenced, from February to March of 1905, it was a struggle
for the capital city of the area. Mukden is today called Shenyang. The Titanic battle
turned out to be the largest and longest battle in modern military history up to this point.
Surpassing even the battles of the Napoleonic Wars. Both armies had been reinforced, so
now over a half a million men did battle for weeks on end.
At the end, Japanese frontal attacks ground down the Russian forces, but at tremendous
cost. Japanese casualties were 70,000 men, or a quarter of their entire army. And then
the climax of the war came with a naval battle of Tsushima.
After the attack on Port Arthur, Russia's Baltic fleet had been ordered in October of
1904 to undertake an epic trek from the Baltic Sea to the Pacific Ocean half a world away.
The trip was going to be 17,800 miles long and took seven and a half months. That trip
could have been shortened by using the Suez Canal, but Japan's ally Britain controlled
the canal and would not allow its use by the Russians.
The trip east turned into a disaster, starting with an incident off Dogger Bank, off the
coast of Britain, that nearly started another war. Russian warships saw British fishing
boats and assumed that they were Japanese torpedo ships and they fired on them, killing
some fishermen. Perhaps Vodka was involved in this story somewhere. Only subtle diplomacy
and reparations smoothed over this crisis between Britain and Russia.
Then when at last the Russian Baltic fleet arrived off Korea on May 27, 1905, it met
total disaster. Japan's Admiral Togo sank the Russian Baltic fleet at Tsushima Strait
in one of the greatest naval victories of all time. The fleets were evenly matched in
strength but the Japanese proved superior with new British built ships and better training
for their men. Two-thirds of the Russian fleet was sunk along with almost 50,000 sailors.
A young lieutenant who was with Admiral Togo that day by the name of Yamamoto Isoruku later
would come up with the idea for the attack on Pearl Harbor.
In Korea and China, the war devastated the civilian population as both armies took food
and resources and shot locals suspected of spying for the other side. The fighting created
countless refugees. But further away, the war was greeted differently
in Japan and Russia themselves. Japan experienced great enthusiasm. Little girls wore kimonos
which bore beautiful prints of battle scenes, cavalry charges, and naval combat. And these
images also recurred on fans, lanterns, and even cakes. The new medium of film, discussed
in a previous lecture, celebrated the war.
In 1904 to 1905, 80 percent of Japanese films were about the war with Russia. They included
such stirring titles as Occupation in the vicinity of Blank, named withheld for reasons
of national security. Over 270 films were created in Japan about the war as it was going on.
And so in Japanese theaters, the Benchi, those narrators of silent films, actually told audiences
when to shout banzai along with the charging infantry that they saw on the screen.
In Russia, the reception was grim. News of defeats brought depression and a longing for
reform. But instead of reform, the Russian Empire got bloody Sunday.
On January 22, 1905, peaceful petitioners outside the beautiful Winter Palace in St. Petersburg
were shot down by soldiers of the Tsar. This sparked the revolution of 1905, which almost
brought the Empire crashing down.
Mass strikes broke out in the Russian Empire. Illegal trade unions were set up. Unrest flared
in the broad countryside with the burning of manor houses. It seemed that civil order,
as well as the police, just melted away. Pogroms or riots against the persecuted Jewish minority
also took place. News of all of this unrest back home leaked to Russian troops in the
field in spite of censorship. Famously depicted in a classic film by Sergei Eisenstein, the
battleship Potemkin in the Black Sea mutinied as a result of this discontent. Russian revolutionaries
like Lenin eagerly awaited Russia's defeat, hoping that defeat could be turned into a
revolutionary radical force.
After the Battle of Tsushima, both sides were really ready for peace, given the vast
costs of war on both sides. Japan had relied on many foreign loans to finance the war and
drafted some 20% of its male workforce. As we just saw, Russia was racked with internal
crisis. Peace was finally negotiated by the American President, Theodore Roosevelt, who
offered himself as mediator and later actually won the Nobel Peace Prize for his peacemaking.
On August 9th, 1905, the talks began in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. Why Portsmouth? The town was,
as it turns out, much cooler than hot Washington, D.C., and it also had a naval base with an
underwater telegraph cable for speeding of international communications.
After negotiations, the treaty was signed on September 5th, 1905. Japan won control
over Korea, which became an official Japanese colony by 1910. It won Port Arthur, and the
railroads that the Russians had built in Manchuria, as well as the southern half of Sakhalin Island.
But Russia paid no indemnity, nor did it have to give up any Russian mainland territory.
In Japan, the treaty was not viewed as a success. It was met with outrage, and there were riots
against the peace in the cities. Protesters were upset that Japan had not won more for
its victory, and many of them blamed America for sabotaging victory and short-changing
Japan in this conflict. In spite of this dissatisfaction, Japan's arrival as a great power due to its
victory in this war was obvious to all.
So if this was a true historical turning point, what were its effects? First, this event lit
the fuse for the longer-term process of decolonization, which has lasted into our own times. In a word,
this was a body blow to the authority that imperialism earlier had commanded. This first
Asian victory against a great European power had tremendous psychological impact worldwide,
and it really encouraged decolonization, because it showed that it could be done.
This was one of the most actively observed wars in modern history. Real documentary films
with footage of the fighting as well as reenacted documentary films were popular worldwide, not
just in Japan. In fact, Thomas Edison's studios in 1904 produced a film reenactment
of naval combat at Chimopo Bay. As you would expect, especially engaged observers came from
subject peoples living under foreign rule, including many who later led independence movements
in their own countries. The effect on Asians was electrifying. One Indian poet wrote, Japan,
the proudest European powers thee now dread, thou amazed all, all nations, thee the world
adores.
During the war, the Chinese revolutionary Sun Yat-sen, later president of China, was traveling
through the Suez Canal. At one point, an Arab man rushed up to him to ask if he was
Japanese, and he told him how proud he was to be an Asian, how joyful he was at Japan's
victory. In India at this time, Jawaharlal Nehru, later prime minister of independent
India, recalled that as a boy he'd been so excited about these events that they lessened
the feeling of inferiority from which most of us suffered, he said. Gandhi, at this point
living in South Africa, was also excited and declared the people of the East seemed to
be waking up from their lethargy.
Japanese victory inspired Indonesian, Vietnamese, and Iranian nationalists. Not only Asians
were affected. Within Russia, Finns and Poles admired the example of Japan, and in fact,
members of the Polish national movement actually came to Japan during the war to discuss cooperating
against the common Russian foe.
Japan's victory obviously rattled all sorts of racial stereotypes and alleged hierarchies
of Western superiority. An American missionary wrote that this really marked a new era in
the world because, quote, for now begins a readjustment of the balance of power among
the nations, a readjustment which promises to halt the territorial expansion of white
races and to check their racial pride, end quote.
Some in Europe and America worried about what they called the yellow peril, the vision
of a resurgent Asia, perhaps led by the Japanese that would in the future challenge Western
predominance. Others in the West, on the contrary, welcomed Japan to the family of imperialist
powers. In a poem published in Britain, one Jane Oakley celebrated Japan in verse.
On modern lines, Japan now wages war, tis well that Europe should quite grasp this fact,
and duly civilize that every point consistent proves in every word and act. Yet this, Japan's
equality with imperialist great powers actually points to a big irony. Japan had defeated an
imperialist power and sparked a powerful movement for decolonization, but its real aim was to
claim empire for itself. It was Korea and China that bore the brunt of this most quickly.
Japan annexed Korea in 1910, split Manchuria off from China in 1931 as a puppet state,
and then invaded China in 1937. The Great Pacific War of 1937-1945 followed and still
has powerful reverberations in the region today, with continuing disputes over memories
of modern history and over island territories. The second historical impact involves the lessons
that were learned. These were all the wrong lessons as it turned out. Huge numbers of
military observers were sent to the war by neutral countries to see firsthand what modern
industrial war would look like. Among them was the young Douglas MacArthur, who didn't
know at this point that he was seeing places he would later direct troops in decades afterwards.
Many European officers who were sent as observers would shortly be fighting one another in World
War I, which here was essentially being rehearsed. Many elements were there, machine guns, trenches,
barbed wire, massive firepower, soldiers' uniforms in drab colors to blend in. Airplanes
were not used in this war as they had been invented too recently. Yet the observers saw
what they wanted to see. They admired the ferocity and spirit of Japanese frontal attacks,
as so-called human bullets were sent against the enemy defenses, even against machine guns.
Officers recorded bayonet charges of Latter-day Samurai shouting Banzai, but the costs had
been great. Japan lost over 100,000 men in the war, but the observers focused on the
fact that Japan had won. A French observer recorded how Japanese officers jumped forward,
swords flashing, and entire units of men went into a merciless hail of bullets. Entire
units were shot to pieces, but others came up behind in a human wave that was pressing
on to win. This was part of a so-called Cult of the Offensive, current in the world at
the time, which argued that not weapons or firepower or equipment was decisive, but willpower
and morale and fighting spirit. In 1914, this approach was tried out on the western front
of the First World War. Direct attacks, even by motivated troops, produced not victory,
but senseless deaths by the millions. For its part, the war created for many Japanese
an image of their army and navy as invincible, true pillars of the nation, along with the
Emperor. Until the end of World War II, the anniversary of Mukden was Army Day, and the
anniversary of Tsushima was Navy Day. Shrines were built, dedicated to General Nogi and Admiral
Togo. The military's power in politics led to more imperialism, more war, and then
the gamble of Pearl Harbor. This points to the third great impact of the
Russo-Japanese War. It set the stage for two World Wars to come, more total and even
more destructive. Defeat in the East ended up turning Russia westwards again toward the
Balkans where the First World War would erupt. Japan, for its part, was launched on a course
of carving out empire in East Asia. And Japan had been left, as a result of that victory
at Port Arthur, with the durable dream of being able to strike a decisive knockout blow
that could win the war in one stroke right from the start.
So Japan later used exactly this formula against Pearl Harbor in 1941. In fact, the commanding
vessel in the attack on Pearl Harbor, the carrier Akagi, was actually flying Admiral
Togo's old battle flag from his flagship at the attack on Port Arthur, the Mikasa.
The attack on the United States was a huge gamble that willpower could compensate for
inferiority in economic reserves and firepower. That gamble backfired disastrously.
Finally, defeat in 1905 was a bad omen for Russia, an omen of worse tragedies to come.
In the 1905 revolution, the Russian Empire had almost collapsed. The Tsar's subjects
never again fully trusted him or his government after troops had fired on peaceful civilians.
But instead of using the interval of peace for reforms, the Romanov dynasty slumped into
the grip of a mad, smelly monk from Siberia, Gregory Rasputin. When the First World War
hit in 1914, the Russian Empire soon collapsed. And in the power vacuum, Lenin and his Bolsheviks
established a new kind of state following the formula of the French Revolution and its
radical violent trajectory. They created a state that aimed to abolish all other states
in the name of a world revolution and helped set the violent trajectory for much of the
rest of the century.
So this conflict, the Russo-Japanese War of 1904 to 1905, set the stage for the devastating
use of killing technology in two world wars and a violent century in general. To balance
off this dreadful legacy, we'll consider next a healing revolution in the discovery
of penicillin in our next lecture.
