This lecture opens in my hometown, Chicago, and actually at my undergraduate alma mater,
the University of Chicago, in Hyde Park on the city's south side.
It's a bitterly cold Chicago winter morning.
It's December 2, 1942.
As the Second World War rages, scientists are in a race to employ atomic power to end
the war.
Here, a team of scientists are about to undertake an experiment that will open the door to new
uses for atomic power and create a decisive turning point, not just in modern history,
but in all of human history.
The team assembled today includes 48 men and one woman, presided over by the brilliant
Italian physicist Enrico Fermi.
They have gathered under the stands of the university's football stadium, Stagg Field.
By the way, this harkens back to the days when the University of Chicago was a national
football powerhouse.
Those days are long gone.
There under the stands, during peacetime, were the indoor courts for playing squash.
But now, instead, an apparatus has been constructed here in the darkness.
It consists of wood, graphite bricks, clumps of uranium, and cadmium control rods.
A great deal of uncertainty hovered over this experiment, which had never been done before.
What if the experiment got out of control?
What if it took on a life of its own, erupting in unpredictable ways that had not been anticipated
even by experts?
At 9.54 a.m., Fermi orders the control rods withdrawn, and everyone listens.
Suddenly, the neutron counters come alive, and their ticking grows in intensity.
That ticking increases over the next hour, as the structure, known as a nuclear pile,
approaches critical state.
Ticking critical means producing a self-sustaining chain reaction.
Then by 3.25 p.m., the neutron counters are no longer clicking in separate clicks.
The clicks are coming so fast that they're just buzzing, and Enrico Fermi proudly announces
the reaction is self-sustaining.
This was the first time in all of history that humans had produced and controlled efficient
chain reaction.
This beginning was small.
Before the chain reaction was shut down by reinserting the control rods that had been
pulled out, the power produced had only been enough to power a light bulb, but it showed
the way, and led within three short years of non-stop work to the building of the atomic
bomb.
Some turning points are ones that build slowly in history, unfolding over time.
This one, however, was a race.
The effects of this turning point were profound.
That Chicago pile ushered in the nuclear age in which we live today.
The atom bomb, and later generations of nuclear weapons, made the modern phenomenon of total
war absolute.
For the first time, mankind possessed the technology by which it might destroy itself
in a comprehensive way.
Ever since then, we have lived in a world overshadowed by that reality, from which it
seems there is no going back.
However much one might desire it, there proved to be no way of uninventing the bomb, unknowing
such knowledge after it had been acquired.
So modernity is marked by this peril, produced by its own progress in technological and scientific
directions.
This turning point was born of a broader change in the understanding of physics.
The unsettling discoveries made by scientists only slowly percolated out to a broader audience.
The earlier dominant model had been that of classical mechanics.
The sort of physics shaped by Sir Isaac Newton and his laws, which together suggested a universe
of regularity, predictability, and stability.
This sort of worldview, sometimes called Newton's world machine, was now going to
be challenged in fundamental ways.
Around the start of the 20th century, new discoveries were being made.
The French researchers Marie Curie and Pierre Curie researched radioactivity, and she won
two Nobel Prizes for her scientific work.
This work revealed atoms as not just stable orderly units, but ones that could emit subatomic
particles and energy.
In 1900, the German physicist Max Planck produced quantum theory, which described what had earlier
been seen as solid matter, as actually having qualities of waves, and radiation also having
qualities of particles.
This new quantum mechanics on the atomic and subatomic scale dealt with probabilities,
dealt with the seeming certainties of classical mechanics.
In 1905, the German-born physicist Albert Einstein announced his special theory of relativity,
which along with quantum mechanics is one of the bases of modern physics.
In his famous equation E equals mc squared, Einstein showed that matter was a form of
energy.
Mass and energy can be converted into one another.
Between the world wars in the 1920s came what has been called the heroic age of physics.
By its end, with the bomb and nuclear power, unworldly scientists would be regarded with
an awe that surpassed their earlier stature.
Increasingly, they seemed arbiters of our world.
Ernest Rutherford, a British physicist who had been born in New Zealand, established
the nuclear model of the atom, and in quick succession different subatomic particles were
also identified, electrons, protons, and neutrons.
And this subatomic world acted according to the postulates of quantum mechanics.
In 1927, German physicist Werner Heisenberg proposed his famed uncertainty principle,
according to which the very act of measurement altered that which was being observed, and
this further undermined the certainties earlier promised by classical physics.
The tremendous power latent in the atom was intuited by a figure we've actually encountered
repeatedly before in this course for his visionary insights.
This was the British writer H.G. Wells.
It rarely gets more visionary than this.
Just before the outbreak of the First World War in 1914, Wells actually predicted the
atom bomb.
In fact, he's the one who coined the term atom bomb.
In 1914, he published a novel that was entitled The World Set Free.
This was a future history, predicting events that had not yet come to pass.
Wells imagined in this book that by 1933, the atom had been split, generating boundless
reserves of energy, what he called worlds of limitless power.
In fact, he postulated in his book that gold was a waste byproduct of this process, which
would instantly overturn worldwide finance.
In his story, the nations of the world soon set about building atom bombs of devastating
force.
In Wells' imagination, atom bombs once dropped did not simply explode once, but continued
to explode for years afterwards until exhausted, burrowing down into the earth.
So this is an aspect that he didn't get quite right.
But by a dreadful paradox, Wells argued, war had finally become so efficient that it
had become impossible to control.
Moreover, and here's Wells' diagnosis of modernity, the political arrangements and
social organization of mankind was fatally lagging behind humanity's scientific and
technical powers.
In his story, by 1956, a general atomic war breaks out, lasting for years, with over 200
cities bombed into oblivion, with countries one after another seeking to seize power until
finally civilization has been completely destroyed.
In the aftermath in Wells' story, survivors recognized that what they need most of all
is a change of heart that will usher in a new phase of human history.
Individualism, Wells argues, needs to give way to science and service.
Humanity needs to be organized not into separate sovereign states on the Westphalian model
originated in 1648, but rather under one common world government, a world republic ruled
not by democracy, but regulation and administration by experts.
Indeed, science would be the basis of an entire new social order of what Wells called unity
and collectivism.
Continuous planning on a global scale was now needed, and in Wells' story, desperately
desired by survivors.
According to Wells, now at last humanity would face a bright future in which humanity
itself could be shaped deliberately.
In a disturbing note at the end of Wells' story, the book suggests that the previous
world had become so old, ill, and confused that nothing less than the violence of the
atomic bombs could finally release the world and set it free.
Wells is fascinating for the purposes of our course, not as a hero or as someone who was
always right in his prophecies, but rather as someone who wrestled with questions of
progress, modernity, and the human future.
Yet this concept of progress through apocalypse is surely a deeply alarming one.
So how did Wells' predictions of an atom bomb and atomic warfare come true?
New advances in atomic knowledge started cascading at a time of great international peril, the
1930s, a time when dictatorships were on the march.
Hitler was coming to power in Nazi Germany.
Benito Mussolini was ruling over Fascist Italy, and Stalin was presiding over the Soviet Union.
In this decade, more than a hundred noted scientists emigrated to Britain or the United
States from Germany and Italy, and this brain drain would prove decisive.
It included Albert Einstein from Germany, and Rico Fermi from Italy, and from Hungary,
Leo Schillard, Eugene Wigner, and Edward Teller.
But to begin with, it seemed that Hitler's Germany had a lead in the new physics.
In 1938, German physicists conducted experiments in nuclear fission, splitting the atom.
The news of this German advance scared refugee scientists.
Leo Schillard was a refugee from Hungary who had come to the United States in 1937 and
taught at Columbia.
On hearing the news of what the Germans had accomplished, he reported, suddenly, quote,
All the things which H.G. Wells predicted appeared suddenly very real to me, end quote.
Nuclear fission would release huge power, and this could be used to produce bombs.
Sharing these worries was Enrico Fermi.
He was a brilliant Italian scientist, boundlessly energetic and famously charismatic.
Fermi himself was not politically active, but he had grown disgusted by the anti-Semitic
policies of fascist Italy, especially as his wife was Jewish.
Fermi won the Nobel Prize and then promptly left for the United States in 1939 to teach
at Columbia.
Fermi tried to warn officials in Washington of the advances the Germans were making, but
got little hearing.
So next, Schillard, Teller, and Wigner decided that they needed to send a special letter
to President Roosevelt that would get attention.
So they went to see Albert Einstein.
To have the letter come from him, already a generally famed scientist on a global scale.
Einstein signed the letter, he would not go on to build the bomb.
In a real sense, however, the building of the bomb was launched by this letter dated
August 2nd, 1939.
The letter warned that extremely powerful bombs of a new type might be constructed as
a result of the newest research.
The urgency of this situation at last seemed to dawn on American officials.
What if the Nazis built these new weapons first?
They would have no compunction in their use.
A first research project was approved in the United States in 1940 with a budget of $6,000.
In 1941, Roosevelt ordered the founding of the Office of Scientific Research and Development
to be headed by Vannevar Bush, who was an engineer, inventor, dean at MIT, and later
head of the Carnegie Institution.
Vannevar Bush's job, simply put, was to mobilize science for total war.
Indeed, Vannevar Bush has been called the father of the military industrial complex,
as we know it.
The outcome of this mobilization was the so-called Manhattan Project.
He'd got this codename because so much early work was done at Columbia University in Manhattan.
In spite of the name, however, work would indeed be done all over the United States.
The military commander was the hard-driving General Leslie Groves.
The physicist Robert Oppenheimer was put in charge of the research effort itself.
Overall, the project which began with a budget of $6,000 ended up costing $2 billion, essentially
equivalent to the value of the United States auto industry at the time.
This was unprecedented, the largest national undertaking before the space missions that
will consider in a future lecture.
Success was not assured.
Indeed, there were those who had considerable doubts.
One admiral said the project was the biggest fool thing we have ever done.
The bomb will never go off, and I speak as an expert in explosives.
The project gathered an ever-expanding group of scientists and engineers who would often
work only knowing their part of the larger project.
Some indeed only found out what they had been working on when they heard about the bombing
of Hiroshima on the radio.
There were culture clashes aplenty between the military authorities and the scientists.
When General Groves briefed his military staff about the project, he explained,
Your job won't be easy.
At great expense, we have gathered the largest collection of crackpots ever seen.
Actually, as it turned out, a critical mass of scientists and minds had been gathered
into this larger research undertaking.
It was in a sense a direct line of dissent from Thomas Edison's Menlo Park Laboratory
to this project.
The venture was international, as Britain and Canada collaborated on the project.
Also, as we already noted, many scientists were refugees from Europe.
One popular joke at the time went that whenever Enrico Fermi, the Italian, left the room,
the other physicists breathed a sigh of relief and lapsed back into their common native language,
the Italian.
From the start, scientists wrestled with the moral implications of this work, the job of
creating a weapon of mass destruction.
All agreed that the Nazis must not be allowed to build the bomb first.
Many scientists saw themselves as building a tool that would function as a deterrent.
If it were held in reserve, others might be reluctant to use this technology.
Perhaps this would be a weapon so terrible that it made war impossible.
Whether or not this was realistic, the race continued at breakneck speed.
At the same time as penicillin was being mass produced as a healing invention, work was
surging ahead on the building of this super weapon.
The first key step was the one that we started our lecture with, beginning and controlling
a chain reaction, as was done for the first time in December 1942 in Chicago.
This first nuclear reactor was codenamed CP-1 for Chicago Pile No. 1.
The pile of almost 400 tons of graphite bricks and uranium and control rods was assembled
in an arduous process in secrecy from mid-November.
It was literally shrouded from view by a great grey balloon stretched around the project.
The Goodyear Company provided that balloon but could not be told what it was for.
The sole woman on the team, Leona Woods, measured the pile as it was slowly put together.
And then finally it was ready to go.
A lot of tension played in the air.
Think about this.
No one knew for sure that the chain reaction would not run out of control.
No one knew that an explosion might not ensue in one of the biggest cities of the world.
There was no shield or cooling system for the procedure.
Instead, for protection, a technician stood ready with an axe to cut a rope that would
insert one more control rod.
And in addition, some workers stood by with buckets of cadmium and salt to throw onto
the pile if it went out of control as a last resort.
Imagine that.
An axe and some buckets against the first nuclear chain reaction.
Fermi started the process and the pile began to operate.
Over hours it built to criticality.
Then Fermi called for a lunch break.
Try for a moment to envision how his team must have felt at this historic moment being
forced to take a break.
None of our other turning points of modern history have been interrupted by a lunch break.
Then after lunch, the experiment resumed and by 3.25 pm was successful.
From somewhere, someone pulled a bottle of Chianti to toast their success from paper cups.
One of the physicists, Dean Arthur Compton of the University of Chicago, now had to report
by phone to their military superiors that the experiment had been successful.
But no code had been pre-arranged, so Compton had to improvise on the phone, and the words
that leapt up for him are really telling.
Compton spoke into the phone.
The Italian navigator has landed in the New World.
Spontaneously, this turning point was linked to the encounter of Columbus with the Americas.
Columbus's 1492 was linked to Enrico Fermi's 1942.
There's a persistent urban legend that all 49 participants in the experiment soon died
of cancer, as if a kind of curse had hovered over the event.
This is clearly not true.
Many lived much longer and died of many different causes.
Indeed, of 27 participants whose cause of death is known, 6 died of cancers, but ones
that are said to have been unlikely to have been caused by radiation exposure.
When this fateful door to atomic energy was opened, the project took off in earnest.
So urgent did the goal seem that the Manhattan Project actually pursued several different
courses of action simultaneously to see which seemed most promising.
So for instance, since it was not clear whether uranium-235 or plutonium would be the best
material to use, both were worked on at the same time.
When different bomb designs for triggering the explosion were in dispute, both were pursued.
The work also took place at different sites, Hanford, Washington, in the mountains of
eastern Tennessee and in the deserts of New Mexico at Los Alamos, 34 miles north of Santa
Fe.
Now, I actually teach just down the road from the Oak Ridge site, which is near Knoxville,
Tennessee, in the foothills of the Smoky Mountains.
This remote site was where uranium and plutonium were separated and produced for use in the
bomb.
This entire secret city was enclosed and self-sufficient behind barbed wire, with up to 70,000 men
and women working 10-hour shifts around the clock to produce a weapon that might win the
war.
Not possessing it might mean losing the war.
The work raced ahead and was soon ready for a test.
On July 16, 1945, the first atomic bomb was detonated at 5.29 a.m. in New Mexico at Alamogordo
Air Force Base, 120 miles south of Albuquerque.
This was the so-called trinity test.
The atomic explosive device was installed atop a steel tower.
Some five and a half miles away, observers with scientific instruments crouched down
in a bunker to experience the results.
This test was also accompanied by uncertainty, and some physicists actually argued about whether
the explosion might not cause the Earth's atmosphere to catch fire, ending all of humanity
all at once.
First came a blinding flash, a light greater than any before on Earth and one that could
have been seen from other planets, then a heat wave followed by a shock wave.
The explosion sent a mushroom cloud seven and a half miles into the air.
This was it, the symbol of the new atomic age in all of its fearsome potential.
At ground zero, the metal tower was vaporized, and the ground at the center of the explosion
had been subjected to such heat that the desert sands had turned into glass.
The successful experiment was to be kept secret, but obviously something like this was of course
hard to hide.
The explosion had been heard in three states.
One laconic westerner actually remarked to some of the workers afterwards, you boys must
have been up to something this morning.
The sun came up in the west and went on down again.
The bomb was ready for use.
After years of hard struggle, Hitler's Germany had been defeated in May of 1945, in part
by a campaign of strategic bombing that killed 635,000 Germans on the ground, mostly civilians.
Searching among the ruins afterwards, Allied officials discovered that Germany had in fact,
after a promising head start, made little progress on an atom bomb.
Yet the Second World War continued in the Pacific, raging there with great intensity
and ferocity.
What happened next marked the point where total war became absolute.
We've mentioned before in this course the modern phenomenon of total war, involving
soldiers and civilians, for total victory or total defeat, blurring the lines between
the home front and the battle front.
Now in a sense, total war reached critical mass as well.
In August 1945, the United States dropped two bombs on Japan at Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
In Hiroshima, between 80,000 and 140,000 people died at once, with many more succumbing afterwards.
In Nagasaki, 24,000 were killed immediately.
The blast, the firestorm, and human suffering surpass words and imagination.
This was truly ground zero for the revelation of the destructiveness of war.
Survivors would ever after be marked by their memories.
Among them was Tsutomu Yamaguchi, a man who survived the Hiroshima blast and went to heal
at Nagasaki, surviving that ordeal as well, who finally passed away in 2010.
The decision to use the atomic bombs remains controversial today.
That decision was taken in the context of a war in which 60 million were killed, and
when the knowledge we have of what the bomb was truly like in practice was not yet known.
We know, because all history afterwards has been lived in the shadow of the bomb.
This was a turning point that was obvious at the time, unlike some others in our course.
People understood something fundamental had happened.
Nuclear weapons loomed over the decades that followed, especially in the escalating Cold
War that commenced once the former allies, the United States and the Soviet Union, confronted
one another on a global scale.
America's nuclear monopoly turned out to be vanishingly brief.
By 1949, the Soviet Union had detonated its own atomic bomb, aided both by brilliant physicists
as well as atomic espionage, spies who had been infiltrated into the Manhattan Project.
Both sides produced even more powerful hydrogen bombs in the 1950s.
The ruling logic of the Cold War was that of deterrence, threatening one's enemy with
weapons of unthinkable power to stave off an attack, by being in a position to massively
retaliate against any first strike.
This doomsday scenario even acquired its own, appropriately official-sounding bureaucratic
acronym, MAD, MAD stands for Mutually Assured Destruction.
Throughout the atomic age, which we still live in today, some 128,000 nuclear weapons
were built, more than 500 above-ground tests and more than 1,500 underground nuclear tests
were held.
The club of those states going nuclear also kept growing.
Britain joined in October of 1952, France in 1960, and China in 1964.
Since then, India, Pakistan, Israel and North Korea were added.
Stories about the spread of nuclear weapons led to the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963,
then the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1968, but fears grow today of what
further proliferation might mean, what one might ironically call a democratization of
these weapons.
A well-known peak moment of Cold War peril, when the confrontation of the Cold War might
have turned hot, was the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962, which was fortunately diffused by
negotiation.
Almost unknown, however, is that nuclear war might have broken out accidentally in 1983,
when the Soviets' early warning devices reported incorrectly an American missile launch.
A Soviet satellite mistook the sun, reflecting off the tops of clouds over the North American
continent, for five American missiles in launch.
A Russian officer, who was sitting at the controls, decided that this must be an error.
He reasoned that any American attack would involve not five, but thousands of incoming
missiles.
And so, by reporting this to his superiors as a false alarm, he may have saved millions
of lives.
One might add that even the peaceful use of nuclear energy has remained problematic in
the eyes of many.
Nuclear accidents at Chernobyl in the Soviet Union in 1986 and in Japan at Fukushima in
2011 have further stoked such concerns.
The opening of the atomic age raised profound questions about the authority of progress
through science.
The Cold War, in turn, produced another world historical first, the voyage to the moon.
And it is to that topic that we turn in our next lecture.
