The
first humans walked on the moon on July 20, 1969, during the Apollo 11 mission.
Those steps on another world marked a new era in how humans viewed their own Earth and their
own potential. The astronauts gazed up at the Earth and gained an entirely new perspective on
our shared home. Yet, since 1972, with the end of follow-up missions to the moon, humans have
not returned nor have they gone on manned expeditions to further planets. As one astronaut has put it
with a kind of bitter astonishment, we have been marooned for 40 years now.
So here is a fascinating, perplexing question that confronts us. At present, we're still learning what
this turning point actually means. In fact, in our entire course on modern turning points, we've
discovered that the closer we get to the present, the harder it inevitably becomes to define in full
what the real impact is of a turning point, because that turning point is still unfolding.
In this case, we should ask, is the moon landing more like the voyages of Zhenhe in the 1430s,
or more like those of Columbus around 1492? In other words, does this mark a turning point
that did not turn an ending, or is it rather a beginning of vast discoveries and exchanges?
To make this turning point in 1969 happen, humans needed to do a lot of things. They needed to
find a way to tear away from the Earth's gravitational pull. Then they had to cross
nearly a quarter million miles. Then they faced the uncertainties of what for the human race
was an entirely unprecedented environment, the airless and cold emptiness of space.
Then they had to touch down on the moon's unknown surface. All of these things were entirely new.
Yet mankind had actually spent all of its existence wondering at the moon and observing it.
Prehistoric astronomers aligned monuments like Stonehenge with their reckoning of the moon and
stars. And in modern times, Galileo used his telescope to make ever more detailed surveys
of lunar features. Astronomers mapped the lunar landscapes they could discern from the Earth.
And in fact, the names they gave to these features actually echo turning points we've
examined in our course. Consider some of the lunar craters named for people we're familiar with,
the Levenhoek crater, the Darwin crater, Diderot crater, Edison crater and Fermi crater,
and the Colombo crater named for Christopher Columbus.
Repeatedly, people imagined over the centuries what it might be like to journey to the moon.
So in a sense, literature and film anticipated this later historic step.
Jules Verne presented a popular novel in 1865, entitled From the Earth to the Moon,
which had some remarkable predictions to make. In that novel, American artillery experts,
who are idled by the end of the Civil War, start to restlessly seek a new goal.
And they find that goal in building a super cannon that will shoot a space capsule to the moon.
Incidentally, the super cannon they build is actually even modeled on the one which shattered
the walls of Constantinople in 1453 at the start of our course. The name given to Verne's super
cannon also refers to another turning point. It is called a Columbiaad after Christopher Columbus.
Most remarkably, Jules Verne set the launch site for this expedition
in Florida, a remarkable prediction that turned out to be true.
The further adventures of the crew, made up of two Americans and one Frenchman,
are related in a sequel novel by Verne. They circle the moon, they find it to be lifeless,
and then are pulled back towards the earth, where they finally land safely and are celebrated worldwide.
And then in 1901, a science fiction pioneer whom we've met repeatedly in this course,
H. D. Wells, published his book entitled The First Men in the Moon. In this novel,
a somewhat shady British businessman and a scientist team up to undertake the mission.
Now, whereas Jules Verne sought to suggest technically realistic means, or at least
more realistic means, well started his story unrealistically. The scientist, Mr. Kavor,
a kind of Thomas Edison figure of the abstracted genius inventor, discovers a new substance,
which then promptly is named Kavorite, that actually counteracts gravity. It kind of shuts
it off. So Kavor designs a spherical capsule, covers it in Kavorite, and that allows the two
men to climb inside and rise up to the moon. As they discover, the moon turns out to be inhabited,
underground, by a strange, intelligent insect-like race. The moon is also, as it turns out, full of
gold. Only the shady businessman is able to escape and return to earth. Eventually, when
the truth about the moon becomes known, it will unleash wars by humans to get at that gold,
what Wells and his novel calls an inevitable struggle for mastery. In fact, this novel is,
in many ways, an attack on Western imperialism and the greed it represented, and how often
discovery turns to conquest. A year after Wells' novel, the early medium of motion pictures took
up the same story. That first master of special effects, and we discussed in an earlier lecture,
Georges Melier, blended plot lines from Van and Wells and created his most famous film,
in fact, the first science fiction film, the 1902 film A Trip to the Moon, in which French
astronomers fly to the moon in the process poking the man in the moon in the eye and then encounter
moon creatures before making a spectacular escape back to earth. After these fictional
speculations at the start of the 20th century, scientists were emboldened to start thinking
about how to turn such speculative stories into reality. Their answer was not a giant canon,
but rather rockets. Rockets were an old technology from China from about a thousand years ago,
but now they offered new possibilities when built on a larger scale.
The Russian mathematician Konstantin Solkovsky explored theoretical aspects of spaceflight,
the use of rockets to reach out into the cosmos. In the United States, Robert Hutchings Goddard
was fascinated by rocketry as well, in part for reading books like those of H.G. Wells.
Later, as a physics professor, Goddard worked on liquid-fueled rockets, launching the first of
these in 1926. The German rocket scientist, Hermann Obert, also had been inspired by fiction,
in particular, verns from the earth to the moon. And following his example, in Germany,
many enthusiasts formed rocket clubs looking forward to the future.
These were the beginnings, but ultimately, the real space program grew out of the Second World War
and the advances made in rocketry during wartime. This larger phenomenon of discovery following
from war is actually a reverse of the pattern we've seen so often in this course. Often,
we've seen inventions being weaponized, so discovery leading to conquest, or the airplane
used for war, or films used for propaganda, or the splitting of the atom leading to Hiroshima.
In this case, weapons were turned to more peaceful uses.
The Second World War itself represented a culmination of a modern trend towards perfected
total war, a kind of war fueled by ideology and technology that became steadily more destructive
and all-encompassing. This phenomenon haunted the thinker H.G. Wells. He hoped against hope
that the very destructiveness of total modern war would increasingly make it impossible.
Indeed, during the First World War, it was actually H.G. Wells who coined that well-known
phrase that this was going to be the war to end all war, precisely because Wells felt that it
was becoming unsustainable. In 1913, just before the First World War broke out, Wells even published
a book called Little Wars, which was a guidebook to war games using toy soldiers and cannon,
which he hoped might become a kind of proxy form of conflict that might replace actual warfare.
So today, if you know people who play war games on a tabletop or a computer, they're
indebted to Wells who started this trend. How did the space program grow out of war time?
Remember from our lecture on the atom bomb, the persistent fears that the Nazis were working on
this project too. It later was learned that they were not as far along as had been initially feared,
but in fact, they had been at work on other super weapons that they hoped would help them win the
war. In particular, the young German engineer Wernher von Braun, earlier a rocket club member in
Germany, had been put in charge of a research project into the military uses of rockets,
in particular to produce the feared V-2 missile. From 1944, V-2 missiles rained down on London
and other Allied targets. These were actions to avenge the Nazi regime said the Allied bombings
of Germany. Indeed, the name of the missile itself meant vergeltungswaffe in German or the
vengeance weapon. Slave labor was used to produce these rockets, and many historians believe that
von Braun actually knew more about this fact than he later admitted to. Von Braun generally was
entranced by what this weapon could instead do for space flight, his original and true enthusiasm.
As the defeat of Nazi Germany neared, the former Allies began to pull apart. Now the United States
and its allies on the one hand and Stalin's Soviet Union on the other started to position
themselves for the post-war world. This was in fact the opening stage of what came to be called
the Cold War. As part of this, American and Soviet intelligence officials spread out across the
ruined landscape of Germany to grab hold of the German rocket scientists and to exploit their
know-how for their side. Most of the scientists surrendered to the Americans, but others opted
to help the Soviet effort. In 1945, the Americans brought von Braun to the United States along with
his team who had built the V-2 rockets. At White Sands, New Mexico, their missiles were tested.
In America, von Braun became a very effective spokesman for space exploration.
Braun had style and charisma, and he managed to infect others with a dream that possessed him
personally. To one such audience, von Braun explained, the first man who puts his foot on
the moon or another planet will be in much the same position as Columbus when he discovered the
new world. With mankind visiting and exploring other planets, the future history of our world
is both unlimited and unpredictable. On the Soviet side, after using the expertise of some
German scientists as well, the real impetus passed to a Soviet aeronautical engineer,
Sergei Karolyov. He had actually been arrested in 1937 by the Soviet secret police in the purges
that Stalin ordered. During the war, Karolyov was put to work in a prison laboratory. And
afterwards, this former prisoner became a driving force of the Soviet space effort.
But because of intense Soviet secrecy, Karolyov always remained hidden in obscurity.
As the Cold War intensified, it became clear that satellites in orbit around the globe
could be a powerful tool of information gathering. Satellites were able to fly above
sovereign territory and peer down into it, at distances that were far safer than those of spy
planes. The United States and the Soviets raced to be first to achieve these satellites. Always,
the military dimension of this work was prominent. For instance, the rockets to launch satellites
also could in wartime deliver nuclear warheads as intercontinental ballistic missiles.
So the Soviet Union amazed the world when after intense secrecy, it launched its satellite called
Sputnik on October 4, 1957. Sputnik was small and very basic looking. It weighed 184 pounds.
It was a 23-inch diameter silver sphere with four antennas.
And as it coursed high overhead in the skies, it emitted a steady beep, beep, beep radio signal,
as if taunting the opponents on Earth that it had left in the dust.
As a result, the American media spread a mood of alarm, seeing this as proof of a Soviet technological
leap which the United States could not yet match. Soon, money poured into scientific
research and science education. Indeed, it's a good bet that some listeners to this course
actually had their educations shaped by this infusion of resources into the sciences.
The next month, November, the Soviet Union followed by launching the first animal in
outer space, the dog Laika on Sputnik II. After American failures with rockets to match the
Soviet feat, von Braun's army team of researchers now were clear to try, and in January of 1958,
they succeeded with Explorer 1. The space race was truly on.
Incidentally, the drive in this Cold War competition in space led to what really has
to be classed among the worst ideas of all time. This was the proposal to nuke the moon.
That is, some American planners suggested that a gesture that could show that the Soviets were
not the only ones capable of achieving something dramatic might be to send a nuclear missile to
the moon with its impact point plotted precisely so there would be a spectacular explosion visible
from the earth. Obviously, the scientific value of all this would be negligible,
but the visuals would be outstanding and impressive, it was argued.
By the way, this idea also occurred to some Soviet experts around the same time,
as a way of confirming that a lunar probe had actually successfully landed. In both cases,
fortunately, cooler heads prevailed and the idea was shelved. Imagine what a way of encountering
a new world that would have been, blasting it into smithereens.
More productively, research establishments were built up. While intense secrecy surrounded the
Soviet effort, publicity that accompanied the founding in 1958 of NASA or the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration was meant to excite the American people at large. This project
grew to huge proportions. At its height during the Apollo program, 34,000 employees worked directly
for NASA and hundreds of other companies were involved in providing equipment and materials
for the project with more than a third of a million contractors. And then the Soviet Union
stole a march again, seeming to widen its scientific lead. It put the first human being into space
with a launch on April 12, 1961 from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan.
The Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin was lifted into orbital flight on the Vastok-1,
the new orbital spacecraft. After 108 minutes in space, he returned to Earth.
This first human spaceflight was full of perils and unknowns.
How would weightlessness be dealt with? How would the isolation of space affect the psychology
of a human being? Would the dangers of reentry into the Earth's atmosphere be managed successfully?
As it turns out, the flight was a success. Space sickness could be surmounted, and Gagarin's
smiling face became famous globally. The 27-year-old cosmonaut became a world
celebrity, the first to embody the cosmonaut or astronaut as a hero. In 1963, Valentina
Tereshkova became the first woman in space on the Vastok-6. Within a decade of Gagarin's flight,
humans were walking on the moon. This was an astonishing pace of advance.
And the impetus for this, like that of the voyages of Zhenghe back in the 1400s,
involved questions of prestige and authority in a global Cold War context.
After Gagarin's famous flight, the United States President, John F. Kennedy, was informed that
experts like von Braun believed that the Soviets might soon be able to send larger spacecraft
with more cosmonauts around the Earth and even around the moon.
Hearing this, Kennedy charged his advisors with drafting a space program which promises
dramatic results in which we could win. The resulting strategic plan concluded that the moon
should be the object because of the immense prestige that came from space exploration achievements
as, quote, part of the battle along the fluid front of the Cold War, end quote.
As a result, on May 25, 1961, Kennedy now announced publicly to a joint session of Congress
that the United States would get to the moon. Kennedy declared,
I believe this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before the decade is out,
of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to the Earth. No single space project
in this period will be more impressive to mankind or more important for the long-range
exploration of space, and none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish.
As Kennedy later added, we choose to go to the moon in this decade and do the other things,
not because they are easy, but because they are hard, because the challenge is one we are willing
to accept, one we are unwilling to postpone, and one which we intend to win. Here, the context was
everything, and that context was the Cold War. Later that same year, in August of 1961, Khrushchev
and his East German clients started building the Berlin Wall. Then the Cuban Missile Crisis of
October 1962 highlighted just how much tension and peril and risk the Cold War really involved.
The American space effort leapt into high gear at a breakneck speed that really reminds us of
the building of the Transcontinental Railroad that we discussed in an earlier lecture. In the
three years after Kennedy's announcement, NASA's budget increased five times over. In 1966, NASA
was actually spending 4.4 percent of the entire federal budget. The costs of this program were
five times more than those of the Manhattan Project to build the atomic bomb that we discussed in an
earlier lecture. Intense publicity surrounded the selection of a team of American astronauts who
became national heroes. Time magazine compared them to Columbus and to the Wright Brothers.
The basis of the Apollo moon program was the Saturn V rocket. It was decided to mount the
spacecraft on the rocket rather than assemble it in outer space as was an alternative proposal.
The Apollo spacecraft came in three parts, a command module, a service module, and a lunar
module. A big command post for this mission was established near Cape Canaveral in Florida,
near where Jules Verne had set his fictional moonshot.
Meanwhile, the Soviet program was also racing forward. One of their cosmonauts, Alexei Leonov,
was the first to achieve a spacewalk. The new Soyuz spacecraft was launched in 1967.
But on re-entry, it slammed into the earth, and Vladimir Komarov became the first casualty of a
spaceflight. The engineer Karalyov directed the Soviet effort. But when he died in 1966,
essentially from overwork, this was a huge setback for the Soviet program, as his successors were
not as effective as he had been. The American effort also met a tragic setback. When in January
1967, three American astronauts were killed during a fire while testing the Apollo command module.
In spite of this, the first manned Apollo mission was put into orbit on October 1968.
On December 24th of 1968, American astronauts on Apollo 8 were the first to orbit the moon,
and send back photographs of the earth rise over the moon. No one before had seen the whole
earth itself in all its beauty and fragile perfection. You could say that a new planetary
consciousness would follow from this act. The stage was now set for the moon mission itself.
Apollo 11 lifted off on July 16, 1969. On board were Neil Armstrong, Edwin Buzz Aldrin Jr.,
and Michael Collins. When they covered the distance to orbit the moon, Collins was posted
on the orbiting command module while Armstrong steered the lunar module with Aldrin aboard.
The craft that would touch down on the moon's surface was nicknamed the Eagle. The landing
itself was tricky, needing to avoid boulders and to find a spot to touch down on the open plane,
the Sea of Tranquility. This was nerve-racking, as searching for a safe landing space used up
almost all of the reserves of fuel, and a computer alarm caused by a software problem
could have led to a boarding of the entire mission. But instead, the astronauts continued,
and touched down at 4.17 pm Eastern Daylight Time, Armstrong announced to Houston,
the Eagle has landed. Then, after six and a half hours, the moment arrived to leave the module.
Armstrong stepped out, and he announced, that's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.
Armstrong had intended to say, one small step for a man. Either he passed over the word
A in his excitement, or the radio transmission cut out that word.
For two and a half hours, Armstrong, joined by Aldrin, moved about on the surface of the moon.
They planted an American flag, and they also placed a plaque, which stated,
we came in peace for all mankind. They continued to gather moon rock samples as well.
And then, they again took off, and met up with the command module in orbit,
and the astronauts returned safely to the Earth on July 24th, landing in the Pacific.
It's quite poignant to know, as we do now, that a press release had actually been drafted in advance
for the American president to read, in case the mission ended in failure.
This press release lauded the heroism of real life epic heroes. Fortunately, that text was not
needed. When the astronauts returned, they were placed in quarantine. This was an insight from
the Columbian Exchange that we discussed in an earlier lecture. NASA wanted to ensure that no
bacteria or viruses had accompanied the men from their encounter back to the Earth.
This had been, well and truly, a global event. More than half a billion people around the world
had watched live television capturing this moment in human history. It was the most
widely-witnessed live media event up until then. At the moment of the moon landing,
even in the Soviet space control station, where you would probably have expected
glum silence and a sense of defeat and dismay at having been beaten to the moon,
the reaction was actually deeply touching. Reportedly, in the Soviet command station,
shearing broke out for this triumph, which now seemed to be part of the property of mankind in
general. Indeed, so epic were the proportions of this turning point that inevitably,
contrarian voices arose. Conspiracy theories developed about this and later moon missions,
claiming that they weren't real, but rather were the product of special effects in a Hollywood
studio. Some historians argue that in the era of the Watergate scandal, this was a symptom of
mistrust in general of government and authority. In reality, 12 Americans on six Apollo missions
walked on the moon's surface from 1969 to 1972 or rode about in a moon rover on the last missions.
The very last mission was Apollo 17 in 1972. After that point, no humans left the orbit
of the Earth. For their part, the Soviets never managed to make their N1 rocket perform,
and they canceled their program in 1974. While it lasted, the era of moon exploration
gave us a new conception of human capacity, what humans could achieve. Certainly, being able to
explore space was much more constructive and positive than being able to destroy the Earth with
nuclear weapons. And as a result of the moon landing, a new mantra entered human consciousness.
Now people would often ask, if we're able to put men on the moon, why can't we then fill in the blank,
whatever project it is they had in mind. This feat of the moon landing expanded our sense of what was
humanly possible. And as we've seen before, this is a key attribute of the condition of modernity.
But where does this all leave us today, more than 40 years after these events? Is this turning point
an end or only a beginning? Has human capacity or willpower declined since the 1970s?
Some experts are quick to point out that new participants have actually entered this process.
In 2003, China sent its first astronaut into orbit and plans more space activity to follow.
Currently, while NASA funding has been cut and space activity declines, commercial ventures
have risen to a new prominence. Does the future of space exploration perhaps lie with private
companies, harkening back to the private enterprise of companies like the many East India companies
of centuries past that we saw in our course? Most basically, does humanity's future extend
beyond the Earth? The British physicist Stephen Hawking has declared that without space colonization,
humanity likely will not survive, probably falling prey to biological dangers.
In the very longest term, how this turning point we've examined in this lecture turns out
is existentially important. Meanwhile, back on Earth, world politics were about to be reconfigured
by China's return to the world stage, vividly clear in 1972, and it is to this turning point
that we turn in our next lecture.
