On February 21, 1972, a fateful meeting took place in China.
It had been prepared months in advance in secret.
The meeting unfolded in the exclusive Communist Party leadership compound called the Zhengnan
Hai in Beijing.
The Zhengnan Hai was a private walled community where the Communist officials and their families
lived in splendid villas, a kind of modern forbidden city like the Chinese emperors had
once occupied, away from the masses of ordinary people.
A limousine drove into the compound, carrying special foreign guests.
These were the United States President Richard Nixon and his National Security Advisor Henry
Kissinger.
They had just flown into China, and on arrival, both had actually been very nervous.
In spite of the many careful and clandestine preparations that had preceded this visit,
the Chinese officials had never confirmed whether the American President would actually
meet with Chairman Mao Zedong, the leader of this vast country.
Without such a meeting, their entire trip might prove an embarrassing failure.
But then, suddenly, soon after they had settled into their guest rooms, they were summoned
for the meeting with Mao.
Once inside the Zhengnan Hai compound, they were ushered into Mao's study.
The elderly Mao was in very bad health, is wracked with congestive heart failure.
He was so weak that, for days before, he'd been practicing the simple act of sitting
down and rising up again in advance of just this meeting.
The discussion that ensued took place through a Chinese government translator, a young woman
who had lived in Brooklyn as a little girl.
The meeting lasted just over an hour, and it was vague, polite, and non-committal, full
of mutual compliments and self-deprecating humor and jokes.
Mao, for instance, claimed that he had voted for Nixon in the last election.
Even as the very earnest Nixon sought to draw Mao into a profound discussion of world politics,
Mao said that those topics should really be handled by their officials and subordinates.
Mao announced that he only discussed philosophical questions, and soon the meeting was over.
Nixon assumed that, surely, they would meet again while he was on his historic visit to
China, the first ever Biden-American president, but they did not meet again.
That hour was it for this visit.
The historian Margaret McMillan has written a marvelous historical account of this meeting,
which she entitled Nixon and Mao, The Week That Changed the World.
In her book, McMillan calls this hour-long chat, Curiously Inconclusive.
So we really need to ask, how could a curiously inconclusive and vague chat be one of the turning
points of modern history?
In fact, it was not the words that were exchanged that were crucial, nor even the dramatic and
striking personalities of the people involved.
What makes this a key turning point was the mere fact of the conversation itself, coming
as it did after decades of diplomatic silence between the United States and China and estrangement.
It also was a turning point due to the massive international realignment of world politics
that followed from the visit and changed the Chinese and American relationship.
This turning point revealed a key moment in a much longer and extended process, that of
China seeking its own form of modernity and its own place in the modern world.
First, after deadly and destructive convulsions within China, this event set China on the
course it continues to follow today.
Second, as a result, this meeting also redrew world politics, shifting the balance of the
Cold War that was then going on.
But beyond even that, the international transformation that followed produced global consequences
that are still unfolding as we speak.
In essence, the larger drama in which this turning point is set is China seeking to resolve
how to relate to the modern world at large.
As we saw from the start of our course on modern turning points, successive dynasties
and Chinese emperors had understood China as the middle kingdom, occupying the central
place of importance in the world.
They had seen their realm as self-sufficient, not needing anything from the peripheries.
The voyages of Zheng He from 1405 to 1433 had been all about manifesting that authority
far and wide.
This self-understanding and this concept of authority was shattered in the opium wars
of 1839 to 1842 and of 1856 to 1860, which we discussed in an earlier lecture.
We saw how the onslaught of the British East India Company and its drug trade revealed the
full power of Western imperialism when united to the energies of the Industrial Revolution
that was going on at the same time.
The Chinese emperor was forced to sign unequal treaties that gave special trade privileges
to foreigners and set up special treaty ports.
Moreover, these foreigners in China were not subject to Chinese legal authority, but instead
had so-called extra-territoriality.
One really has to work hard to imagine the depth and impact of this on the Chinese as
they considered what it all meant.
In essence, this was nothing less than a civilizational crisis for China.
Contrary to earlier understanding, China suddenly appeared not a central but weaker than the
foreigners it earlier had belittled.
Even more, China was revealed to be not even an equal, not even sovereign, not the ruler
in its own house.
Look back to our lecture on the Peace of Westphalia back in 1648 and how out of that peace settlement
there evolved a system of sovereign states interacting with one another in a dynamic
balance of power.
Sovereignty meant internal self-rule without an outside overarching authority, but China
in the late 19th century didn't even possess that as unequal territories, unequal treaties
and extra-territoriality made vividly clear.
For the next century, Chinese political leaders and thinkers struggled with the implications
of this crisis.
How could China best find its place in the New World?
What sort of modernity should it craft for itself?
Should it imitate Western models?
Or should it seek to renew its own old values like Confucianism adapted for the present?
Global generations tried many of these paths in succession.
For young Chinese in the later 19th century, the message of nationalism had great potency.
We've seen in this course how nationalism grew out of the American and French revolutions
and how, by a kind of chain reaction, nationalism spread further and further afield to the non-Western
world as well.
In a Westphalian international system of sovereign states, the nation state seemed
to many the most effective and desirable way to organize a people for sovereignty and the
exercise of self-rule.
Another Western set of ideas that appealed was social Darwinism, drawing on the ideas
about evolution and the struggle for survival, which we discussed in an earlier lecture.
If nations and societies were really entities that flourished or became extinct, like natural
species, then threatened societies like China needed to revitalize themselves and engage
in this struggle or simply go under.
Young Chinese, who planned a so-called self-strengthening movement for China, felt a tremendous urgency
to modernize their country for survival.
In this quest, Japan, obviously, was a model for selective adaptation of Western technology
and organization while allied to one's own cultural values.
But as it turns out, Japan was a difficult role model for China to accept.
In earlier centuries, Japan had always been seen as a recipient of Chinese culture.
And now, in an added difficulty, Japan was actually one of the imperialist powers that
threatened to carve up China.
It had already taken over Taiwan as a colony.
So Japan was, at one and the same time, admired and resented.
In 1912, the Manchu, or Qing Dynasty, was overthrown by Chinese nationalists and the
Chinese Republic was proclaimed.
The revolutionary movement was led by Sun Yat-sen, who founded the new Kuomintang Nationalist
Revolutionary Party to modernize China.
The aims of this party were to promote national independence, progress and science.
And yet, even in the Republic, unequal treaties with foreign powers remained in force.
And China's continuing inferior status internationally was made bitterly clear in the aftermath of
the First World War.
During that war, China had entered the war against Germany on the side of the allied
powers.
But then, when the Treaty of Versailles took place in 1919, instead of Germany's colonial
holdings in China being returned to China, those holdings were awarded to Japan.
This truly shocking news provoked a huge Chinese demonstration on May 4, 1919.
Thousands of students from Beijing University gathered in masses at the Tiananmen Square
to protest and denounce this international treatment of their country.
Those few hours of protest actually gave birth to a larger movement that called itself the
May 4 movement and also sometimes went by the name of New Culture.
That name, New Culture, is enormously significant because of what it meant ideologically.
It urged a break with the old Confucian culture and with traditional values in favor of adopting
new imported Western ideas.
These ideas were given the names Mr. Science and Mr. Democracy as the two core values of
modernization that this young generation envisioned.
Fits all this turmoil, some radicals from Beijing University founded the Chinese Communist
Party in 1921.
Among them was a young assistant at the University Library, Mao.
He was born in 1893 in Hunan Province, the son of a peasant landlord.
In his youth, Mao admired Napoleon.
In retrospect, this kind of sounds an ominous note given what we know of how Napoleon used
a revolution to establish a personal dictatorship.
The Communists saw the answer to China's problems in terms of another ideology that
was imported from the West.
This was Marxism and its program of so-called scientific socialism which would, it was promised,
eliminate class exploitation by establishing the ultimate dictatorship of the working class.
The Chinese Communists looked above all to the new Soviet Union which had been established
by Lenin and the Bolsheviks in the wreckage of the Russian Empire.
In addition to the internal conflict between the nationalist government and the Communists,
China in this period also now confronted the terrible invasion of Japanese imperialism.
From 1937 to 1945, the Japanese-Chinese war raged with mass atrocities against civilians
in places like Nanjing.
This was one of the starting points of the Second World War.
Estimates of Chinese deaths in this war ranged between 15 to 35 million.
Yet even when this war ended in 1945, peace did not come for China.
Instead, civil war between the nationalist forces and the Communists under Mao resumed
in full force.
That conflict finally ended by 1949 when the nationalist forces retreated to Taiwan where
they claimed and still claim that they were the legitimate rulers of all of mainland China.
Meanwhile, on October 1st, 1949, Mao stood above the Tiananmen Square in Beijing and
proclaimed the establishment of the People's Republic of China.
Now announced, we, the 475 million Chinese people, have stood up and our future is infinitely
bright.
At this point, the building of a new China on a Communist model of modernity commenced,
and as it turns out, did so at tremendous human cost.
Under Mao's leadership, China would also be shaped by some of his core convictions,
whereas Confucian thought and its traditions had valued order and harmony and stability,
Mao by contrast praised turmoil and revolution.
In one of his earliest writings, Mao stated, a long period of peace, pure peace without
any disorder of any kind, would be unbearable.
Disorder promised Mao access to power, which he could use to create a modern China as he
envisioned.
Mao called China a clean sheet of paper on which the newest and most beautiful words
can be written.
Revolution would not only remake China, but he was sure would set it at the center of
the world again.
There's an irony here.
After breaking with the past totally, Communist China would once again, it was promised,
find itself in a place of centrality, as it had had in the days of Zhenghe.
Mao declared, quote, the Chinese revolution is the key factor in the world situation,
and its victory is heartily anticipated by the people of every country, end quote.
Mao launched Communist China into this transformation, increasingly determined to overtake the capitalists
and China's former ally, the Soviet Union.
The costs of Mao's policies were harrowing.
His attempts to industrialize the country through the creation of huge communes for
collectivized agriculture were called the Great Leap Forward of 1958 to 1962.
These led to a horrific man-made famine that left an estimated 40 million dead.
In China today, only in the last decade is this traumatic event being studied and more
openly discussed.
Then Mao launched a further campaign against the old China in the name of the future modern
China.
This was the Cultural Revolution of 1966 to 1976.
This campaign attacked even the Communist Party and the government itself, because they
were accused of having strayed from the true revolutionary path.
Mao's concern was that in some sense the forward momentum of the revolution had slowed,
and finding down at a point when he felt it should be accelerated.
So the young generation of Chinese organized into red guard units were encouraged to attack
the older generation, their teachers, local authorities, even their parents.
Soon there were several million red guards dressed in Mao suits and waving Mao's little
red book with his sayings and aphorisms.
A huge cult of personality was built up around Mao, and 2.2 billion badges with Mao's picture
on them were produced.
At the same time, millions of Chinese were purged, arrested, killed, or sent to re-education
camps called Lao-Gai.
When senior party officials were accused of being spies or counter-revolutionaries, one
could almost discern eerie echoes of the days of the French Revolution, a time when many
who had been makers of that revolution had been consumed by that revolution during the
reign of terror.
Indeed, looking back to those earlier events, the red guards proudly espoused what they called
red terror in action.
Public campaigns aimed to erase foreign influence and traces of the past from China.
This affected especially the rich Confucian culture in architecture, libraries, schools,
and temples, increasingly destroyed.
One slogan condemned the so-called Four Olds, old ideas, old culture, old customs, old habits
of the exploiting classes.
In this course on turning points, we've explored how modernity is marked by breaks with the
past.
In this utopian and totalitarian vision of what modernity should look like, the break
was supposed to be total and complete.
China also at this time seemed to shut itself off from the world.
Chinese ambassadors were recalled from those countries where China was diplomatically recognized,
brought back to Beijing to be examined for their political loyalties and perhaps purged.
But in the midst of all this upheaval, another sudden fear struck Mao and his comrades.
They began to fear China's increasing isolation and the threat of their former ally, the Soviet
Union.
Because the Soviet Union and China both claimed for themselves the position of being in the
vanguard of international revolution, relations between the two powers had cooled and then
had grown poisonous.
By 1969, Soviet and Chinese troops were actually clashing at the Amur River at China's northern
border.
And the question emerged, would this unofficial conflict turn into an all-out war?
Soviet diplomats at this time were even asking their Western counterparts how they might
react if the Soviet Union undertook a preemptive strike on China.
By 1970, the Chinese leadership was gripped by a war scare, and Mao decided that China
needed to find new relationships internationally and also to begin to wind down the internal
fury of the Cultural Revolution.
The time was felt ripe for a mutual approach between China and the United States, but they
had not spoken to one another for decades.
Indeed, up to this point, the United States didn't recognize Communist China, favoring
instead the nationalist Guomindang government in Taiwan as the legitimate China.
Now, however, President Richard Nixon saw a chance for a profound change in international
affairs.
He was convinced that crafting a new relationship with China would put pressure on America's
rival in the Cold War, the Soviet Union.
Nixon also hoped that China might help end the Vietnam War that was dragging on inconclusively
for the Americans and devastating public opinion in America itself.
In the end, Nixon's aim was a new overarching stability worldwide.
Now, President Nixon was a complex, even strange man, and political actor.
He blended many qualities – ambition, self-pity, paranoia, a deep isolation, and a lack of
friendships.
But he also had political sophistication and strategic vision.
Together with his controversial National Security Advisor and later Secretary of State, Henry
Kissinger, Nixon set about a dramatic diplomatic reversal.
One of Nixon's favorite movies was Around the World in 80 Days, the Jules Verne story
which had charted a worldwide trajectory as we saw in an earlier lecture.
Nixon's aim was worldwide and global, and in the pursuit of that goal, the man who had
made his name politically in his early career through fierce anti-communism now reached
out to red China.
In secret, Henry Kissinger and the Chinese Foreign Minister, Zhou Enlai, had planned
the visit.
Zhou, you may recall, allegedly said that it was too soon to know the real results of
the French Revolution.
A first sign of these thawing relations was the oddly named phenomenon of ping-pong diplomacy
when an American sports team visited China and was welcomed there.
Nixon's planned visit seemed to him a leap into the unknown and politically risky at
home as well, even though his reputation as a fierce anti-communist gave him cover.
Indeed, the bloody course of internal struggle and persecution during the Great Leap Forward
and its famine and then the intensity of the Cultural Revolution remained largely unknown
to Westerners.
As Nixon cast about for some comparison to describe the venture he was undertaking, he
fell back on a recent turning point from our course.
Nixon repeatedly compared his trip to the moon mission of three years previous.
He said, a trip to China is like going to the moon, and he added that his motto for his
trip, like the plaque that the astronauts had left on the moon, should read, we came
in peace for all mankind.
Overall, Nixon counted his trip a great success, and he spoke of it as the week that changed
the world.
Indeed, many people worldwide watched televised images of the trip, and gallop polling in
the United States showed more public awareness, at 98 percent, of this event than any other
in the history of their polling.
The shift in the Cold War balance that resulted gave the United States more leverage in dealing
with the Soviet Union.
Nixon was able to draw the Vietnam War to a close, and the normalization of relations
between the United States and China marked a new stage in their relationship, which was
quite different from the previous frosty silence of the past.
But in spite of this success, Nixon's presidency soon afterwards imploded with the Watergate
cover-up and his resignation in 1974.
But to this day, the phrase, Nixon goes to China, is synonymous with a politically surprising
event.
Indeed, ironically, it was Nixon's very fervent anti-communist record that allowed him to
make this approach to the Chinese communists.
So the next time someone criticizes you for doing something that seems out of character
or strange, just turn to them and astonish and baffle them by answering, only Nixon
could go to China.
It could be the perfect alibi.
Even more important, however, was what this turning point meant for China and for world
politics at large.
Indeed, the consequences are still reverberating now as China races to a leading economic position
in the world.
The new relationship with the United States was only part of a larger opening to the world
and Chinese entry onto the world stage as a sovereign state, part of the Westphalian
international system.
Part of the worldwide trend towards decolonization we've surveyed in this course also was to
be seen here.
China was no longer subject to what had been called a century of humiliation.
The opening to the wider world, rather than being in a state of isolation, was the beginning
of a process that led to China growing into the position of great economic and exporting
power it holds today.
So let me suggest this.
The next time you see the words made in China on a product, think of 1972 and this turning
point.
With the opening of 1972, the regime in China underwent surprising, even shocking changes.
After Mao's death in 1976, there was a fierce leadership struggle and at its end, Deng Xiaoping
became leader of China.
He was a more pragmatic leader who in fact had been purged by radicals during the Cultural
Revolution.
Deng set a new course which introduced a so-called reform era from 1978.
After repudiating Mao explicitly, Deng altered many of the earlier leader's principles
in radical ways.
Deng's policy pressed the so-called four modernizations, modernization in agriculture,
industry, military and science.
Deng also endorsed the slogan, It is glorious to get rich, in really a profound reversal
of earlier Marxist ideology.
And in place of the Maoist slogan, serve the people, a new slogan declared, create wealth
for the people.
And that meant a market economy.
Deng sought to unleash China's economic potential by promoting private enterprise, all while
retaining political control for the Communist Party.
The huge collective farms that had been at the core of Mao's policies were now dismantled
in stages.
Workers were allowed to sell ever more of their own produce on the market.
Their free enterprise in small garden plots was not just tolerated but encouraged.
Small businesses were permitted, and by 1985 there were about 12 million of them.
As a result, during the 1980s, per capita income roughly doubled in China.
China also opened for foreign investment, as Deng created four special economic zones
as they were called, on the Chinese coast, to encourage investment, to entice people
from abroad with special low tax rates.
Now actually there's a terrific irony here, as it was these coastal locations where the
treaty ports during the time of unequal treaties had been located.
But now this trade was desired.
Deng also traveled to the United States and even wore a cowboy hat at a Texas rodeo, all
part of his campaign to pursue trade opportunities wherever they could be found.
Economic development in China surged ahead.
For three decades, the Chinese economy has boomed, and in the first decade of the 21st
century, Chinese annual growth rates were at around 10%, astonishing.
Chinese exports flowed out in vast quantities.
China ran huge trade surpluses as a result.
In 2011, China overtook Japan as the world's second largest economy.
And some experts predict that it may be the world's largest economy by 2025 overtaking
the United States.
At the same time, a human flow of Chinese students studying abroad commenced as well.
Hundreds of thousands studied and are studying now in the United States and Europe, engaging
with new ideas and experiences.
These were changes that flowed from the turning point of 1972, could not have happened without
it, and are still unfolding today.
But these changes perhaps have produced internal contradictions, as Marx would have called them.
After the Communist Party endorsed private enterprise, which earlier had been taboo,
where does that leave Communist ideological legitimacy or the authority of the government?
Wang had announced that the changes to government policy were to achieve the four modernizations.
But then in 1978, a dissident named Wei Jin Sheng plastered a poster in Beijing at a spot
called the Democracy Wall, where others were also pasting up their ideas.
Wei's poster called for the fifth modernization, democracy, and he's scored in Deng's program.
Wei announced, democracy, freedom, and happiness are the only goals of modernization.
Without this fifth modernization, the four others are nothing more than a new fangle
lie.
For this statement, for engaging in a debate about what modernization really means, Wei
was arrested and sentenced to 15 years in jail.
And so it is to that topic, dissent for democracy as modernization, which led to the fall of
the Berlin Wall in 1989, and the crushing of Chinese protests in Tiananmen Square that
we will turn in our next lecture.
