The
year is 1989 and the fall of a wall will herald the end of an empire.
If you think back to the start of our course, you'll recall that we witnessed something
in some ways similar and yet very different.
That earlier scene came in 1453 with the fall of Constantinople and the collapse of
the Eastern Roman Empire.
We heard the sound of the approaching end, the booming of monster cannon that smashed
the ancient ramparts on which we were standing.
But now, over five centuries later, let's revisit the question of how a modern empire
falls.
It is the night of November 9 and we are in Berlin, Germany, in the center of this metropolis.
Once again, we are standing atop a wall.
It's not a thousand years old, as the walls of Constantinople were, but only 28 years
old, made of concrete and festooned with barbed wire.
As we listen to this turning point, this is what we hear, laughter, singing, shouts of
joy and wonder, a champagne corks popping, and a steady noise of hammering.
That hammering is not the great booming sound of monster cannon like at besieged Constantinople,
but rather the small sound of countless sledgehammers, picks and chisels that people are using to
break down the wall itself.
The infamous Berlin Wall we are standing on will in short order be gone, deconstructed
by the efforts of quite ordinary people, and in a way, there is a perfect justice to that.
Because this wall was not built to keep invaders out, like the walls of Constantinople, rather
it had been built to keep ordinary people in, subjects in a vast political and social experiment
enforced modernization.
In this lecture, we consider a comparatively recent turning point that already has become
part of history, the year of revolutions, 1989.
Today, we often take for granted what was a huge surprise, the largely peaceful collapse
of communist dictatorships as a result of the social mobilization of millions of ordinary
people for nonviolent protest.
We will see how these elements made this a turning point of huge and continuing significance.
First, with amazing speed and little warning, the collapse of communist regimes in Central
and Eastern Europe ended the half-century-long Cold War, which had defined world politics,
and also pushed forward a global phenomenon that we've traced already in our course,
decolonization.
Second, this revolution was striking for the grassroots mobilization, which made it happen.
It resulted, most of all, from the convictions of millions of ordinary people who had shed
their fear of authority and power.
Third, and this is something that we're enormously grateful for, or should be, the revolution
was generally peaceful, not marked by mass bloodshed or war, as had essentially been
the rule in the past.
So let's explore these astonishing dimensions to that year of miracles, 1989.
The Empire, whose collapse we will observe, was built up by Joseph Stalin, leader of the
Soviet Union.
Ever since its founding by Lenin after the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution, the Soviet Union
was a radical new kind of state.
The Marxist ideology of this communist project looked forward to launching a new stage of
human history, a final modernization.
Marx projected a coming great final revolution which would eliminate all inequalities, all
private property, and all classes but the working class.
He and his followers claimed that theirs was a scientific socialism that had discerned
the direction of history and history's iron laws.
This conviction of certainty which they gained as a result gave vast confidence to revolutionaries
like Lenin and Stalin, but it could also be used to justify great crimes, imposing final
solutions to the problems of modernity.
Stalin proved a great master of just such atrocities in the name of modernization, with
a death toll in the many, many millions.
In this course, we've discussed modernity as a process, and we've discussed different
concepts of how to modernize.
Like China's Mao, who was discussed in an earlier lecture, Stalin had pressed a compulsory
version of modernization that involved subordinating everything to a plan, allegedly scientific,
a plan that was synonymous with the will of the infallible leader.
It also involved an assault on existing society.
In the case of the Soviet Union, this came in the form of a collectivization drive and
a famine, like that which later took place under Mao, as well as waves of purges, mass
arrests, and executions.
And all of this was done in favor of a future planned society.
In fact, the lure of planned societies extended very far in the 20th century.
The British science fiction author and visionary H.G. Wells, among many others, saw liberal
democracy as messy and not really up to the task of building a rational, ordered future.
When Wells actually met Stalin in Moscow, Wells proved disappointed, mostly because
Stalin wouldn't accept his advice about how to govern.
But Wells kept returning, nonetheless, in his writings and in his musings on the future,
to the idea of a dictatorship of elite experts, who would scientifically plan and regiment
society and individuals all in the name of progress.
Even at the time, these hopes were really willfully naive.
After the Allied victory in the Second World War, Stalin expanded his personal rule.
The Soviet Union absorbed the Baltic states, parts of Poland, and set up allied regimes
in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria.
Communist political systems were imposed on these countries, and a sustained assault
took place on their societies to bring those societies under state control.
The real aim was to eliminate civil society.
Civil society is that zone between the individual and the state or government, that zone where
voluntary relations and interactions take place, a zone of organizations, churches, clubs,
even friendships.
Across Central and Eastern Europe, where the victorious Red Army was stationed, the Soviet
takeover was experienced as colonialism, not overseas imperialism, but in Europe itself.
As the Cold War escalated, with the former Allies, the United States and the Soviet
Union squaring off against one another, it was the defeated and occupied land of Germany
that was ground zero.
Germany was divided into separate zones of military occupation, and its capital, Berlin,
likewise was divided into zones, even though it was inside the Soviet zone itself.
Eventually, a Federal Republic of Germany under American sponsorship was established
in the West, and the German Democratic Republic under Soviet sponsorship in the East, both
claimed to be the one true, legitimate Germany.
For years, for Stalin and then for his successor Khrushchev, the existence of West Berlin inside
their area of control was an irritant, and really an offense.
The result was a series of Berlin crises, which made the city a hotspot where the Cold
War might potentially tip over into World War III, in which case we likely would not
be having this lecture today.
Stalin tried blockading West Berlin in 1948, but the Americans and the British used a dramatic
airlift to supply the civilian population for 11 months, and Stalin was forced to call
off his attempt to throttle West Berlin.
After Stalin died in 1953, East Berlin was the scene of the Berlin workers uprising,
the Abbeite Aufstand.
When striking, workers had begun calling for free elections.
Soviet tanks crushed the workers.
But as a result, they left in tatters the ideological claim of the East German communists
to represent the working classes at large.
Through these years, an ominous thing was happening moreover, from the perspective of
the East German leaders and their Soviet patrons.
The very best and most talented people, especially from the younger generation, were draining
out of East Germany.
Because Berlin was a city with shared control by the victors of World War II, one could
travel from East Germany to Berlin, cross over into the western part of the city, and
then travel safely onwards to West Germany where citizenship was automatic to Germans.
Thus, from 1949 to 1961, some two and a half million Germans fled from East Germany to
West Germany.
These were the cream of the crop, the skilled, the venturesome, and the communist leaders
were determined to stop this.
Without any advance warning, but with the approval of Khrushchev and the Soviet Union,
East German police put up the Berlin Wall on August 13, 1961, on what should have been
a quiet and peaceful Sunday morning.
East German police set up blockades and barbed wire fences.
This surprise move, by the way, actually intersected with another one of our turning points, with
the space race that we discussed in an earlier lecture.
The Soviets deliberately scheduled the flight of one of their cosmonauts to coincide with
the building of the wall to emphasize the superiority of their ideology on earth and
in space.
This new barrier provoked panic and desperation on the part of East Germans who still wanted
to leave.
On one particular street in downtown Berlin, the Bernhauer Straße, where windows on buildings
of that street faced west, people actually jumped from them to get to freedom.
An ordinary East German soldier who had been ordered to guard the barbed wire fence decided
in a moment of personal resolve on the spur of the moment that he would defect and he
leapt across himself.
While just before all this, East German government propaganda had declared that no one has the
intention of building a wall, now propaganda turned on a dime.
And celebrated what the East German government called the New Anti-Fascist Protection Barrier.
For East German citizens, it now became a crime to try to escape the Republic.
In German this was known as Republikflucht as a crime.
This threat was revealed as deadly earnest when the first victim was shot by border guards
at the wall, a week and a half after it had been set up.
This was a young worker trying to get to the west, a 24-year-old tailor named Günther
Litvin.
The United States and other Western powers protested against the wall but did not move
to prevent its construction.
In the years that followed, amazing ingenuity and daring were on display as people escaped
from East Berlin by tunnels or were smuggled out in hidden compartments of cars or even
sought to escape by hot air balloons.
But increasingly the wall took on permanence.
That earlier improvised construction of cinder blocks and barbed wire was steadily replaced
by tall concrete walls up to 15 feet high.
Watchtowers were erected.
The wall inside Berlin between East and West ran for 28 miles through the city center and
then another wall ran around the rest of West Berlin for 75 miles.
The border between East and West Germany likewise was separated by walls, electrified fences
and so-called death strips where raked sand would reveal the footprints of those trying
to escape.
Mines and automatic machine guns might be triggered by people fleeing and would bring
instant death.
At the Berlin Wall in Berlin, an estimated 5,000 people actually made it over the wall.
The same number it's estimated were captured in trying to get across and an estimated 191
people were killed as they tried to escape.
Behind the wall in East Germany, most had no choice but to conform and to accommodate
themselves to the plans of the state.
To keep people in line and under observation, an extraordinary secret police institution
was set up in East Germany, the Ministry for State Security, informally known as the
Stasi.
Stasi officers and legions of secret informers kept people under watch.
Indeed, East Germany has been called the most comprehensively spied on society of the modern
age.
And all of this took place behind the wall.
Just before the wall fell, East German leaders predicted that the wall would stand for centuries
longer, and they sought to make it indeed into a perfect automated barrier by the year 2000.
And yet ultimately, perhaps the wall was truly self-defeating in the long run.
Building it proved that the planned and centrally controlled communist society ultimately needed
to rely on compulsion and force, not the consent of the governed.
This admission over the long haul and in ways that were visible only to very, very keen
observers would ultimately lead to the disintegration of the East German state and the Soviet
Empire as a whole.
After Stalin's death, the combination of fear and ideological fervor that had propelled
communism was increasingly replaced by a kind of dull conformity, a loss of momentum,
and less resort to mass violence, although uprisings in Hungary and Czechoslovakia were
crushed very brutally.
As the promises of outpacing the Western capitalist countries and the United States in industrial
production and quality consumer goods or even in the space race that we discussed were dropped,
a sort of malaise set in.
Now this is really hard to quantify or really to pinpoint exactly, but in aggregate it was
a big transformation, especially in the psychology of the ruling elites of the Communist Party.
Even the very existence of party elites with special privileges and access to goods or
travel abroad for themselves and their families that weren't allowed to ordinary people really
made a mockery of the ideological promise of equality.
Military people stood in long lines to buy scarce and often shoddy goods, they could
not dream of travel abroad, and often were reduced to making an art of speaking one way
in public and inside thinking something different.
These factors conspired to create a certain general cynicism and loss of confidence.
Here, let me inject some personal experience.
I was able to make a trip to the Soviet Union in the 1970s and then another one in 1989,
the year of our turning point.
A mood of malaise was palpable and it also produced brilliant political jokes as a genre.
For instance, ordinary people joked, we pretend to work and the government pretends to pay
us.
Another anecdote described the history of the Soviet Union as a train.
Stalin had the engineer arrested as an enemy of the people and shot.
His successor, Khrushchev, rehabilitated the dead engineer.
But the train still didn't move.
So the next leader, Brezhnev, had everyone pull down the shades, rock from side to side
and make choo-choo noises to pretend that the train was actually speeding along.
Now when I was engaged in Russian language study, my Russian teacher announced to us
a deep truth.
She said, to speak Russian, you must have confidence.
Well, likewise, confidence and certainty were key attributes for Lenin and Stalin, who praised
a certain hardness of ideological conviction based on the trust in inevitable historical
victory.
When that historical certainty was eroded, the confidence of the ruling class would go
as well.
From the western side of the wall, the wall was mocked.
President John F. Kennedy and President Ronald Reagan came to Berlin and denounced the wall.
Everyone has probably seen the pictures of the graffiti-covered concrete of the Berlin
wall.
But all those drawings and declarations were on the western side, not on the eastern side.
In addition, one man, a man who was an eccentric on a truly heroic scale, was a man who was
an eccentric on a truly heroic scale, found a way of illuminating the madness of the wall.
His name was John Runnings.
He was a peace activist from Seattle, a man from Quaker background, who crusaded, among
other things, against the very idea of borders and passports.
You might even consider him a rebel against the entire Westphalian international system
that we've discussed.
In 1886, he actually climbed up onto the wall at the age of 68 and ran atop it until he
was finally wrestled to the ground by border guards.
After being released, John Runnings went back to the wall and got arrested again, and so
on and so on and so on.
Eventually, Runnings even went after the wall with a homemade battering ram, and he urged
others to join him in a great pee-in to urinate on the structure to show disgust.
These antics revealed the greater absurdity of the wall itself.
In a way, Runnings reminds me of walking Stuart, that famous eccentric ex-employee of the East
India Company, who walked home from India to London to protest policies he didn't agree
with.
Both men showed something really impressive in their personal determination.
In Eastern Europe, an entire generation of dissidents was showing even greater personal
determination at high personal cost, including imprisonment and brutalization by the secret
police.
Such dissidents urged themselves and society at large to, as they put it, live in truth,
whatever the price, rather than simply repeating the party line or the orthodoxy.
These dissidents counseled, act as if you are free.
If one could do this, fear would no longer rule.
The modernity which many dissidents envisioned and set against the modernity that communism
postulated was a modernity of a healthy civil society of free individuals, not pervasive
control by the state.
In 1985, a younger communist leader was appointed General Secretary of the Soviet Union, Mikhail
Sergeyevich Gorbachev.
A committed Leninist, Gorbachev aimed to introduce a reform program to inject new confidence
into the Soviet system and to fundamentally make it work.
Now, as is often the case in history, the moment when a regime tries to reform itself
can prove fatal, because the fundamental principles of the entire ruling system may come under
question at just that moment.
Gorbachev's reforms was a policy of openness in public expression.
He intended that openness would produce useful constructive criticism.
Soon, however, that openness unleashed criticism of the ruling regime itself and its record.
Gorbachev's reforms soon escaped his control, like the story of the Sorcerer's Apprentice,
who loses control of spells.
To reduce the crushing costs of military spending in the Cold War and the commitments of the
Soviet Union to its outer empire of satellite states in Eastern Europe, Gorbachev allowed
those states to go their own way.
Public demonstrations demanding free elections led to the creation of non-communist governments
in Poland and Hungary, a remarkable site.
Meanwhile, while these countries liberalized, East Germany did not liberalize, and as a
result found itself increasingly isolated even in the Eastern Bloc.
Peaceful demonstrations in the city of Leipzig grew testimony to an increasing loss of fear
by ordinary people.
And then in a kind of domino effect, the liberalization of Hungary ended up undermining East German
authority.
Because Hungary opened its borders to Austria to allow free travel, and an increasing stream
of East Germans traveled to Hungary to use it as a way of making their way west.
In fact, bizarrely, some East Berliners actually traveled hundreds of miles through Hungary
and Austria to go to the west to end up in West Berlin, blocks away from where their
odyssey had begun.
In desperation, the East German communist elite dropped the hard-line leader, who at
the time was urging a violent crackdown against the protesters, and instead they promised
reforms as a way of buying time.
At this point, accident intervened as a force in history.
How much of our lives and histories ruled by accident?
In this case, it was a bureaucratic blunder.
New rules allowing freer travel abroad were being worked out by the East German communist
government, and they were to be enacted sometime in the future.
The draft of the legislation had not been worked out fully, but then on the night of
November 9th, 1989, a member of the ruling elite, the Politburo, gave a disorganized
press conference in which he read the press release to reporters.
On hearing of this new freedom of travel, a reporter shouted out, when does this come
into effect?
And the flustered spokesman, who didn't really know, improvised on the spot and said, immediately.
At this point, astonished East Berliners, who had just seen this exchange on television,
went out to the border crossings to see what was really going on, and their confusion reigned.
The border guards, some of whom had been listening as well, had heard the same words, so who
knew what the party line was?
Faithfully, the confused guards stood aside.
Soon crowds were passing freely into West Berlin.
They were soon climbing on the wall and smashing at it with hammers or whatever else was near
to hand.
Popular protest for fundamental change grew within East Germany, and a dynamic that was
unstoppable had developed.
Thus, less than a year after the Berlin Wall was brought down, Germany was reunited on
October 3rd, 1990.
In 1990, I was actually able to visit the wall, and I was able to rent a sledgehammer
from an entrepreneur on the street for five minutes at the cost of a few Deutschmarks,
and I was able to smash away at the wall myself.
I can tell you this was a deeply satisfying experience.
Indeed, so many people did just that, that the wall no longer stands today even as ruins.
You really have to make a special effort in Berlin to trace where the wall once ran.
Similar waves of nonviolent protest, then also in a chain reaction, brought down the Soviet
Union and other communist regimes in Eastern Europe.
Within the Soviet Union, the Baltic states declared their independence from the Soviet
Union in a process that soon spread.
Ironically, eventually even Russia had declared its independence from the Soviet Union.
In early 1991, Gorbachev turned towards repression.
In Lithuania, Soviet special forces and their tanks killed civilian protesters, but even
this could not halt the dynamic.
Finally, in August of 1991, some of Gorbachev's associates sought to take matters into their
own hands, take power in a coup, and clamp down.
But this is where the role of confidence in a ruling elite showed itself.
At the press conference that the plotters held, some of them appeared with shaking hands.
Others appeared to be drunk.
The coup soon folded, and by the end of the year, the Soviet Union was officially dissolved.
As independent republics emerged from the wreckage of the Soviet Union, another stage
of that longer process of world decolonization had been achieved, with the end of the ideological
empire that Stalin had built up.
Among the marvels of this process unleashed in 1989, the greatest was the restraint of
the protesters, who did not turn to violence when they easily might have.
Since then, the countries of Central and Eastern Europe have worked hard to build democracies
on the basis of the sovereignty that earlier had been denied to them in an empire.
And they're working to reintegrate themselves into a Europe that they had earlier been split
off from for decades.
However, we need to be clear about this.
A happy outcome was never foreordained or inevitable.
That's made clear by events in the same year, 1989, in China.
China had also experienced protests and crisis.
After seven weeks, crowds of thousands of Chinese students had gathered in Beijing's
famous Tiananmen Square, peacefully raising demands for change and democracy.
But in stark contrast to the liberation experienced at the Berlin Wall, the Chinese communists
ruthlessly crushed the movement.
On June 4th, tanks and soldiers were moved in and killed hundreds of the protesters.
Even the bravery of an unknown man in famous photographs standing in the way of a column
of tanks could not prevent the outcome.
Some historians suggest that it was memories of the Cultural Revolution and fear of general
disorder that really stopped the democracy movement spreading from the cities throughout
China as a whole.
Now clearly, a key difference here, compared with East Berlin, is that in the Chinese case,
party leaders did have the confidence to use violence.
In the aftermath of these events, the Chinese government focused on nationalism as a rallying
point and a source of legitimacy to replace their earlier communist ideology.
Thus, a program of patriotic education worked to cultivate memories of the Japanese invasion
of the 1930s, along with commemoration of the opium wars in a new generation.
The question remains open today for China's 1.4 billion people.
Does such nationalism and booming economic growth effectively mute calls for democratic
change, or are those demands merely deferred to a later day?
What will happen in an economic slowdown or in another crisis?
The question remains open.
So what were the ultimate results of this turning point?
The fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of the Soviet Union's entire structure of
ideological empire showed the power and ultimate resilience of civil society, that voluntary
interaction of individuals seeking freedom and refusing to fear.
In spite of the communist model, which had worked to absorb society into the state in
its plans, civil society revived.
The newly independent countries of Central and Eastern Europe regained their sovereignty,
that key element of the Westphalian system.
In spite of many predictions that nationalism and ethnic divisions would lead to endless
wars, for the most part, these countries have taken a democratic and peaceful road.
Now many of them are part of the project of the European Union, pooling their national
sovereignty.
But without 1989, only a Europe in the West could have been organized on a federal basis,
and still would have been achingly incomplete.
So now the question arises, what sort of Europe will emerge, or is emerging today?
In this lecture, we followed a remarkable and vast social mobilization in 1989.
New technologies, called social media, were about to supercharge just such interactions,
and so we'll consider those in our next lecture.
