Ond i i chi wneud unrhyw i ddylau.
I'm a biologist as well and my talk will touch on some of the same themes as Peter's and I'm pleased to say from a similar point of view a lot of the time, not all the time.
Just to establish where we're at for the astrobiologists in the audience, this is essentially what's going on in us right now, these are the mitochondria in our own cells.
What's going on as we respire is we're stripping electrons from food and we're passing them down the chain of proteins, the respiratory chain, inside a membrane, ultimately to oxygen.
And that flow of electrons to oxygen is powering the extrusion of protons across the membrane, so this is a proton type membrane.
Here's the ATP synthase that Peter was talking about, it's the flow of protons through the ATP synthase which is driving ATP synthesis.
Now you can get rid of food and have hydrogen sulfide or hydrogen as an electron donor here, you can get rid of oxygen, you could have nitric oxide or sulfate or something.
The chain itself is slightly different but this principle, shockingly, is basically conserved right across all of life as we know it.
It goes back, this idea of chemiosmotic coupling goes back to Peter Mitchell in the early 1960s, there he is actually in the late 40s in Cambridge.
And it was a period of known as the oxfos wars for nearly 20 years or so, there was quite serious battles among the proponents about whether this really was the mechanism of respiration or not.
It turns out that it is. There's a very nice quote from Leslie Orgel who said, not since Darwin has biology come up with an idea as counterintuitive as those of say Einstein, Heisenberg or Schrödinger.
It really is an odd idea, nobody expected that this is how life would work, that rather than being simple chemistry transferring phosphate groups from one molecule onto another one that there would be this intermediary of a proton gradient across a membrane.
What's turned out really since then, Luca, the last universal common ancestor was almost certainly chemiosmotic as we've seen in the last talk, had an ATP synthase.
What's odd though is that chemiosmotic coupling requires pretty sophisticated membranes and pretty sophisticated proteins.
Now we've already heard that Luca was a sophisticated cell and therefore had those things, so this doesn't give any direct insights into the origin of life.
However, if the last universal common ancestor already had all of this, then it points back beyond Luca and it begs the question, well how did it arise in cells before Luca?
So this is a tree that's from Bill Martin about 1998 and there's two aspects of this I'd like to raise.
One of them is that eukaryotes are really arising in a chimeric event.
So there was an archaeon host cell, this is now looking increasingly likely, we don't really know exactly which group but something to do with the lociarchiota perhaps, acquired a bacterial endosymbion.
So this is now generally accepted that the eukaryotes are not now considered a primary domain, they're considered a derived domain, they're still a domain of life, but the two primary domains really are the bacteria, the eubacteria and the archaea.
And so the common ancestor of those two groups, which is not necessarily the common ancestor within these two groups, so again this is corresponding to what Peter was saying, but the common ancestor of the bacteria and the archaea was the last universal common ancestor.
And Bill here has these two groups coming independently from events you'll notice at the bottom and I want to say why that is.
It's to do with the paradoxical traits of the bacteria and the archaea.
So we know they share a common ancestor, there's no question about that, the universal genetic code, the ribosomes, most of the enzymes and genes therefore involved in transcription and translation, parts of intermediary metabolism like the Krebs cycle for example,
and the requirement for chemiosmotic coupling in the ATP synthase, they all go back to this common ancestor, so they're all present in Luka.
What's different though, and this is not easy to interpret, the cell membrane in bacteria and archaea is fundamentally different.
It's very similar in its biophysical properties, but it's fundamentally different in its chemistry and a lot of the enzymes required to form it.
So the cell wall as well, so really the entire barrier between the inside of a cell and the external world that's different in bacteria and archaea.
So it begs the question, well what did their common ancestor actually have then?
Now it almost certainly had a membrane of some sort, we just can't constrain exactly what sort.
It must have had a membrane because it had proteins, membrane proteins like the ATP synthase.
Even DNA replication, there's quite a lot of divergence between the bacteria and the archaea.
There's not a lot of homologous in those enzymes, is my understanding.
Respiratory chains, Wolfgang will say more about this, it's very difficult to reconstruct the origin of the respiratory chain because of lateral gene transfer.
There are different pathways of heme and quinone synthesis which suggests it might have arisen independently.
This is just to give you a sense with the membrane, so this is the archaeal membranes here, so these are isoprenes in the tail here.
Then we have an ethobond to a head group which is a glycerol 1 phosphate head group.
This is our own type of membrane, fatty acids via an estobond to glycerol 3 phosphate.
Now the difference between fatty acids and isoprenes, you could describe that to adaptation to different environments.
But this difference in stereochemistry here is very difficult to ascribe to any selective advantage of glycerol 1 phosphate over glycerol 3 phosphate.
It looks as if they were simply independently originated in that common ancestor.
It implies that Luca, whatever she did have, did not have a phosphorylipid membrane, a lipid membrane of some sort but not necessarily with a glycerol phosphate head group.
Now what the ancestors are, what the deepest branching roots of these domains are, there is really very little if any agreement about this at all.
I think that's from a phylogenetic point of view.
From a biochemical point of view I would say that it points to the methanogens or archaea and the acetogens of bacteria as possibly the deepest branches.
The reason I say that's got nothing to do with phylogenetics and everything to do with how they actually grow.
Both grow from hydrogen and carbon dioxide via a pathway, the acetyl CoA pathway.
There's only six known pathways of carbon fixation right across all of life.
This is the only one which is shared in the bacteria in the archaea, so that looks as if it's going back to that common ancestor.
It has other nice properties too, it's short, it's only a few steps, linear, so you don't have problems with declining substrate at each step of a cycle.
It's exagonic, so it's actually releasing energy and I'll say more about that.
There's a lot of iron, sulfur, nickel, sulfur catalysts involved in there, and it's obliquatly chemiosmotic, but it doesn't require quinones or cytochromes.
The problem is that again there's a very deep divergence between the mechanisms of iron pumping, between the way in which they produce in fact a methyl group,
but that's coupled to iron pumping, that differs fundamentally between the methanogens and the acetogens, so again it's begging the question.
One interpretation, which is my favourite interpretation to this, the problem is that membrane biologetics are universal,
but the membranes themselves are not, and potentially neither is the active proton pumping machinery.
This paradox could be resolved if life originated in an environment where there were natural proton gradients across inorganic barriers.
Like these vents for example, so this is Lost City, which was discovered in the year 2000, and it's an alkaline hydrothermal vent formed not by reactions between water and magma,
but between rock essentially, between minerals like olivine, which are extremely common in interstellar dust I'm told, as well as in the mantle of the earth.
Relatively cool interactions between water and olivine, the olivine is oxidised, releasing hydrogen charged, and hydrothermal fluid is charged with hydroxide ions,
so quite strongly alkaline around about pH 11 or thereabouts.
We see similar things, so I'm told in cellar dust that the pH is around about 11, that's often taken to be serpentinisation as well.
There's detection of methane on Mars, is often attributed to serpentinisation, and the chances are as well on Europa and so on, there is serpentinisation going on.
All it really requires is water and rock and an atmosphere with CO2, so from an astrobiology point of view these conditions should be extremely common, perhaps as common as billions of exoplanets in the Milky Way alone.
So these conditions were pointed out by Mike Russell, more than 20 years ago now.
He referred to them as electrochemical flow reactors and pointed out, this was 10 years before Lost City was even discovered,
they should be saturated, serpentinisation gives rise to millimolar quantities of hydrogen, CO2, the early oceans we think would have been richer in CO2.
There should be temperature gradients, but relatively mild temperature gradients.
We don't have temperatures of 400 degrees as you see in black smoke events, they tend to be 50 to 100 degrees or thereabouts, that kind of temperature range.
What you have is a micro porous labyrinth, and you can see this is aragonite today, but in the Hadean, in the absence of oxygen and with ferudinous oceans, there should have been, we think, catalytic iron, nickel, sulphide minerals in these walls.
Perhaps the most important thing from the point of view of this talk, pH gradients, the fluids coming in, the hydrothermal fluids are around about pH 11, the early oceans, we don't know their pH,
but 5 to 7 is probably reasonably conservative, relatively acidic because there is so much CO2 around.
So that means that the structure of these inorganic pores, and think of this as a pore deep within the vent rather than at the very edge,
so we have hydrothermal fluids in the inside of this, we have an inorganic barrier, and then percolating in from the oceans, we also have relatively acidic ocean waters.
And this is analogous to the structure of a cell, so here we have the cell membrane, this is what bacteria and archaea are doing, is they're pumping protons across the cell membrane outside,
so we have a proton gradient between the outside and the inside in both cases, and it's a pH gradient of around about equivalent to 3 pH units in both cases.
So, both the magnitude and the polarity of this gradient are equivalent, which is interesting, it doesn't mean anything necessarily, but it begs the question of how could natural proton gradients across inorganic barriers drive anything at all?
Well, the clue might be in the methanogens themselves, and this is how they are generating methane in the first place, so this is going on in your own intestines now,
and cows obviously contribute a great deal of methane to the atmosphere. What they're doing, and this has worked from Rolf Tower over the last five or six years, is they're taking a pair of electrons from hydrogen and they're bifocating the electron pair,
so they're coupling an exogonic reduction of a heterodisulfide group here to an endogonic reduction of the ferrodoxin, the ferrodoxin's reducing the CO2, ultimately through to a methyl group attached to a cofactor, it's transferred to a separate cofactor,
and then it acquires that same electron again from the heterodisulfide that's released as methane, so we have a cycle going on here which is just releasing methane, and the only thing that's conserved is a proton gradient across the membrane.
In actual fact, it's very often a sodium gradient, but they have sodium proton anti-porters, which means that it's very easy to convert a sodium gradient into a proton gradient.
What do they use it for, and here it seems they do use the proton gradient rather than the sodium gradient, well they use it directly to reduce ferrodoxin via a membrane protein called the energy converting hydrogenase,
it's powered by the proton motive force, the ferrodoxin again reduces the CO2 through to the methyl group, and we have also running from that same proton motive force, the ATP synthase.
So this is essentially it as far as driving metabolism is concerned in methanogens, so the whole process of methanogenesis and electron bifocation is generating a gradient, this gradient is free of charge if you're in a vent which has natural proton gradients,
and so natural proton gradients potentially could drive both an ATP synthase and perhaps more plausibly at a very early stage of evolution and energy converting hydrogenase, it's again an iron sulfur protein,
membrane bound driving the reduction of ferrodoxin and other iron sulfur protein, and this is just a highlight that in fact you can't even see, there's shading around a lot of these,
a lot of the proteins involved in electron bifocation and carbon metabolism and methanogens and acetogens are iron sulfur proteins with structures which are reminiscent of grigite, the mineral grigite which you would expect to find in that kind of vent.
So the reaction between hydrogen and CO2 to produce organic matter under strictly anoxic conditions is exogonic, so to produce total cell biomass down here, so this is delta G minus 1000 or so, it's not millivolts, I can't remember what the unit is, it's joules per gram.
Nuclear tides are up here, so it's endogonic to produce nuclear tides, there has to be some form of coupling in this system to generate nuclear tides, but amino acids and fatty acids should be formed fairly spontaneously under that set of conditions, of course they're not, they don't form very easily at all under these conditions,
and the reason is there's an endogonic barrier to get through the first couple of steps of reduction of CO2, this is the geochemical pathway to get up to formaldehyde here, and then it's exogonic after that.
What methanogens actually do is suppress that initial energetic barrier using the proton motive force, using the ionic gradient here, and that's what you have free of charge in the vents, which begs a hypothesis which we've been trying to test.
This is the problem from the point of view of reduction potential in millivolts, the reduction potential of the hydrogen proton pair is not sufficiently reducing, it's not low enough, this is an inverted scale of minus 600, not enough to reduce CO2 through to formaldehyde, it's not going to happen spontaneously.
But that's at pH 7, the Nernst equation says that the reduction potential of protons are involved depends on pH, and so what we actually have in the vents, this is conservative again, pH 10 of hydrogen proton reduction potential falls to about minus 600, whereas CO2 at pH 6 through to formaldehyde rises to about minus 480 or thereabouts.
So under those conditions, hydrogen ought to be able to reduce CO2, the trouble is mixing, how do you stop mixing? Well the answer is exactly the barriers that you find between the pores in these vents, so on one side of the barrier we have hydrogen in alkaline conditions, on the other side we have CO2 or bicarbonate in relatively acidic conditions, and the question is would you expect to see a transfer of electrons through these semi-conducting ion sulfur minerals in the barrier?
That of course would accumulate a charge, but because we have mixing in the system you would expect to dissipate that charge. So the question is does it work? And we built a very simple reactor, a benchtop reactor is only about 9cm in diameter, to try and simulate, and this is in an aerobic hood, so strictly anoxic conditions, these precipitating vent-like structures which are reflecting our simulated hydrothermal fluids and simulated early acidic oceans.
These are the minerals that we form in there, so this is very similar to McKinnawite, disorded McKinnawite nanocrystals of that, and the question is well does it actually reduce CO2 or bicarbonate? The answer is yes, we're getting a small amount of formate, we're getting a certain amount of formaldehyde, especially in the precipitates themselves.
So this is down at the bottom is HPLC grade water, above that is the ferrous chloride solution, so we do get some reduction going on just in ferrous chloride solution, but that's not surprising, ferrous ion can act as an electron donor.
This is in the solution within the reactor itself, so we're getting a small increase in formaldehyde, but in the precipitates themselves over a couple of hours we're seeing quite a substantial, this is up to about 120 micromolar concentration we're getting.
So reasonable production of formaldehyde under those conditions, and it does seem to depend on the pH gradient.
They are, though, low yield, and most of the reactions that we've been doing have been low yield. There is a very neat way in these vents of increasing, not the yield, but the concentration by a process that Dieter Braun has talked about over the last 10 years, also called thermophoresis, where you have thermal gradients within this micro porous network,
and you would expect to concentrate organics, really anything up to 10 to the 12 fold from Dieter's initial simulations, whoops, sorry I seem to have jumped right to the end somehow.
So we tried doing the same thing in a more open system in our reactor itself, using a ceramic foam, and we generate heat gradients with at least a suggestion of convection going on there, but the proof is in the pudding.
Do we actually concentrate organics, and what we used initially was quinine, simply because it's UV fluorescent, and this is in fact quinine concentrating to about 30 million fold precipitating as pellets of quinine.
So this is effectively just infusing the very low nanomolar concentrations of quinine and concentrating it up to millimolar concentrations in a completely open system.
If you switch the heat off, you don't see any concentration at all, it simply leaves the entire system. So that's a way of concentrating really over several orders of magnitude.
That makes it far more likely that you'll have interactions between molecules, even if they're formed at fairly low yield in the first place, and just for the last couple of minutes I'll mention some recent work I've been doing looking at whether or not acetyl phosphate can operate as an analogue, if you like, a mimic of ATP.
So acetyl CoA, I mentioned the acetyl CoA pathway, this is the business end of it. His ATP, adenosine triphosphate, these are not molecules that you would associate with the first stages of abiogenesis, but there are much simpler analogs.
So this is acetyl phosphate, which might potentially do the same job as ATP, thioacetic acid and methyl thioacetate have a thioester bond and potentially could do a similar job to acetyl CoA.
So the question is, could it actually work as an ATP mimetic? We've shown that we can actually synthesise it under these conditions, especially a pH 7, so relatively neutral conditions.
We still get a reasonable amount at pH 8, we get nothing at all at pH 11, but because you have continuous mixing going on in these vent systems you don't necessarily have to insist that it's going to be pH 11, it could be really anything between pH 5 and pH 11.
So we're getting reasonable amounts, especially in the presence of magnesium.
And I should just note here that if we haven't yet shown every step of the pathway to making acetyl phosphate, we're still working on that now, but the assumption is that the first steps of reducing CO2 through to formaldehyde and beyond onto methyl sulfide, we hope,
means that the synthesis of acetyl phosphate should also be powered ultimately by the proton gradient itself.
Can it phosphorylate things? Yes, to a degree, again fairly low yields.
So this is looking initially at ribose here, at different temperatures, 20 degrees C and 50 degrees C, and this is adenosine, phosphorylating adenosine to adenosine monophosphate, again 20 degrees C and 50 degrees C.
So yes, it's about a 1% to 2% yield, that's all, but it is able to do it in water with nothing else.
And this is looking at the polymerisation of amino acids so far we've not succeeded with nucleotides, but with glycine, this is forming di-glycine, or a more strictly di-keto pyperazine, which is a cyclic form of di-glycine.
This is TMP for comparison, and this is using acetyl phosphate.
So we're getting a yield of 30 to 40% or so, really within minutes to hours, and it tends to last for around about a week.
So what we're doing, and this is the final slide, is this is the acetyl CoA pathway starting with hydrogen and CO2 taking you through to acetyl CoA.
The next step is going to pyruvate into an incomplete reverse Krebs cycle here.
Most of those steps involve carboxylation or hydrogenation powered by ATP, these are the stars showing ATP power.
So can this be done abiotically at one reaction at a time through to these?
So most nucleotide bases for example are produced in methanogens from amino acids and so on.
That's all, I'm happy to take questions, thank you.
Thank you.
