We live in capitalism. Its power seems inescapable. So did the divine right of kings. Any human power
can be resisted and changed by human beings. Resistance and change often begin in art,
very often in our art, the art of the words.
Ursula Croba Le Guin was among the most acclaimed and respected science fiction writers
of the 20th century, a best-selling author in 40 languages, multiple winner of the Hugo and Nebula
Awards, and inspiration to generations who have followed her. Here in the 21st century Le Guin
has become something more than a beloved author. She has become an icon. She may be the only classic
sci-fi writer to regularly trend on TikTok. Ursula Le Guin is one of my favorite authors.
Science fiction is the art that builds worlds. In her science fiction stories, Ursula Le Guin didn't
just tell us a better world was possible, she showed us better worlds by building them in the
imagination of generations, worlds where life is fairer, more equal, and more just.
At this point in time, when a better world seems to be slipping through our fingers,
I want to understand the better worlds that Ursula Le Guin showed us. I want to dig down
to the big ideas that shaped Le Guin's storytelling. I want to understand not just Ursula Le Guin,
the sci-fi writer, but Ursula Le Guin, the philosopher.
Through the medium of sci-fi and fantasy, Ursula Le Guin spoke a powerful philosophy,
a philosophy that shows us how the art of words can resist and change the world,
in which human imagination, our ideas and feelings, our dreams and visions, and the very stories we
tell have the power to shape reality. It's a philosophy of immense power, the power to build
worlds and the power to destroy them. Wait, wait, wait right there. We're talking about a
kid's fantasy author, the lady who wrote those dragon books, right? Well, you might be confusing
the subject of this essay with Anne McCaffrey, or Jane Yolen, or any of the intelligent sci-fi
and fantasy writers who have created beautiful and politically relevant stories for children.
If you mean to change the world, where better to start than the dreams of the young? Ursula
Le Guin's career stretched over six decades, but the work she remains most famous for,
and that we're going to be thinking about here, were created in a brief few years between 1968 and
1974. Think of these as Le Guin's Bob Dylan years, when she created the tunes most of us still
hum along to. That's not to reduce the rest of Le Guin's career, but here we're thinking about
the core philosophy of Le Guin, her big ideas. You don't need to have read these books to follow
this, and we won't be spoiling them. In fact, we're not going to be talking about most of what's
special about these stories, not the quality of Le Guin's writing or her poetic imagery.
We're just going to find the big ideas that are the philosophy of Ursula Le Guin. To do that,
we're going to name check a number of famed philosophers. You don't need to know who Emmanuel
Kant is, have read Hegel or any of the German idealists, but if you want to go deeper into
philosophy, I recommend the channel of Professor Michael Sugru as an excellent guide. If things
get a bit too abstract and confusing along the way, just hang on, we'll try to bring it all together
at the end. Okay. The Left Hand of Darkness, published in 1969, The Lave of Heaven, 1971,
and the dispossessed 1974, defined Le Guin as a science fiction author. In a unique achievement,
Le Guin simultaneously wrote and published a fantasy trilogy. The Wizard of Earth, see 1968,
The Tombs of Attuan, 1970, and the farthest shore, 1972. And for good measure, in 1973, Le Guin
published The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas, one of the most famous science fiction stories ever
published. What kind of music do you usually have here? Oh, we got both kinds. We got country and
science fiction. Surely, Omelas is a fantasy story. Le Guin was one of many authors who saw
science fiction and fantasy as flip sides of the same coin. All fiction is metaphor. Science
fiction is metaphor. Le Guin argues in her introduction to the Left Hand of Darkness,
but metaphor for what? Keep that question in mind on our journey. To understand Le Guin's writing
and her philosophy, we need to place her in context as a woman writer working in the male
dominated field of American science fiction of the late 1960s. The women on your planet are
logical. That's the only planet in this galaxy that can make that claim. A machine does not care.
Tom Godwin, The Cold Equations. The Cold Equations, 1954, is a science fiction story Ursula Le Guin
would have read when she was a young writer and fan of Amazing Stories magazine. It tells of a young
woman who stows away on a spacecraft, but the ship only has fuel for its mission. So the cold
equations of reality dictates the girl must be blown out of the airlock. It's widely believed
that while the story was offered by Tom Godwin, it's rather incredible ending the young woman
willingly accepts her sacrifice was dictated by the legendary editor of Amazing Stories magazine,
John W. Campbell. Campbell shaped the field of American science fiction, which grew up in the
pulp magazines of the early 20th century around the idea of stories that extrapolated current
science into the future. Campbell formalized the label science fiction to describe such stories.
The Cold Equations exemplifies Cambalian sci-fi that sees reality as a set of cold hard facts
sitting out in the void of space. Reality as a machine that does not care. And Cambalian sci-fi
displayed a casual disregard for women whom it frequently caricatured as unreasoning creatures
who put feelings before the cold hard equations of reality. Early science fiction was created by
women writers like Margaret Cavendish and Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. Hundreds of other women
writers for the 18th and 19th centuries imagined a diverse array of utopian and feminist futures.
You can learn more in my podcast episode about the true history of science fiction,
but Cambalian science fiction largely wrote women out of the field. The history of science fiction
was rewritten to start with Jules Verne and H.G. Wells, relative latecomers, and the definition
of science fiction was narrowed to exclude those earlier feminist utopias and include only pure
scientific speculation. The ones who walk away from Omelas 1973 can be read as a rejoinder to
stories like the Cold Equations. Both are short stories that use a kind of reductio ad absurdum,
pushing an argument that limits of logic to show where it breaks. The city of Omelas is a perfect
utopia except for one child who is held prisoner to suffer for all. Most in Omelas accept this
bargain, but the ones who walk away from Omelas exemplify a higher morality, rejecting injustice
and accepting the unknown, perhaps even death instead. In her introduction to her debut novel
The Left Hand of Darkness, written some years after its publication,
Le Guin devastates the Cambalian idea of speculative sci-fi stating that it always arrives
somewhere between the gradual extinction of human liberty and the total extinction of human life.
If the Cold Equations argues that reality is a machine that does not care,
Omelas replies, even so, the only moral path is to resist whatever the consequence is.
And so the gauntlet was thrown down for a clash of philosophies between Cambalian sci-fi
versus Ursula Le Guin. Cambalian sci-fi believed a better world could be made by science and
technology. Any problem could be fixed by just building bigger and better machines,
that the natural universe is made of matter, particles and forces,
an uncaring machine governed by the cold equations of reality. We can call this the
philosophy of materialism, realism or naturalism. Ursula Le Guin was a revolutionary force in
science fiction because she championed an alternate philosophy, a philosophical school
which argues that the human world is shaped by human thinking, that the universe and everything in
it are the product of human mental formations, of human ideas, the philosophy of idealism.
I think hard times are coming when we will be wanting the voices of writers who can see alternatives,
can see through our fear-stricken society and its obsessive technologies to other ways of being.
We will need writers who can remember freedom, the realists of a larger reality.
The left hand of darkness explores one of the most controversial
and politically charged issues of our time, gender. Genly I is a man on a mission to invite the
planet of Geffen to join the Ecumen, a political alliance trying to re-establish galactic civilization.
The people of Geffen have no fixed gender identities, which Genly is very slow to understand.
He forms a deep relationship with a Geffen native, but is unable to overcome his gender
perceptions to recognize that he's in love. Our entire pattern of socio-sexual interaction
is non-existent here. They cannot play the game. They do not see one another as men or women.
This is almost impossible for our imagination to accept. What is the first question we ask
about a newborn baby? Ursula K. Le Guin, the left hand of darkness. Even when the left hand of
darkness was written, women were still seen as the second sex. Evolution and biology materialist
philosophy argued had made women smaller, weaker, even less intelligent. Their role was as second
class citizens, if they were citizens at all. Those were the cold equations of gender, understood
through the dominant materialist philosophy. That was reality. Feminist philosophers from
Simone de Beauvoir to Judith Butler argued instead that gender was performative. Sex may be biologically
determined, but contributed only a part to the performance of gender. In opposition to the
dominant realist concept of gender was constructed an alternative idealist philosophy. Gender was
a mental concept, an idea that could be changed or even abandoned. In the imagined world of Geffen,
Le Guin is able to model gender performativity to see what remains behind after gender is removed.
The left hand of darkness became a classic work of science fiction because it moved
the idealist philosophy of gender performativity out of the realm of theory and into the powerful
world of story. Ursula Le Guin completed seven novels in the heinous sequence, each exploring
radical ideas that would influence science fiction authors who followed, including Ian M. Banks and
Anne Leckie. The dispossessed is arguably the most radical of Le Guin's novels. A refugee
scientist, the creator of Le Guin's famous Ansible, travels from the anarchist utopia of
Anárez to the capitalist nation of Urás. Like any good utopia, since Thomas More defined the
concept in his 1516 book of that title, the dispossessed imagines a world run under a single
political ideology, anarchism in this case, and what the consequences might be. The outcome
is equivocal, as Le Guin concedes in her book's subtitle, An Ambiguous Utopia.
Anarchism is a political ideology built on idealist philosophy. It asserts that humans
are not simply products of nature driven by greed and violence in a fight for survival. Instead,
human ideas about humanity, like justice, fairness and peace, are fundamental to human existence.
Anarchism has its roots with idealist philosophers like Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who believed in the
essential goodness of humanity. Remove unjust social structures like kings and governments,
Rousseau argued, and human goodness would flourish. Rousseau's ideas directly inspired both the
French and American revolutions, fought in the name of ideas like liberty, freedom and equality.
If Le Guin's anarchist utopia is ambiguous, it's because real world anarchies are too.
The anarchy that followed the French Revolution cost thousands of lives to the guillotine,
and the American Revolution produced not an anarchist utopia, but modern capitalism.
But the idealist philosophy of the dispossessed goes even deeper than politics.
Le Guin takes on one of the most fundamental arguments in philosophy, the concept of time itself.
The refugee scientist Chevek is developing a new theory of time that will lead to the
creation of the Ansible, Le Guin's famous invention for faster-than-light communication.
But Chevek's theory arises not from a breakthrough discovery of quantum physics,
but from an insight into the shape of time. Time has two aspects. There is the arrow,
the running river, without which there is no change, no progress, or direction, or creation.
And there is the circle, or the cycle, without which there is chaos, a meaningless progression
of instance, a world without clocks, or seasons, or promises. A silicae Le Guin, the dispossessed.
Le Guin's concept of time is mirrored in the great-granddaddy of idealist philosophy, Emmanuel
Kant. Kant famously, and rather controversially classified, both time and space, not as things
happening out there in the universe, but as categories of human perception. Space and time
are the framework within which the mind is constrained to construct its experience of reality.
Kant argued that humans could only ever perceive reality through the structures of our mind.
The reality beyond these structures, the thing itself, could never be known. Space,
time, objects, movement, relationship were not the true phenomena of reality, but the phenomena
of the mind. Later idealist philosophers would ask the question, how are the structures of the
mind formed? The answer that would revolutionize modern philosophy was language, that the structures
of the mind and the reality we experience are shaped by the language we speak. Languages,
as a power that can shape reality, are central to Ursula Le Guin's philosophy, not least her
Earthsea novels. And to understand Earthsea, we need to look beyond the conscious mind
and towards its dark shadow, the unconscious. The unconscious mind is co-extensive with the
universe, Ursula Le Guin, the dispossessed. Earthsea is a fantasy land, an archipelago of
islands where magic rules. Magic is practiced through language. In Earthsea, all things have
a common name and a true name. Knowing the true name of a thing gives you power over that thing.
Whether it's a cloud, a flower, a goat, or a dragon, the true name reveals the thing itself.
The Wizard of Earthsea, 1968, reaches its inciting incident when the ambitious young
wizard Ged accidentally succeeds in severing himself from his shadow. With this act, Ged,
who had been a wild and powerful young wizard, becomes meek and uncertain. To regain his power,
Ged will have to reintegrate his shadow. Ged had neither lost nor won, but naming the
shadow of his death with his own name had made himself whole. A man who, knowing his whole,
true self, cannot be used or possessed by any power other than himself. Ursula Le Guin, The
Wizard of Earthsea. The shadow and the self are central images from the psychological theories
of Carl Jung. In her essay, Myth and Archetype in Science Fiction, Ursula Le Guin talks about
the place of Jungian symbolism in her storytelling. It's clear that the Earthsea novels are expressions
of Carl Jung's theory of archetypes. The tombs of Atuan continues the Jungian fantasy.
Tenar is a young woman who has been raised as the high priestess of an arcane faith.
She is lost within a labyrinth and guided to freedom by Ged, who appears as the masculine ideal
of Tenar's dreams. The archetype, the Carl Jung, labelled the anima. Carl Jung was a
swish psychiatrist who began his career in the realist-materialist paradigm. With his mentor,
Sigmund Freud, Jung was an early explorer of the concept of the unconscious, the idea that most of
our thinking happens outside the awareness of the conscious mind. Study of the unconscious
threw Carl Jung into the deep waters of idealist philosophy. Jung was ambivalent towards
philosophers like Kant and Hegel. But the deeper he swam into the unconscious,
the more unescapable idealism became. Jung left his scientific research and spent
years in inner contemplation, producing his famous illuminated manuscript,
the Liebernovus. Jung claims to have discovered structures of the unconscious mind, structures
he called the archetypes of self, persona, shadow, anima, and more. Ursula Le Guin adopts
these ideas of the unconscious and the Jungian archetypes to rewrite the narrative of fantasy.
The war between the Dark Lord and the Good King of Tolkien's Middle Earth are replaced in Le Guin's
Earthsea with the quest for self-knowledge. The evil we must defeat is not out there in the world,
Le Guin tells her young readers, but inside our own selves. The farthest shore, the third volume
of Earthsea, introduces the darkest and most complex of the Jungian archetypes, the Demiurge,
or false god. Magic has left the land of Earthsea and Ged, now an older man, must sail
out to find the cause. The farthest shore is a haunting and challenging story. Ged is now the
mentor to a young prince, Aaron, who will complete his own hero's journey through the story.
As they travel, Aaron is tormented by doubts about his mentor, sometimes Ged appears as the
archmage of Roke, at other times he's just an ignorant old man. Earthsea has fallen under the
magic of a dark wizard named Cobb. Cobb needs no armies of orcs, he is not conquering the world.
The power of magic is to rewrite reality itself. The conflict between Ged and Cobb is about who
controls reality. The Demiurge is an archetype that dates back to at least early Christianity.
The Gnostic sect believes the Old Testament Jehovah to be a false god named Yal Leboeth.
Carl Jung described his own encounter with the Demiurge, named Abraxas in his Libanovus.
In the farthest shore, Ursula Le Guin has encountered her own Demiurge. The ending of the story is
opaque and symbolically dense. It reads as though the author is struggling to navigate
the inner world she is exploring. Le Guin is a young writer in her 40s who is unpacking these
ideas as she goes. After the furthest shore and those six years of intense creativity,
Ursula Le Guin's writing slows substantially. She doesn't return to Earthsea for 18 years,
perhaps she is searching for answers to the questions raised by her philosophical questing
and her encounter with the Demiurge and the dangers that encounter revealed.
To begin to pull all these ideas together and before we dive into a final Le Guin story,
let's think more about philosophy. Philosophy means love of wisdom. From the Greek philo,
a form of love and Sophia, the goddess of wisdom. Only a fool would think that a philosophy without
women would be wise. But as is widely noted, the canon of philosophy features almost no women.
The storyteller and philosopher Clarissa Pincola Estes suggests that women have instead
passed their wisdom down through stories. It's increasingly recognised that many of the greatest
mythic stories passed down through history were perhaps offered by women. The anonymous J
author of the Genesis Myths was a Babylonian princess. God may not be a woman, but his script
writer was. Analysis of the Odyssey suggests Homer was a woman writer satirising the toxic
masculinity of the classical era. European folklore is stamped with the names of Hans Christian Anderson
and the Brothers Grimm, but these were stories told by women for women, about women.
Add in those women writers who created science fiction, their names scrubbed from its history,
and we have a pattern forming. To give Ursula Le Guin her full due, we must think of her in
that tradition of great women storytellers, philosopher poets who express their wisdom
in stories. That Le Guin stories are not only great science fiction, but mythic stories that
express a deep and powerful philosophy. And as she explored the power of this philosophy,
Ursula Le Guin also considered the dangers that came with such power in the archetypal figure
of the demiurge. Ursula Le Guin titled The Lave of Heaven after a mistranslation
from the Taoist poet Zhuangzi. That mistake aside, the title poetically captures the essence
of Le Guin's philosophy. George Orr, a likely nod to Orwell in 1984, is an ordinary man who
believes his dreams can change reality. But instead of using this power for himself, Orr is exploited
by the psychologist William Harbour, a man of stronger will. Harbour's various attempts to
shape Orr's dreams to make a better world all result in a worse world, but make Harbour ever
more powerful. The strength of Harbour's will allows him to control reality until Orr fights back.
The conflict between Orr and Harbour in The Lave of Heaven mirrors the conflict between Ged
and Cobb in The Father's Shore. Both are encounters with the demiurge archetype,
conflicts over the most fundamental question. If human willpower can reshape reality,
the question becomes who's will? It's kind of like old fairy tales where somebody's trying to do good
and is always sort of defeated by reality. You've got to go with the flow. You can't push the river,
as the Buddhists say. And Poor Harbour in the book is a do-gooder, but George is sort of in tune
with things. Go with the flow man. Go with the flow man. And of course, this is a Taoist book.
The Taoism was pretty conscious. What do you mean by that? A lot of people say,
what does she mean, a Taoist book? Well, in the Buddhist sense, the Taoism says you do things
by not doing things. And all attempt to do and to set things right and to make things happen
eventually backfires. The Lave of Heaven is Le Guin's Taoist novel. Le Guin had a lifelong
interest in the Eastern philosophy of Taoism. In contrast to the Confucian tradition that
emphasises rigid social order, Taoism is a philosophy of change and flexibility that
emphasises the need to flow with the forces that surround us. The Lave of Heaven, with its failed
experiments in reshaping human social order, is Le Guin's most complex thought experiment on the
question of, is a better world possible? And what if the New World turns out not to be better
at all? It's a book that asks hard questions about the utopian vision of a better world.
Utopianism was given a new energy by the philosophy of George Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel.
Hegel built on the idealism of Kant to argue that the structures of the human mind didn't just
shape our perception of reality, but the history and development of human civilisation. History,
Hegel argued, had a shape. And by understanding that shape, we could progress to the end of history,
where a better world was possible. Hegel's ideas influenced both liberal and socialist
utopian dreams. But the most famous thinker to be inspired by the Hegelian model of history was
Karl Marx, father of Marxism. Marx's ideas for a communist utopia at the end of history were
so convincing to people who dreamed of a better world that communist revolutions
spread worldwide in the 20th century. But time and again, these utopian revolutions served
not the workers, but a new intellectual elite who had the intelligence and strength of will
to lead such revolutions. Like George Orr, the workers of the world discovered they did have
the power to make a better world, but that power was taken from them by men of stronger will,
like William Haber, or Joseph Stalin, or Mao Zedong, or Adolf Hitler, or Fidel Castro,
the Cuban dictator who famously declared a better world is possible.
All fiction is metaphor. Science fiction is metaphor.
The lave of heaven is metaphor for the human will to power. No lone man can reshape reality with his
dreams, but the human collective has it within our power to create almost any reality we can dream
or imagine. But whose dreams? Whose imagination will be made real? Whose will has the power?
Science fiction in its golden age, under John W. Campbell, created metaphors for the philosophy
of realism and naturalism. It expressed the dreams of rational men who believed the world
could be made better with science and technology. But as those dreams became real, as the space
rockets, nuclear weapons, and artificial intelligence of sci-fi dreams came into reality,
they failed to make a better world. Technology is just a tool in the hands of humans driven by human
ideas. Ursula Le Guin was not alone in challenging Campbellian science fiction. Other authors of
the new wave, like Samuel Delaney and J. G. Ballard, joined her. But Le Guin's stories have
proved the most long-lasting because they are the most powerful metaphors for the philosophy
that challenges materialism, the philosophy of idealism. To make a better world, Le Guin argues,
we need to understand the inner world of imagination and dreams that shape the outer world.
In this essay, we've looked at some of the philosophical ideas that Ursula Le Guin's stories
echo. I'm not suggesting Ursula Le Guin set out to create metaphors for Kantian idealism,
but rather that Le Guin, as a great thinker and creator, was discovering for herself new ways
of conceptualizing reality. And by expressing those ideas in stories, Le Guin became one of,
or perhaps the greatest, philosopher poets of our time. If we were to give Ursula Le Guin's
philosophy a name, we might call it radical idealism. Radical in three senses. Firstly,
that it models a pure idealism, in which language, archetypes of the unconscious,
and the conceptual structures of mind create our reality. Secondly, that there is a power
in knowing the true names at the root of reality, and that fundamental concepts like gender and
identity can be controlled and changed. Thirdly, that control over the root concepts of reality
should serve radical social change. The danger of Ursula Le Guin's philosophy of radical idealism
is twofold. Firstly, there is the haunting question of whose reality. As we awaken to the
potential of the human collective will to reshape our reality in the image of our dreams and stories,
we need to beware that our dreams do not become nightmares, and that the story we tell is a good
one. There is the constant threat that those who win the fight for reality are those with the strongest
will, but the least wisdom, the demi urges of our time. The second danger is less obvious,
but more immediate. If we accept the idealist model that the mind and imagination can,
in some sense, shape reality, then it's clear that we aren't the first to realise this.
Those with real power have always known it. Caesars and kings, politicians and popes,
billionaires and media magnates all know that part of their power rests on controlling the
narrative, shaping the ideas and concepts that in turn shape our reality. The power of Ursula
Le Guin's storytelling is that it reaches into our dreams and imagination. It weaves meaning
from symbol, metaphor and archetype. It crafts mythic stories to awaken all who read it to the
deep truths of our reality, truths that are no longer hidden and secret, but are now being learned
by all. Ursula Le Guin's philosophy is dangerous because it awakens the once powerless
to the potential of our own power. Those who cling to unjust power over others might find that
very dangerous indeed. Listen to the long-form audio commentary on the dangerous philosophy of
Ursula Le Guin by subscribing to the science fiction podcast at DamianGWalter.com forward slash
podcast and next watch The Ocean of Story.
