Human Anatomy, Lecture 2. Bones and Muscles of the Arms and Hands.
In this lecture, I'd like to describe you the bones and muscles of the upper extremity or the
arm. Now, when you take a look at the scheme of the arm, one of the things you might want to conclude
right off the bat is that the most important bones of the arm might be the humorous or the
radius of the ulna, these long limb bones that are quite visible in any skeleton that you take
a look at. And if you were to put these bones at the top of the list, I think you'd probably be
making a mistake because there's another very important bone of the upper extremity that you
might ordinarily ignore or forget about. And the bone we're talking about is the shoulder blade,
or the scapula. The scapula is a kind of a curved plate-like bone that has an overall
triangular shape. And you can feel the scapula just by passing your arm over your shoulder and
reaching around to find a kind of a large ridge on the back. This ridge corresponds to a spine
that extends along the width of the scapula from the medial side to the lateral side. And this spine
is an important part of the scapula because it's an area where muscles are attached to the scapula.
This spine of the scapula ends in a large knob called the acromion. And this knob-shaped portion
of the scapula forms the upper roof of the shoulder. The scapula is very important for the
upper extremity because without the scapula the arm would fall off of the body. The arm is articulated
onto the scapula and the scapula holds the arm onto the axial skeleton. One of the curious things
about the scapula is that it's not really articulated on the axial skeleton very tightly.
The main reason why the scapula is attached to the body at all is that it's floating in a big
mass of muscles that are inserted into the scapula and connect the scapula with other bones.
So the scapula is kind of a freely floating bone that's very very flexible and that allows for a
great deal of flexibility the upper extremity. This unusual anatomy of the scapula makes it
possible for us to move our arms upwards and downwards and backwards and forwards with a
great deal of flexibility and that makes it very helpful for us to manipulate things in
three-dimensional space. When you look at the scapula carefully you'll notice that it ends in
its lateral surface with a cup-shaped depression on its lateral surface. And this depression is
called the glenoid fossa. And the fossa basically represents the socket of a ball and socket joint.
The ball-shaped portion of the ball and socket joint is formed by a massive bone called the
head of the humerus. And the humerus is the bone that represents the bone of the upper arm. The
humerus is articulating with the scapula once again in a very flexible way and that allows a wide range
of movement of the humerus. And the remainder of the humerus, the upper arm bone, represents kind of
a cylindrical mass of bone that's a very strong structure. Now if you move your thumb and forefinger
along your upper arm from your shoulder down to your elbow you'll notice that when you get to your
elbow you're running to two sharp points on the medial and lateral surfaces of your upper arm.
These sharp points are called the medial and lateral epicondyles of the humerus. And their
points that represent the terminal part of the humerus. And on the epicondyles we have
attachments formed by ligaments. And these ligaments connect the upper bone of the arm,
the humerus, to the lower bones of the arm which are called the radius and ulna.
If you also run your hands along the back of your arm you'll run down until you get to your elbow
and at the dorsal surface of the elbow you'll run into a large movable point.
So when you flex your arm this point which is the point of your elbow will move. This is a process
that comes out of the ulnar bone and this process is called the alecranon. The reason that we have
this big bony process at the elbow is to increase the surface area of the bones of the lower arm
and that allows muscles to insert into this area to help move the lower arm. Also when you move
your fingers along the medial epicondyle of your elbow you'll notice that just lateral to this
medial point there's a little groove that's located between the alecranon of the ulna
and the medial epicondyle. This groove contains a number of structures and one of the structures
that passes along in this groove is a large nerve called the ulnar nerve. Now normally you don't
notice the ulnar nerve but you happen to bang your elbow against something by accident so that you
hit your funny bone you'll experience a big burst of pain that radiates down your anterior part of
your arm and ends in your little finger. This tingling and burning sensation comes about because
when you hit your elbow you're compressing the ulnar nerve that extends down into your forearm
and that causes a momentary abnormality and sensation. Now the distal end of the humerus is
designed to articulate with the two lower bones of the forearm the radius and the ulna. Which is
which? Well if you hold out your hand as if you're going to shake hands with somebody and your thumb
is pointing upwards to the sky the bone on the lower surface of your arm is the ulna and you
can feel it with the tips of your other fingers. I always remember that the ulna is the bone beneath
the arm it's the underneath bones so the ulna and under start with the same word. The ulna
articulates with the humerus in a little process that forms a hinge joint and this process of the
humerus is called the trochlea. It's kind of a spool-shaped process on the end of the humerus
and the ulna kind of wraps around this trochlea and forms a hinge joint so it's a very strong
stable joint which is very helpful because you don't want to have your lower arm dislocated very easily.
The other bone of the forearm is called the radius and it gets its name because of its
peculiar movements. You can feel the radius once again by reaching outward to shake hands with
somebody and the bone that's on the top of your arm is the radius. The radius functions as a
rotator of the hand and therefore it has the ability to rotate along its own axis. If you stick your
hand out to shake hands with somebody and put your thumb pointing straight up into the sky
you notice that the upper bone of the forearm is called the radius and the radius is called
the radius because it has the ability to rotate along its own axis. That allows you to put your
hand palm downwards and your hand palm upwards and the reason that's doing it is the radius is
rotating and crossing over the ulna. The radius has the ability to rotate like this because it
articulates with the humerus at a ball shaped spherical process called the capitulum and when
the radius is moved it basically rotates along its axis. So this allows you to pronate and
supinate your hand to flip it from palm side down to palm side up and all this is of course
accomplished by muscles called pronators and supinators that move the radius in this direction.
Well when you move your thumb and forefinger down along your forearm eventually you're going to get
to the end of the radius and the ulna and the radius and the ulna are marked by little bumps on
either side of your wrist and these bumps are called the styloid processes and these styloid
processes once again are points of attachment for strong ligaments that hold the hand onto the
forearm. Well this basically describes what the structure of the forearm is. Now let's go on and
describe some of the structures in the hand. The hand is a complicated organ. Each hand contains
27 different bones. Fortunately for you we're not going to name them all but many of these bones
are rather similar in structure and they can get general terms that describe them. For example the
bones of the fingers are called phalanges and the thumb has only two phalangeal bones whereas
each one of the other fingers have three phalangeal bones of course. We can see the difference quite
easily if you hold your hand up in front of you. Now there's one curious feature of the hand that's
not quite obvious unless you actually try to look at it carefully. If you hold your hand palm up in
front of you and if you happen to be a man you notice that the first finger is is is relatively
short then the next finger is is a long finger and the third finger is a little shorter is a
little longer than the first finger. So in men the ring finger tends to be a little longer than the
index finger. If you happen to be a woman however that's often reversed. The index finger tends to
be a little longer than the third finger. So there's a subtle sexual dimorphism or sex difference
in the anatomy of the hand. I don't know if this has any particular functional significance. It's
a very minor thing but it seems to be true not only in human beings but also in other animals
like rats. So this sexual dimorphism in hand anatomy probably is related to the exposure of
the skeleton to sex hormones during development which tends to promote slight differences in
bony anatomy. There are other sex differences in the skeleton which are much more obvious. For
example the pelvic bones of the female tend to be flatter and broader than the pelvic bones of the
male. This sexual dimorphism in bone anatomy is not restricted to the hand but it's also present
in some other bones of the body. For example the pelvic bones of males tend to be different
in appearance from females. Female pelvis has bones that are flatter and broader than males
and this of course has a very important functional consequence. This allows for a greater capacity
of the pelvic cavity and allows for childbirth in females. This is not only found in humans but
it's also present in lots of other different creatures. Even rats have slight sex differences
in pelvic anatomy and generally the skeleton of a male can be distinguished from the skeleton of a
female primarily because the skeleton of a male tends to have rougher surfaces on many of the
bones. The skull of a female tends to be more smooth and less rough than that of a male and this
reflects the fact that the muscles of males tend to be stronger and when they insert onto the
bones they tend to pull up ridges and marks and depressions in the in the skeleton that are more
prominent in males and in females. So a good anatomist can distinguish what the sex of the
skeleton is in most cases in most regions of the body. Well as we continue to look at the hand
we'll find that there are other bones in the hand as well. The palm of the hand is composed of five
strong bones called metacarpal bones and these basically are similar to the smaller phalangeal
bones of the finger. The metacarpal bones in turn are connected to a mass of irregular bones
there are eight of these bones called carpal bones and each one of these carpal bones is basically
forming the wrist. They have very complex anatomies and they are connected to a number of ligaments
and tendons that form the compartment within the the hand itself. One final bone of the
appendicular skeleton that we have to talk about is the collar bone or the clavicle.
The collar bone or clavicle is connected on one side to the scapula and on the other side
it's connected to the medial bone or the sternum the breast bone. The function of the clavicle is
actually to function as more or less a strut. It inserts upon the breast bone and then pushes the
scapula away from the rib cage. This allows us the possibility of squaring our shoulders and throw
back our shoulders. This has a fairly important function in regulating the anatomy of the shoulder
and because of this important function the clavicle is the most frequently fractured bone in the body
and you can understand why it might fracture quite easily for example you're playing football
and if you run across the field and grab onto a flying football and then dive on the ground
the impact of that shoulder hitting the ground is basically transmitted right through the clavicle
and that's why it's most frequently fractured. It's somewhat difficult to repair a fractured
clavicle as a matter of fact. It's not so hard to repair a broken bone in the lower arm you just
put a cast around the arm and tell somebody be careful for six to eight weeks but the clavicle
can't be easily immobilized so sometimes you have to actually put someone's arm on a sling or
actually have to take a screw and screw the fractured parts of the clavicle together so
they're immobilized and they'll heal up better. Well that completes our description of the
bones of the upper extremity now let's talk a little bit about some of the muscles. There are
many many muscles that are present in the upper extremity and I'm not once again going to describe
all of them but let's describe some of the basic ones that and so I think you can get some understanding
of all these muscles function. The first muscle we need to describe are the ones that hold the
scapula in place. The first superficial muscle that holds the scapula in place is a triangular
shaped muscle called the trapezius. This trapezius muscle begins at the base of the neck and then
fans out to cover over the spine of the scapula and then eventually attaches to the thoracic
vertebrae. This is a large flattened sheet of muscle and sometimes this muscle can become
cramped if we sleep on our sides incorrectly if you have an inappropriate pillow or you don't move
properly when you're sleeping. A cramped trapezius muscle can give you the sensation of a crick in
your neck so this is the the culprit that can hurt us sometimes when we wake up after sleeping
incorrectly. The scapula is also anchored to the vertebral column on its medial border by two
muscles called the rhomboid muscles that hold it in place. Now when we move down onto the remainder
of the arm we'll run into a number of other muscles that are important for you to remember.
If you raise your arm away from your shoulder and then cover your shoulder with your arm you're
going to feel a large muscle contract that covers the shoulder and this muscle is called a deltoid
muscle. This extends from the acromion process of the scapula and inserts onto the humerus and
helps us abduct the arm. There are other deep muscles that surround the shoulder that are also
very important for the stability of the joint. These muscles form a group called the rotator cuff
muscles and they're important. You'll see sometimes if you read the sports page that
an athlete may have difficulty because he's torn his rotator cuff. What do you mean by rotator cuff?
What is this all about? Well it turns out the rotator cuff is composed of muscles that originate
from the scapula. Two of these muscles arise from the dorsal surface of the scapula. One of
them arises from the area of the scapula above the spine of the scapula and this is called the
supraspinatus which makes sense. The other muscle arises from the surface of the scapula that's
below the spine. How many want to guess what that muscle might be called? It's called the infraspinatus
and both of these muscles insert upon the humerus and hold it in place. There's another muscle that
arises from the scapula which comes from the ventral surface or the underside of the scapula
and appropriately this is called the subscapularis and finally there's one final muscle called the
terezminer that arises from the lateral border of the scapula. All of these muscles insert upon
the humerus and they hold it in place. If you injure parts of these rotator cuff this can result
in a dislocated shoulder and usually the humerus will pop out of the glenoid fossa in an anterior
direction because the tendons and muscles are weaker in that direction and this is a very painful
experience and fortunately can be corrected by pulling on the humerus and pushing it back into
the glenoid fossa. So that's what happens when you dislocate your shoulder which we none of us want
to do. There are other muscles lower down on the arm that also move it and one of these is probably
a muscle that we're all very familiar with. This is called the biceps brachii and when you flex your
arm and put your hand over your anterior part of your arm you can feel a big bulge in that
which is the biceps. What do the name of the biceps come from? The name of the biceps originates
from the Latin word for head. The Latin word for head is called cephalon and the biceps is divided
into two portions. One head of the biceps originates on one bone on the upper shoulder and the other
part of the other head of the biceps originates from the lower part of the glenoid fossa.
So this muscle is considered to have two heads and that's why it's called biceps.
These two heads of the biceps merge to form a common tendon and this tendon is easily felt at the
inner surface of the elbow when you flex your arm. This tendon of the biceps inserts upon the radius
and helps us flex and rotate the radius. Now if you look at the back of the arm there's another
major muscle that covers over the back and this muscle has three heads or three origins so it's
called the triceps brachii and the fleshy part of the back of your arm is occupied mainly by this
triceps muscle. It's an extensor of the arm and it's particularly well exercised when you do a
push-up so if you want to make your triceps bigger go ahead and do lots of push-ups and your
triceps will get stronger and larger. Now these are not the only muscles that operate the arm and
help us move it. There are two large muscles that originate from the chest wall. The anterior chest
wall gives rise to muscles called the prectorallis muscles or pecs and these originate from the sternum
and the anterior ribs and they insert upon the humerus as well. There's a pectorallis major
and a pectorallis minor. There's a corresponding muscle on the back of the thoracic part of the
body that's called the latissimus dorsi. That originates from the vertebral column and dorsal
parts of the ribs and also inserts upon the humerus. Now actually you can feel these muscles
quite easily. All you have to do is sit in a chair and put your arm on an arm rest and then try to
pull your arm closer to your body or adduct it. That'll activate the pectorallis major on the anterior
part of your chest wall and also will activate the latissimus dorsi on the back of your chest wall.
So these are the muscles that you can see very activated and strained when an athlete for example
tries to do gymnastics. If you see an athlete that's performing an iron cross on the rings,
you know that those two muscles, the pectorallis, if you see an athlete trying to perform an
athletic maneuver called the iron cross on the rings, you'll be able to distinguish the pectorallis
major and the latissimus dorsi actively pulling on the humerus to support the body. Now when you
get into the forearm there's many many muscles that are important for the flexure of the hand and
fingers. The ventral surface of the forearm contains eight different muscles and I'm not going to go
ahead and try to name all of them but if you but it's easy for you to palpate or feel some of the
tendons of these muscles and the easy way to do it is to sit at a table and then try to move your
hand upwards against the lower surface of the table and when you do that you can feel at the
wrist lots and lots of tendons that are crossing your wrist. One of the largest and strongest
tendon is the tendon of a muscle called the flexor carpi radialis and if you put your hand palm
upwards underneath the table and and and palpate your the radius you can see this really strong
tendon there. Just lateral to this tendon you can feel pulsations if you put your fingers
on your wrist and these pulsations are due to the beating of the radial artery as it's
transmitted blood down into the hand. All of the muscles that have to flex the fingers have to pass
into the compartment of the hand to insert onto either the metacarpal bones or the phalangeal
bones and to do this they have to pass over the carpal bones and they also have to pass underneath
a band of of tendons called the flexor retinaculum. The flexor retinaculum is a massive tissue that
covers over the surface of the wrist and it keeps the ligaments and tendons in good order and keeps
them pointed in the right direction. One of the problems with this flexor retinaculum is that
they basically represent the roof of a tunnel and this tunnel is called the carpal tunnel
which emits the muscles that pass into the hand. If you do lots of repetitive movements for example
if you sit at a keyboard all day long and type repetitively this may cause swelling of the
muscles that are passing through this carpal tunnel and if they swell they can push upon nerves
and the nerves that enter the hand can be compromised in this situation.
This situation is called the carpal tunnel syndrome in which you can experience pain and
numbness in some of the portions of the hand. When you look at the palm of the hand itself
it's possible to distinguish 19 different muscles that originate on the metacarpal bones
and they insert by tendons into the fingers. Now curiously you'd think that the fingers would
have lots of muscles that would enable them to flex and move around and of course our fingers are
very mobile but in fact the fingers themselves possess no muscles at all and they're operated on
only by tendons that originate from muscles that are located in the forearm and in the hand.
I remember kind of an amusing story about this anatomical truth.
I read a publication in which an archaeologist was examining the hand of a mummy
and they wanted to extract some muscle tissue from the hand of this mummy to determine the
genetics of where this mummy might have come from. So an archaeologist asked an anatomist well what
muscle would you suggest that I cut off of the finger and the anatomist just stared at the
archaeologist and said don't you know that there are no muscles in the fingers you have to cut muscles
from further on up in the hand otherwise you'd just be cutting into tendons that won't have the
tissue that you want. Now when you look at the dorsal surface of the forearm there are also lots
of muscles that permit the extension of the fingers and extension of the forearm. There are 10 muscles
in all and I'm once again not going to identify all of them but once again you can identify some
of these muscles because they're particularly prominent. If you fan your hand and place it
palm down on the surface of a table you can identify some of these tendons by lifting your
fingers. So there's tendons that at the base of your fingers called the extensor digitorum
superficialis that extends your fingers and straightens them out. Also if you look at your thumb
there's a tendon of a muscle that's particularly prominent so if you look at your hand on a table
and try to move your thumb upwards you'll see a very prominent tendon that extends from the
base of your thumb. This is the tendon of a muscle called the extensor pollicis longus.
Pollicis is a Latin word for thumb so extensor of the thumb is called the extensor pollicis
longus and it forms a very strong tendon that you can see at the base of your thumb. If you move
more immediately you'll find another tendon that also moves this thumb and between them
there's a triangular shaped space or a hollow at the base of your thumb. This space has a very
peculiar anatomical name it's called the anatomical snuff box and this term originates from the fact
that in the 17th and 18th centuries people would have the habit of putting a little pinch of snuff
on the base of your thumb and then moving this part and snuffing the snuff right up into your
nostrils. It was the equivalent of smoking cigarettes today. Well this particular portion of the base
of the thumb was named by an anatomist quite a long time ago so this old-fashioned name that
describes these tendons of the base of the thumb still persists and so we're still talking about
a snuff box even in the 21st century. This ends lecture two. If you borrowed this course from
a public library and would like your own copy of the course guide for future reference call
recorded books at 1-800-636-3399 and we'll send you a free copy. A shipping charge will apply.
