Human Anatomy, Lecture 3.
Bones and Muscles of the Legs and Feet.
The subject of this lecture is going
to be the structure and function of the lower extremity.
In other words, we'll be talking about the leg and the foot.
Now, when you get an overview of the leg and the foot,
you'll notice that the anatomy of this lower limb
is really rather similar to the anatomy of the upper limb.
Like the upper limb, the lower limb
has a large bone that's the proximal part of the upper
lower limb, and that's the thigh bone or the femur.
And then below the thigh bone or femur,
we have the other smaller bones, the tibia and the fibula,
which are really rather similar in lots of ways
to the radius and the ulna.
And if you look at the structure of the hand
and compare it with the structure of the foot,
there are lots of similarities there, too.
So generally, the structure of the lower limb
is rather similar to the structure of the upper limb.
There's a major obvious difference between them, of course,
and the major difference is that when you flex the upper limb,
you move your hand toward your face,
but when you flex the lower limb,
you move your foot away from your face,
so they bend in opposite directions.
Now, why is it the upper and lower limb
are so similar in lots of ways,
but also have such differences in their function?
Well, the reason for this dates back
to the earlier part of the development of the lower limbs
during embryogenesis.
The lower limbs and the upper limbs
both form as so-called limb buds,
flaps of tissue that extend outwards
from the sides of the embryo.
And let's describe how these structures form.
And to do that, imagine that you're considering
yourself an embryo and that you're lying in the bed
with your back on the bed
and your limbs are growing out from the sides of your body.
The upper limb bud grows out
and it gradually develops a bend in it
so that the elbow is positioned in the upper limb
at the lateral surface of the upper limb.
The same thing happens for the lower limb.
When the lower limb grows, it develops a bend in it,
the knee, and the knee is positioned
at the lateral surface of the lower limb as well.
So initially, when these two limbs are flexed,
the upper limbs are positioned
so that the hands are brought together as if you're clapping.
Similarly, the lower limbs,
when they're flexed in the embryo,
the two feet are brought close together
as if you're clapping your feet.
This is because the joints are located
on the lateral surfaces of both limbs.
This situation does not persist indefinitely, however.
As the limbs develop further,
they start to undergo mild rotations.
So for example, your upper limb, your right arm,
develops a rotation, it's a 90 degrees clockwise rotation
and that moves your elbow from the lateral surface of your limb
to the back surface of your limb.
Eventually, when the limb is fully developed,
the upper limb will have the elbow at the back
and that means when you flex it,
you move your hand up toward your face.
However, the lower limbs develop a rotation
that's completely opposite.
Your right lower limb, your right leg,
will develop a counterclockwise rotation
and 90 degrees in extent,
and that will move your knee
from the lateral part of your leg
to the front part of your leg.
That means that eventually when the leg is fully developed,
when you flex it, you'll move your foot away from your face
rather than toward it.
So the reason that these two limbs differ in their function
relates to this rotation that they experienced
during embryogenesis.
Now, why does all these things happen?
Once again, we don't know all the cues and signals
that cause these structures to form in the human body,
but embryologists are determining some of them
and one of them is quite interesting.
One of the signal that is found in the lower limb
is a protein called PITX1 or PITX1.
This protein binds to the DNA in cells
that are forming the lower limb
and it instructs the cells of the lower limb
to start forming the structures that we see
in the adult organism.
This PITX is necessary for the function of the lower limb
and if you artificially introduce it
into the upper limb of a developing mouse,
the upper limb starts to adopt
a very strange type of structure.
Instead of an elbow joint,
in this genetically modified upper limb,
you'll find that it'll start to develop a knee joint
and some of the other structures of the upper limb
will begin to look more like those of the lower limb.
So gradually, modern embryologists are determining
the cues and signals that create all these adult structures
and we're gradually getting to learn
what causes them to form.
Well, when you look at the main bones of the leg,
you have to start first with the femur.
The femur is the thigh bone.
In lots of ways, it has very many similarities
to these structures that are found in the humerus.
The femur also has a ball-shaped upper portion
that inserts into the ball and socket joint in the pelvis
and the ball-shaped portion of the femur
is called the head of the femur.
It articulates into a depression in the pelvis,
which is called the acetabulum.
The femoral head is a very strong round spherical structure
and it connects to the rest of the femur
by a short cylindrical mass of bone,
which is called the neck of the femur.
Now, this neck of the femur
has to bear the weight of the entire body
and not infrequently, it can become fractured.
And this is what happens when you break your hip,
which is a very serious and distressing situation.
Also, the femoral head can develop problems as we get older.
The femoral head is covered over
with a slippery layer of cartilage
and the cartilage helps lubricate the joint
and helps the femur slide into the ball and socket joint
without any friction.
As people get older, they tend to develop arthritis
in their joints, which tends to strip away
this slippery layer of cartilage on the head of the femur.
And as this gets worse and worse,
the bones of the hip start to grind against each other,
which can be extremely painful.
So a number of conditions, for example,
a fracture of the head of the femur
or arthritis of the head of the femur
can cause this hip joint to become inoperative.
Well, many years ago, there wasn't very much
that anyone could do about this.
A person was fundamentally crippled for life,
if this happened.
But nowadays, surgeons have the ability
to do something called a total hip replacement.
And when we're talking about a total hip replacement,
we're really talking about replacing the head
in the neck of the femur.
How is this done?
Well, if a person has a severely damaged joint
for their hip, they can be put on anesthesia
and the hip joint can be exposed by pulling apart
the muscles that cover over the hip joint.
And then the femoral head can be disarticulated
from the acetabulum.
And the next thing a surgeon will do
is he'll literally take a saw
and saw the head right off of the femur.
The reason this is possible is that there are no muscles
that directly insert into the neck and head of the femur.
So they're relatively bare bones.
And so it's not difficult for a surgeon to take a saw
and cut these portions off.
And then they can replace them by taking a titanium spike
and gently tapping it into the shaft of the femur.
This titanium spike will gradually become incorporated
into the bone of the femur.
And the top part of the spike will have a ball-shaped
structure, which is similar to the head of a normal femur.
Then a small plastic cup can be screwed onto the surface
of the acetabulum and the entire apparatus
can be replaced and articulated again.
And recent small incisions have allowed this procedure
to be done fairly rapidly with the recovery times
of a week or two weeks, perhaps.
So this procedure is called a total hip replacement.
And it's been very helpful in allowing people
with damage to their femur to recover their ability to walk.
And once again, the female pelvis is somewhat larger
and broader than the male pelvis
to facilitate the process of childbirth.
And that means that the two femurs on either side
are farther apart from each other than they are in males.
And in order to reach the midline,
they have to make a slightly greater angle.
So that means that women generally
are a little more knock-knead than men.
They have wider pelvises and the femurs
have to converge at a greater angle.
Well, the remainder of the femur is covered over
with a number of bumps and surfaces
that allow for the insertion and articulation of muscles.
Just below the neck of the femur are two large bumps
called the greater and lesser trochanters.
And these large bumps offer large bony surfaces
that muscles can insert upon.
And these muscles are there fundamentally to move the leg.
The remainder of the femur is basically
a strong bony cylinder.
And as the femur moves down toward the knee joint,
we can feel it end in two bony processes
called the medial and lateral condyles.
These form the ends of the femur
and they help articulate with the bones of the lower leg,
which are called the tibia anfibula.
Now we can't really feel the joint of the knee very well
because it's covered over with a little armor plating.
And the armor plating I'm talking about
is a flat bone called a kneecap or patella.
The kneecap is held in place by strong ligaments
and also by the tendons that muscles insert into.
And this offers us some protection
so that we don't damage the knee joint
when we kneel down on the ground, for example.
Also there are strong ligaments called collateral ligaments
that attach to the condyles of the femur
and anchor the femur onto the tibia anfibula.
Now it's very important that the knee joint
be relatively rigid.
It's kind of a hinge joint.
And if we're walking along,
we don't want that hinge joint to slip at all
because that would cause us to fall and damage ourselves.
So the knee joint is stabilized
by lots of accessory structures.
In addition to having collateral ligaments
on the medial and lateral surfaces of the knee,
we also have ligaments that cross within the knee joint itself
and attach the femur to the tibia anfibula.
These two ligaments are called
the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments.
And they derive their name from a Latin word for cross
because they cross each other within the joint cavity.
Occasionally you'll read in the newspaper
that someone's had an injury to his ACL.
That's a shorthand for the anterior cruciate ligament.
And if someone's running along in a football game
and does a sudden zigzagging movement,
this puts a lot of strain on the knee joint
and can cause some of these ligaments to tear.
And naturally the only way you can recover function
is that you have to have surgery
to repair the tears in these ligaments.
Now the knee joints have to bear
a lot and lots of stress and strain.
They have to support the entire weight of the body
and they have to react to changes in velocity
when we run and walk.
So they have to have cushions that protect the bones
of the knee from grinding against each other.
And the cushions that are present in the knee joint
are called the menisci.
These are basically pads of specialized types of cartilage
and they're called the medial and lateral menisci.
They prevent the femur from grinding
against the surface of the tibia.
Unfortunately these pads of cartilage
can also develop tears occasionally
when you have athletic movements.
So the result of that is that these torn pieces of cartilage
can sneak into the joint cavity itself
and rub on the bones.
The only real cure for this of course
is to make small incisions into the knee joint
and take tiny instruments and go and cut these portions
of the menisci away so they don't interfere
with the function of the joint.
One of the goals of modern medicine
is to try to find some ways to regrow cartilage
because once this cartilage has been torn
it generally will not regenerate or heal to any extent.
One of the hopes of orthopedic surgeons
is to develop lines of cells that can be grown in a dish.
For example, if you were to be able
to take some of the cartilage out of your knee joint
and then expand it by growing the cells in a dish
to provide more cartilage cells,
then those cartilage cells could be reintroduced
into joints and help build up the cartilage that was damaged.
Right now this is a part of experimental medicine
but is not generally available
and hopefully it might be available
to more people in the future.
Well, the bones of the lower leg
are called the tibia and fibula
and almost all of the weight that's transmitted
from the femur down to the lower part of the leg
is transmitted through the tibia.
The tibia is the weight-burning bone of the body
and of course it's familiarly called the shin bone
and it can conducts all the weight of the body
down into the foot.
The lateral bone of the leg
is not really a weight-bearing bone at all.
The fibula is a very thin and rather delicate bone
but it does have a function
because it serves as a site of origin
for some of the muscles that move the foot.
Now if you move your hands alongside the lower leg
until you get down to the ankle,
you're gonna feel bumps at the very bottom of your ankle
that just above the lips of your shoes.
The bump on the medial surface of your ankle
is called the medial malleolus
and that's the bump that ends on the tibia.
Whereas the bump on the outside of the foot of the ankle
that you can feel just above your shoe
is called the lateral malleolus
and this basically represents
the terminal portions of the fibula.
So it's possible to feel upon your own leg
these two basic strong bones
that conduct weight down into the foot.
Now the structure of the foot itself
is rather similar to the hand
but the names of the bones are slightly different.
For example, the bones of the phalanges
are called the phalangeal bones once again
so the toe bones are called phalanges
and just like the hand,
the big toe only has two phalangeal bones
and the remaining toes have three
so that's a somewhat similarity
between the hands and the foot.
The other bones of the foot are called tarsal bones
and they're quite different in appearance
from the comparable carpal bones of the hands.
Two very large tarsal bones
transmit the weight of the body into the ground.
The tibula articulates with a very large
tarsal bone called the talus
and you can't really feel the talus very well
because it's covered over with lots of tendons
but it articulates with another bone
that is in contact with the ground
and this is the heel bone
and the Latin word for the heel bone is calcaneus.
A large part of the weight that has to be supported
by the foot is transmitted through the calcaneus.
The other bones, the other tarsal bones
are called metatarsal bones.
The remaining weight from the body
is transmitted to the five metatarsal bones
which have very big knobs or condyles on the bottom
and they make the pads of the foot just behind the toes.
Now one of the obvious features of the foot
is that it's not quite so flat as they hand.
It has a very strong arch at the bottom
and this springy arch gives the foot
a little bit of elasticity.
It allows us to bend the foot when we slam it
into the ground and then it'll bounce back again
to support the weight of the body.
This important arch of the foot
is important for the function of the foot
and if the arch collapses you develop a condition
called a fallen arch which is somewhat painful
and it impedes our ability to walk properly.
Maintenance of the arch of the foot
is a very important function
and it's partly carried out by muscles
that send tendons that cross underneath this arch
and we'll describe some of these muscles a little bit.
Well that's the skeletal structure of the lower limb.
When we talk about the lower limb
we also have to talk about the muscles.
Now there are lots and lots of muscles
that move the bones of the lower extremity.
There's approximately 36 different muscles in all
and once again I'm not gonna try to list all of them
in this particular lecture
but we should have some general understanding
of what the major muscles of the leg are.
Well let's start out this story by recalling the fact
that the back of the leg, the dorsal surface of the leg
is basically analogous to the front surface of the arm
or the ventral surface because you may remember
that the arms and legs rotated during embryogenesis.
Now if you look at the arm
you'll see that the ventral surface of the arm
is covered by a muscle called the biceps brachii, the biceps.
Well similarly there's another muscle in the leg
which covers the dorsal surface of the leg, the thigh
and this is called the biceps femoris.
The biceps once again has two heads.
It arises from two spots.
One is on the ischial bone of the pelvis
and the other is on the long area of the femur.
These two heads merge to form one long strong muscle
that inserts via a strong tendon under the fibula.
Now you can actually palpate this tendon.
If you're sitting on a chair,
bring your foot closer to your body.
You'll notice that a tendon on the lateral margin
of your knee springs into action
and this is the tendon of the biceps femoris.
Now if you look at the medial surface of your knee
and when you're doing the same kind of an action
you can feel another tendon on the bottom of your knee.
These actually are two tendons
and they belong to two major muscles that flex the knee.
These two medial muscles are called the semi-tendinosis
and semi-membranosus
and it's because the semi-tendinosis
is kind of a round shape in cross-section
and the semi-membranosus has a flat shape.
If you flex your leg and put pressure on it
you can feel these two tendons
on the medial surface of your leg.
All three of these muscles are strong flexors of the leg
and these strong flexors of the leg
are known by a familiar term
called the hamstring muscles
and of course one of the injurious things
that can happen during an accident
or during warfare in the olden times
is that if you had these muscles cut or damaged or torn
this procedure made it impossible for you to walk
because you could no longer flex your leg.
Well now let's turn our attention
to the ventral surface of the leg
and the lateral surface of the leg.
These have muscles that are somewhat analogous
to the muscles we found in the arm.
You may remember that in order to abduct your arm away
from the body, what muscle did you have to use?
You had to use a muscle called the deltoid muscle
that moved the arm away from the plane of your body.
Well there's a rather analogous muscle in the leg
and this muscle is called the gluteus maximus.
This is an abductor of the femur
and it arises from the pelvis
and it search onto the femur
so if you try to move your leg away
from the plane of your body
you're gonna have a contraction of the gluteus maximus.
Of course the gluteus maximus has another important function
for all of us that sit in chairs.
It covers over the bony margins of the pelvis
called the ischial tuberosities
and provides with a little padding upon which to sit.
Now when we turn our attention
to the ventral surface of the leg
you gotta remember that this is analogous
to the dorsal surface of the arm.
The dorsal surface of the arm is covered over
by a muscle called the triceps
which extends the arm.
Well there's a similar muscle that extends the leg
and instead of having three heads
this muscle on the front part of the leg
is called the quadriceps muscle
or quadriceps femoris
and this is because it's divisible
into four different subdivisions
or four heads instead of the three heads of the triceps.
There are individual names to this quadriceps muscle
but we don't really need to talk about it at the moment.
Fundamentally you can feel this quadriceps very easily.
All you have to do is put your leg out in front of you
and then extend it straight outward
so your foot's off the ground
and if you touch the front of your thigh
you'll feel all these heads of the quadriceps muscles
contracting quite actively.
Well these are not the only muscles of the leg
that move the leg around
but they're the ones we're gonna talk about today.
Now let's go ahead and talk about some of the other muscles
that are covering over the lower portion of your leg.
If you touch the fingertips of both of your hands
to your shin bone which is the tibia
you can feel that there's a very strong bony ridge
right in front of your leg
and that's the surface of the tibia
which is bare at this point.
But just lateral to it you can feel a major muscle
called the tibialis anterior
and you can feel this muscle contract very easily.
All you have to do is sit in a chair
and then flex your foot, move it upwards
and you can find that the tibialis anterior bulges
just lateral to the shin bone.
This muscle is a flexor of the foot
and it sends a tendon that curves around
the medial margin of the big toe.
Finally this tendon reaches around the bottom of the foot
and the tendon of the tibialis anterior
is inserted into a metatarsal bone.
Now you can feel another muscle
just lateral to the tibialis anterior
and this is called the fibularis longus.
Guess what bone this originates from?
Of course it originates from the fibula.
Now this muscle also extends down toward the foot
and it extends another tendon that curves
just posterior to this bony bump in your ankle
which is you may remember is called a lateral malleolus.
The fibularis longus muscle passes this tendon
behind the lateral malleolus
and this is kind of like a rope
passing beneath the wheel of a pulley.
So finally this tendon passes past the lateral malleolus
and goes down at the bottom of the foot
to once again insert into the lateral surface
of the first metatarsal.
Now when you look at these two tendons,
the tendons of the tibialis anterior
and the tendons of the fibularis longus
kind of meet more or less like a stirrup
at the bottom of the foot.
So this is almost like you're standing on a saddle
and that these two muscles are forming
a supportive massive tissue
that helps support the bottom of the foot.
This is one of the major structures
that helps keep the arch of the foot intact
and helps our foot resist the massive amount of force
we put on it every day when we walk.
There's another structure at the bottom of the foot
that's also of some interest.
This is a massive, tough connective tissue
on the bottom of the foot.
This massive connective tissue is called a plantar fascia.
Fascia is a Latin word for a covering of dense tissue
and this plantar fascia tugs upon the lateral
and medial margins of the foot
by inserting into the metatarsal bones.
Now occasionally this plantar fascia
can become inflamed or damaged
and this condition is called plantar fasciitis.
And I've experienced this
and I'm sure a lot of you have experienced it as well.
It's a painful burning sensation
on the bottom of your foot
and it can be so difficult to bear
that it's almost impossible to put weight on your foot.
Usually this condition of plantar fasciitis
will resolve after a period of some weeks
and one of the common treatments for it
is just to stand up against the wall
and put pressure on your foot to extend the muscles
and stretch them a little bit.
But the only real long-term cure for this
is to stay off your foot for a while until it gets better.
Well, we've gone through a lot of the muscles
of the leg and lower leg
and we still have a few more left to go.
One of the major muscles of the lower leg or calf
is called a very prominent on the back of your leg.
This superficial muscle of the calf
is called the gastrocnemius
and you can feel it,
it makes up the large bulge of the back of your leg
and just beneath it is a flatter muscle
which is also a flexor of the leg
called the soleus muscle.
Both of these muscles insert into the heel bone
or calcaneus and the way they do this
is that they form a large, large tendon
called the Achilles tendon.
This was named after the hero of Greek myths
who was only vulnerable in a certain spot in his body.
In other words, he was only vulnerable at his heel
and so this name is derived from this Greek myth.
The Achilles tendon is the largest
and strongest tendon in the body
and it looks almost like a whitish looking steel cable
when you expose it during surgery.
However, even this very strong tendon
has the possibility of being damaged.
For example, people that play basketball all the time
are constantly running back up and down the court
to try to get a basket
and this violent change in velocity of the body
can sometimes tear even this very strong Achilles tendon
and cause a ruptured Achilles tendon.
Once this tendon snaps, immediately immobilizes the leg.
You can't walk on the leg with a torn Achilles tendon
and it's a relatively difficult thing to treat
because the muscles of the lower leg,
the gastric nemius and soleus muscles
are some of the strongest muscles in the body
so you really have to pull on the Achilles tendon
with a lot of strength to approximate
the cut ends of this tendon.
In order to do this, you pull on it very strongly
and under anesthetic, the two ends of the Achilles tendon
have to be sewn back together with very strong sutures
and in order for these tendons to heal,
the leg will frequently have to be put in a cast
to immobilize the muscles
and prevent the muscles from pulling on this ruptured tendon.
Now, one of the curious things that's true
about the lower limbs and also the upper limbs
is that the right and left limbs
are almost exactly the same size.
As a matter of fact, you can determine this scientifically
by looking at the bones from large numbers of skeletons
and if you do a survey of the skeletons of the body,
you can find that the tibias of the right and left sides
are almost exactly the same size.
They're maybe two or three millimeters
in difference and length.
Now, that's something we all take for granted.
We take for granted this property of bilateral symmetry.
We just take for granted that our legs
are gonna be exactly the same size
on the right and left side.
And if this weren't true,
of course, we wouldn't be able to walk properly.
We'd have a rolling or uneven gait.
Now, this is something that is actually, in my mind,
a kind of a remarkable thing.
The reason that I find this to be remarkable
is that the tibia of the adult human body
has to grow rather substantially throughout life.
The tibia of a baby is almost a third to a half as long
as the tibia will be eventually
when the baby grows up to be an adult.
It seems remarkable to me that the right tibia grows
exactly to be almost exactly the same length
as the left tibia.
What causes this perfect symmetry?
Well, in short, we really don't know.
A lot of anatomists just take it for granted,
but there must be some sort of a mechanism
that causes the bones of the right and left sides
of the body to grow exactly equally.
In very few and rare conditions,
this perfect bilateral symmetry can be violated.
For example, I read of a paper
in which a person had a genetic disease
that was restricted to one side of the body.
It was called Marfan syndrome.
And in this condition, the elastic fibers
that surround the bones don't exert
the proper tension on the bones.
And this allowed the bones to grow one inch longer
on one side of the body than the other.
Also, there's a very rare and poorly understood syndrome
called the Proteus syndrome.
And in this disease, individual limbs
or individual fingers or joints can go much larger
on one side of body than the other.
So there must be some sort of a regulatory mechanism
that constantly governs how long the bones of the body grow.
And in rare circumstances, this can become violated
and cause asymmetry in the body.
So there's still a lot left to be understood
in regard to the establishment of these bilateral symmetry.
When you look at the structure of the foot in more detail,
many of the muscles are similar to the muscles
that we have in the hand.
The foot itself has 19 intrinsic muscles
that help us move the toes.
And once again, there are no muscles in the toes at all.
All the muscles that move and flex and extend the toes
are actually found within the foot itself
or within the lower limb.
Many of the muscles that move the toes have long tendons.
And you can feel some of these tendons
if you palpate the front of your foot.
If you go ahead and palpate your foot at your ankle,
you can feel tendons, for example,
the flexor-digitum superficialis,
some of the tendons that move your big toe.
They're all rather prominent on the front of your foot.
Unless you want to be a specialist
in the anatomy of the lower limb,
we don't really have to go into the names
of all of these muscles right now.
Now, in these two lectures, we've described lots of the structures
that are present in the upper and lower extremity.
We've described the muscles of the upper and lower extremity,
and we've described the bones and some of the tendons.
But one thing we've ignored are structures
that are equally important.
We also have to talk about blood vessels
that provide blood to all these areas.
And we also have to talk about the nerves
that innervate the muscles and allow them to stimuli
that make them move.
So these will be the subjects of lectures
that are coming up in this series.
One of the things that's important about the foot
is that the circulation of the foot is particularly critical
for our ability to walk and stand up.
And there's a disorder in which the circulation of the foot
is greatly impaired.
In diabetes mellitus, some of the blood vessels
that enter the foot don't maintain a healthy condition.
And since these blood vessels are so far away from the heart,
it's difficult for these blood vessels
to maintain adequate circulation in the foot.
So one of the serious consequences of diabetes mellitus
is that the impaired circulation can lead to development
of serious ulcers and sores on the bottom of the foot.
And these can lead to the loss of actual toes
in a condition called gangrene.
So the additional structures that supply blood
and nerve supply to the foot are equally as important
as the muscles and bones.
And we'll be talking about these aspects
of these functional components in later lectures.
This ends lecture three.
