Human anatomy, lecture four, the cardiovascular system.
The subject of this lecture is going to be
the cardiovascular system, which forms the propulsive organ
that pushes blood throughout all the blood vessels
in the body.
In some ways, you can regard the heart
as basically just a very complicated
and very muscater version of a very large blood vessel.
It contracts in a number of places
to push blood through the system,
but during embryogenesis, it starts out life
as a very much simpler structure.
And this actually kind of reflects
the evolutionary history of the heart.
In many lower animals, like amphyoxys
or animals like sharks, the heart isn't very much more
than just a simple tube that is constricted
in a variety of places, in which rhythmically it contracts
to force blood through the system.
But as evolution proceeded,
the heart became much more complicated
and it acquired the anatomy that we see in human beings.
Let's describe a little bit about the anatomy
and embryology of the heart.
Early in embryogenesis, the heart begins
as basically two paired blood vessels
that lie alongside of each other.
The portion of the blood vessels that's closest
to the head or the cranial portion
receives blood that's coming from all the rest of the body.
The blood is forced into these two paired blood vessels
which constrict and then blood exits the blood vessels
at the more caudal part of the heart,
which is a part of the heart pointed toward the tail.
The heart is basically forming two paired pumps
that are simultaneously forcing blood
through the cardiovascular system.
Now, as the embryogenesis proceeds,
the heart becomes more complicated in its appearance.
First of all, each one of these two paired pumps
is further subdivided into atria and ventricles.
The atria of the two sides of the heart
receive the blood and fill up with blood
and then they contract to force blood into the ventricles.
And the ventricles do most of the work.
They're stronger and larger cavities
and the muscles of the ventricles are the ones
that force the blood from the heart
into the remainder of the cardiovascular system.
Now, as these two paired pumps continue to develop,
they each one of them develops an S-shaped curve.
And as the heart becomes more and more curved,
this causes the blood vessels to approach each other
so that the blood vessels going to the heart
gradually become closer and closer
to the blood vessels that leave the heart.
And as a consequence of this bending of the heart
during embryogenesis,
eventually the heart will more or less resemble a tomato
that's hanging from a vine.
The blood vessels enter and leave one part of the heart
and then the remainder of the heart
is kind of suspended in space
in a sac called a pericardial sac.
This sac is filled with pericardial fluid,
which coats the surface of the heart and lubricates it.
And therefore, since the heart is hanging from one spot
in the pericardial sac,
it has the freedom to jump around and contract quite freely.
And therefore, the pumping movement of the heart
is not impeded by any connections
that would otherwise impair this process.
The reason that the heart has to form two parallel pumps
is that the two sides of the heart
receive blood from two different parts of the body.
The right side of the heart receives poorly oxygenated blood
that comes from the entire body
and collects the blood and sends it to the lungs
via pulmonary arteries.
Now by definition,
any blood vessel that's leaving the heart
is termed an artery,
whether it contains oxygenated blood or not.
The pulmonary arteries contain blood
that has levels of oxygen are quite low.
When the pulmonary arteries reach the lungs,
saturate the blood with oxygen
and the blood leaving the lungs via the pulmonary veins
contains lots and lots of oxygen.
This oxygenated blood then goes to the left side of the heart.
It's poured into the left atrium, which collects the blood.
And then the left atrium contracts
to deliver it to the left ventricle.
And the left ventricle pumps these oxygenated blood
via a very large blood vessel called the aorta
into the remaining portions of the body.
So basically the heart is composed of two pumps
that are operating side by side
in which pump blood simultaneously.
All blood vessels that leave the heart are called arteries
and all blood vessels that enter the heart are called veins.
Now the heart of course has a remarkable ability
to continuously contract throughout our life.
And it can't cease for even a couple of minutes
or else we die.
So we're dependent upon a continuous
arrhythmic beating of the heart for life.
The rate of the heartbeat tends to vary
depending upon how metabolically active the body is.
So for example, if you're looking at the heart of a codfish
that's swimming around in the cold ocean,
it doesn't have a very high metabolic rate
and doesn't require very much energy.
So the heart may only beat about 20 times a minute.
The human heart tends to beat around 70 times a minute
and the hearts of very small animals
that are even more metabolically active than ourselves
beat a lot faster.
The heart of a rat can beat 350 times a minute.
And I can't even imagine how the heart rate
of a hummingbird is something like that.
So animals that are very metabolically active
have to have a very energetic cardiovascular system.
One of the interesting aspects of this is that
you can kind of state poetically
that we all have about the same lifespan
in terms of heartbeats.
A rat may only live about two or three years
but it has many more heartbeats in those two or three years
than we do.
Whereas a turtle in the Galapagos Islands
may live to 150 years,
but its metabolic rate is much slower
and it experiences fewer heartbeats per year.
So we could say poetically that we all live
to the same number of heartbeats in our lives.
And that's roughly true,
though perhaps not precisely or scientifically true.
The muscles of the heart have an amazing ability
to contract all the time.
And so if you actually isolate heart muscle cells
and put them in a Petri dish,
and even if they're separated from each other,
you'll still notice that each heart muscle cell
has the ability to spontaneously contract all the time.
But in order for the heart to function
as an efficient pumping organ,
all these heart muscle cells have to be coordinated
so they basically contract more or less at the same time.
And that makes the pumping action
of the heart more efficient.
In order to regulate the beating action of the heart,
there's a specialized patch of tissue
that's located at the top of the right atrium.
This specialized piece of tissue
is called the sinoatrial node,
or the pacemaker of the heart.
In this particular portion of the heart,
there are specialized muscle cells,
and these muscle cells have the ability
to contract more rapidly
than all the other muscle cells in the heart.
And this contractile ability causes the heart muscles
to become synchronized.
As the sinoatrial node contracts,
it produces a surge of electricity.
And this surge of electrical charge
is transmitted through all the muscle cells of the atria.
And when it reaches the cells of the atria,
they all contract in unison.
That forces the blood from the atria into the ventricles.
Now, one of the things that this system might produce
is a real problem,
because if the electrical impulse was carried
from the atria to the ventricles all at the same time,
then all of the chambers of the heart
would all constrict it at once.
And that would cause stasis of the blood.
The ventricles would be fighting the atria.
So you want to have a delay
in the contraction of the ventricles.
You want the ventricles to contract after the atria,
after the atria have delivered the blood into the ventricles.
So how does the heart arrange for this particular situation?
The reason that the heart
doesn't contract all at the same time
is that the atria are isolated electrically
from the ventricles.
And what do I mean by that?
It turns out there's a massive fibrous tissue
that passes through the muscles of the heart.
And this fibrous tissue composes a structure
called the fibrous cardiac skeleton.
A mass of this fibrous tissue forms a sheet
that's interposed between the atria and the ventricles.
And this fibrous tissue is not like muscle
because it does not conduct electricity.
So the electrical impulse that travels
from the sinus atrial node stops dead at this wall
between the atria and the ventricles.
And that prevents the ventricles from contracting
when the atria are contracting.
However, that poses another problem.
If the atria are isolated from the ventricles electrically,
then how can you get the ventricles to contract
when you need them to?
There's another solution that the heart has provided
to solve this problem.
It turns out there's another specialized patch of tissue
that's present at the junction
between the atria and the ventricles.
And this specialized patch of tissue
is called the atrial ventricular node.
This patch of tissue allows for the conduction
of an electrical impulse from the atria to the ventricles.
But it doesn't allow for this patches
to occur very rapidly.
Cells in the atrial ventricular node
pick up the electrical impulse from the atria
and then slow it down.
They delay it.
And then after this impulse has been delayed,
the electrical impulse is conducted down to the ventricles
by a specialized pathway.
And this specialized pathway is called
the atrial ventricular bundle,
or sometimes known as a bundle of hiss.
These are specialized muscle cells
that conduct the electrical impulse
down to the bottom of the ventricles.
And when the impulse reaches the ventricles,
then they are free to contract.
So that means that when the heart functions,
the atria contract first,
the impulse is delayed at the AV node,
and then is conducted by the bundle of hiss
down to the ventricles, which then contract.
Now, when the ventricles contract,
the blood has a potential going in all directions.
Why doesn't it go right back to the atria?
The reason that that doesn't happen
is that there are valves that are located
between the atria and the ventricles.
And the valves are one-way conduits.
They allow the blood to pass from the atria
into the ventricles, but they don't allow
the backflow of blood.
And you can hear the closing and opening of the valve
quite clearly when you listen to the beating heart
with a stethoscope.
Some of the sounds that you hear in the stethoscope
reflect the slapping together of the sheets of tissue
that form the leaves of these valves.
Well, since the beating of the heart
is associated with changes in electrical flow,
the heartbeat can also be monitored
by monitoring the patterns of electrical discharge
that are carried across the chest.
The heartbeat can be monitored by using a procedure
called an electrocardiogram, or EKG.
EKG stands for the words electrocardiogram in German,
and it's a convention that's been preserved
ever since it was originated in Germany.
In order to measure the electrical impulses
during the beating of a heart, you can simply
paste a series of fine electrode wires to the chest,
and they're commonly pasted to the shoulders,
to a line that diagonally progresses from the top
of the heart to the bottom of the heart on the chest,
and sometimes additional electrode leads
can be attached to the feet.
Well, if these are sensitive enough electrodes,
they could detect the changes of electricity
that are transmitted through the chest,
and these changes of electricity will reflect
the movement and conduction of the impulse
in the heart muscle itself.
When you go to a cardiologist
and have your heart examined for health,
the cardiologist will frequently hook up these leads
to a oscilloscope, or also to a moving strip of paper
with pens that move up and down in response to electricity,
and when these pens respond
to these electrical conduction patterns,
they produce a series of wiggles or waves
on a piece of paper, and each one of these wiggles
or waves tells the cardiologist information
about what the heart's doing.
One of these traces of an electrocardiogram
is actually quite easy to understand
if you just look at these individual waves.
The initial wave in electrocardiogram
is a small bump called the P wave,
and this P wave signifies that the atria
have started to contract.
Slightly after the P wave, there's a larger wiggle
called the QRS complex, and the QRS complex
reflects the fact that the ventricles have contracted,
and it's pretty obvious how these initiatives
were arrived at, isn't it?
They're just in alphabetical order,
so it's no mystery as to where these terms came from.
Finally, after the ventricles have contracted,
another electrical disturbance signals
that they've recovered from contracting
and resumed a normal electrical charge.
This final wiggle in electrocardiogram
is called the T wave.
So if you ever happen to have your electrocardiogram taken,
you can go up to the doctor and say,
well, here's my P wave, here's my QRS complex,
and here's my T wave, and these are simple terms,
but they'll tell the doctor, you know,
a little bit about what's going on with your heart.
Why bother to collect all this information
about the electrical impulses of the heart?
They're actually quite valuable pieces of information
because they tell the physician
what's going on with your heart.
By measuring the interval between one QRS complex
and another, they can tell you the rate at which
your heart beats.
Also, you can look at abnormalities in these wiggles
in your electrocardiogram to see what might be going wrong
with your heart.
For example, if you have a P wave that appears
that signals your atria have contracted,
then you should have a QRS wave and then a T wave,
but occasionally you can have two successive P waves
that do not have QRS waves between them.
That signifies that occasionally in your heartbeat
the ventricles are failing to contract,
and therefore they don't leave a QRS wave behind
on the electrocardiogram.
This is actually a diagnostic of a fairly common condition,
which is called atrial ventricular block.
In atrial ventricular block, the electrical impulses
are not transmitted properly through the bundle of hiss,
and that means the ventricles are not
contracting at every heartbeat.
If they don't contract, they don't
push the blood through your body properly,
and this can be a potentially serious heart problem.
If you have lots of AV blocks and if the ventricles aren't
functioning properly, nowadays there's a fairly simple
solution, and the solution is the provision
of something called an artificial pacemaker.
In an artificial pacemaker, we have the implantation
of a battery beneath the skin that's connected to a wire,
and the wire is inserted into the ventricles,
and this artificial pacemaker shocks the ventricles
70 times a minute and forces them to contract.
So this makes the beating of the heart more regular
and prevents some of the symptoms that we would
otherwise see in heart disease.
If you look at the structure of the heart,
you'll notice that the ventricles in particular
are very, very thick.
There's lots and lots of muscle in the ventricles,
and this reflects the fact that the ventricles
have to push lots of blood into the systemic circulation,
and they have to resist the blood pressure
that's present in the arteries of the body,
so that the ventricles have lots and lots
of thick cardiac muscle.
Now this cardiac muscle is so thick
that the muscles themselves can't rely upon diffusion
of oxygen from the interior of the heart.
These layers of muscle are just too thick,
and if they relied on simple diffusion of oxygen,
they'd all starve to death and your heart would die.
So the solution to that is that small arterial branches
branch right off the aorta and supply the intrinsic muscle
of the heart with blood themselves.
These branches that come off the aorta
are called coronary arteries,
and the reason they're called coronary arteries
is that name comes from the Latin word for crown.
They kind of form a ring-shaped crown
upon the top of the heart,
and they branch and branch and deliver the oxygenated blood
into the heart muscle itself.
Now occasionally, these coronary arteries develop problems.
They can become obstructed
in a situation called atherosclerosis,
and when the coronary arteries become too obstructed,
they stop the flow of blood to the heart,
and then you know what happens then.
Then you have a heart attack.
In a heart attack, the muscle that's normally supplied
by a coronary artery starts to die,
and this causes a sensation of intense pain.
Now usually this intense pain of a heart attack
is not felt very often in the heart itself,
but it's instead felt in the shoulder,
even in the neck or the jaw.
This sensation of pain during a heart attack
is called referred pain,
and why in the world would you expect to have heart pain
that's sensed in the shoulder or the jaw,
instead of in the heart itself?
Well the reason for that is that the heart originates
during embryogenesis way up in the neck,
and then it descends down into thoracic cavity
as the embryo develops further.
As it descends, the sensory nerves that innervate the heart
are pulled down from the neck region
and the shoulder region down into the heart itself,
but when they experience pain,
this pain may actually be sensed as belonging to the area
where the heart originated so that you can feel pain
in your jaw or your shoulder.
Sometimes people will experience pain in their jaw
and they go to the dentist thinking they have
something wrong with their teeth,
but in fact a competent dentist will take their pulse
and say, wait a minute, there's nothing wrong with your teeth,
you're having a heart attack, go to a cardiologist.
Well what can you do if you have a situation
in which your heart muscle is being damaged
by a blockade of the coronary arteries?
There is a number of procedures
that have been developed to fight this problem.
One of the initial procedures took advantage of the fact
that you can thread a catheter through the systemic circulation
and put the catheter right up into the coronary arteries
of the heart through the aorta.
This procedure was called balloon angioplasty
and what was done was that this catheter was inserted
into the coronary arteries while you're basically awake
and lying on a table and then by looking at the position
of the catheter using a fluoroscope,
the terminal portion of the catheter could be inflated
with a little balloon and that would force open
the coronary arteries and allow them to be more dilated
to deliver more blood to the heart.
Now this tended to work fairly well in a short-term fashion
but the problem with this balloon angioplasty approach
is that eventually the coronaries would become constricted again
and there you'd be back right at the beginning of your problem
and you still have coronary artery problems.
So a more current procedure that involves
fixing the coronary arteries is an insertion
of small metal tubes called stents.
These stents are once again positioned at the tip of a catheter
that's threaded through the cardiovascular system
up into the heart and they're permanently placed
inside a coronary artery to hold the coronary arteries open.
These are much more effective
than the balloon angioplasty method.
Even more recently, these metal stents or tubes
have been coated with drugs that prevent allergic
or immune reactions in the blood vessels.
These anti-inflammatory drugs prevent the regrowth
or restinosis of the coronary arteries
and they're much more effective than the conventional stents.
So cardiologists have gradually over the years
acquired a lot of different procedures
that help fight the processes that provoke a heart attack
and they're one of the reasons why our lifespan
has increased over the years.
The original procedure that was devised
to correct coronary artery problems
was called a coronary bypass surgery
and in this type of procedure,
a person would be placed on an operating table
put under anesthetic and the heart would be exposed
and the block coronary arteries
would actually be cut away from the heart
and replaced by portions of veins
that were recovered from veins in the legs.
This is a much more rigorous procedure
than putting stents in the heart.
The person has to be under a general anesthetic.
The heart has to be stopped
and it's a very difficult procedure
and nowadays it's not done nearly as much as it used to be
because we have the availability of these stents
that can correct some of these coronary artery problems.
Well, that describes the fundamental function of the heart.
What about the rest of the cardiovascular system?
The cardiovascular system is composed of arteries and veins
and let's talk about the arteries first.
The major artery that leaves the heart
is a very big artery called the aorta.
It's about as thick as your thumb
and it comes out of the upper part of the heart
and curves around to descend into the rest of the body
through the thoracic and abdominal cavities.
The descending aorta contains many, many branches
that supply many, many structures.
The first branches of the aorta
are the brachiosophallic artery
and this branch of the aorta supplies blood
to the right arm and head.
The brachiosophallic artery on the right side of the body
branches into the right common carotid artery
and the right subclavian artery.
The common carotid artery is the big pulsing artery
that you can find in the neck
and it divides into the external and internal carotids
that supply blood to the brain and face, respectively.
Subclavian artery is an arterial branch
that passes underneath the clavicle
and that's why it's called the subclavian artery.
It enters the right arm
and turns into something called the brachial artery
and gives off a number of very important branches.
The branches of these subclavian artery in the right arm
are mainly the radial and ulnar arteries.
And also another branch of the subclavian artery
is the vertebral artery.
You may remember hearing
about the vertebral artery previously.
The vertebral artery ascends up in the neck
and it's surrounded by the bony processes
of the cervical vertebrae
so it's very carefully protected.
This protection is important
because it delivers large amounts of blood up to the brain
and we don't want to have that blood supply to the brain
interrupted at any particular time.
As we proceed along the curve of the aorta
that's coming out of the heart,
the next branches we'll run into
are the left common carotid artery
which supplies blood to the left side of the head
and the left subclavian artery.
And of course the left subclavian artery branches once again
into the brachial ulnar and radial arteries.
Now one of the interesting features of the arteries
that are coming directly off the aorta
is that they're very stretchy.
The reason that they're stretchy
is that they're wrapped around by molecules
of a structure called elastin.
And this is actually very helpful
because we don't want to have these arteries
functioning as rigid hollow tubes.
And let's imagine why that would be a disadvantage to us.
Let's say that the arteries coming off the aorta
were made up of steel
so they're little steel plumbing tubes
just like the plumbing we have in the house.
Well, when the ventricles of the heart contract
they send a big bolus of blood into the arteries
under a great deal of pressure.
And if this arteries were rigid structures
the bolus of blood would pass down the arteries
and then when the heart contracted
the blood would be sucked back up again into the heart.
So the blood would be rushing back and forth
through the arteries which would be a very bad idea
for the tissues that depend upon this arterial blood.
To avoid this kind of a problem
of great variability in blood pressure
these arteries that spring directly off the aorta
are surrounded by elastin.
So when they receive a big pulse of blood
their walls expand in response to the increased blood pressure.
Then as the blood pressure falls, as the heart relaxes
the walls of these blood vessels spring closed again
and that means that they keep pushing the blood forward
into the cardiovascular system.
So the elasticity of these particularly large arteries
is important for the maintenance of a steady blood pressure
and helps the pressure of the blood remain stable
as the blood is forced down into the rest of the body.
As we follow the blood that's passing from the aorta
we can see that it gets down into the arms.
And the two main branches in the forearm
of course are the ulnar and the radial arteries.
Now the ulnar artery is more or less covered over
by lots of tendons so it's not very easily palpated.
But you can palpate the radial artery quite clearly
as it passes down into the hand.
You can feel it pulsating
and it's just medial to the flexor carpi radialis tendon.
And this is a spot where a physician
will push on to feel your pulse
to get an idea of how frequently your heart is beating.
The radial and ulnar arteries form little arches in the hand
that can supply blood to the fingers.
Well as we turn our attention back to the aorta
we'll see that it curves around the heart
and descends into the thorax and abdomen.
And as it's doing this it gives off lots of branches
that supply the thoracic wall, the spleen,
the stomach and all the internal organs.
As the aorta descends in the thoracic cavity
it gives off little branches that are carried along each rib
and these are called segmental arteries
that supply the thoracic wall.
Finally when the aorta reaches down into the pelvis
it splits into two very large arteries.
These are called common iliac arteries
and they're named because they're passing alongside
the iliac bones of the pelvis.
The major branch of the iliac artery that enters the leg
is called the femoral artery.
The femoral artery leaves the abdominal cavity
and enters the leg and as it does so
it's fairly superficial.
It's not buried very deeply beneath the leg muscles.
And because of that it's fairly easily palpated
and identified by a doctor.
And this is a good thing because the femoral artery
can easily be identified and this allows a catheter
to be introduced into this large femoral artery
and that's the reason that we can correct
the coronary arteries of the heart.
A catheter, a plastic tube can be threaded up
through femoral artery into the common iliac artery
all the way up the descending aorta
and finally it'll get to the base of the aorta
as the aorta leaves the heart.
Then you can inject a dye from this special catheter
and find out exactly where the coronary arteries are.
So this will help a physician determine
whether or not a coronary artery is blocked or constricted
and once again will help the passage of a catheter
into a coronary artery to correct the problem.
So the major artery of the leg is the femoral artery.
It proceeds down the surface of the femur
and supplies all the muscles
and eventually will develop into,
divide into smaller arteries like the tibial artery
that supplies the leg.
There's a particular artery on the surface of the leg
called the anterior tibial artery
and as it reaches the ankle it changes its name
and is called the dorsalis pedis artery
or the dorsal artery of the foot.
Pedis is the Latin word for foot, P-E-D-I-S.
This is another useful artery
because this artery can be used by physicians.
If you had a leg injury and the physician is concerned
that there's not enough blood getting to the foot,
it's very appropriate and useful to palpate
the dorsalis pedis artery on the front of the foot
and if it's pulsing nicely,
then the physician will be reassured
that there's still plenty of blood supply down to the foot
and you don't have to worry about it.
Another way that a physician can examine
whether or not the blood supply to the foot is adequate
is they can take your sock off and then pinch your toes
and if the toes initially turn pale
and then refill with blood, they turn pink,
this means that the capillaries
are being supplied with blood adequately.
On the other hand, if you pinch your toes
and they remain white for a significant part of the time,
that's a bad sign.
One more thing about the cardiovascular system
that we need to talk about
and that's the capillaries and veins.
There are something like 100 billion capillaries in the body.
They're the tiniest divisions of the cardiovascular system
and they represent a total surface area
of about 100 square meters.
All these capillaries supply oxygenated blood to the tissues.
The blood from the capillaries is connected
into vanuos and veins
and most of the veins in the body have names
that are corresponding to their accompanying arteries.
There's a few veins that have special names.
For example, the jugular veins that drain the head
are parallel to the carotid arteries.
Also, the two main veins of the body
have their own unique names.
The superior vena cava and the inferior vena cava
conduct blood from the top and bottom of the body,
respectively, and they feed the blood back into the atria.
The right atrium collects this blood
and sends it to the lungs via pulmonary arteries.
And after this is done, the circulation starts all over again
and we're back to the beginning of the story.
One final thing to mention about the cardiovascular system
is that the cardiovascular system
has to have a great change in function
as we pass from the stage of the embryo
to the normal infant.
Normally, during the embryogenic period of life,
there is no oxygen that enters the lungs.
And therefore, all the blood vessels
that are going through the lungs
don't pick up any oxygen.
Instead, the oxygen is carried from the mother
via the umbilical veins.
Well, after a baby is born,
all of a sudden there's no oxygen coming in
from the placenta
and the baby has to start to breathe on its own
and collect oxygen via the lungs.
In order to do that, the lungs have to inflate
and when they do that, they draw lots of blood
from the right side of the heart into the lungs
and that pulmonary circulation is greatly expanded.
At the same time, another functional change
have to happen in the heart.
During the embryonic period of life,
there's a hole that connects the right atrium
with the left atrium.
And this hole is called the fremen ovale.
The reason that this is present
is because in the absence of oxygen in the lungs,
the blood from the right and left sides of the body
has to be mixed so that there's an adequate amount
of oxygen carried to the body.
But afterwards, the two sides of the heart
have to be completely separate.
So when a baby is born,
this fremen ovale is slammed shut by a flap of tissue
that collapses onto the fremen ovale
and seals it off like a swinging door.
Occasionally, this process does not occur completely
and therefore you may have a so-called patent fremen ovale
or hole in the heart that has to be surgically corrected.
Nevertheless, this whole process represents
how adaptable the cardiovascular system is
and how it can respond to the functional changes
that are necessary that occur during birth.
Well, this concludes this lecture
on the cardiovascular system,
but in succeeding lectures,
we have to talk about other systems,
for example, the lymphatic system
that also have to circulate blood,
circulate fluid throughout the body.
So there are more aspects of fluid movement in the body
than we've covered so far
and we'll talk about those in succeeding lectures.
This ends lecture four.
Remember to visit this course's webpage at www.modernscholar.com
where you'll find additional information
about the lectures you just heard.
