Human Anatomy, Lecture 5, Lymphatic Vessels and Organs of the Immune System.
In this lecture, I'm going to be discussing the components of the lymphatic system, or the immune system.
And there are a number of organs of the immune system scattered around the body,
and most of these organs contain specialized cells called lymphocytes.
Lymphocytes are small, round, dark-staining cells that originate from the bone marrow
and which migrate into the organs of the lymphatic system, or lymphoid system.
The main function of these lymphocytes is to attack foreign materials that somehow gain
access to the body. So the immune system is designed to destroy viruses or bacteria or
small parasites that could potentially cause infections and damage to the body.
There's a number of different organs that constitute the lymphoid system,
and I'd like to start out this lecture by talking about lymphatic vessels.
Lymphatic vessels are extremely thin-walled tubular structures that are present pretty
much throughout all of the body. Unlike the cardiovascular system, the fluid within
lymphatic vessels does not actually circulate. Instead, the fluid in lymphatic vessels originates
as pools of fluid that accumulate in the connective tissues of the body.
Where does this fluid come from? Well, it turns out that the capillaries of the body,
which are engaged in exchanging blood and nutrients with cells of the body,
are very efficient at doing their job, but one of the problems with the capillaries is that
they're very leaky. So lots of fluid is continuously oozing out of the ends of capillaries and is not
getting back to the heart via the veins. Now, if this fluid were to continue to accumulate
in peripheral organs like the limbs or other parts of the body, these organs would become
extremely swollen with this fluid, and that's a situation called edema. So in order to avoid
this problem, the lymphatic system has to recover the fluid that's leaking out of the capillaries.
And the way that this happens is that the fluid passes into these lymphatic vessels through
very thin walls. There's flaps of cells that create openings in the lymphatic vessels,
and once the fluid is accumulated within the lymphatic vessels, it puts pressure on the
wall and these flaps swing shut. So the fluid in the lymphatic vessels can come in easily,
but can't leave easily. Of course, one of the problems with the lymphatic system
is that these thin-walled vessels really aren't very contractile. They're mildly contractile.
They can kind of squeeze the contents a little bit, but most of the fluid is kind of inert
within these capillaries, lymphatic capillaries. So how does the fluid get back to the heart?
Well, the solution to this is that this fluid, which is called lymph, is moved upwards from
the limbs by the constant pressure and activity of muscles that surround the lymphatic vessels.
So whenever you move the muscles of your legs or your arms, they're constantly squeezing on the
lymphatic vessels, and it's forcing the fluid up the lymphatics and eventually to penetrate into
veins and get back to the heart and into the circulation. Another question you might want
to ask is why is the direction of fluid movement in the lymphatic vessels in one direction only?
Well, the reason this happens is that each lymphatic vessel is equipped with flaps of tissue on the
inside called valves, very much like the valves in the heart or valves in veins. And these valves
are one-way directional gateways. They allow a lymph to go toward the heart, but they don't allow
lymph to leak backwards so that the lymph is indeed going in one direction all the time.
Well, these lymphatic vessels have a very important function to fulfill, but one of their
problems is that anything that's present circulating, that's floating around in the body,
can easily penetrate into the lymphatics. So if there's a collection of bacteria in an
infected toe, for example, these bacteria could easily get into the lymphatic vessels and potentially
they could be carried by lymphatics all throughout the body, which would cause serious problems.
We could get infections spreading everywhere. So what's the solution for this potential problem?
The solution for this problem is the presence of small structures called lymph nodes. Lymph nodes are
small p-shaped structures, they're about the size of a p, and they're regularly present
along the course of all the lymphatic vessels in the body. The lymph nodes are organs that function
as filters that constantly filter the lymph. And if bacteria or other nasty organisms are present
in the lymph, they're usually detected in lymph nodes and attacked and destroyed. So these lymph
nodes are a potentially very important organs for the body. Now, I've read about lymphatic
vessels and lymph nodes for many years, there are descriptions of them, there are all the textbooks,
but for some reason it was difficult for me to actually believe in them, and this is the reason
why. If you cut open a body, a dissected cadaver or open up an animal for surgery and look for
lymphatic vessels, you're going to look all day long and you won't see anything because they're
extremely delicate structures and very thin walled. So even though textbooks told me that they
existed, it was kind of hard for me to believe in them in any real sense. But one day my whole
belief system changed. One day I was having to do an experiment involving an anesthetized rat,
and the rat was anesthetized so I could remove a small amount of muscle from its lower leg to
examine it under the microscope. And as I was going about preparing the rat and shaving the hair off
its leg so I could make a little incision, one of my friends in my department said, well you know
there's a real easy way to demonstrate the presence of lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes and here's
how you do it. All you have to do is to take a drop of india ink that you use in a pen, take a
tiny little syringe and squirt a drop of this india ink into the foot pad of a rat. When you do
this the india ink particles which are basically a suspension of little tiny soot or carbon particles
are carried up into lymphatic vessels and they wind up in lymph nodes. So I said well okay I guess
I'll believe you let me give this a little try. So I put a little drop of fluid in a rat's foot
and after about two minutes I was astounded to see tiny little gray rivers appearing underneath the
skin of the rat. They were filling up with the carbon particles and eventually they terminated
in a lymph node just behind the knee which is called a popliteal lymph node. The lymph node
appeared as a suddenly cold black little structure and this proved to me that lymphatic vessels
actually do exist. So lymphatic vessels are quite an important though occasionally disregarded portions
of the body. Well what are the functions of lymph nodes? Lymph nodes as I said contain masses and
masses of lymphocytes and the lymphocytes come from two different places. Some of the lymphocytes
originate in bone marrow and they're called B lymphocytes which stands for bone marrow. The other
lymphocytes originate in bone marrow but before they get to the rest of the body they take an exit
and get into another lymphoid organ called the thymus gland. The thymus gland is a site where
some specific kinds of lymphocytes mature and differentiate and so they they spend a certain
amount of time in the thymus they multiply there and then eventually they leave the thymus and
circulate throughout the body. So this means that the lymphocytes of the immune system come in two
varieties B cells and T cells. Both of these types of lymphocytes wander around in the lymphatic
vessels and eventually come to rest in a lymph node. Now what happens when these B cells reach a
lymph node? When you look under the microscope at the structure of a lymph node you see there's
millions and millions of cells that accumulate under a thin capsule of connective tissue and
many of these lymph nodes will form rounded structures called lymphatic nodules or lymphoid
follicles. What is the origin of these lymphoid nodules? When a lymphocyte enters a lymph node
and happens to encounter some foreign substance that's wrong that might hurt the body the lymph
node has the potential to react to this foreign substance which is called an antigen and when
they bind this antigen they explode into activity they start multiplying like crazy and form huge
spherical masses of daughter cells. Each one of these daughter cells has the potential to attack
and destroy this foreign antigen. So these masses of daughter cells form lymphoid nodules and they
mainly are consisting of B type lymphocytes. The other T type lymphocytes are sequestered in specific
other portions of the lymph node. So the function of all of these cells is to constantly sample the
lymph flowing through the lymph node between one set of lymphoid vessels and another set of
lymphatic vessels and as they sample these fluid they filter out harmful things that could otherwise
damage the body. Well one of the medically relevant things about lymph nodes is that when you get an
infection or some sort of a foreign material inserted into your body the cells in the lymph
nodes will start multiplying and the lymph node as a whole becomes enlarged because these cells
exert pressure on the outside of the lymph nodes. This is a classical sign of an infection and if
you go to the doctor and complain of a sore throat or something wrong with your interior of your
oral cavity one of the first things a physician will do is that he'll palpate the the bottom of
your jaw and at the bottom of your jaw is a large collection of lymph nodes the cervical lymph nodes
and if they become enlarged by reactive lymphocytes they swell up. So when a physician is being
consulted for a sore throat and if he feels swollen so-called glands at the back of your
jaw he'll know that you have a bacterial infection and that you very likely should be
giving some sort of antibiotic. Well lymph nodes are not only located just beneath the
jaw but they tend to accumulate in specific parts of the body. They're prominent particularly in
your large joints so that you can find accumulation of lymph nodes behind the knee and these are
called popliteal nodes. You have nodes in the groin which are called inguinal nodes and you can
find a collection of nodes in the armpit and the armpit is called the axilla so these are called
axillary nodes. So a good anatomist by palpating various parts of the body can detect whether
you have infections in various parts of the body by seeing if some of these lymph nodes are swollen
and that's a good diagnostic feature to determine where the problems are. Well where does all this
lymphatic fluid eventually wind up? All of these network of fine lymphatic vessels eventually connect
with each other and they dump into two large major lymphatic vessels. The first lymphatic
vessel that's of major importance is something called the thoracic duct which is a very fine
lacy hollow structure that lies alongside the vertebral column and this thoracic duct collects
lymph from almost all of the left side of the body and eventually will dump the fluid into the
left subclavian vein. So this is one way in which lymph from the body can eventually find its way
back to a vein and return to the heart. There's another large lymphatic duct in the neck which
drains lymph from the right arm in the neck and it delivers this fluid into the right subclavian
vein. Now for most of us the function of these lymph nodes and lymph vessels is fairly subtle.
We won't be able to detect whether there's anything wrong with them most of the time because they
function routinely without any problems but there are a couple conditions in which the lymph vessels
are affected and these have very drastic effects on the health of the body. There's one kind of a
disease called elephantiasis. It's common in poorly developed parts of the world in which there's a
lot of poverty and in these areas there's a parasitic worm, a particular type of worm that
infests the lymphatics of the vessels. This situation is called filariasis after the name of
this worm. These worms prevent the flow of lymph along the lymphatic vessels and because of that
fluid starts to accumulate in various parts of the body and in some people this can cause
enormous swelling of the lower limbs. It's very difficult to treat this. You have to use antibiotics
to try to kill the worm and sometimes in this situation which is called lymphedema, the limbs
have to be wrapped with layers of cloth that exert pressure on the limbs and try to force some of
this excess fluid back into the cardiovascular system. So the lymphatic system functions well
in most people but if it starts to go wrong some of the symptoms are quite severe. There's another
disease which is very infamous for affecting the lymphatic system and this disease is a very serious
one called the black death or bubonic plague. This is caused by a particular type of bacteria,
prominent in medieval Europe and it caused rather major depopulation of the continent of Europe.
Bacteria accumulate in some particular lymph nodes and particularly the ones that were affected with
the axillary lymph nodes in the armpit and the inguinal lymph nodes in the groin and these became
swollen and dark and these symptoms were called buboes in medieval times. So the bubonic plague
was associated with this rather drastic response of the immune system to this bacteria and very
frequently became fatal. Another medical condition that involves the lymph nodes is also important
these are various types of cancer. In some types of cancer the tumor forms in a particular spot
in the body and then some of the cancer cells start to be shed into the surrounding connective
tissue. So these cancer cells are traveling in the body. This process is called metastases.
This is particularly important in breast cancer for example in which the cancer cells are shed
from a tumor in the breast and they can enter the lymphatic system and travel into the rest
of the body. So if a woman is being examined for breast cancer and there's some indications that
there might be a tumor forming frequently a physician will perform surgery to remove the
tumor itself then also they will check the axillary lymph nodes to see if there's any signs of tumor
cells in them. If the tumor cells have been confined to the tumor in the breast that's a good sign for
the prognosis of that particular patient but on the other hand if the lymph nodes in the axillary
region do contain cancer cells and that's a sign of a poorer prognosis. So once again this is an
example of how the lymphatic system is acting as a filter that keeps out harmful cells from
reaching the rest of the body. One of the treatments for breast cancer may not only involve removing
the original tumor but also removal of some of the axillary nodes of the armpit that might contain
some spare tumor cells. This will prolong the life and health of the individual patient but it can
have a serious side effect it will often result in the swelling of the arm on that one side because
the flow of lymph from that particular organ has been diminished. Well the lymphatic vessels are
not the only components of the immune system that are interesting and important to talk about.
One other large immune system organ is an organ called the spleen which is the largest single
lymphoid organ in the body. The spleen is about the size of a clenched fist and you can find it
by opening up the abdominal cavity and looking just dorsal and lateral to the stomach it's kind
of tucked in behind the stomach. The spleen is basically an organ that represents a rather
enormous lymph node but instead of filtering lymph the function of the spleen is to filter blood
so it kind of performs the same function as lymph nodes but except it's functioning in the
cardiovascular system itself. The spleen receives a very large blood vessel that sprouts off of the
celiac trunk. Remember that the celiac trunk is a major branch that comes right off the descending
aorta and one of the large arteries that sprouts off the celiac trunk is a splinic artery and that
enters the spleen and divides rapidly into lots of smaller vessels. Blood travels through these
small vessels and then pours out into the connective tissue of the spleen itself. The function of
the spleen is to detect foreign particles that might be traveling in the bloodstream and also
another function of the spleen is to attack and destroy red blood cells that have become too old
and are no longer functioning properly. In order to do this the spleen has a number of different
regions. If you're a surgeon and you reach into the abdominal cavity of somebody and remove the
spleen it's easily distinguishable into two different regions just when you take it out and
remove it and cut it open. If you cut the spleen midway through with a knife and look at it two
types of tissue are visible just by looking at the spleen with a naked eye. There'll be big patches
of white appearing tissue that are scattered throughout the spleen. This is called the white
pulp of the spleen. The reason that the white pulp looks white is it is composed of millions and
millions of lymphocytes and other white blood cells that are clustered around blood vessels.
Now white blood cells in the fresh, unfixed and unstained condition tend to look white
and you can demonstrate this very easily. If you ever have an infection where lots of white blood
cells are migrated you see a whitish fluid that accumulates and that's of course pus. The pus
looks white because of the presence of all these so-called white blood cells. Well the same things
happening in the spleen. Accumulations of white blood cells here form masses called white pulp.
Now when you take a section of the spleen put it on a slide and stain it with biological stains
the appearance of the white pulp changes. The white blood cells, the lymphocytes,
contain cell nuclei and the cell nuclei tend to stain blue with most of the stains. So when
you've taken a section of spleen and put it on the microscope the blue areas are actually the areas
where the white pulp is because a white pulp contains DNA and the nuclei of the white blood
cells and the stains blue. Well there's other regions of the spleen that are also important.
In addition to having patches of white pulp in the spleen we also have irregular patches of
red pulp. Why is the red pulp red? Well the red pulp is red because it has lots of red blood cells.
The blood that's pouring into the spleen is mainly composed, 99% of the blood is mainly
composed of red blood cells and these cells tend to stain red because they have hemoglobin in them
and because also red blood cells don't have any cell nuclei and they don't have any DNA
and so they don't have any components that would stain blue. So these biological stains allow us
to distinguish two regions of the spleen, a red pulp and the white pulp which stains blue and
histological stains. Well what's the function of these two regions of the spleen? Well fundamentally
they have two different functions. The white pulp as I said contains lymphocytes. The lymphocytes
that are clustered around the small branches of arteries in the spleen are mainly masses of T cells.
The lymphocytes that hang onto these masses of T cells form big nodules and the nodules are mainly
composed of B cells. Now why do we care about the distinction between B cells and T cells? What
difference does this all make? Why should we be concerned about how the spleen is organized?
Well the B cells and T cells have two different kinds of functions. The B cells are specialized to
attack foreign proteins and foreign molecules that happen to be floating around in the body
and so they're mainly targeted to those types of molecules. The T cells on the other hand have a
different function to perform. The main job of a T cell is to attack one of our own body cells that's
been infected with viruses. So the T cells are directed against cells that have become damaged
or infected. The B cells are directed against foreign proteins which are different. Obviously the
functions of both of these types of cells is important to maintain the health of the body.
And of course we all know that there's diseases which affect the immune system particularly
strongly and one of them is of course acquired immunodeficiency syndrome AIDS or HIV infections.
The virus that is the cause of the organism for HIV tends to preferentially attack and
infect T cells and because of that the ability of the immune system to destroy infected cells
is very much diminished. So this is a serious disease of the immune system that would particularly
deplete the T cell rich areas of the spleen. Now when you talk about the function of the
spleen in anatomy classes it's been known for at least a hundred years that these two regions existed
but the reason why the spleen is organized into these two masses of different types of cells
hasn't been clear up until now but now we know that the arteries in the spleen have particular
proteins on them that attract specific types of lymphocytes. So one of these proteins is called
CCl21 it's a very unruly un-gainly name but that's the name of it and this tends to attract the T cells
to the periphery of blood vessels and another protein called CXCl13 tends to attract B cells
to certain locations so these specific proteins are the explanation for how the spleen is organized
and if you experimentally damage or alter these proteins and insert these alterations into a
genetically modified mouse the mouse will grow up looking fairly well but when you take the spleen
out it's completely disorganized and doesn't have these discrete patches of a white pulp and red
pulp it's a mess basically. So like many other things in anatomy the fundamental signals that
are organizing organs into discrete regions are gradually being identified and it's making it easier
for an anatomist to explain to students why things are the way they are. I've talked a little bit
about the white pulp of the spleen but what about the red pulp of the spleen what does that do?
Well in the red pulp red blood cells are pouring directly out of the capillaries into the connective
tissue and in the red pulp these red blood cells actually do not get directly back into veins.
In order to get into the venous circulation and leave the spleen the red blood cells have to be
pushed through past all kinds of connective tissue cells and finally poke themselves through the
walls of specialized veins called sinusoids. If a red blood cell is too old its membrane
becomes inflexible and rigid and it will not be elastic enough to accomplish this it can't squeeze
past the lining cells of a blood vessel to get back into the veins. So these aged red blood cells
are kind of hapless wanderers that wander around trapped in the spleen and eventually as they wander
for a long time they are attacked by cells called macrophages which destroy them and eat them up.
So the spleen is another another function of the spleen therefore is to
remove older red blood cells from the circulation and get rid of them. Now occasionally this large
lymphoid organ the spleen can be damaged if you have a fall or a serious collision the spleen
can sometimes rupture and this will cause a serious amount of bleeding in the abdominal cavity
because the blood vessels will no longer be restrained from leaking blood. You can detect
this right away because the amount of red blood cells in the blood will be diminished. So the only
cure for this of course is to perform surgery on somebody and go in and actually remove the spleen.
In actual fact the spleen can be removed without any serious consequences to the body.
The only really major thing that you'll notice is that red blood cells are no longer removed very
adequately from circulation. The liver and the bone marrow have to take over this job and they're not
really as good at it as a spleen so that blood cells in a person with a splenectomy will tend to
circulate longer than in a normal person. Well what other lymphoid organs should we talk about
today? A major lymphoid organ that you can see and very active particularly in young people
is an organ called the thymus. The thymus is a single large structure that lies just beneath
the breast bone or sternum and it's particularly prominent in infants and young children and
becomes somewhat smaller as we get older. Generally with age the thymus becomes less
and less active so by about the age of 40 only about five percent of the originally active portion
of the thymus is still functioning and it gradually becomes replaced with fat. Because the thymus tends
to involute or decrease in activity with age for a long time scientists didn't consider it had a
very important function at all and was pretty much ignored. But then in the 50s and 60s the critical
function of the thymus was discovered. It's known now that the thymus is an area in which the lymphocytes
are maturing and mature into active T cells and so if you remove the thymus from a very young person
they have serious problems in defending their bodies against infections and infected cells.
On the other hand of course if you remove the thymus later in life most of the active T cells
have already been formed and these T lymphocytes have the ability to last for decades so that they've
already been formed in the thymus and they can migrate all over the body and since they've
already been formed you can remove the thymus and you have relatively small effects on anything.
Another type of lymphoid organ that we need to talk about are the tonsils.
Tonsils are defined as big masses of lymphocytes that accumulate beneath the epithelium of the
oral and nasal cavities and these masses of lymphoid cells serve as more or less filters
for the air and food that's coming in the nasal or oral cavity respectively. If there's any foreign
organisms that are ingested into the body by these pathways these masses of lymphocytes are
located to attack these organisms before they can get further into the body and cause more damage.
At the back of the nasal cavity there's a single midline structure called a pharyngeal tonsil
and most of those have never seen any because they're way at the back of the nose and you can't
detect them very easily. However at the back of the mouth there are two additional tonsils that
are formed on either side of the mouth. If you open your mouth and look in the mirror you can see
at the very back of the mouth that there's a little mass of pendulous tissue that's suspended from
the palate that's called the uvula and on either side of the uvula there are two oval shaped masses
of tissue called palatine tonsils. These filter out harmful organisms from any fluids or food
that we've ingested and it's been proposed that they tend to have a significant function for the
health of the body. Occasionally these palatine tonsils become infected and swollen and they're
painful and for many many years this condition has been treated surgically. Very frequently young
people will go to the hospital and have their tonsils out on the premise that if these tonsils are
infected they perhaps could not be functioning properly and even make the condition of a person
worse. However there's been a number of surveys and studies done on this recently and it's suggested
that removal of tonsils from the back of the mouth don't really have a very impressive effect on the
health of a patient and therefore a more recent evidence suggests that these tonsilectomies that
were performed by the millions in the 1950s and 60s may not have been very helpful and it would
discourage this from being done very much longer. A final accumulation of lymphocytes that is present
in the oral cavity is a mass of lymphocytes that lie beneath the posterior covering of the tongue
and this is a mass of lymphocytes called the lingual tonsils. Once again these lingual
tonsils are defined to filter out harmful material from the food and they generally
are not removed surgically and they usually are quite effective. So in summary the lymphoid
organs in the body are sentinels that protect us against various types of infections and of
course one of the worst kinds of infections that affect the lymphoid system was a bubonic plague
which caused lots of fatalities in the medieval times. But all kinds of infections can cause
swelling of accumulations of lymph nodes and can cause some of the same symptoms that we see in
bubonic plague. Plague of course was due to infections that were carried by rats. Rats initially
harbored the bacterium and if there were conditions of economic instability and famine
the rats would be forced to find food in any places they could and therefore they would tend to
invade places where people were living. So the appearance of the plague was not only due to the
rats but also to disruptions of the economic system. There's one final place in the body
that we have lymph nodes that I haven't talked about very much and this is a collection of
lymph nodes that are found in the respiratory system. This collection of lymph nodes is called
the bronchus associated lymphoid tissues or BALT and we have masses of lymph nodes that are found
at the branching points of bronchi and other respiratory tubes in the lungs and once again
these are placed there because the air that's carried into our bodies may frequently contain
foreign antigens or foreign bacteria and therefore we have to have large amounts of lymphocytes there.
Finally there are masses of lymphocytes that are located in the GI tract and we're going to be
covering the structure and function of the GI tract in subsequent lectures and we'll mention the
role of lymphocytes there. After listening to lecture five a student posed this question to
Professor Young. How was the bubonic plague transmitted?
Sometimes people living in an area infested with rats can be bitten by rats and the saliva from
the rats will contain lots of the bacteria that cause bubonic plague. There's another form of plague
called pneumonic plague and in this particular strain of plague the bacteria can be spread by
coughing or sneezing and the bacteria can be therefore airborne as aerosol particles and
if you happen to inhale one of these particles it'll lodge in your lungs and cause this particular
form of plague. Both the bubonic plague which causes swelling of the lymph nodes in the groin
and the pneumonic plague which is more restricted to the lungs have a very serious effect upon your
health and can very frequently be fatal. This ends lecture five.
