Human Anatomy, lecture seven, eye and ear.
In this next lecture, I plan to describe
two very specialized sensory structures
that provide the brain with very interesting information.
And of course, the sensory structures I'm talking about
are the eye and the ear.
These sensory organs are unique in the body
because they allow us to get information
about our environment at a great distance.
In order to sense our environment,
we can taste and touch and feel it,
but we can also sense it at great distances
because we can detect changes in light
and changes in sound that are produced by objects
in our environment even miles away.
So these are very remarkable and unusual structures
and they deserve a little bit of specialized attention.
Well, the eyeballs are basically round,
spherical structures filled with a very viscous fluid,
primarily composed of something called vitreous humor.
This viscous fluid maintains the spherical structure
of the eye and is under a certain amount of pressure.
The outer covering of the eye is actually
divisible into three distinct layers.
The outermost layer of each eyeball
is a tough layer called the sclera.
And this tough layer is generally routine
connective tissue around most of the eyeball,
but the anterior portion of the sclera is unusual
because it's transparent.
And this transparent portion of the sclera
is called the cornea.
The next layer of the eye is a vascular structure,
which is filled full of lots and lots of blood vessels.
This vascular structure is called the uvia.
In most of the eyeball, the uvia directly underlies
the retina, the sensory structure of the eye.
In the anterior portions of the eye,
the uvia is adapted to create specialized structures.
One of the structures formed by the uvia
is a structure called the ciliary body,
which is important in anchoring the lens in place.
And another portion of the uvia that's extended
outwards into the anterior portion of the eye
is a flap of tissue called the iris.
The iris represents a circular disc-shaped massive tissue,
and the opening through this massive tissue
can be adjusted by small muscles
that tug on the margins of the iris.
And this opening in the iris is, of course,
the pupil that permits light to enter the eyeball.
Finally, the innermost layer of the eye is called the retina,
and the retina is the portion of the eye
that contains all the sensory cells that detect light
and provide information that goes into the brain.
Now, let's talk about some of these regions of the eye
in a little more detail.
The cornea is an unusual piece of tissue
because it looks under the microscope
like ordinary connective tissue.
It looks just like the same kind of tissue
that we find in tendons and ligaments.
But the unique thing about the cornea
is it is actually transparent.
What makes the cornea so transparent?
Almost like a remarkable magical tissue.
Why does it permit light to pass through it so easily?
Well, there's a couple reasons why the cornea is transparent.
One of the reasons that the cornea is transparent
is that it completely lacks any blood vessels.
And that's a good thing because the pigmented cells
in blood vessels, the red blood cells,
would naturally absorb light.
So if it weren't lacking blood vessels,
when we looked at something,
we'd see a tracing network of blood cells
flowing in front of our eyes.
But we don't see this because the cornea
does not permit blood vessels to grow into it,
unlike most kinds of connective tissues.
Apparently, the reason that this happens
is because the cells of the cornea
secrete a specialized protein called tino-modulin.
And tino-modulin prevents the blood vessels
from creating little channels
and digging into connective tissue.
So this is great for maintaining
the transparency of the cornea,
but it poses potential problems
for the cells of the cornea.
The main function of blood vessels
is to supply surrounding tissues
with nutrients and oxygen.
And if the cornea lacks blood vessels,
why don't the cells starve to death?
Well, the reason the cells of the cornea don't starve to death
is that the cornea is relatively thin
and most of the nutrients and oxygen
can diffuse into the cornea from the surrounding fluids.
The fluid in the front of the cornea
is, of course, the tears that constantly bathe the cornea
and the tears contain dissolved oxygen and nutrients
that nourish the cells of the cornea.
And just behind the cornea is another thin fluid
called aqueous humor
that also provides the nutrients with the cornea.
Now, one aspect of the cornea
that makes it medically interesting
is that the blood vessels of the cornea
don't permit any blood to get into it,
and it also prevents cells of the immune system
from entering the cornea.
That actually has an advantage
for a certain medical procedure
and the medical procedure I'm talking about
is corneal transplants.
Occasionally, patients will experience
severe corneal scarring
that makes it impossible for them to see.
In previous years,
this condition was irreversible.
There was nothing anyone could do.
But nowadays, you can write on your driver's license
that you're willing to donate your eyes
for medical purposes.
And what you're doing when you're doing this
is it's not possible for you
to actually transplant your whole eye.
But it is possible for you, after death,
to have the cornea removed from your eye with a scalpel.
And since that cornea lacks blood vessels,
it can be immediately implanted
into the eye of a recipient.
Now, normally, tissue from one person to the other
can't be transplanted easily
because the immune system will attack that tissue.
But that's not a problem for the cornea
because the cornea lacks blood vessels
and therefore it's impossible
for cells of the immune system to enter it.
That makes the cornea a perfect type of tissue
that can be easily transplanted from one person to another
and allows somebody to give the gift of sight
to somebody even after they die.
Another common medical procedure involving the cornea
is something called Lasik surgery.
Lasik surgery stands for
laser assisted keratomoleosis.
And that's a procedure in which
both a scalpel and a laser beam
is used to adjust the contours of the cornea.
In this particular type of procedure,
a person is locally anesthetized
and the cornea is immobilized under a microscope.
And then a very sharp, thin blade
is used to create a flap in the cornea
on the anterior surface of the eye.
The flap of tissue is pulled back
and then the tissue underneath it
is sculpted with bursts from a laser beam.
Then the flap is allowed to fall back in place
where it will naturally adhere to the cornea
and eventually will heal up.
Why is this procedure done?
Well, it turns out that most of the bending of light,
the refraction of light by the eyeball
happens when light passes through the cornea.
So the cornea causes 90% of the bending of light
that passes through the eye.
If the cornea is misshapen at all,
the light will not focus properly on the retina
and you'll be either nearsighted or farsighted.
So if you can change the shape of the cornea,
you can increase the visual acuity of the eye
and therefore sometimes you can do without glasses.
What's the other properties of the cornea
that allow it to become transparent?
Well, in addition to not having blood vessels,
the molecules that form up the structure of the cornea
are located very regularly relative to each other.
And what do I mean by that?
Most of the extracellular molecules in the cornea
are composed of long strands of protein called collagen.
And in the cornea, these strands of collagen
are located very precisely relative to each other.
So they almost take a crystalline type of orientation.
Now, why this actually causes transparency
is better left explained by a physicist,
and I'm not a physicist,
so I won't pretend to do a good job of it,
but let's make an analogy.
In nature, there's a particular type of compound
called silicon dioxide.
And there's a lot of silicon dioxide in the world,
and most of it forms grains of sand.
And as we know very well,
if you fill up a bottle with grains of sand,
the grains of sand will not be transparent.
And that's because the molecules in the grains of sand
are not organized in any particular way.
On the other hand,
you can also organize these silicon dioxide molecules
into a crystalline shape and form a quartz crystal.
When the molecules are organized very regularly,
this regularity in their spacing
allows the passage of photons between the molecules,
and that causes a crystal to be transparent,
whereas a grain of sand is not.
Well, by analogy,
the same situation is taking place in the cornea.
This regular arrangement of molecules
allows light to pass between the molecules
and pass into the eye.
Well, after light passes through the cornea,
it enters the eye via an opening called the pupil,
which is an opening in the iris in front of the eye.
Some of the light entering the eye passes through the pupil,
but a lot of it will bounce off the anterior margins
of the iris and be reflected back out into space.
The iris of the eye is deliberately constructed
to be relatively opaque to light
so that you can regulate the amount of light
that enters the eye.
And one of the reasons that the iris is opaque
is it contains pigment-producing cells called melanocytes.
These pigment-producing cells
produce a brown pigment called melanin.
If you happen to have lots and lots of melanin in your eye,
the color of your irises will be brown.
If you have relatively small amounts of melanin in your iris,
the color of the iris will generally tend to be greenish
or bluish.
And finally, there are some individuals
that lack the ability to produce melanin altogether.
These individuals are called albinos,
and they cannot make any brown pigment,
and therefore their irises will have a kind of a pinkish color,
and the pinkish color just derives
from the presence of red blood cells
that are percolating around in the connective tissue
of the iris.
As light enters the eye through the pupil,
it next has to pass through a large oval structure
called the lens of the eye.
The lens of the eye actually provides us
with the ability to find focus a beam of light.
Most of the refraction of the light
is accomplished by bending through the cornea,
but the remaining refractive power of the eye
depends on the presence of the lens.
The lens is composed of very peculiar cells
called lens fibers,
and unlike most cells,
these cells are packed very closely together,
and they lack any structures within them.
They don't have any cell nuclei or any other organelles,
and the molecules within the lens fibers, once again,
are positioned very regularly relative to each other
so that the lens acts like a big crystal.
The lens is extraordinarily transparent.
Some of you may have had the experience
of examining a lens,
so when I was an undergraduate taking a biology course,
we all examined the anatomy of the eye,
and we did so by looking at a cow's eye
that was obtained from a slaughterhouse.
When you take a look at a cow's eye and cut it open,
one of the things you'll notice right off the bat
is that it's covered by a very dark staining,
highly pigmented layer underneath the retina,
so the inside of the eye looks cold black,
and then when you try to snip out the lens of the eye
and hold it up, it looks kind of like a big teardrop,
and when you drop it in a pan of water,
it'll completely disappear and be completely invisible.
That's because the lens of the eye
is so transparent to light.
The lens is held in place by small fibers
of a protein called fibrillin,
and these fibers are attached to the margins of the lens
around its rim,
and they connect it to a vascular, massive tissue
formed from the uvea called the ciliary body.
Occasionally, the lens will undergo pathological processes
that make it more opaque and not very transparent to light.
This situation is called a cataract,
and to correct a cataract,
a surgeon will have to go in, remove the lens of the eye,
and replace it with a plastic lens
that will once again permit light
to enter the rest of the eyeball.
In addition to holding the lens in place,
the massive tissue called the ciliary body
also has another function to perform.
Cells that cover the surface of the ciliary body
secrete a watery fluid called aqueous humor,
and that percolates forward around the back of the lens
and finally around the front of the lens
to reach a position just beneath the cornea.
This aqueous humor is less viscous
than the remainder of the fluid in the eye,
and it contains the oxygen and nutrients
that are necessary to nourish the anterior eye structures.
This aqueous humor is produced constantly
at all hours of the day and night,
and if it weren't eventually removed from the eye,
it would build up and cause a great increase
in intraocular pressure.
So in order to remove this fluid,
the fluid enters a passageway on the margins of the cornea,
called the canal of schlem,
and the canal of schlem absorbs this fluid from the eyeball
and directs the fluid into veins
that are draining fluid out of the eyeball itself.
What if this procedure doesn't take place properly?
Well, occasionally the canal of schlem
and its associated tissues can become blocked,
and when this happens,
you have a condition called glaucoma.
In glaucoma, the production of the aqueous humor increases,
and this results in a increased intraocular pressure,
and this proceeds for a long period of time.
The pressure can squeeze and exert forces upon the retina
so that some of the cells in the retina may die,
and this can eventually result in blindness.
So in order to check for the presence of glaucoma in an eye,
when you go to an ophthalmologist,
an ophthalmologist will commonly squirt a small amount of air
onto the surface of the cornea,
and by measuring the response of the cornea
to this air pressure,
a person can estimate if the intraocular pressure is too strong
and if the eye is becoming rigid and not flexible.
In that case, medical attention has to be given
to try to reduce the intraocular pressure.
Now, deep within the ciliary body itself,
there's a ring-shaped mass of muscle
that more or less forms a path parallel
to the margins of the lens,
and this muscle regulates the tension upon the lens
that's exerted in the fibers of fibrillin.
When this muscle is commanded to contract,
the muscle tightens up this ring-shaped mass,
and therefore the diameter of this ciliary muscle shrinks,
and when the diameter of this surrounding muscle shrinks,
the tension on the lens is reduced,
and that allows the lens to round up a little bit.
When the lens rounds up elastically like this,
it has the ability to focus more clearly
on objects that are very close to the eyeball,
so you use this muscater response
to focus your beams of light from nearby objects.
Now, that means if you're a habitual reader
and you read morning, noon, and night,
very frequently you'll develop a condition called eye strain,
and that's because the ciliary muscle inside your eye
gets tired from contracting all the time,
and you'll have sensations of fatigue
and pain within your eye.
Fortunately, it doesn't last very long.
Now, as light continues through the eyeball,
it passes through the lens and moves through
this viscous fluid in the back of the eye
called vitreous humor,
and then finally photons of light will strike the retina.
The retina is composed of millions of light-sensitive neurons,
and most of these neurons are neurons called rod cells.
There's about 100 million rod cells in each human retina,
so there's lots of them.
In addition, there's more specialized photoreceptive cells
called cone cells,
and these cone cells are localized
mainly in the very center of the retina.
There's a functional difference
between rod cells and cone cells.
The rod cells are mainly sensitive to dim light
and help us see at nighttime,
but they're not particularly good
at location of a beam of light.
The cone cells are much less sensitive to light,
but they have the ability to distinguish
between red, green, and blue colors,
and they're mainly concentrated
in the spot in the retina called a fovea.
Most of the precise visual information we get
from the retina comes from these cone cells,
whereas poorly localized
and poorly illuminated scenes
are detected by the rod cells.
There's one area of the retina
where we don't have any photoreceptive cells,
and this is the area where all the nerves
coming from these nerve cells
are gathered together to leave the eyeball
as the optic nerve.
This particular area is called a blind spot
because it contains no photoreceptive cells,
and normally we don't see a blind spot.
If you look up at a wall and look around,
you feel that you're seeing every single spot in it,
but actually you can detect it by moving a finger
slowly across your visual field
by staring at one particular spot on a wall,
and at one spot, as you move your finger,
you'll notice the tip of your finger
will seem to disappear.
So this area of the retina is insensitive
to visual stimuli, but normally our brains
normally edit out this area of the retina,
so we're not even aware of it,
and so that's one of the examples
of how remarkable the neural processing of the eye is.
Now one of the questions you might wanna ask about the eye
is how did such a complex structure ever originate?
Charles Darwin was very concerned about this question.
He couldn't imagine what the precursors of the eye were,
and how could they possibly evolve
from some simpler structures?
This has been a challenge for an evolutionary biologist
for a long time, but more recently it's been determined
that some of the same genes that create eyes
in very primitive structures
are exactly the same in human beings.
You may remember that I mentioned early on in this lecture
is that there are homeotic proteins
that govern the formation of body segments.
Well, some of these homeotic proteins are expressed
in animals like flies and even jellyfish,
and these are responsible for the creation of eyes
in these organisms.
Well, our eyes look very different
from the eyes of jellyfish or fruit flies,
but the same type of genes seem to be involved
in forming the visual structures.
So it appears that the proteins
that are responsible for forming the eyes
did only evolve once in a very simple form
and gradually became adapted and changed
during the course of evolution
to produce the more complicated structures
we see in human beings.
Now let's turn our attention to the ear.
Like the eye, the ear is responsible
for long distance sensory perception.
It can detect changes in vibrations
of the air surrounding us.
Each ear is divisible into three main regions.
The outer ear is clearly visible,
it's just a massive tissue covered with skin
called the oracle or pinna,
and this outer portion of the ear is more like a funnel
that directs sound into a hole in our head
called the auditory canal.
At the bottom of the auditory canal in each ear
is a large membrane called the tympanic membrane
or eardrum.
The eardrum first receives sound from the outer world
and conducts it into the next portion of the ear,
which is called the middle ear.
The middle ear contains three tiny bones or ear ossicles
that are suspended in an air filled cavity
and these bones are connected to tiny little muscles
that adjust the position and function of these bones.
Finally, the sound is conveyed from the middle ear
into the inner ear.
The inner ear is a collection of fluid filled sacs
that is surrounded by the bone of the temporal bone.
As vibrations pass through the outer,
middle and inner ears,
they cause this fluid in the fluid filled sacs
to shake and vibrate and the movement of this fluid
has an effect upon sensory cells
in the inner ear that detect sounds.
Well, most of us probably know the basic structure
of the ear from classes in elementary school
or high school, but some of the questions
that may occur to you are not obvious
just by knowing the anatomy of the ear.
For one thing, why is it necessary for the middle ear
to contain bones in it?
Why do we have to have three bones that convey sound
from the outer ear to the inner ear?
Well, as it turns out, not all animals
have three tiny bones in the middle ear.
Lots of fish, for example, have only one bone
called the stapes, which connects directly
between the tympanic membrane and the inner ear.
So these three tiny bones are not uniform
throughout all types of animals.
And the other question is why do I have
any of these bones at all?
Wouldn't it be more sensible to have the eardrum
collect sound from the outer environment
and convey it directly into the inner ear?
And why can't we just dispense
with the middle ear altogether?
Well, let's discuss this in some detail.
Let's talk about these bones, first of all, one by one.
The three bones of the middle ear are called the malleus
or hammer, the incus or anvil, and the stapes or stirrup.
And their names reflect the basic anatomical shapes
that these bones take.
The malleus is connected to the eardrum,
and it conveys sound through the incus and the stapes
to a smaller membrane called the oval window.
Now, it turns out the oval window
is considerably smaller than the eardrum.
For example, the eardrum basically has a surface area
of about 60 square millimeters, which is fairly large.
The oval window, on the other hand,
has a much smaller area, about 3.2 millimeters.
So that means that any sound that reaches the inner ear
is transferred across two different membranes.
Now, why does this help us understand
why the ear is constructed as it is?
Well, it turns out that vibrations traveling air
can travel through air relatively easily.
Air is a very dispersed medium,
and when a vibration travels through air,
it really doesn't encounter very much resistance.
So sound will go through air for many, many miles.
But when the sound enters fluid,
the viscosity of the fluid is much greater than that of air,
and therefore the transmission of sound through fluid
is much more attenuated.
And you can experience this easily
if you just dive into a swimming pool
and try to hear sounds.
The sounds are not conducted through fluid well at all.
So if we have to detect vibrations and sound
that are transmitted into a fluid,
we have to deal with a problem called impedance.
And impedance is the resistance to sound transmission
that occurs within a fluid.
The reason why we have middle ears
relates to this problem of impedance.
The middle ear ossicles have a function of impedance
matching between air and inner ear fluid.
And what do I mean exactly by that?
Well, if you have a sound that strikes the ear drum
or tympanic membrane,
it causes the whole membrane to vibrate rather subtly.
Then these vibrations are conveyed
through the three ear ossicles
unto a much smaller membrane
that covers over the structure called the oval window.
Now, since the sound is collected over a large area
and conveyed to a very small area,
for each tiny vibration in the large area,
you result in a much more intense vibration
of the smaller area.
So the middle ear serves to amplify the sound vibrations,
and that allows the vibrations to enter
into the much more viscous liquid medium in the inner ear
and allows their ears to be much more sensitive
than they would be otherwise.
So that accounts for the presence
of the bones of the middle ear.
The middle ear also has a number of other features,
and one of these noteworthy features
is that it has a tiny tube
that connects the middle ear to the oral pharynx,
the back of the oral cavity.
This tube is called the eustachian tube.
And a function of this tube is to equalize the pressure
between the outside world and the inside world
that's contained within the middle ear.
Now, normally this equalization of air pressure
is accomplished when we swallow,
because there's a muscle that covers the surface
of the palate called the tensor palatii.
And when we swallow, it reflexly tugs
on the opening of the eustachian tube.
That allows the eustachian tube to open
and allows air to rush in or out of the middle ear.
This is the reason why when we go up on an airplane,
we can have sensations of pain in the middle ear
because the air pressure is much lower
than we're accustomed to.
And it's easy to relieve this pain
by yawning or swallowing, which will open the eustachian tube
and allow air to enter or leave the middle ear.
Well, how does the ear function?
How does it detect sound vibrations?
Well, once the sound vibrations are conveyed
via the stapes into the oval window,
the vibrations go into the fluid inside the inner ear.
And the fluid is contained within three basic little tubes.
And these tubes are located side by side, adjacent
to each other.
One of the tubes is called a cochlear duct
or a scalar media.
Another tube is called the scalar tympani.
And finally, another tube is called the scalar vestibuli.
And vibrations that pass from the middle ear
disturb the fluid in these three tubules.
And it sets the fluid into vibratory movements.
These fluid filled tubes make up a large structure
called the cochlea in human beings.
Now it turns out that these fluid filled tubes
don't have the same anatomy
in all different types of animals.
For example, in reptiles, these three tubes
basically extend straight into the interior of the skull
and form structures that are a little bit like
a little inverted ice cream cone.
So we have little points extending
into the interior of the skull in these animals.
However, these tubes are fairly short in these animals
and that doesn't allow these tubes to be very sensitive
to a wide range of vibrations.
Mammals, on the other hand, contain tubes
that are much longer.
And if these were continued into the skull
in a straight direction, they'd poke into the brain.
So instead, mammals have developed a cochlea
that's coiled up, kind of like the shell of a snail.
And this allows these tubes to be elongated
and still occupy a spiral arrangement
that basically occupies less space inside the skull.
Well, once the sound gets into these tubules,
these fluid filled tubes,
the shaking of this fluid in the tubes
activates sensory cells in the cochlea
called inner hair cells.
In human beings, there's about 3,500 inner hair cells
that react to the sound waves.
And every time they react,
they create an electrical disturbance in their membranes
and nerve cells that innervate them
pick up this electrical disturbance
and carry it into the brain
in the form of the vestibulocochlear nerve.
It's interesting to note that the number of nerve cells
that innervate the ear is much smaller than the nerve cells
that innervate the eye.
There's something like a million axons
that are present in each optic nerve,
but each auditory nerve only contains about 30,000 axons.
So there's much less nerve cell processes in the ear
than there are in the eye.
This can actually result in some problems
because as we age,
the sensory cells in the ear tend to accumulate damage.
As they shake throughout their life,
some of these cells die off as a response to this damage.
And as they continue to die off,
we begin to lose some of our senses of hearing.
This may be particularly troublesome
for low-frequency sounds, which are very, very powerful.
The cochlea is organized into different regions,
and some of the regions of the cochlea
are more sensitive to one frequency,
and other regions of the cochlea
are more sensitive to another frequency.
Cells at the tip of the cochlea
are particularly sensitive to low-frequency sounds.
And if you're a person that happens to work
in a very loud environment,
some of these cells will begin to be damaged
by these loud sounds.
And the physicians used to call this disorder
Boiler Maker's Disease,
because if you happen to work in a factory
where people are hammering on big pieces of metal
all day long to make boilers,
these loud, low-frequency sounds would eventually damage
some of these cells in the cochlea,
and you become deaf to these low-frequency sounds.
It would be a very desirable thing
if you could cause these sensory cells to regenerate.
And it turns out some species of animals
have hair cells that can regenerate.
Apparently, the cochlea of birds has hair cells
that can replace themselves if they're damaged,
so that there are stem cells in the cells
of the cochlea of a bird that can turn
into brand-new sensory cells,
and therefore birds tend to not lose their hearing
over their lifespan.
Of course, this is very important for a bird
because birds listen to each other songs all day long,
and they locate each other in the forest by listening.
So birds have to have particularly acute senses of hearing.
If we could mimic this ability of birds
to regrowth and grow their hair cells,
this might make it possible for us
to treat age-related deafness.
Well, the cochlea is not the only portion of the inner ear
that reacts to vibrations.
There's another portion of the inner ear
called the vestibule,
and this vestibule contains patches of sensory cells
that also react to currents and movements of fluid
that pass along the chambers of the inner ear.
Now, these sensory cells are not specialized
to respond to sounds.
Instead, these sensory cells are constructed
to respond to currents or movements of a fluid,
and the only reason about fluid will move
inside your inner ear is when we re-rotate our heads.
These particular sensory cells of the inner ear
are sensitive to rotational movements of the head
in three-dimensional space,
and they're connected to long tubules
filled with fluid called semicircular canals.
The rushing movements of fluid
within these semicircular canals occurs
when we rotate our head,
and the information that's gathered by these sensory cells
is conveyed to the brain.
This sensory information gives us the ability
to instantaneously detect where our heads are
in three-dimensional space,
and therefore, this gives us the ability
to focus our eyes in one spot at a time.
If you stare at a spot on the wall
and then move your head from side to side,
you'll notice that your eyes will automatically be locked
under that specific spot,
even though your head is moving.
The reason for this is that information
from the vestibules of the inner ear
is constantly being sent to the nerve structures
that control the movements of the eye,
so the eyes can automatically adjust
for any movement of the head
and still lock onto a target far off in the distance
that we wanna look at.
Well, once again, one of the problems that biologists
have faced in the ear is that it's hard to imagine
how these very complicated structures
could have originated from very simple structures.
The ear is a little less complicated than the eyeball,
but still, one really has to ask the question,
how do these ear structures ever arise?
Well, once again, if you examine the DNA
of a variety of different proteins,
it turns out that the same proteins
that are found in our ears
are also found in sound-sensitive structures
even on the antennae of insects.
So it suggests that the sound-sensing organs
were created by proteins that evolved
far back in evolution when the ancestors of insects
and mammals diverged from each other.
So once again, it suggests that the creation of eyes
is a very ancient event occurring
before the ancestors of insects were any different
from the ancestors of our own structures.
This ends lecture seven.
