Human Anatomy, Lecture 8, Upper Digestive System.
In this lecture, I'm going to begin
the discussion of the digestive system.
And primarily, what we'll be talking about in this lecture
is the upper portions of the digestive system.
And later on, we'll talk about the lower portions
of the digestive system.
Well, of course, we all know that the digestive system begins
at the mouth.
And the mouth, in turn, begins with the lips,
which are flaps of skin and tissue and muscle
that cover over the anterior portions of the mouth.
Now, we all take lips for granted.
But in actual fact, lips are relatively specialized structures.
Lots of animals in the animal kingdom don't have lips.
And you can think about animals like fish and frogs
and reptiles and lizards and crocodiles and birds.
All of these animals don't have any lips.
Lips are structures that are more or less restricted
to human beings and to other mammals.
The lips are surrounded by a circular mass of muscle
called the orbicularis oris muscle.
And they provide us with a number of important functions.
One of the basic functions of lips
probably relates to our ability to obtain nutrition as babies.
Mammals are unique in the animal kingdom
because they're provided with a ready source of nutrition
from the mother in the form of milk from mammary glands.
And lips probably evolved for us to suckle
from a mammary gland without spilling one drop of milk.
So the lips originally probably were created
for a nutritional function.
But in human beings, they've been greatly adapted
and they allow us to modulate the air coming out of the mouth
and help us to form a very great variety of sounds.
So providentially, the lips are evolved for one function
and yet they allow us the creation of complicated language.
So it's very useful for humans to have lips.
If you're a science fiction enthusiast
and you want to postulate the existence
of non-human intelligent species,
it's very likely these other species wouldn't have any lips.
So we'd probably have to be forced to communicate with them
by singing or tweaking or whistling,
certainly not by making the variety of sounds
that human beings can make with our lips.
Well, behind the lips, we have a number of hard structures
and primarily we're talking about the teeth
that occupy the anterior part of the mouth.
Human beings have 32 teeth embedded either into the maxilla
or mandible and each tooth in the human mouth
comes in a variety of forms.
The anterior most teeth in the mouth are teeth called incisors
and these have kind of a blade-like surfaces
that are useful for cutting or shearing off food.
Just behind the incisors, we have four different canine teeth,
two in each jaw, and the canine teeth are spear-shaped teeth
that are good for stabbing.
In lots of animals like lions or baboons,
these canine teeth are not only used for eating,
but they're used as weapons of aggression
for biting other animals.
Apparently, human beings have stopped doing this
for many millions of years
because our canine teeth are relatively small.
Finally, behind the canine teeth,
we have a number of other teeth called molars
and molars have unusual complicated surfaces
that are very useful for smashing and chewing food.
Different types of teeth in our mouth
reflect our very variable diets.
Human beings are omnivores.
We can eat meat, we can eat fruit,
we can eat grain-like material,
and so we have teeth that are adaptable
and can be utilized for eating a variety of different foods.
This is not true for lots of different animals.
If you look at the mouth of a shark, for example,
the teeth of a shark have a very simple function to fulfill.
They have to grab onto a prey animal
and carve off a chunk of meat and pass it into the mouth.
So these teeth of a shark are all, they all look alike.
They're all like little blade-like triangles,
but the variety of food that human beings eat
dictate that we have teeth
that are used for a variety of different functions.
Each tooth is composed of three different components.
The outermost covering of a tooth is a layer called enamel,
and enamel is a very unusual substance.
96% of the content of enamel
is composed of a specialized type of mineral
called hydroxyapatite,
which is a form of calcium phosphate
that is harder than steel.
The teeth are the most durable portions of our bodies,
and very frequently after we pass along,
the teeth will be the only things that will remain.
The reason that the teeth are so hard
is that they contain this highly crystalline,
concentrated form of mineral.
And since they're harder than steel,
the enamel of the teeth is resistant to scratching
by most types of objects.
So if you go to the dentist,
and the dentist is cleaning your teeth with a steel probe,
you really don't have to worry
that it's gonna scratch the enamel.
More likely, your teeth are gonna scratch the probe.
One unique feature of tooth enamel
is that the cells that make tooth enamel
have been destroyed when the teeth erupt through the gums.
So these cells, called immunoblasts, no longer exist,
and all they've done is left behind
their specialized product in the form of enamel
that covers the outer surface of each tooth.
Now, just beneath the enamel of a tooth
is a form of tissue called dentin.
And dentin is a little softer than enamel.
It's only about 70% mineral.
The rest of dentin is protein.
And dentin is very much similar to the tissue
that we find in most of the bones of our body.
It's very similar to bone.
Dentin is also different from enamel
because it contains the processes of living cells
that make the dentin.
And these cells are called adodablasts.
And they extend long, thin cellular processes
through tiny canals in the dentin.
So that means the dentin, unlike the enamel,
is a living tissue.
You can get pretty good evidence
that this is a living tissue
when you happen to visit the dentist.
And if the dentist is involved
in trying to fill a cavity in your tooth,
if the grinding point of a dental drill reaches the dentin,
it'll damage the living cells in the dentin.
And you'll perceive this right away
as a sensation of pain.
The reason we get tooth cavities
relates to the presence of oral bacteria
in the oral cavity.
These bacteria are swarming around
in the interior of our mouth
and they digest some of the remnants of food
that we eat that are available to them.
And when they digest these food remnants,
they're digested to tiny molecules
that usually are very acid.
The acid produced by these oral bacteria
has the ability to gradually dissolve the enamel.
And so eventually, if this process goes on indefinitely,
a nice little cavity or crater will form in the enamel.
Since the enamel is no longer alive,
this will not be repaired.
So the only cure for these dental cavities
is to fill them with an amalgam of mercury and silver,
which is applied by a dentist.
And of course, the best way of avoiding cavities
is to brush your teeth all the time
to try to remove as much bacteria as you can
and remove the acid that will otherwise form in your mouth.
Another concern for oral hygiene
is the presence of bands of connective tissue
called the periodontal ligaments
that connect the tooth to the surrounding socket of bone
in each jaw.
These periodontal ligaments can also be damaged by bacteria.
In this condition, which is called periodontitis,
this can cause a weakening of the periodontal ligament
and a possible loosening of teeth.
So it's a good idea to see your dentist regularly
and floss and do all those good kind of things.
Well, just behind the teeth in the oral cavity,
we have a large musketer structure called the tongue.
The tongue represents a massive oral muscle
that's covered over by a lining layer of epithelium.
The tongue is not precisely the same in all portions of it
because it's covered by many tiny little bumps
or upfoldings.
And these upfoldings on the upper surface of the tongue
are called lingual papillae.
It turns out that there are four specific types
of lingual papillae that you can find
if you look carefully at the tongue.
The majority of the lingual papillae
that you find on the surface of the tongue
form tiny little spear-shaped points.
And these spear-shaped papillae are called
filliform papillae.
There's hundreds and hundreds of them
that cover the surface of the tongue.
The reason that they're there is that they act
kind of like the little points that you see
on the surface of a file.
They make the surface of the tongue much more rough.
And when the surface of the tongue is rough
rather than slippery,
this permits the tongue to manipulate food within the mouth
and position it so that we can bite on it
and chew it more properly.
All animals contain lots and lots of filliform papillae
on the surface of their tongues.
Some animals have many more filliform papillae than others
and the filliform papillae on the tongue of a cat
are particularly large.
There's very good evidence for this
that you can achieve just by going up to your pet cat
and having your cat lick your fingers.
The tongue of a cat is particularly rough feeling
and that's because the filliform papillae
on the surface of a cat's tongue are very large.
I had to look at the surface of a cat's tongue
under the microscope once
and their papillae look like little rhinoceros horns.
They're much larger than those of human beings.
This is very helpful for a cat
because a cat not only has to manipulate food in its mouth
but a cat uses its tongue to groom itself
and to constantly adjust the quality of the fur on a cat.
So having all these filliform papillae
is very useful for this particular type of animal.
We don't do this, we don't have to groom our fur
so we don't need such large filliform papillae.
There are other types of lingual papillae
that you can detect also on the surface of the tongue.
One type is a small mushroom-shaped papilla
called a fungiform papilla
and these are distributed randomly
over the surface of the tongue
and they're fairly small and they're not very easily seen.
A cousin to these small fungiform papillae
are a larger papillae called valate
or circumvalate papillae.
These are larger mushroom-shaped structures.
They're not nearly as many of them
and they form a particular formation on the back of the tongue.
You can find these circumvalate papillae
occupying a V-shaped line that demarcates
the anterior two-thirds of the tongue
from the posterior one-third of the tongue.
And if you stick your tongue out and look in a mirror,
you can see these little round-shaped structures
at the back of the tongue.
These papillae are unusual
because they have unusually large numbers
of specialized sensory structures called taste buds on them.
Taste buds are the sensory structures
that allow us to taste the different ingredients of food
and assign various flavors to them.
So these are the fundamental papillae
that contain lots and lots of taste buds.
Finally, there's a fourth type of papilla
that's present on the lateral surfaces of the tongue.
These also contain taste buds
and they're a little more difficult to see
and they're kind of buried under the lateral surface
of the tongue.
Now, when you cut a tongue in cross-section
and when you're dissecting a cadaver,
you can see that there's lots and lots of muscles
that are inside the tongue that modulate its shape
and the function of the tongue.
A mass of these muscles that are running around
within the tongue itself are called
the intrinsic muscles of the tongue.
However, some of the muscles that are inserted
into the tongue originate from other places
in the oral cavity.
These type of muscles are called
extrinsic muscles of the tongue.
And one of these is called the genioglossus muscle.
It originates on the inside of the chin,
just inside the inner branching of the mandible,
the lower jaw, and it attaches to the inside of the tongue
and helps you protrude the tongue.
So when you're sticking your tongue out of your mouth,
you're using the genioglossus muscle.
This would seem like to be a fairly trivial action
of the tongue, but it's actually fairly important.
If the genioglossus muscle is paralyzed or injured,
this prevents us from moving our tongue forward
and it tends to fall to the back of the mouth
and it can plug up the oral cavity
and in some cases can lead to suffocation.
So it's important for all these muscles
to have their functions normal
to adjust the positions of the tongue in the mouth.
There's another muscle,
extrinsic muscle of the tongue
that attaches to another structure.
One muscle is called the hyoglossus muscle.
The hyoglossus muscle attaches to a bone
that is located at the very top of the larynx.
And if you take your forefinger and thumb
and reach around the larynx, your voice box,
you can feel this very firm structure
at the very top of your voice box.
And this is the hyoid bone,
a semi-circuiter massive bone
that's found at the top of the larynx.
The hyoglossus muscle originates on this hyoid bone
and it search into the tongue.
If you stick your tongue out,
you can feel this hyoid bone move
in response to the contractions of the hyoglossus muscle.
There are other components of the oral cavity
that you need to know a little bit about too.
The roof of the mouth, the roof of the oral cavity,
is a structure called the palate.
And actually, the palate has two components.
The anterior part of the palate has an epithelial lining
and above the epithelial lining is a big plate of bone
formed by the palatine bone.
The posterior part of the palate
is not covered over by bone.
It's covered over by soft muscles and connective tissue.
And therefore, accordingly,
this part of the palate is called the soft palate.
The soft palate is relatively deformable.
It's not rigid.
And muscles pull on the soft palate
every time we have an attempt to swallow.
Now, this has a very great functional importance
because this prevents food from passing upwards
from the oral cavity into the nasal cavity.
And you can demonstrate this fairly easily.
Just try to do this.
Try swallowing and try to breathe at the same time.
You'll find if you try this a number of times,
it's just about impossible.
And that's because the nasal cavity becomes blocked off
by muscles of the soft palate when we're trying to swallow.
And that prevents us from strangling when we eat food
and prevents us from passing food into our nasal cavity.
Now, unfortunately, the formation of the palate
does not always routinely occur without any error.
In about one out of 700 newborn infants,
the structures that are present on both sides of the face
fail to completely come together during embryogenesis
so that the palatine bones may fail to completely fuse.
This condition is called a cleft palate.
One of the serious problems with a cleft palate
is that food may freely leave the oral cavity
and enter the nasal cavity.
Also, of course, the cleft and the palate
may proceed anteriorly to actually cause a breach
in the structure of the face.
Fortunately, nowadays, this type of abnormality
can be corrected with surgery
after a baby is about 10 to 15 weeks of age.
And usually, this intervention is
sufficient to completely correct this condition of cleft palate.
We don't know why cleft palate is a relatively common birth
abnormality.
There are some indications that there may be a chance
for this condition to be slightly inheritable.
And one of the genes that may be abnormal in this condition
of cleft palate is, once again, it's another DNA binding
protein that binds to the genes of the cells that
form the palate.
This protein is called IRF6.
And there's some early indications
that this gene may be involved in the abnormality
that we call cleft palate.
Now, most of the structures in the oral cavity
convey sensory information up to the branches
of the cranial nerves that carry information back up
to the brain.
Some of the sensory information from the oral cavity
and from the face is carried by a cranial nerve 5, which
is called the trigeminal nerve.
The trigeminal nerve gets its name
because it has three major branches,
and thus leading to the name trigeminal.
The first branch is called the ophthalmic branch that
innervates the forehead in the eye area.
The second branch is called the maxillary branch
of the trigeminal nerve.
And that innervates the upper jaw and maxillary area.
And the third branch of the mandibular branch
divides to innervate the tongue and the lower jaw.
So sensory information from the oral cavity
is carried up to the brain via this particular cranial nerve.
Now, a dentist can take advantage of this nerve pathway
by injecting anesthetic, like novocaine,
into the area where this mandibular nerve originates
from the skull.
And when this happens, the numbness
that you're feeling in your teeth
may extend toward the tongue and toward the cheeks,
as well as the upper or lower teeth,
because the anesthetic may involve
various branches of this mandibular nerve
and anesthetize large parts of the face.
In addition to providing sensory information
from the oral cavity, the trigeminal nerve
also supplies motor innervation to muscles that help us chew.
And you may remember from the second lecture
that these muscles include the temporalis muscle, the masseter
muscle, and the buccinator muscle, a muscle which
forms a lateral wall of the oral cavity and the cheeks.
On the other hand, the other muscles of the face,
for example, the muscles of the eyelids
or the muscles that open and close the mouth,
receive their information from the seventh cranial nerve.
So there's kind of a distinction
between the innervation between these two
different cranial nerves.
Well, that more or less explains the major functions
of the oral cavity.
And let's assume that we've eaten a sandwich,
and the sandwich has been chewed by the molar teeth
and passed back down into the oral pharynx.
And then finally, it's handed down
from the oral pharynx down into the remainder
of the digestive system.
The first structure that the food will pass through
is a structure called the esophagus.
The esophagus is a muscater tube about a foot long or so
that conveys fluid and food from the oral cavity
past the lungs and heart and down into the abdominal cavity.
And eventually, it'll terminate in the stomach.
The esophagus is a hollow muscater tube
with lots of muscles in it that are constantly constricting.
Muscular contractions of the muscle of the esophagus
are coordinated by millions of nerve cells
that are present in clusters located throughout the walls
of the gastrointestinal tract.
This regulated and coordinated constrictions of muscle
help move the food through the GI tract.
And this whole pattern of musculature contraction
is called peristalsis.
This regulated contractile activity
of the muscle surrounding the GI tract
would be impossible without the presence
of these millions of nerve cells.
And as a matter of fact, the large numbers of nerve cells
that are associated with the GI tract
are considerably more extensive than the number of nerve cells
that are actually found in the spinal cord.
So that the nervous system of the GI tract
is almost as extensive as the spinal cord.
And you can regard the nervous system of the GI tract
as kind of like a little mini brain.
It doesn't have nearly as sophisticated functions
to fulfill.
It mainly is concerned with coordinating
the movement of food.
But without this function, we would basically
succumb.
We couldn't live without this passage of food
through the GI tract.
Well, the esophagus passes down through the thoracic cavity
behind the heart, and it pierces through the diaphragm
in an opening called the esophageal hiatus.
This is a portion where the muscle fibers of the diaphragm
part to permit the passage of the esophagus.
This makes that the diaphragm is slightly weak
into this area.
Without the presence of the esophagus,
the diaphragm would be one simple membrane.
But because the esophagus is passing through it,
this allows for a weakness of these muscle fibers here.
And this sometimes can cause a clinical condition.
Occasionally, the stomach will begin
to push up into the thoracic cavity
through this opening in the diaphragm.
And this condition is called a hiatal hernia.
Consequence of this is that the contents of the stomach
can sometimes be pushed up into the esophagus.
And that's not a good thing.
The acids present in the stomach can sometimes
damage the lining of the esophagus
and cause a condition called Barrett's esophagus,
in which we have erosion of the esophageal lining.
One of the remedies for this is to undergo
a surgical procedure called a fundoplasty in which
the stomach is pulled down through this esophageal hiatus
and folded over on itself slightly
so it will be prevented from moving up into the thorax.
This prevents the damage to the esophagus by stomach acid.
And sometimes can have a very positive effect
on other organ systems as too.
In hiatal hernia, occasionally, the stomach contents
can move up the esophagus and pass into the respiratory system
and can provoke reactions like asthma.
So actually, one treatment for some forms of asthma
may be this surgical procedure that
can prevent the reflux of stomach contents
into the respiratory system.
Well, now we've gotten to the point of the GI tract that's
called the stomach.
The stomach is a large musketer sac that stores food
and starts preparing it for digestion.
One of the main functions of the stomach
is to expose the proteins in our diet
to large amounts of hydrochloric acid.
Hydrochloric acid is quite strong in the stomach.
It's something like 6 normal hydrochloric acid
and has a pH below 3, so it's very, very strong acid.
And this strong acid is produced by the epithelial cells
of the stomach itself.
When you put a chunk of meat into this type of hydrochloric
acid, the acid will dissolve the large, large protein
molecules in the meat into smaller amino acids.
And these amino acids are much more easily absorbed
by the remainder of the GI tract.
Now, normally, the stomach can expand to hold almost a liter
or about a quart of fluid.
So it can contain large amounts of food
and slowly release it into the remaining parts of the GI tract
so that the food can be digested more slowly.
More recently, the stomach has been
the target of lots of surgeons that
are trying to prevent the epidemic of obesity, which
is overtaking the American population.
A particular type of procedure called gastric bypass surgery
has been developed as a treatment for reducing obesity.
In this particular procedure, the stomach
is divided into two portions, sometimes with staples
or sometimes with sutures.
Most of the stomach is separated from the esophagus
and is allowed to remain as a hollow, a functionless cavity.
The remaining small portion of the stomach
is reconnected to the small intestines.
And this allows the stomach to be greatly reduced in size.
After a gastric bypass procedure,
the remaining portion of the stomach
is almost a thumb-shaped pouch that
can hold about 15 milliliters at a time
instead of a whole liter.
So after a gastric bypass surgery,
the amount of the size of a meal that can be taken by a person
is greatly reduced.
A person following the surgery has
to eat many, many small meals all day long in order
to get enough nutrition.
Because of this, the amount of calories
that a person can eat is greatly reduced.
And that usually results in a fairly safe and relatively
effective means of treating morbid obesity.
This particular type of surgical procedure
is getting more and more popular in the last few years.
And currently, something like 140,000 gastric bypass
surgeries are performed every year in the United States.
Now, it turns out that the stomach is not an organ that's
found universally in the animal kingdom.
In human beings, the stomach is useful for storing food
until it can be digested later.
But some types of animals eat types of food
that doesn't have to be stored very much,
so that these particular animals don't even have any stomachs.
And this is particularly true of small animals
like certain fish that can eat very, very small food like krill.
And therefore, the food passes directly
to the small intestines without having any need
to have go through a stomach.
On the other hand, the GI tract can be greatly
shaped by the particular diet that other animals eat.
And cows and sheep are animals that have enormous stomachs.
Cows and sheep are animals that subsist on grass.
And grass is mainly composed of lots and lots of cellulose.
In most animals, cellulose is fundamentally indigestible,
and it would provide no nutrition at all.
But in cows and sheep, the stomach has been greatly modified,
and it's developed constrictions that
divided into four distinct pouches.
And these pouches are called the omacem, the abomasem,
the reticulum, and the rumin.
And all of these pouches have different functions.
Three of them are basically big storage tanks
that provide space for the gradual digestion of cellulose
into more digestible molecules.
And one of these pouches is more similar to the mammalian stomach
and produces the acids and the enzymes
that we have in our stomachs.
The other ones are basically big chemical factories
or fermentation tanks.
And some of these stomachs account
for a substantial amount of volume.
For example, in a cow, the stomach
can account for 25% of the entire body weight of the animal.
So a cow is basically a big digestion tank
on four legs that can efficiently utilize grass
as an otherwise indigestible source of nutrition.
Now, the acid produced by the stomach
can sometimes pose problems for people.
For example, if the lining epithelium of the stomach
is damaged, it exposes the underlying connective tissue
to these very strong stomach acids.
And these stomach acids will gradually
destroy the walls of the stomach and cause
a great deal of damage and bleeding.
And some of these gastric ulcers are
quite serious medical problems.
The reasons for these stomach ulcers
have been debated for many, many years.
For a long time, medical doctors thought
that psychological stress had a major role
in causing an increased stomach acid secretion
and therefore could possibly be responsible for the production
of stomach ulcers.
So one of the treatments that people applied
was to cut the vagus nerve that innervated the stomach.
And that would prevent the stomach from making as much acid
and supposedly would be able to help cure ulcers.
Well, this was tried fairly often,
but it wasn't always that successful.
And other types of treatments like eating a very bland diet
or taking lots of antacids also didn't really
help the course of the stomach ulcers.
Finally, in the 1980s, a completely new explanation
for the presence of stomach ulcers
was proposed by two Australian researchers named Barry Marshall
and Robin Warren.
These investigators thought that it
might be possible that a particular type of bacterium
called Helicobacter pyloriii could actually
be infesting the stomach and causing the damage
to the stomach epithelium that promoted gastric ulcers.
At the time this was proposed, this theory
was greatly derided by lots of medical practitioners.
And so Marshall and Warren fought back
by actually infecting themselves with this particular bacterium.
And they were bold and brave enough to do this.
And sure enough, they found out that they sure enough
caused stomach ulcers.
And they were able to treat themselves with antibiotics
and cured themselves.
So this bold approach finally convinced all the skeptics.
And now there's a general treatment for stomach ulcers.
It's much more effective.
If you get stomach ulcers, you can often
take an antibiotic called chlorothromycin.
And if you also take drugs like Prilosec, which
inhibits stomach acid secretion, these combinations
of medicines can very frequently, completely
cure stomach ulcers and prevent the chronic pain
that people had to deal with for so many years.
For once, these particular investigators
were recognized and awarded with the Nobel Prize in 2005
for this pioneering work.
So the conceptions of how the stomach functions over the years
has been altered by new research.
And gradually, the clinical problems
that relate to the stomach have become much more tractable
and solvable by medical treatments.
Well, that covers this particular portion of the GI tract,
the upper portion that contains the oral cavity,
the esophagus, and the stomach.
We've reached a point in the GI tract
where the food has been mashed and liquefied
and partly digested.
And now we have to follow the passage of the food
through the remainder of the GI tract
to see how the nutrients are absorbed from the food.
This ends lecture eight.
