Human Anatomy, lecture 10.
Exocrine and endocrine glands.
In this lecture, I'd like to discuss the glands of the body.
Glands are assemblies of cells that have one specific function.
And this function is to produce some sort of a molecule
that's carried away from the gland and delivered to another part of the body.
As it turns out, there's two basic ways of doing that.
And as a result of that, there's two basic types of glands.
One basic type of glands in the body is called exocrine glands.
And by definition, an exocrine gland is a gland that secretes a molecule
and delivers it via a duct into some sort of a hollow cavity.
And examples of these types of glands would be the salivary glands
that delivers saliva into the mouth,
or the pancreas that delivers enzymes into the lumen of the gut.
The second type of gland is called an endocrine gland.
And all endocrine glands are collections of cells
that don't secrete molecules into a duct,
but instead secrete them directly into capillaries, into the bloodstream.
So in a certain sense, endocrine glands are more powerful than exocrine glands.
Instead of secreting something into a tiny little area that's restricted in its distribution,
an endocrine gland, by secreting something directly into the bloodstream,
can send a molecule all the way from the top of your head to the bottom of your feet.
And therefore, these molecules have the ability to affect the function of the entire body as a whole.
But nevertheless, both of these types of glands are important for the health of the body,
and I'd like to discuss each one of them in a certain amount of detail in this particular lecture.
Well, let's start out with the topic of exocrine glands first.
There's a number of exocrine glands that are important for our health,
and one of them we can start off right away with is an exocrine gland that's located in the head.
This exocrine gland is the lacrimal gland,
and it's something we're not very much aware of most of the time,
but it's very important because it produces the tears that bathe the surface of the eyeball.
Lacrimal glands are located at the upper corners of each eyeball,
and they secrete fluid that washes over the surface of the eye.
This fluid, or tears, gradually accumulates in the lower medial corner of each eye,
and the tears are gradually removed from the surface of the eyeball
by entering a tiny duct called the nasal lacrimal duct.
The nasal lacrimal duct funnels tears into the nasal cavity,
and therefore, when we start crying for some reason,
it's not uncommon for our nose to also run because the tears eventually enter the nose and enter the nasal cavity.
Most of us have the opportunity to taste our own tears if we wipe our eyes when we're crying,
and it's not unreasonable to suggest that tears would just be a little salty fluid.
But in actual fact, tears are a lot more complicated than that.
If you take a sample of a tears and examine it with biochemical methods,
you can determine the tears contain something like 491 different proteins.
All of these proteins have very different complex functions,
but most of them seem to be involved in protecting the surface of the eye from bacteria.
In addition, the tears are also important for lubricating the cornea
and preventing our eyelids from scratching the cornea when we blink.
So the tears are actually a little more important and a little more complicated than we might otherwise expect.
There's a common disorder that affects the function of lots of excreting glands.
In particular, this disorder can lead to deficits and secretion by the lacrimal glands
and also by the salivary glands that we'll talk about next.
This particular disorder is called Sjogren's syndrome.
And in Sjogren's syndrome, the cells of the immune system, for some unknown reasons,
start to attack cells that are located in these particular excreting glands.
Now, many of you might not have heard of Sjogren's syndrome,
but in actual fact, it's the second most common autoimmune disease, just after arthritis.
And Sjogren's syndrome can be fairly widespread.
Apparently, it seems to affect about 5% of all women over the ages of 65 or so.
For some reason, this disease is much more common in women than in men.
It affects nine times more women than men.
So it's basically a disease of elderly women and it can have symptoms that range in severity.
If you damage the function of the lacrimal glands,
one of the things you're going to see right away is that the volume of tears
that are secreted in the orbital cavity diminishes.
Mild symptoms just include kind of a drying of the eye.
But if the symptoms are very severe and almost no tears are created,
then this dryness can be so serious that the cornea can develop damage
and it can potentially lead to blindness.
So one of the treatments for Sjogren's syndrome that we can use right now
is that drug companies have been able to make artificial tears,
salty, sterile solutions that are in little bottles,
and people that develop Sjogren's syndrome have to apply these tears several times a day
to the surface of the eye so that they don't develop corneal damage.
The actual causes for this peculiar disease are still not very well identified.
Well, some other important extracurricular glands are located around the mouth
and these extracurricular glands are by definition called salivary glands.
There's three major salivary glands that are easily distinguishable
and dissectable away from the tissues of the oral cavity.
And the largest salivary gland that's located near the mouth is called the parotid gland.
The parotid gland is located more or less at the angle of the jaw just below the ear
and it derives its name from its location.
The Latin word para is a word that means alongside or nearby,
and otid is the same word that describes the ear in Latin.
So the bony chamber that encloses the ear is called the otic cavity.
So the parotid gland is located nearby the ear and it produces saliva constantly
and it delivers the saliva via a duct that penetrates through the cheek muscles
and delivers saliva into the mouth not far from the second upper molar.
So if you're hungry and you're yearning to have some food,
the salivary glands prepare your mouth for the reception of food
and you'll notice that your mouth will fill with saliva if you're smelling a particular tasty meal.
For some reason the parotid gland is particularly susceptible to an infection by a particular type of virus
and this virus causes the parotid gland to swell up and become inflamed
and when you get this sort of viral infection of the parotid gland this condition is called the mumps.
Usually the mumps is a relatively benign infection.
It doesn't cause too many problems generally.
After three to four days the symptoms of the mumps generally tend to go away a little bit.
Occasionally the virus that infects the parotid glands can also cause damage to the testicles.
For some reason the viruses tend to prefer these particular two environments.
So in older people the mumps can sometimes result in damage to the testicles and reduce fertility.
But this is a relatively rare occurrence.
There are two other salivary glands that we also have to pay attention to.
Another salivary gland called the subandibular gland is located just a little anterior to the parotid gland
and it also sends saliva into the mouth by a tiny little duct.
And finally in the interior of the mouth there's another gland called the sublingual gland which lies just beneath the tongue.
All of these glands constantly secrete this lubricating fluid saliva into the mouth.
Now once again when you take a sample of spit you wouldn't think it would be very complicated liquid
but in actual fact if you analyze saliva something like 300 different proteins can be identified in human saliva.
These proteins have somewhat different functions than the proteins that we see in tears.
Some of them are protecting the interior of the mouth against bacteria.
But other proteins in saliva include enzymes that can help initiate the digestion of food.
For example if you go ahead and eat lots of soda crackers that contain lots of starch
this stimulates the salivary glands to produce an enzyme called amylase.
And the amylase can break down the starch into sugars so this initiates the digestion of carbohydrates by the GI tract.
In addition to these type of proteins are other proteins produced by the salivary glands
that are important for the structure and integrity of the teeth.
These proteins regulate how much calcium is deposited in the enamel of the teeth
and they also prevent the enamel from being digested by acids.
Now of course if you happen to have Sjogren syndrome once again
this can also lead to damage to the salivary glands and diminish flow of saliva.
And in addition there are other circumstances that can potentially damage the salivary glands.
For example occasionally people develop cancers of the oral cavity
and one of the treatments to diminish the size of these oral tumors
is the application of doses of radiation to the oral cavity.
Well these types of treatments are helpful in destroying the oral cavity cancers
but they can also damage the salivary glands.
So it's not uncommon that people treated for oral cancer
or people experiencing Sjogren syndrome can have diminished saliva production.
And the diminished saliva production can have catastrophic effects on the health of the teeth.
If your salivary glands don't function you can have an explosion of dental cavities
that can lead to basically an epidemic of cavities within your mouth
and it can eventually lead to the loss of lots of your teeth.
The salivary glands have a function that's a little more important than most people might think they do.
Now these salivary glands that I mentioned are fairly large and discreet
but they're not the only salivary glands that you can find throughout the oral cavity.
There are many tiny clusters of salivary gland cells that secrete saliva into the oral cavity
but these are generally unnamed, lots and lots of them scattered throughout the lining of the mouth.
There's a particular type of salivary gland that's located right next to taste buds
and the main function of these glands is to continually bathe the taste buds with lots of fluid.
The function of this fluid is to wash away food molecules that would be bound by the taste cells
and so that after we eat a meal that's rich in garlic
we don't have to taste garlic the rest of the day because the taste buds will be washed with this salivary flow
and therefore the garlic molecules will be washed away and that frees the taste buds to taste other materials
so we can taste our dessert.
One other gland that I just mentioned in the previous lecture of course is the pancreas
which is probably the largest excreting gland in the body
and of course the function of the pancreas once again is to produce an alkaline fluid
that's delivered into the duodenum to neutralize stomach acid.
Alkaline fluid is not the only component of pancreatic juice however.
When we eat food basically we're eating lots of cells.
We're eating cells derived from plants or fruits or from animals
and all of these cells contain lots of different molecules that have to be broken down so we can absorb them.
One of the important molecules that every cell contains is long stretches of DNA
and if we were to ingest lots of DNA without modifying it this would cause serious problems
because DNA is an extremely long twisted molecule
and long twisted molecules when they're assembled in fluid become extremely viscous.
If you extract the DNA from lots of cells and look at it in a dish it looks like a big mass of cotton candy.
It's a very viscous sticky material.
So the pancreas has to secrete enzymes that destroy DNA
and they also destroy RNA molecules that are found in the cells that we eat.
If we didn't have these enzymes the food in our stomachs would clog up into a viscous mass
so the enzymes produced by the pancreas are essential for the process of digestion of food.
This description of extrican glands is not entirely inclusive.
There are other extrican glands that are scattered throughout the body
but many of these are very small and don't have individual names.
For example there are extrican glands in the skin that produce sweat or sebaceous secretion
and they're important for maintaining the health of the skin
but we're not going to talk about them in any detail here because they're microscopic
and I've already addressed them in another series of lectures that talks about cells.
Now let's turn our attention to endocrine glands.
There are lots of endocrine glands scattered throughout the body
and they all produce molecules that are carried throughout the bloodstream.
Now endocrine glands are not the only structures or cells in the body that produce these molecules.
By definition molecules released into the bloodstream are called hormones
and many organs produce lots of different hormones.
The heart produces a hormone, the thymus gland produces a hormone
and even the kidney produces hormones.
In lots of ways a lot of the different organs in the body are representing endocrine glands
but these other endocrine organs in the body have other things to do.
The heart has to pump blood, the kidney has to produce urine
so we can kind of ignore the endocrine functions of these other organs
and just concentrate on the endocrine glands that have nothing else to do but to make hormones.
Well one of the first endocrine glands that I'd like to talk about
is the cells that make up the endocrine portion of the pancreas.
Now something like 96% of the cells in the pancreas form excreting glands
that make all the digestive enzymes and basic fluid that's delivered into the duodenum.
But in addition to these extricant cells, about 4% of the cells of the pancreas
are organized into small spherical clusters
and these small spherical clusters are given a name they're called Islets of Longerhans.
They were actually discovered in the 1860s by a German medical student named Paul Longerhans
and this medical student was told by his professor that in order to graduate
he had to do a little research so he examined sections of the pancreas under the microscope
and he discovered these small spherical little clusters.
At the time however Paul Longerhans had no idea what they did
so he finished his thesis, described the Islets
and then he went on to practice medicine for four or five years and then he unfortunately died.
So poor Paul Longerhans never did find out what these structures were that he actually discovered
but later scientists found out that they were endocrine organs, clusters of hormones secreting cells.
The two major hormones that are produced by the Islets of Longerhans of the pancreas
are hormones called glucagon and another hormone called insulin.
Both glucagon and insulin are hormones that regulate the levels of sugar in the bloodstream.
Glucagon stimulates the release of glucose or sugar from the liver
and causes the levels of glucose in the bloodstream to go up.
Insulin on the other hand does the opposite effects.
Insulin is a hormone that causes cells to take glucose from the bloodstream
and therefore it stimulates the removal of glucose from the blood and causes levels of glucose to fall.
Between these two hormones the levels of circulating glucose are usually fairly tightly controlled
so that if we eat a large meal that contains lots of sugar
the sugar will pour into our circulation after being released from the liver
and the insulin will stimulate cells to remove the glucose from the bloodstream.
However, there is a disease in which this function of insulin is not taking place normally
and you probably all know that the name of this disease is diabetes mellitus.
In diabetes mellitus the effects of insulin are blocked
so that glucose is not removed from the bloodstream properly
and levels of glucose become highly elevated.
An elevations in blood glucose is one of the symptoms that's associated with
various serious problems in the body.
Diabetics run the risk of lots of abnormal function of a variety of organs.
For example, diabetes is associated with impaired kidney function
and can increase the risk for heart disease.
Diabetes provokes the increase in bleeding by blood vessels in the retina
and it also increases the risk for cataract formation in the lens of the eye
so diabetes represents a major risk factor for the development of blindness.
Finally, diabetes is associated, as I said earlier, with poor circulation
in the extremities and it can impair wound healing in the feet
that can cause amputations of the toes.
So this is a serious disorder and research is currently devoted
to try to understand what causes this disorder
and how we can possibly protect ourselves against it.
Something like 5% of people in the United States
currently have one form or another of diabetes mellitus.
What are the causes of diabetes mellitus?
There's two forms of diabetes.
One form is called type 1 diabetes
and that accounts for about 10% of the people in the United States that have diabetes.
In type 1 diabetes, for some reason, the immune system starts to attack
the cells of the islets of longerhonds
and eventually over a period of years the cells are destroyed
to such an extent that the islets no longer have the ability to make very much insulin.
So the cause of type 1 diabetes mellitus is a lack of insulin
and this usually has to be treated by giving subcutaneous injections of insulin
from a syringe that can correct the abnormalities in glucose metabolism.
Why this actually happens is not certain.
Recent evidence suggests that nerves that innervate the islets of longerhonds
may have a role in provoking this autoimmune attack
and in animals with this type of diabetes,
if you correct these nerve abnormalities,
you can prevent them from developing this type of diabetes.
So research is gradually beginning to uncover some of the causes
for this type of diabetes mellitus.
However, most of the diabetics in the United States
experience the second type of diabetes or type 2 diabetes.
In this form of diabetes, the pancreas still has the ability
to produce fairly large amounts of insulin.
However, for some reason, when the insulin is released into the bloodstream,
the cells of the body don't respond to it properly
so that they exhibit something called resistance to insulin.
We don't know exactly what causes this resistance to insulin.
It's a mystery so far.
Also, the ability of the body to respond to insulin
is diminished as people become more obese.
And since obesity is gradually becoming more and more common in the United States,
diabetes mellitus is also becoming more common.
What the connection is between obesity and diabetes is still not sure.
It's known recently that fat cells have the ability to release molecules,
and some of these molecules can affect the function of the brain
and impair the function of the hypothalamus
so that the hypothalamus doesn't regulate glucose properly.
And other molecules have the ability to directly impair the effects of insulin
on a variety of tissues.
So hopefully with more research that's taking place currently on diabetes,
the causes and perhaps potential cures for diabetes can be achieved.
And this would be a major effect on the health of people in the United States.
Well, the endocrine pancreas is a very interesting and medically important endocrine gland,
but there are other endocrine glands in the body that we also would like to pay some attention to.
Another prominent endocrine gland is called the adrenal gland.
The adrenal glands are actually located fairly close to the pancreas
and they're positioned so that they sit on the top of each kidney,
one on each side of the body.
The name adrenal refers to the fact that each gland is sitting on top of a renal organ.
So it's adrenal.
The adrenal glands are surrounded by abundance amounts of perirenal fat,
but if you can push aside this fat and examine them in the body of an individual,
you can see that they're kind of pyramidal shaped structures.
And when you remove each adrenal gland from the body and cut it open,
it's easily seen that each adrenal gland is composed of two different regions.
In the adrenal gland itself, they have an outermost cortex and an innermost medulla.
And the cells of the outermost cortex secrete hormones called steroid hormones
that are derived from a cholesterol.
And the innermost medulla of the adrenal gland secrete peptide hormones,
which have completely different functions.
So let's describe these two zones of the adrenal gland in a little more detail.
The outermost adrenal cortex of the adrenal gland secrete hormones like cortisol,
and cortisol stimulates the release of glucose from the liver
and also has the ability to suppress the function of the immune system.
And when cortisol was first identified and discovered in the 1950s,
people greeted this discovery with a great deal of anticipation
because it was thought that cortisol might have the potential to treat autoimmune diseases.
And one of the most prominent autoimmune diseases in which the immune system
is damaging our own body is a disease called arthritis.
For uncertain reasons in arthritis, the immune system has attacked the cartilage of the joints.
And therefore it makes it very difficult for anybody to walk.
Well, since the cortisol hormone has the ability to suppress the immune system,
it was initially tried out as a treatment for arthritis.
And initial trials at places like the Mayo Clinic
showed that it was wildly successful.
If you gave arthritic patients large doses of cortisol or a precursor to cortisol called prednisone,
patients had immediate relief of their symptoms of arthritis.
They could get up from their wheelchairs all of a sudden after having not walked for years
and they could walk around and they were all very happy.
So initially, steroids were considered to be wonder drugs
and wonderful treatments that could reverse these autoimmune disorders.
But then after prolonged treatment with cortisol, a number of serious problems started to emerge.
Cortisol is great for suppressing the immune system,
but in large doses it can have harmful effects on the remainder of the body.
It causes the thinning of the skin, weakening the muscles,
and it can promote the tendency to succumb to infections because the immune system is suppressed.
Also, if you give someone prednisone or cortisol for a long period of time,
it causes substantial amounts of weight gain so that people get very fat.
So the lesson that people have learned since the 1950s is that adrenal steroid drugs
are very useful for acute situations in which we have severe allergic reactions.
If you are very allergic to a bee sting,
you can be given an injection of prednisones and that will relieve your symptoms for a while.
Or if you have a serious asthma attack due to immune problems,
you can take prednisone for a small amount of time,
but you can't take it for indefinite periods because that will damage the rest of your body.
Sometimes, the adrenal glands produce too much cortisol for periods of years
and this situation is called Cushing Syndrome
and it causes weight gain, a thin skin, and all the signs of immunosuppression
that we expect to see from steroids.
The inner portion of the adrenal gland produces completely different types of hormones
and some of the hormones are given the names epinephrine and norepinephrine.
These hormones are released into the circulatory system
and they can stimulate the heart rate and increase blood pressure.
Also, the adrenal medulla produces another hormone called enkephalin.
Enkephalin is kind of a remarkable protein hormone.
It has the ability to bind to pain receptors
and it suppresses the reactivity of nerve cells in the nervous system
to put painful stimuli.
So it's a painkiller.
Many of the drugs that we employ for pain relief
actually function by binding to receptors in the body that are designed to bind in kephalin.
Morphine, for example, is a compound produced by plants
and morphine has a shape in three dimensions that's rather similar to the shape of enkephalin.
So it has the ability to bind to these pain receptors
and that's the reason why morphine and other opioid drugs can relieve pain.
Another major endocrine gland in the body is the thyroid gland.
The thyroid gland is located just beneath the larynx.
It's wrapped around the cartilages of the trachea
and it produces two major hormones.
One of the hormones that it makes is a hormone called thyroxin.
Thyroxin acts on the main tissues of the body to stimulate their overall metabolic rate
and so if you inject somebody with a dose of thyroxin,
it causes the heart rate to increase,
it causes your overall general body activity to increase
and it generally causes people to lose weight
as their increased metabolic rate burns up the fat in their body.
Sometimes some of these symptoms can occur naturally
if the thyroid gland produces too much thyroxin.
In this circumstance, an overactive thyroid gland enlarges
and produces a swelling in the neck called a goiter.
This overactive thyroid gland can have harmful effects on the body.
It causes a racing heart and excessive loss of body fat
and another peculiar symptom of overactive thyroid gland
is the tendency of the eyeballs to become pushed forwards in their sockets.
So an observant physician can almost diagnose hyperthyroidism
just by looking at somebody that's coming to their waiting room.
If someone has pop eyes or protruding eyeballs,
this is a good sign there might be something wrong with the thyroid gland.
The reason that this happens apparently is because
the tissues that are located behind the eyeball, such as fat and muscle,
seem unusually sensitive to thyroxin
and when they're exposed to high levels of thyroxin, they tend to swell up
and since they're surrounded by a large bony mass that's right behind the eyeball,
they can't swell up and push backwards so they have to push forwards
and that causes the protrusion of the eyeballs forwards in the eye.
One way to treat this condition of hyperthyroidism
is to inject somebody with a radioactive form of iodine.
Iodine is an atom that is actively accumulated by cells of the thyroid gland
and iodine is normally added to molecules in the thyroid
to produce the thyroid hormone called thyroxin.
If you give radioactive iodine to a person,
it's preferentially accumulated in the thyroid gland
so it won't damage the rest of the body
but the high levels of radiation that accumulate in the thyroid
are sufficient to kill some of the thyroid cells
and therefore it can reduce the overactivity of the thyroid gland.
Now since some forms of radioactive iodine have very short half-lives,
the radiation that accumulates in the thyroid dies off relatively quickly
and therefore it won't accumulate to cause other problems.
Another hormone produced by the thyroid gland is called calcitonin
and calcitonin stimulates these cells that modulate bones
to tube up on bones, to stop destroying bone
and therefore less calcium is released into the bloodstream.
So calcitonin is a hormone that tones down blood calcium.
Now just on top of the thyroid gland hidden beneath its dorsal surface
are two other small glands called parathyroid glands
that are lying alongside the thyroid.
These glands produce another hormone called parathyroid hormone
and these have an opposite effect on bone than calcitonin does.
Parathyroid hormone stimulates the breakdown of bone
and causes more calcium to be released in the bloodstream.
Now calcium is a very important molecule
because it regulates how excitable nerves and muscles are
and if blood levels of calcium fall too low
it causes uncontrollable firing of the nerves and muscles
and repeated contraction of muscles that can actually lead to death.
So the parathyroid glands are essential for life
and in the early parts of the 20th century
when surgeons were doing surgery on the thyroid gland to correct goiter
they would occasionally remove the parathyroid glands by accident
not even recognizing that they were there.
And in this search situation patients would wake up from surgery
and start developing uncontrollable convulsions
and they would die because of the abnormalities in calcium levels on the bloodstream.
Nowadays of course surgeons know better
and this is almost never a result of the thyroid surgery.
There's one final gland that we need to talk about today
that is basically a controller from large portions of the endocrine system.
This gland is the pituitary gland.
The pituitary gland is suspended from the bottom of the brain
by a thin process called the infundibulum
and most of the gland is surrounded by a cavity in the sphenoid bone
and you may remember from the first lecture in this series
that the sphenoid bone is kind of a bat shaped bone
that forms the floor of the cranial cavity and supports most of the brain.
Well a little cavity within the sphenoid bone holds the pituitary gland
and the pituitary gland is an important endocrine gland
it produces lots of hormones that regulate the functions of other endocrine organs in the body.
The anterior pituitary gland is a specific division of the pituitary gland
that secretes a number of different hormones.
The anterior pituitary cells make two hormones called FSH and LH
which stands for follicle stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone.
These two hormones are secreted in the bloodstream
and they control the activity of the ovaries or the testicles
so they're so-called gonadotrophin hormones.
These levels of hormone increase in early adolescence
and stimulate the process of puberty.
They activate the gonads to cause the production of sex hormones.
Another hormone produced by the anterior pituitary is a hormone called ACTH
or adrenal corticotrophic hormone.
This hormone stimulates the adrenal cortex to produce cortisol.
Another hormone once again is called TSH or thyroid stimulating hormone.
This hormone released from the pituitary gland increases the function of the thyroid gland
and causes it to produce more thyroxin.
Two final hormones produced by this hormone factory underneath the brain
are growth hormone and prolactin.
Growth hormone acts on the liver and causes it to secrete a stimulating protein
called insulin-like growth factor.
This insulin-like growth factor goes to the bones and causes the bones to elongate.
Occasionally, this particular portion of the pituitary gland will develop a tumor
and this tumor will secrete excessive amounts of growth hormone
and you can imagine what the result of that is.
It causes gigantism or an extremely enlarged height.
Finally, another pituitary hormone that's produced by the anterior pituitary is prolactin
and prolactin functions to stimulate milk synthesis in lactating mammary glands.
In males, it doesn't seem to have very much in the way of function,
but of course in females, it functions very much to produce milk after a pregnancy.
Finally, there's one other portion of the pituitary gland that we have to consider
and that's the posterior portion of the pituitary gland.
The posterior portion of the pituitary gland is actually a reservoir
for hormones that are synthesized in another part of the body.
Two hormones were synthesized in collections of nerve cells in the hypothalamus.
These hormones are called oxytocin and vasopressin.
Oxytocin and vasopressin are carried down from the brain
and stored in nerve endings that terminate in the posterior pituitary gland.
When oxytocin is secreted from the posterior pituitary into the bloodstream,
oxytocin stimulates contractile cells in the mammary glands to push on secretory cells
and that causes the release of milk onto the nipple.
The other hormone stored in the posterior pituitary gland is called vasopressin,
or anodiuretic hormone, and this hormone acts on the kidney
to allow the production of a dilute urine.
And we'll talk about the mechanism by which this functions in a succeeding lecture.
So this concludes our tour through the glands of the body
and it gives you a brief overview of the endocrine tissues of the body.
And in succeeding lectures, we'll talk about how some of these hormones
affect organ systems like the reproductive system and the urinary system.
After listening to lecture 10, a student posed this question to Professor Young.
Why is there such an increase in diabetes in the United States?
One of the noteworthy features of current life in the United States
is that diabetes is on the increase.
And this seems to be directly related to the increase in incidence of obesity.
Obesity is a serious health problem, but we don't really know all the causes that cause obesity.
But clearly, the reason that people become obese is that they expand fewer calories
and they expand more, let me say that again,
clearly one of the reasons why people become obese is that they expand fewer calories and then they eat.
So you could imagine that obesity might partly be due to poor eating habits
and also lessened activity in this world that's dominated by automobiles rather than walking.
One curious fact that's been noted in the last few years is that consumption of soft drinks
and other high sugar drinks may partly account for the increases in obesity in the United States.
A delivery of large amounts of sugar into the stomach rapidly by drinking
doesn't allow the body to monitor calories properly so that when someone eats a soft drink with lots and lots of sugar,
they don't decrease the amount of food they eat and in proportion to the amount of calories they've ingested by the soft drink.
So this rapid form of delivery of these processed foods into the GI tract
probably upsets the monitoring of calories by the body
and maybe one of the contributing factors in causing obesity in the United States.
For a course guide for future reference, call Recorded Books at 1-800-636-3399
and we'll send you a free copy. A shipping charge will apply.
