Human Anatomy, Lecture 11, The Respiratory System.
In this lecture, I'd like to introduce to you some of the components of the respiratory system.
The main function of the respiratory system is to extract oxygen from the air and deliver it to cells.
The cells utilize the oxygen for the efficient metabolism of our nutrient molecules,
produces the energy they're required to keep the body going.
So, oxygen is, of course, an essential ingredient for life of human beings.
In addition, the respiratory system functions to expel the waste products from the body,
such as carbon dioxide, which is a molecule that results from metabolism of food.
So, entry of oxygen and the exit of carbon dioxide is the main function of the respiratory system.
Well, the respiratory system, of course, begins with the nose.
And the nose is the area of the body, which air enters the body,
and is protected by a variety of structures that prepare the air for entry into the lungs.
At the entry of the nose, we have a small number of hairs that help filter out particulate matter
that otherwise would enter the respiratory system and clog up the lungs.
So, right away, we have a defensive system at the very beginning of the respiratory system.
In addition, the respiratory system contains a patch of sensory cells that are located at the very top of the nasal cavity.
This patch of sensory cells contains olfactory neurons,
and the neurons have receptors that are able to bind to a large variety of molecules that are found floating in the air,
and that, of course, gives us our sensation of smell.
As air enters the nasal cavity, it first has to pass through a number of different structures.
And one of the structures that air encounters are three flattened bones that are attached to the lateral walls of the nasal cavity.
These flattened bones are curved into a variety of unusual shapes, and these bones are called nasal conchi or nasal turbinates.
As air encounters these highly curved bones in the interior of the nose,
the passage of the air is slowed down and the air is made much more turbulent.
Why do you suppose the nose would want to have these barriers to the passage of air?
Well, the function of the nasal conchi is to prepare the air for entry into the lungs.
The air that's coming into the nasal cavity is usually fairly cool and quite dry,
and if this cool, dry air were to allow it to enter the lungs, it would basically desiccate the lungs and dry them out,
and the lung wouldn't be able to function.
So the air has to first be prepared, and the way this is accomplished is that the air that's passing over these highly convoluted nasal conchi
is moisturized by moisture that escapes from blood vessels in the interior of the nose,
and these blood vessels also contain highly warmed arterial blood, and that warmth is conveyed into the air so that the air is both warmed up and moistened.
It's only after this initial preparatory period that the air is in good shape to enter the rest of the respiratory system.
Joining the nasal cavity attached to the lateral walls of the nasal cavity are a number of hollow spaces that are present within the bones of the anterior face.
These hollow, air-filled spaces are called perinasal sinuses, and they're present in a variety of different bones.
There are some perinasal sinuses that are located within the frontal bone just over the eyebrows that lead into the nasal cavity by a small openings called meatuses.
Another bone, the sphenoid bone, also contains a hollow space called the sphenoid sinus.
Bones in the back of the nasal cavity, called the ethmoid bones, contain their own nasal sinuses.
And finally, the maxillary bones that are forming the lower margins of the cheeks also contain hollow cavities called maxillary sinuses.
All of these hollow cavities continually secrete small amounts of mucus that drains into the nasal cavity.
But other than that, they don't really have a very strong function.
Their main function is to allow the growth of the face as a baby changes its shape of its head from infancy to adulthood.
By expanding these air-filled spaces in the skull, the overall volume of the face can be enlarged to allow for the attachment of muscles.
But at the same time, because these spaces are filled with air, they don't add to the weight of the skull very much.
So this is a very efficient mechanism of changing the overall shape of the head.
Perinasal sinuses are not terribly important in human beings. They're relatively small.
But in other animals, they have a very important function.
One of the animals that comes to mind immediately is the elephant.
If you take a look at the head of an elephant, just above the eyes and above the trunk, you can see two large bulges that would kind of look like the forehead of an elephant.
But in actual fact, these bulges are not really the forehead. They represent very enlarged frontal sinuses that are filled full of air.
This allows the skull of the elephant to become larger and allows the attachment of very strong muscles that hold the head of the elephant up.
Without these large frontal sinuses, the skull would be unable to be supported by the muscles and an elephant wouldn't be able to hold up this very heavy trunk and tusks.
So perinasal sinuses in lots of animals are very, very important for the structure and function of the head.
But in human beings, they're relatively small.
Nevertheless, these perinasal sinuses can occasionally cause us some medical problems.
If the meiasis that open into the nasal cavity become blocked, the sinuses still keep producing mucus and the mucus can accumulate within the sinuses and become infected.
So this results in a condition called a sinus infection.
And a sinus infection is actually easily diagnosable because it causes facial pain.
If you have pain behind your eyebrows and your frontal sinuses, or if you're painting your cheeks and your maxillary sinuses,
this is usually a pretty reliable indication that you develop a sinus infection.
A common approach to treating sinus infections these days is the administration of antibiotics, which diminish the growth of bacteria in the sinuses.
This actual practice is a little bit controversial these days.
It's not always clear if antibiotic treatment routinely improves the course of a sinus infection.
And some physicians are concerned that excessive amounts of antibiotics in the population can lead to the production of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
But generally, particularly for younger children, antibiotics are usually given to cure sinus infections.
Occasionally, if you develop a sinus infection in the maxillary sinuses, it can cause some peculiar side effects.
Many of the small nerves that originate from the teeth pass within the walls of the maxillary sinuses
and are only separated from the interior of the sinuses by paper-thin layers of bone.
If that bone experiences pressure from a maxillary infection, these nerves can react in a very painful fashion,
and they can fool us into thinking they were actually developing a toothache.
So before you go to the dentist, because one of your teeth aches, you should make sure that you don't actually have a sinus infection
that's pressing upon the nerves leading from the teeth and giving us the false impression that we've developed cavities in one of our upper teeth.
Now, in addition to the maxillary sinuses, many animals contain small sensory organs within the nasal cavity.
And these special sensory organs are located in the midline septum of the nose, and they're called vomarole nasal organs.
And they take their name from a small bone that helps form the nasal septum called the vomar.
In many animals, these vomarole nasal organs are of very great importance in regulating lots of behavior.
The vomarole nasal organ of animals like deer and cows and pigs and sheep and rats
all seem to specifically bind specific chemicals that are present in the air that we're inhaling.
These chemicals are called pheromones, and they're produced in secretions from other animals.
For example, they're present in the urine of dogs and cats and rats and monkeys,
and they're also present in the sweat secreted by lots of mammalian species.
These pheromones act like biological signals that signal adjacent animals what the reproductive status of an animal is.
So pheromones released from female animals like sheep or cats or deer can have a stimulatory effect upon males
and provoke them to engage in male sexual behavior.
So these are airborne cues that regulate behavior in communities of many different types of animals,
and the effects of these pheromones is dependent upon their detection by the specialized sensory organ called the vomarole nasal organ.
Well, what about human beings? We have sweat and other secretions that may produce pheromones.
Are vomarole nasal organs important for our behaviors as well?
Well, human beings do have a tiny vomarole nasal organ in the middle of the nose,
but it's much smaller than those of other animals, and if you look carefully at the cells of the vomarole nasal organ,
they don't seem to be actually functioning.
So this represents a vestigial organ that's no longer very important in human beings,
and it makes it relatively unlikely that pheromones have a very powerful effect upon human behavior, unlike in other animals.
Well, as air proceeds through the nose and passes through the nasal conchi or nasal turbinates,
it eventually arrives at the back of the nose or the nasal pharynx.
It passes by a mass of lymphoid tissue, which is called the pharyngeal tonsil,
which helps identify and attack any nasty bacteria that happen to be inhaled along with the air.
And then the air passes through the back of the mouth, a back of the nasal cavity to enter the oral pharynx,
and is directed back down toward the trachea and larynx.
Now, before the air can pass down into the trachea, it has to make sure that it gets through a number of different barriers.
One of the barriers that interferes with the flow of air into the respiratory system is the soft palate,
which can be moved upward during swallowing to block the passage of air when we're eating.
Also, there's another barrier that protects the opening of the trachea
and prevents the passage of food into the trachea when we're eating,
and this barrier is a flap of flexible cartilage called the epiglottis.
The epiglottis covers the opening of the trachea and the larynx
and prevents food from entering it when we're not trying to breathe.
Well, after the air passes through these barriers, it moves along the back of the pharynx.
The pharynx is enclosed by three flattened muscles called pharyngeal constrictors
that form the posterior wall of the pharynx.
And then, as the air leaves the pharynx, it enters a structure called the larynx.
The larynx is popularly known as our voice box, and it's composed of a number of very complicated different structures.
The uppermost structure of the larynx is a small curved bone called the hyoid bone,
and it's easy to feel the hyoid bone just by putting your thumb and forefinger just below your jaw
and wiggling it around just above your larynx, and you can feel there's a solid rigid structure there.
The hyoid bone is a bony anchor, and the larynx more or less hangs from this bony anchor
that's suspended in the very top of the throat.
The remainder of the larynx is composed of six different cartilaginous structures composed of cartilage.
One of the structures we've already mentioned, that's the flap of cartilage called the epiglottis.
Below the epiglottis, which is more or less a flap-shaped structure,
are cylindrical structures that are also built out of cartilage.
The outermost structure of the larynx is a mass of cartilage called the thyroid cartilage,
and it represents the structure we can see in our throat, and which is popularly known as the Adam's apple.
The thyroid cartilages tend to be larger in males and in females,
because they respond directly to the male sex hormone testosterone, which makes the thyroid cartilage get bigger.
So, men tend to have a larger Adam's apple than women.
The thyroid cartilage is the outermost cartilage of the larynx,
and it sits atop a ring-shaped mass of cartilage called the cricoid cartilage.
Now, if you look at the structure of the larynx from above,
you can distinguish the outermost thyroid cartilage and a slightly lower ring of cricoid cartilage,
and sitting upon this ring of cricoid cartilage, there are two smaller little masses of cartilage called the arytenoid cartilage.
The arytenoid cartilages have the ability to sit on top of the cricoid cartilage,
and they pivot and rotate in different directions.
This is important for the function of the larynx, because the arytenoid cartilages represent one spot
for the attachment of long ligaments called the vocal cords.
These masses of tissue called vocal cords stretch from the back of the larynx
and anchor themselves to the arytenoid cartilage,
and then they move forward into the interior of the thyroid cartilages
and are anchored to the inside of the thyroid cartilages.
Now, the vocal cords represent one final barrier to the passage of air into the respiratory system,
but fortunately this barrier can be made to open and close,
and the way this is accomplished is that the arytenoid cartilages pivot or rotate on themselves
in response to tugging by muscles, and when they do this,
the arytenoid cartilages cause the opening and closure of the opening to the respiratory system,
which is called the glottis.
In the open position, the arytenoid cartilages are pivoted laterally,
and that causes the posterior portions of the vocal cords to move apart from each other,
and that allows the free passage of air when we're normally breathing.
However, the arytenoid cartilages can also rotate in the opposite direction,
and that brings the vocal cords closer together.
When the vocal cords are close together, the only way air can exit the respiratory system
is by forcing itself past the vocal cords,
and this of course causes the vocal cords to vibrate and produces the sounds of our voice.
The timbre and frequency of our voice is related to the amount of tension on the vocal cords
and also to the length of the vocal cords,
and since the thyroid cartilages are larger in males than in females,
the vocal cords tend to be longer and they vibrate at a lower pitch,
so that's the explanation for why males tend to have a lower voice tone than females.
Now, human beings are kind of unusual because the larynx in a human being is relatively low in the throat.
In most animals, the larynx is positioned higher up in the throat, much closer to the tongue,
and this has an influence on the ability of animals to produce sounds.
Since our larynx is relatively low in the throat,
it allows for a greater resonating capacity of the upper respiratory tract
and allows human beings to produce perhaps a greater variety of sounds than many other animals.
Also, the position of the larynx in the throat is very variable depending on what type of animal you're looking at,
and an extreme example of a very high larynx can be seen in animals like snakes.
You may remember that snakes have a very difficult way of eating.
A snake has to kill its prey, like a little mouse for example,
and then a snake has to dislocate its jaw and force the mouse down its throat.
If we were to do this, and it takes considerable time for a snake to accomplish this feat,
a snake would suffocate in normal condition because the mouse passing through its throat would compress the larynx
and would prevent the passage of air into the lungs.
But the snake solved this problem by having the larynx up in such a high position
that can extrude it into the oral cavity just near the tongue.
So the larynx actually kind of hangs out of the mouth of the snake while it's eating a mouse,
and that allows the snake to breathe even while the mouse is slowly passing down
through the head of the snake and into its GI tract.
So larynxes are rather variable structures that can have very different anatomy
depending on what type of animal you're looking at.
One curious thing is that animals like birds completely lack a larynx,
so they don't make noises via larynx, but they have a completely different structure called the syrinx.
And the syrinx is not located at the top of the trachea at all.
Instead, it's located at the bottom of the trachea where the trachea divides into two tubes called bronchi.
The syrinx of birds is quite different in structure from the larynx of mammals,
and this allows birds to produce a wonderful variety of sounds, basically termed bird song.
So the anatomy of the respiratory system is very variable depending on what type of animal you're looking at
and allows the animals to perform quite different functions.
Well, as air finally passes through the larynx and past the vocal cords,
it finally gets into a very long flexible tube called the trachea.
The task of conveying air down into a wet, moist respiratory system is rather difficult task.
The air passages that have to conduct air have to be relatively moist,
and yet at the same time they have to be flexible, and this is a real challenge for an engineer.
Let me explain why the conduction of air in the respiratory system poses difficult problems in terms of engineering.
Let's say you decided you want to take a sip of a drink out of a cup,
but you don't want to put your lips to the cup, you want to suck it up through a straw.
Well, that's usually very possible if the straw is not wet,
but if you have a paper straw and soak it and then try to stick it into a glass and suck air up through it and water,
the suction that's exerted on the inside of the straw will cause it to collapse.
So you can't have very humid and moist tubes in the respiratory system that also convey air,
because the suction produced by sucking air up into the respiratory system will cause the structures to collapse
and they won't be able to convey air.
So how does the body solve this engineering problem?
These structures have to be wet and moist, but they also have to be rigid.
Well, the way this is solved is that the trachea is encircled at intervals by rings of rigid cartilage.
These relatively flexible but still rigid cartilage's masses keep the structure of the trachea open
even when large amounts of air are passing down it.
At the same time, the trachea can still be moist and contribute to the moisture that's present in the air,
so the air won't desiccate the lungs.
So this is fundamentally ideal design for the trachea.
On the other hand, if the trachea were continuously provided with lots and lots of cartilage all along its length,
the trachea would be a completely rigid tube and that would be a very serious mistake
because that means that every time we bend our head, we'd break the trachea.
So the only way the trachea can function is that Mother Nature has divided it into a segment and structure
that at intervals contain rigid elements that are joined by flexible elements,
not like a drinking straw that has rigid in it that allows the drinking straw to be bent.
This is the only way the trachea could work and it's a really tribute to Mother Nature
that the trachea has been designed in this fashion.
Well, we now know that the design of the trachea and the engineering of the trachea is not exactly an accident.
Like many other parts of the body, the trachea is divided into discrete segments
and each segment contains either cartilage or more flexible connective tissue that allows the trachea to be bent.
These segmented structures in the body develop under the influence of DNA binding proteins,
as I said, called homeotic proteins, and each homeotic protein is present in each body segment
and dictates how that body segment will develop.
Well, the trachea is no exception to this rule and the trachea is developed under the influence of a number of DNA binding homeotic proteins.
One of these homeotic proteins is called NKX2.1,
another unwieldy name that molecular biologists have devised,
and yet another DNA binding protein is a protein called Sonic Hedgehog.
Both of these proteins contribute to the development of the trachea
and it allows for the creation of these tracheal rings that allow the trachea to be both rigid and flexible at the same time.
If these proteins are disturbed or artificially blocked during development,
the cartilage rings in the trachea fail to form properly and an animal will not survive because it can't breathe.
Well, the engineering problems inherent in conveying air into the lungs are continued
as the trachea divides into two large tubes that direct air into the right lung and the left lung.
These two large tubes at the bottom of the trachea are called primary bronchi
and they contain patches of cartilage in their walls as well that helps them remain open
even under the influence of suction involved in carrying air.
The right bronchus that goes into the right lung is a little bit shorter, wider,
and it's a little straighter than the left bronchus.
And as a consequence of that, if you happen to inhale a foreign object that's carried into the respiratory system,
this foreign object is more likely to fall down into the straight right bronchus and lodge into the right lung.
These two primary bronchi divide into three lobar bronchi in the right lung
and two lobar bronchi in the left lung.
So that means that the right lung has three basic lobes and the left lung has two basic lobes.
Each lobe is further subdivided into smaller and smaller lobules
and these lobules are called bronchopulmonary segments.
So the lungs have discrete anatomical divisions that divide the air into various portions of the lung
and allow oxygen to be distributed into smaller and smaller structures.
As air moves down the respiratory system into the bronchi,
it enters smaller tubules that branch off the bronchi called bronchioles.
And finally, the bronchioles terminate into masses of thin ball-shaped structures called alveoli.
Each alveolus is surrounded by lots and lots of capillaries
and the oxygen that's carried into the lungs through the air reaches each alveolus
and is transferred into the massive capillaries that convey oxygen from the lungs into the rest of the body.
Many of the structures that are present in the lungs are lined by cells that have cilia on them
and cilia are hair-like processes that are constantly beating in one direction.
They're beating up toward the oral pharynx.
In addition, many of the cells in the respiratory system produce a sticky mucus
and the mucus is carried up into the upper parts of the respiratory system by the movement of all these cilia.
This sticky mucus and this ciliary action help trap a particulate matter and bacteria
and move them out of the lungs so we don't develop lung infections.
This bacteria-infested mucus is eventually swallowed and conveyed down to the stomach
where stomach acids make short work of all these harmful organisms and destroy them.
Now, of course, the primary function of the lungs themselves is to exchange oxygen for carbon dioxide.
And this function is, of course, important in all land-living organisms.
But a lot of other animals on Earth have a completely different system for extracting oxygen from their environment.
Fish, of course, use gills to extract oxygen from water so they don't need lungs.
Some land-living animals actually can also dispense with lungs.
Some certain types of salamanders and frogs have small lungs or even lungs that are almost completely gone.
They don't require lungs to extract oxygen from their environment because they have very thin skins
and so they can actually absorb oxygen that's dissolved in the water that they swim in.
A lot of animals don't have the kind of respiratory system that we have,
but of course, since we live on dry land, we have to depend on the lungs for breathing and that's why we have lungs.
Now, in order to inhale air, the lungs have to change their size and shape
and this is a consequence of the alteration of the interior of the thoracic cavity.
When we are stimulating breathing, nerves that innervate the diaphragm cause the diaphragm of this musketer,
mass of tissue beneath the lungs to contract.
When the diaphragm contracts, this causes the thoracic cavity to become larger.
It's like we're tightening the drum head on a drum.
It causes the diaphragm to change its shape from a dome-shaped shape to kind of a flat plate-like shape.
As a consequence of this, the thoracic cavity expands and that causes a suction.
It sucks air down into the lungs from the trachea and bronchi.
Now, in order to relax the lungs, the lungs themselves have to contract
and so as a response to the relaxation of the diaphragm, the lungs themselves have elastic fibers
that cause the lungs to undergo something called elastic recoil
and this elastic recoil causes the lungs to partly collapse
and that causes the expulsion of the air from the respiratory system.
Now, it turns out that there's a membrane that surrounds the lungs called the plural membrane
and this plural membrane is in contact with a fluid-filled space
that's located between the lungs and the thoracic wall and ribs.
This fluid-filled space between the lungs and the thoracic wall
must be constantly intact all the time.
If air is accidentally introduced into this space,
the air will rush into the space between the lungs and the thoracic cavity
and will cause the lungs to collapse.
So, if you get a penetrating wound to the thorax,
one of the things that a surgeon has to be concerned about
is the potential for one of the lungs to actually collapse
due to the introduction of air into the thorax.
Actually, this is not always done entirely by accident.
Occasionally, the lungs develop serious infections called tuberculosis,
which is a bacterial infection of the respiratory system
and one of the early treatments for tuberculosis
was the actual artificial introduction of air into the thoracic cavity
which causes one of the lungs to collapse.
This actually has a beneficial effect on the lung
because in this circumstance, the lung doesn't have to do any more work
and this makes it possible for the lung to recover from a tuberculosis infection.
For a long time, this particular type of approach to treating tuberculosis
was abandoned because antibiotics are much more effective
and useful in treating tuberculosis.
However, in recent decades, antibiotic-resistant strains of tuberculosis
have appeared in many parts of the world,
so this old-fashioned approach to treating tuberculosis may be on the return.
A pneumothorax or collapsed lung
may be once again retaining its place in the medical treatment of tuberculosis.
The moist, warm environment that's present in the lungs
makes the lungs particularly vulnerable to infections,
so there's many types of infections that can affect lung function
and disorders in the respiratory system are very common
and can affect as many as 35 million Americans currently.
There's a variety of medical conditions that affect the respiratory system
that everyone should have some knowledge about.
One lung disorder that's particularly important for the health of newborn infants
is something called a respiratory distress syndrome.
Respiratory distress syndrome arises from an improper production
of a particular molecule by cells in the lungs.
This molecule is a substance called surfactant,
and surfactant is a lipid-rich substance that's secreted by lung cells,
and it causes a decrease in the surface tension of the fluid
that bays the surface of the alveoli of the lungs.
Without this surfactant,
the alveoli tend to have much greater surface tension in fluid,
and this causes the alveoli to collapse.
So without this surfactant, the fluids fill up the lungs
and impair the ability for breathing.
This is a particular serious condition in newborn babies
because newly developed lungs have not acquired the complete ability to make surfactant,
and therefore it's a condition that can affect lots of newborns.
For some reason, male babies are twice as likely,
or something like 50% more likely to develop this condition than female babies,
probably because testosterone has an influence on the production of surfactant
and impairs the production of it in male babies.
There are a number of other serious conditions that affect the respiratory system
that everyone should have some knowledge of.
One of these serious conditions is, of course, lung cancer.
Lung cancer is a particularly pernicious type of cancer.
If you tend to develop lung cancer, the tumors that originate in the lungs
are very resistant to treatment,
and so even in spite of chemotherapy or radiation treatment,
only about 12% of people that develop lung cancer
actually wind up surviving more than five years after their initial diagnosis.
So this is a very serious form of cancer.
There are many causes of lung cancer,
but smoking is clearly one of the environmental causes
that greatly facilitate the development of cancer in patients.
Recent statistics suggest that people who smoke are something like 20 times more likely
to develop the lung cancer than people that don't smoke.
So clearly, the use of cigarettes and cigars poses a substantial health risk
of the general population.
Another serious malady of the respiratory system is something called asthma.
Asthma is a condition that causes the constriction of the bronchioles and bronchi,
which narrow the passages of air and makes the intake of air into the respiratory system
much more difficult.
Asthma is actually a relatively common condition,
and it affects about 7% of the adult population.
The actual causes of asthma are relatively controversial.
We don't know why people that get asthma necessarily have to develop this condition.
Most people feel that asthma represents an overreaction of cells of the immune system
to inhaled allergens or foreign materials.
And when the immune system reacts to these foreign materials,
it stimulates the smooth muscle that surrounds the bronchioles and bronchi to constrict.
So one of the basic ways of treating asthma is to inhale drugs that act on receptors
that are present on the smooth muscle cells.
One of these receptors binds the hormone called epinephrine,
and a drug that acts on these receptors is called albuterol.
And in response to this particular type of drug,
the smooth muscle cells that are constricting in the bronchioles of an asthmatic person
relax and this relieves the symptoms of bronchiol asthma.
Another approach to this situation of an overactive immune system
is to inhale aerosol forms of corticosteroid hormones,
hormones that are similar to the hormones produced by the adrenal gland.
These hormones, as I've said previously,
suppress the activity of the immune system
and tend to prevent the constriction of bronchioles that are seen in asthma.
So a combination of corticosteroids and albuterol
are effective ways of treating asthma and make asthma much more bearable to live with.
Another example in this long list of respiratory disorders
is a disorder called cystic fibrosis.
Cystic fibrosis affects many of the organ systems of the body,
but it's particularly damaging to the respiratory system.
And this inherited disease is relatively common.
It's present in about 1 out of 2400 people.
In cystic fibrosis, there's an abnormality in the transport of chloride ions
from one part of the body to another.
Cells that are affected in cystic fibrosis have an abnormal chloride transporter protein.
As a result of this, there's an excessive accumulation of sodium chloride
in many of the secretory passages of the body.
And this high amount of salt in these secretory passages
cause an accumulation of thick mucus in these passages.
Cystic fibrosis can affect the function of the pancreas,
which has many ducts that contain secretory material and sodium chloride.
And also, among the passages that are affected in the body are the bronchioles.
In cystic fibrosis, the mucus that's secreted in the bronchi
becomes much too thick and viscous and contains much too much salt.
As a consequence, this thick mucus traps a lot of cells in their secretions,
and these dying cells break down and add their DNA into the mucus.
And as I said previously, DNA is an extremely long, thin molecule
that becomes very viscous when you try to dissolve it into solution.
So this DNA in the mucus makes the mucus even worse.
The only real treatment for this problem that develops in the lungs
of people that have cystic fibrosis is a repeated gentle pounding on the back,
which can kind of loosen the mucus in the lungs and allow persons
to cough up the mucus and try to get rid of it.
More recently, other treatments have been added to this tapping on the back,
and this involves the inhalation of aerosols that contain enzymes called DNAs.
This enzyme has the ability to break down the DNA released from these dying cells
and makes the mucus in the lungs much less viscous.
So this is one treatment that can help improve the lives of people
with this rather serious and debilitating disorder.
Another common lung malady is a condition called emphysema.
And in emphysema, the elastic fibres that are present in the lung break down,
and therefore the lung doesn't have an adequate ability to recoil after inspiration.
That means that the lungs are chronically expanded or over-inflated,
and it makes exhalation and removal of air from the lungs much more difficult than normal.
We don't know all the causes of this particular lung disease,
but it seems to be due to an excessive action in the lungs of an enzyme called elastase.
And this elastase enzyme tends to break down the elastic fibres in the lung
and prevent the lungs from undergoing elastic recoil.
This also seems to be worsened by smoking,
so that's another reason why smoking is basically a condition that's bad for you medically.
The thoracic cage is, of course, covered over by the 12 ribs that enclose the lungs
and make a rigid cavity that allows the lungs to expand all the time.
And covering over the thoracic cavity are a number of muscles.
These muscles bridge the gaps between ribs, and they're called intercostal muscles.
The Latin word for rib is costa, so these are the muscles between the ribs, or intercostal muscles.
These muscles also aid the process of inspiration because they help elevate the ribs,
and by elevating the ribs you also expand the volume of the thoracic cavity,
and that causes the lungs to expand when we're breathing.
So this completes our discussion of the respiratory system,
which is a system particularly prone to lots of different disorders.
And in the remaining lectures we'll consider some additional body systems,
like the urinary system and the reproductive system.
