Human Anatomy, Lecture 12, The Urinary System.
In this lecture, I'd like to discuss the components
of the urinary system.
The urinary system is composed of a very restricted number
of organs.
When we talk about the urinary system,
we're really referring to simply the kidneys, long tubules
that leave the kidneys, the ureters that convey urine away
from the kidney to the urinary bladder.
We'll talk about the urinary bladder briefly.
And then we'll talk briefly about the tubule
that leaves the urinary system, the urethra, which
delivers urine to the exterior of the body for removal.
The urinary system has a very important function
for the body, because the urinary system is constantly
monitoring the composition of the blood.
If the levels of important molecules in the blood
become abnormal, the kidneys' job
is to remove the harmful molecules
and to add beneficial molecules back into the bloodstream.
It also regulates the total amount
of water that's present in the body
so that we don't become dehydrated or overhydrated.
And since the health of all the organ systems of the body
is dependent upon the proper amounts of water and molecules
that enter the organs, the kidneys
have a critical role in maintaining
the health of the human body.
The development of the urinary system is rather peculiar,
because developing embryos develop
a number of different kidneys.
And some of these kidneys are retained for periods of time
and some of them completely disappear.
In the early stages of embryogenesis,
the human embryo grows a tiny little kidney called
a pronephrose.
However, this pronephrose really never
becomes very functional and degenerates quickly
after the first several weeks of development.
A second type of kidney then forms,
and this kidney is called a mesonephrose.
This mesonephrose doesn't resemble the adult kidney
that we're all familiar with in any way at all.
The mesonephrose is a long, sausage-shaped structure
that appears during about the first five or six weeks of life
and it functions for about the first three months
of embryogenesis.
The mesonephrose doesn't look like the adult kidney,
but instead it's a sausage-shaped structure
that extends all along the backbone
from the cranial part of the body
down to the caudal part of the body.
This long tubular structure receives blood vessels
from the descending order at regular intervals,
and the blood that is conveyed by these blood vessels
is purified by this long mesonephrose
and they're delivered back into the circulation.
So this peculiar type of kidney
is kind of a primitive form of a kidney.
And this primitive form of a kidney
kind of resembles the type of kidney
that was present early during evolution.
This type of kidney can be seen in sharks
and some other more primitive vertebrate animals.
It doesn't resemble the adult form of kidney
that we'll be talking about a little later.
Well, after about the initial stages of embryogenesis,
a third type of kidney will sprout
from the very lower portions of the urinary system.
And this third type of kidney is called the metanephrose.
The metanephrose represents the type of kidney tissue
that will eventually grow into the adult kidney
and it will replace the mesonephrose,
which will largely degenerate
and the mesonephrose will eventually completely disappear.
The metanephrose starts out as a small bud
that forms close to the developing bladder
and then it enlarges and begins to actually move
in the abdominal cavity.
It ascends from the pelvic brim made by the pelvis
and ascends farther up into the abdominal cavity
until it stops at a final position,
not too far away from the diaphragm.
Now this peculiar movement of this adult form of kidney
proceeds until they're enlarged to the adult size.
It occasionally, in some people,
this whole process of kidney movement is unsuccessful
so that occasionally the developing metanephric kidneys,
the adult kidneys, will remain in the pelvic cavity
and may actually fuse together
to form a peculiar looking kidney called a horseshoe kidney.
This doesn't happen very frequently,
but it is medically significant
and it happens in about one out of 600 people.
So a physician that's trying to check the kidney function
of one of these people will be surprised
because there won't be any kidneys in the lower back at all.
They'll be down in the pelvic cavity
and they often may be fused together.
Most of the time, this abnormally shaped kidney
functions relatively well
and it doesn't have any serious medical consequences
for the person that's experiencing
this type of development.
Well, as the adult kidneys finally form
and take up their proper place in the abdominal cavity,
they take up the job of filtering blood
and the other embryonic type of kidney, the mesonephros,
will largely disappear and degenerate.
Some portions of the mesonephros actually tend to persist,
particularly in male embryos
and we'll talk about what these persisting
mesonephric structures actually will form
when we get to the last series of lectures
that describe the reproductive systems.
Well, the adult kidneys and metanephric kidneys
have a very challenging task to perform.
They have to constantly monitor the composition of the blood
and filter all the impurities out of the bloodstream.
In order to accomplish this,
the kidneys receive very large amounts of blood,
something like 20% of the blood that leaves a heart
is passing through the kidneys at any one time,
so they're very, very vascular organs.
Initially, lots of fluid is filtered out of the blood.
The initial process of urine formation
involves the creation of 125 milliliters of minute of fluid
that is filtered out of the bloodstream.
Now, of course, if we were to pour all this fluid
directly out of the kidneys into the urinary bladder,
in about 10 minutes, we'd secrete an entire liter of fluid
and all the fluid that's necessary to sustain our body
would be lost.
So obviously, this initial filtration of bloodstream
by the kidney must not be continued unabated
because we'd lose all the water in our body.
So it turns out that most of the fluid
that's filtered by the kidneys
has to also be recovered by the kidneys,
and so that the amount of urine produced by each kidney
is much smaller than the initial volume of fluid
that's first formed.
Approximately only about one milliliter a minute of urine
is actually delivered from the kidneys
to the urinary bladder.
So the kidneys have a remarkable job to accomplish.
They have to filter lots and lots of fluid,
and then they have to recover 99% of it
so that it's not lost from the body.
How has this amazing accomplishment done?
Well, all of this formation of urine by the kidney
is accomplished by the basic functional units of the kidney,
and these functional units are called nephrons,
and each kidney contains about one and a half million
of these nephrons,
and they all have lots of work to accomplish.
Each nephron is basically divisible into two portions.
The first portion of the nephron
is something called a renal corpuscle,
and it's in the renal corpuscle
that the fluid is extracted from the bloodstream.
An initial form of urine is created.
So renal corpuscles filter out lots and lots of fluid
from the bloodstream,
and then send the fluid into a long,
highly tortuous tubule that processes
and modifies the initial form of urine.
So the second portion of each nephron is a long tubule
that receives urine from the renal corpuscle.
The long tubule in turn is divisible
into distinct separate regions
that all have individual functions to fulfill.
The portion of the tubule that's closest
to a renal corpuscle is, of course, proximal to it,
and therefore this part of the tubule
is called the proximal convoluted tubule.
This proximal tubule wanders around
inside the outermost cortex of the kidney
and then makes a hairpin turn
and dives down toward the center of the kidney
to create a structure called a loop of Henle.
So fluid that's originally contained
within the proximal tubule passes down
into the medulla of the kidney
and then performs a loop and goes back upwards
toward the cortex again.
And when it leaves the medulla of the kidney
it enters another portion of the nephron
called the distal convoluted tubule.
The distal convoluted tubule, again,
wanders around a little bit in the cortex.
And finally, it connects itself to other structures
called collecting tubules or collecting ducts.
These collecting ducts gather up all the urine
from a number of different nephrons
and then convey it down into the center of the kidney,
the medulla, and eventually this urine
will be conveyed out of the kidney into the ureter.
Now each portions of these nephrons
have challenging amounts of work to do.
The first part of the nephron, the proximal tubule,
probably has more work than all the rest
of the parts of the nephrons.
The proximal tubule has to recover most of the water
and the essential molecules
that otherwise would be lost in the urine.
So something like 80% of the water
is reabsorbed by cells of the proximal tubule.
And in addition, the proximal tubule cells
have to pump out lots of sodium and glucose
and amino acids and other essential molecules
that otherwise would remain in the urine
and would be lost to the body.
So these cells have a great deal of work to do.
And in order to perform all this work,
each one of the proximal tubule cells
is packed full of mitochondria,
which are the energy producing organelles
within each cell.
So a colossal amount of energy is expended by the kidney
to recover all these precious components
of the filtered blood.
One of the components of the filtered blood
that's particularly important is glucose.
The proximal tubule has to reabsorb lots of the glucose
that would otherwise be lost in the urine.
But in some conditions, it just is not up to the job
because levels of glucose may be too elevated
in the bloodstream.
And you may remember, of course,
that one of the diseases in which blood glucose is too high
is a disease called diabetes mellitus.
In diabetes mellitus,
the blood sugar can be two or three times higher than normal
and the poor cells of the proximal tubule
are just unable to recover all this glucose
and have to leave some of it in the urine.
As a consequence, the glucose travels along
through the rest of the nephron
and eventually is delivered into the urine
that leaves the body.
And this causes the production of an excessive amount
of urine that has lots of glucose in it.
This is one of the major symptoms of diabetes mellitus,
which is first diagnosed
by the production of a glucose-laden urine.
Now, recovering sodium and glucose in water from the urine
is an important job for the proximal tubule,
but it's not the only thing
that the proximal tubule has to accomplish.
In addition to these nutrient molecules in the bloodstream,
the blood also contains lots and lots,
dozens and dozens of very small proteins.
And these proteins are small enough
so that they're also filtered into the urine
from the bloodstream.
It would be a very bad idea for the body
to lose all these proteins and all these amino acids
because they're very difficult to recover and make again.
So lots of these small proteins that are present in the urine
also have to be recovered
and transformed back into the body.
However, these proteins, even if they're relatively small,
are still too large to actually pass into the cell membrane
of the cells of the proximal tubules.
So how are these proteins gonna be recovered?
How can the loss of all these amino acids be prevented?
If the cells can't take them up directly into themselves,
how can they hold onto them?
Well, it turns out cells of the proximal tubule
have kind of an ingenious tool to accomplish this task.
They secrete an extremely long protein
into the lumen of the proximal tubule.
And this long protein is a protein called megalin.
It's basically one of the longest proteins
that's ever been discovered in the human body.
These megalin proteins represent long, long fishing lines
that are floating around in the interior
of the proximal tubule and are constantly
being buffeted by proteins that are present in the urine.
These long fishing lines have binding spots on them,
kind of an analogy to little hooks on a long fishing line.
And when all these hooks become fully loaded
with the proteins, the entire fishing line
is reeled back into the cell and everything is destroyed
and turned into amino acids.
So this is an ingenious mechanism whereby
the proximal tubule cells can recover proteins
that otherwise would be lost into the urine.
And this increases the efficiency of our body.
We don't lose all these amino acids
and we can reuse the amino acids
to build more proteins later on.
So the kidney is actually the organ of the body
which is designed for the destruction
of blood-borne proteins.
And that means that if you inject a hormone or a protein
like an enzyme into the bloodstream,
after it passes through the kidney a couple of times,
it'll be almost completely destroyed.
That means that most circulating proteins
have a relatively short half-life
because the kidney destroys them.
On the other hand, if you have kidney disease
and the proximal tubule isn't functioning properly,
the half-life of injected proteins
tends to be much longer.
So that if a physician administers a protein
such as a hormone to a person with kidney disease,
they have to be careful that the hormone
isn't excessively active
because it won't be destroyed properly.
Well, most of the work that's accomplished by the nephron
is actually performed by the proximal tubule.
Most of the extraction of vital elements
is taking place there.
And because of that, the proximal tubule
is actually the largest part of the nephron.
It's about six times longer
than all the other portions of the nephron.
So it's a very, very important part of the kidney.
But the proximal tubule doesn't accomplish all the work
that the nephron has to do.
As the urine that's been modified
by the proximal tubule leaves the proximal tubule,
it then enters a structure called the loop of Henle
which passes down into the interior medulla of the kidney.
Now the loop of Henle has its own specialized function.
The main function of the loop of Henle
is to secrete large amounts of sodium chloride from the urine.
And when it does this, the sodium chloride accumulates
in the spaces between various loops of Henle and the medulla.
And as it accumulates, it reaches concentrations
that are higher than any other part of the body.
In the medulla of the kidney,
the concentrations of sodium can be four or five times higher
than the fluids of the rest of the body.
Now why would the loop of Henle
want to go to the trouble of doing this?
What's the function of maintaining a very large amount of salt
in the interior of the kidney?
Well, the reason that this salt is helpful
for the function of the kidney is that it tends to have an effect
on the production of a concentrated urine.
And let me explain how this happens.
The loop of Henle is not the only structure
that's present in the medulla of the kidney.
As I said, the urine goes up from the loop of Henle
back into the cortex, passes through the distal tubule,
and then enters a long straight structures
called collecting tubules.
These collecting tubules convey the urine
from the cortex down to the medulla.
And when the collecting tubule enters the medulla,
it's suddenly surrounded by an environment
that's extremely salty.
Well, this salt-rich environment produces something
called osmotic flow of water.
And we can visualize an osmotic flow of water very easily.
What, for example, happens when you take a hot dog
and cook it in some hot water?
Well, the hot dog is a very salty structure.
And the salt in this salty structure
tends to cause water to flow from the outside of the hot dog
into the interior of the hot dog through a semi-permeable membrane
that surrounds a hot dog.
That causes the hot dog to swell up when we put it in water,
because it causes water to move from one side of the membrane
to the other side.
This process is, of course, called osmosis.
And the same process is operating
in the interior of the kidney.
In the kidney, the salty environment
that surrounds the collecting tubules
causes water to leave the interior of the collecting tubules
and pass into this very salty environment.
This is a mechanism that allows water to be removed,
final drops of water to be removed from the urine,
and allows the kidney to produce a urine that's even more
concentrated than it otherwise would be.
So the high salt environment of the duller
is crucial for the production of a concentrated urine.
Now, it turns out that the function of the loop of henling
can be controlled by a variety of drugs and hormones.
A very commonly administered drug in the United States
is a drug called lasix, which is also called ferrocemyde.
A lasix interferes with the function of the loop of henling.
It prevents the loop of henling from creating
this high salty environment.
And if there's not enough salt present in the medulla
of the kidney, that means that water will not
be drawn out of the collecting tubules.
And that means that eventually there'll
be much more water in the urine than normal.
Now, of course, this is not usually a desirable thing.
But in certain circumstances, it's
a good idea for water to leave the body
and be secreted into the urine.
And one such circumstance is something
called congestive heart failure.
If you have congestive heart failure,
the heart isn't beating properly and allows water
to accumulate in all the tissues of the body, which
is a condition called edema.
One way to combat this chronic problem
is to administer a drug called lasix
that causes the loop of henling to stop functioning properly.
And that results in the production
of lots and lots of urine with lots and lots of water.
And by withdrawing water from the body,
this can cause a decrease in the edema
that you can see under various medical conditions.
Now, drugs are not the only type of molecules
that affect kidney function.
A naturally produced hormone called
anti-diuretic hormone, or ADH, or vasopressin,
is also present in the bloodstream
and can regulate kidney function.
As you may remember, this hormone
is produced by the posterior pituitary gland.
And when it's secreted from the posterior pituitary gland,
it acts on the collecting tubules of the kidney
and makes them more permeable to water.
This facilitates the production of concentrated urine
by allowing water to leave the collecting tubules
and enter the salt-rich environment of the kidney
medulla.
So production of ADH is necessary for us
to be able to make a concentrated urine.
If the ADH production by the posterior pituitary
is diminished, one of the main symptoms
is that you urinate all the time and are constantly thirsty.
And this condition is a condition called diabetes
encipitus, which is due to a defect in the production of ADH,
or vasopressin.
There's another circumstance in which the production of ADH
is also impaired.
When you drink drinks that contain alcohol,
the alcohol is carried up to the part of the brain
called the hypothalamus, and inhibits the production of ADH
by neurons in the hypothalamus.
As a result of this, we're no longer
able to produce a concentrated urine,
and therefore, when you drink a lot of alcohol at drinks,
it causes an increased production of a dilute urine.
Well, the proximal tubule and the lupifenli
are not the only active parts of the nephrons.
The remaining portion of the nephron
is called the distal tubule, and the distal tubule
completes the job by reserving small amounts of water
and small amounts of sodium from the urine.
The function of the distal tubule
is stimulated by a hormone produced
by the adrenal cortex called aldosterone.
Aldosterone causes the final removal
of small amounts of sodium from the urine
and allows the body to conserve levels of sodium.
Sodium ions are extremely important for the health
of the body, and loss of sodium from the body
can have very damaging effects on the cardiovascular system.
Now, there is one condition called Addison's disease,
in which the adrenal gland doesn't function properly
and doesn't make enough aldosterone.
In the absence of aldosterone, we lose a lot of sodium
in the urine, and eventually this can cause
something called an adisonian crisis
or a collapse of the circulatory system.
This is a very severe condition that can result in death.
So because of the production of aldosterone
and its effects upon the distal tubule,
the adrenal gland is the organ that's essential for life.
And if it's damaged due to a variety of circumstances,
like tuberculosis, for example,
additional hormones have to be administered
so that we don't lose too much sodium from the body.
There's one additional portion of the distal tubule
that actually has a sensory function.
There's a patch of cells in the distal tubule
called the maculodensa, and this patch of sensory cells
is constantly moderating the composition of the urine.
If the levels of sodium in the urine become too small,
this represents an emergency signal
that's detected by these sensory cells of the maculodensa.
As a result, the kidney is stimulated
to produce a protein called a renin,
which is released from the cells of the kidney
and introduced into the bloodstream.
Now, why would this production of this enzyme
have anything to do with detecting sodium
and how does it affect the metabolism of sodium in the body?
Well, let me explain what renin is all about.
Renin is an enzyme that actually causes the conversion
of an inactive, circulating protein
into a more active form.
The protein that's acted upon by renin
is a blood protein called angiotensinogen.
An angiotensinogen is a protein produced by the liver
and secreted into the bloodstream.
Angiotensinogen doesn't do a darn thing.
It's completely an inactive protein.
However, renin converts it into another form
called angiotensin-1.
And unfortunately, angiotensin-1 doesn't do anything either
because it's also an inactive precursor.
However, this inactive precursor can be converted
by another protein in the lungs
into another active protein called angiotensin-2.
Lung cells make an enzyme
called angiotensin-converting enzyme, or ACE.
And this represents the final step
in the activation of angiotensin-2.
Now, angiotensin-2 is actually a very powerful hormone
and it can affect the function
of both the cardiovascular system and of the kidneys.
When angiotensin-2 is finally liberated
from angiotensin-1 by this ACE enzyme,
it stimulates two things.
One of the first effects of angiotensin-2
is that angiotensin-2 binds to the smooth muscle cells
that surround blood vessels.
And it causes these smooth muscle cells to constrict.
That raises blood pressure.
Now, this is a very useful thing.
And let me explain what circumstances this is a good idea.
Let's say you've been taking a hike
through some very beautiful country
and you happen to walk through the Mojave Desert
in the middle of August.
Well, it's very hot in the Mojave Desert.
And as a consequence, your body sweats a lot
and you lose a lot of sodium in the sweat.
Well, if you lose too much sodium,
this causes an abnormality in blood pressure
and you can collapse due to abnormalities
in your circulatory system.
So, to prevent this, the kidney responds
to a lowered amount of sodium in the urine.
It releases renin.
The renin acts on angiotensinogen
to cause the eventual production of angiotensin-2.
And angiotensin-2 causes the blood vessels
to constrict and raise your blood pressure
so you don't pass out.
Another thing that angiotensin-2 does
is that it goes to the adrenal gland
and causes the adrenal gland to produce more aldosterone.
And aldosterone goes back to the distal tubule
and causes it to conserve more sodium.
So this is a very complex biochemical method
of controlling the loss of sodium from the body
and controlling blood pressure.
Now, all this is interesting from an academic viewpoint.
It kind of describes how the body reacts to loss of sodium.
But actually, these particular molecules
have proven to be very useful
in the treatment of a number of medical conditions.
There are new drugs called ACE inhibitors
that are very commonly prescribed to patients
nowadays in the United States.
These drugs, or ACE inhibitors,
prevent the conversion of angiotensin-1 into angiotensin-2.
And if you do that, what's gonna happen?
As a result of a lack of angiotensin-2,
the blood vessels of the whole circulatory system
no longer constrict very much.
And what effect will that have?
That's gonna reduce blood pressure.
So that means that now physicians have a new tool
that they can use to reduce blood pressure.
And this is very useful in the treatment
of a condition called hypertension.
Hypertension develops in a fairly large number
of people in the United States.
It causes an elevated blood pressure
and can have damaging effects on many organs.
So these new types of drugs that take advantage
of the production of angiotensin
are very useful in treating diseases like hypertension.
Now, the phenomenon of hypertension
is a widespread disease
that's still not terribly well understood.
Many people that develop high blood pressure
in response to high amounts of sodium or salt in the diet.
On the other hand, lots of people can go ahead
and eat bags of potato chips all day long,
and they seem to be able to metabolize the sodium
perfectly well, and it never provokes
a high amount of blood pressure.
So why some people develop high blood pressure
and other people don't is still a relative mystery.
However, there's been a recent finding of anatomists
that investigated the kidneys of hypertensive patients
that may give some clues as to why hypertension
develops in the population.
It turns out that if you do an autopsy
on people that have had long life hypertension
and look at their kidneys,
the kidneys of a person with hypertension
have as half the number of nephrons
that a normal person does.
So a person with hypertension
can have maybe 700,000 nephrons per kidney,
whereas a normal person will have 1.5 million nephrons.
And we don't know exactly what the explanation for this is.
Conceivably, the hypertension itself
might have damaged the structures in the kidney
and reduced the normal number of nephrons.
But you can take a rat and make it hypertensive
by a number of experimental procedures,
and it doesn't seem to have any damaging effects
on the kidney at all.
So perhaps a more likely explanation for this finding
is that if kidneys don't develop normally
and they lack the normal of nephrons,
as a person gets older, the kidneys are unable to control
levels of sodium in the bloodstream,
and this might provoke an increase in blood pressure.
So conceivably, an anatomical abnormality in the kidneys
might be a major factor that causes
the creation of hypertension in the population.
And as a matter of fact, this is kind of worrisome,
because if it's an anatomical defect,
it's hard to envision how you could actually correct this,
unless you were actually to try to grow a new kidney
or to make up for this loss of nephrons.
There's one other peculiar feature of cells
in the distal tubule in the collecting ducts.
And that's the fact that each one of these cells
in these structures has a single hairlike structure
called a cilium that projects into the lumen
of the tubular structures and seems to bend
in response to the flow of urine through the tubules.
We now know that these cilia are actually sensory structures,
and they tell the cells of the kidney
that urine is being produced in the normal volume
and is flowing properly.
It turns out that in a few people,
these cilia do not work properly,
and therefore the cells of the kidney
are fooled into thinking that urine
is not being formed adequately.
As a response to this defect in cilia,
a lot of the tubular structures in the kidney
start becoming larger and larger
in an effort to produce more and more urine.
And because of this defect,
we have the development of large hollow fluid-filled cysts
in the kidney.
This particular type of kidney disease
is called polycystic kidney disease,
and eventually the kidney can be completely occupied
by these huge hollow cysts
that interfere with the normal function
of the other structures of the kidney.
Apparently, this is a relatively common genetic disorder.
It affects about one out of 500 people in the population,
and by about age 40 or 50,
polycystic kidney disease can seriously affect the kidneys
and can cause kidney failure.
Currently, polycystic kidney disease affects
about 600,000 Americans.
Now that the actual basis for it is known,
perhaps some sort of treatment can be devised
that will correct the function of these cilia in the kidney
and cause the kidney function in these people
to become more normalized.
Well, all this urine that's constantly being produced
by the nephrons of the kidney eventually accumulates
in the inner spaces within the kidney itself.
These hollow spaces are called minor and major calices,
and each one of these calices
is a kind of irregular cup-shaped space
that covers over individual lobules of the kidney.
These minor and major calices eventually lead
to a larger space called the urinary pelvis,
and then the urinary pelvis of the kidney
eventually leads to the ureter,
and the ureter conveys urine away from each kidney.
Now, it turns out the function of the kidney
does not always run smoothly in older individuals,
and occasionally, large aggregations of precipitate
called kidney stones accumulate within the urinary spaces
of the urinary system, and can fill up or block
the passage of urine.
Some of these kidneys may enlarge kidney stones,
let me say that again,
some of these kidney stones may enlarge
to fill up the major or minor calices,
and because they have kind of an irregular pointed shape
on x-rays, they're called staghorn stones.
These kidney stones are so large
that they really can't pass through the ureters,
or urethra, and they can lodge in the kidneys
and block the formation of urine.
Until recently, the only treatment for very large kidney stones
would have to be surgery that would remove them
from the interior of the kidney.
But more recently, other approaches have been devised
that are just as successful and involve fewer complications.
One treatment for kidney stones is to immerse somebody
in a pool of water in a big metal bath,
and then introduce high-frequency ultrasonic waves of sound
into the fluid surrounding the body.
These ultrasonic waves of sound
pass through the soft structures of the body
without really harming them,
but when these sound waves impact upon the hardened crystal
and kidney stones, it causes these kidney stones
to break up into much smaller pieces.
This procedure is called lithotripsy,
and generally it's a very effective way
for breaking up large kidney stones.
After the kidney stones are broken up into smaller fragments,
it's more feasible for the fragments to pass down
through the ureters and eventually leave the body
by passing out through the urethra.
This whole procedure is not painless,
it's certainly very uncomfortable for people
that are undergoing this procedure,
but nevertheless it's preferable to undergo lithotripsy
and they actually have to have abdominal surgery
to remove them.
Kidney stones are relatively common
and can affect about 12% of all men
at some stages in their life.
For some reasons that are relatively uncertain,
kidney stones are not nearly as common in women
as they are in men.
Well, as urine is formed by the kidneys,
it's conveyed by the ureters down
into the urinary bladder.
And the urinary bladder is an expandable hollow sac
that can expand to fill larger and larger volumes of urine
until they can be conveniently voided
from the body by the urethra.
Now the function of this urinary bladder
is really quite important.
It allows people to undergo long stretches
without having to visit the bathroom all the time.
It allows people to undergo long stretches of time
without having to visit the bathroom frequently.
However, this function of the urinary bladder
is not always completely perfect.
There are some patients that are born
with urinary bladders that are too small
to contain very much urine,
or perhaps the urinary bladders somehow develop
excessive amount of contractility
so that these people suffer from an excessive amount
of urinary incontinence
and they have to constantly go to the bathroom all the time.
In previous years, it was possible to devise
additions to the urinary bladder
by recovering tissue from the large intestine
and attaching it to the bladder to form an extra pouch.
But these medical attempts at curing these problems
are not always very successful
because the intestinal tissue is different
from the tissue of the urinary bladder.
And the intestinal tissue tends to secrete lots of mucus
and that's not appropriate
for the interior of the urinary bladder.
So until recently, it's been difficult
to treat these conditions of urinary incontinence.
However, recent efforts by people have made it possible
to create artificially created bladders.
And the way this is done is that small samples of tissue
are retrieved from the lining of the bladder
and from the muscle that surrounds the bladder.
And then these tissues and retrieved cells
can be grown in culture, in plastic dishes,
in sterile solutions.
And eventually, the sheets of lining epithelium
and sheets of muscle can be expanded
and expanded in culture.
And then these sheets can be retrieved in culture
and placed back into the body
to create artificially created bladders.
This is one way of curing this problem
of urinary incontinence
with people that have abnormal bladder function.
So that concludes our tour of the urinary system.
And for the final portions of this course on human anatomy,
we want to discuss two systems
that are quite related to the urinary system.
And these are the reproductive systems
of the male and the female organism.
This ends lecture 12.
