Human Anatomy, Lecture 13, The Male Reproductive System.
The subject of this lecture is going to be the male reproductive system.
The male reproductive system is primarily composed of the testis,
an organ that produces fertile gametes, the spermatizoa.
It also produces male sex hormones like testosterone.
And included in the male reproductive system is a series of tubular structures that convey
seminal fluid away from the testis. There are several glands that contribute molecules to the
seminal fluid. And of course we also have to discuss the penis and the penile urethra,
which convey seminal fluid out of the body during sexual intercourse.
So let's begin by talking about the testis. I like to start off the description of the testis
by describing the beginning of the testis during embryogenesis, because this story is kind of
unusual and interesting. It turns out that the testis forms from a swelling that appears
on the ventral surface of the embryonic kidney. And you may remember that the embryonic kidney is
called a mesonephrose. A portion of this embryonic kidney becomes transformed into the gonads,
and it can form potentially either the testis or the ovary, depending on what the sex of the embryo
is. Transformation of this part of the mesonephrose has been known for a long, long time, but it's
only recently that we've discovered what actually provokes this. It turns out that there's a DNA
binding protein that affects the function of cells of the mesonephrose, and this DNA binding
protein, which is called stereogenic factor one, turns on about 15 other genes and cells that
are needed to construct the gonads. Now it turns out we can prove this is the case because there's
a ways of disabling this protein in mouse embryos. And if this happens, the mesonephrose appears
right on schedule, but the ventral swelling in the mesonephrose that turns into gonads never
appears, and the gonads never differentiate. So the mice that are affected by this experimental
manipulation grow up in a completely normal, but they don't have any gonads at all. So gradually,
scientists are beginning to learn the signals that create organs in the developing embryo,
and this is one of those important signals. Now normally, in males, the developing testis
becomes attached to a long duct that conveys seminal fluid away from it. This duct does not
appear from nowhere. As a matter of fact, the duct originally conveyed urine from the mesonephrose
itself from the developing embryonic kidney. The mesonephrose will generally completely disappear
except for the portion that's transformed to the testis. However, the duct that originally conveyed
urine away from the mesonephrose becomes adapted to a new use, and it becomes attached to the
developing testis and eventually acquires a new name. This duct that originally was the mesonephric
duct now will be called a duct called the epididymis, and this duct changes its function and now
carries seminal fluid away from the testis instead of urine away from the mesonephrose.
So we can see that the embryogenesis of the male and female reproductive system
is really intimately connected with the embryogenesis of the urinary system,
and that these two systems are quite closely interrelated.
Now it turns out that the testis forms from the mesonephrose and basically is the
site of maturation of germ cells, but the germ cells themselves, curiously enough,
do not actually originate in the testis. Cells that eventually have the ability to turn into
sperm cells actually develop far away from the testis in the site in the embryo called the yolk
sac. So they mature there for a little while and eventually they have to migrate away from the yolk
sac up into the stalk of the body and eventually find their way to take up housekeeping within the
developing testis. Once again, this migration of the germ cells has been known for a long time,
but it hasn't until recently that we understand how this happens. It turns out that the developing
gonadal ridge on the ventral surface of the mesonephrose secretes a protein called stromal cell
derived factor, and this protein is expressed from the mesonephrose and forms a long gradient
that's carried throughout the body. And as the yolk sac is penetrated by this gradient of protein,
the germ cells are alerted to it and they follow the scent, tracking their way to eventually find
the mesonephrose and burrow into it to take up residency there. Another curious thing about
the development of the testis is that the testis changes its position from where it originally
developed. Of course, originally the mesonephrose is located high up in the abdominal cavity of
the embryo and the testis, of course, is originally found in the same position. However, as the male
reproductive system develops, the testis gradually changes its position. It's tugged on by a strong
ligament called the gubernaculum and the ligament attaches to the caudal pole of the testis and
by contracting and shortening, gradually drags the testis more caudally toward the tail of the
embryo until eventually the testis is completely removed from the abdominal cavity and comes to
rest in a small pocket of muscle and skin called the scrotal sac. We now know once again what causes
this event. It turns out that the cells in the testis secrete their own unusual form of insulin
called insulin 3. And when the insulin 3 is secreted by cells in the testis, it stimulates the
migration of the testicles down into the scrotal sac. Well, in previous lectures we've seen that
various organs have the ability to migrate around in the abdomen during embryogenesis.
But what would the possible reason for this peculiar descent of the testis be? Why does the
testis move to this distant location? It turns out that experimentally you can prove that the
reasons why the testis has to descend from the abdominal cavity into the scrotal sac relate
to body temperature. Memerian organisms have a very high body temperature within the abdominal
cavity and it turns out that if you expose developing sperm cells to this high body temperature,
they die. So if the testis is constantly exposed to a high temperature, it makes it impossible for
an animal to become fertile and sperm cells would not develop. So a way around this problem is that
the testicle is pulled from its original location in the abdominal cavity down into the scrotal sac
where temperatures are lower because the sac is actually outside of the abdomen. In order to do
this, the testicle has to migrate through the muscles that form the anterior compartment of
the abdominal cavity. So these muscles and these include the external obliques and the internal
oblique muscles have to develop a weakness and allow the testicle to migrate through this body
wall and forming a channel called the inguinal canal. So as the testis passes through the
inguinal canal and comes to rest in the scrotal sac, this actually causes a site of weakness of
the abdominal muscadature. And of course we all know the consequence of this. It turns out that
this weakness can sometimes become even more severe and the abdominal wall can rupture in
something called an inguinal hernia. In this circumstance, some of the abdominal viscera,
like portions of the intestines, can actually penetrate through the anterior abdominal wall
and poke away into the scrotal sac. This is much more frequent in men than women because of the
developmental event of the migration of the testicles. Men are something like 25 times more
likely to develop an inguinal hernia than women. Frequently this has to be corrected surgically
because the abdominal viscera can become trapped in this inguinal canal and they can become compressed
and damaged. Inguinal hernias are relatively common but something like 5% of the general
population will experience inguinal hernias at one time or another. So it's fairly clear from
experiments why the testicle has to undergo this peculiar journey throughout its development.
But and you can read about this explanation in a lot of textbooks of anatomy and physiology and I'm
sure that these explanations are correct. But as I've been giving this lecture to students over
the course of years, I'm always bothered by a number of questions. And one of the questions I
had is that it's well known that there are lots and lots of warm-blooded animals that have a very
high body temperature and nevertheless these animals have testicles that are not located in
the scrotal sac. In these particular animals the testicles are located intraabdominally where
they originally developed. I'll give everyone about 30 seconds to think of what kind of warm-blooded
animals are common in the environment that nevertheless have intraabdominal testicles.
So let me count out a few seconds to see what you can come up with.
Well here's the times up. Who can think of a warm-blooded animal with intraabdominal testes?
It's a bird. All birds in the animal kingdom are adapted for the purposes of flight and they have a
lot of anatomical adaptations that allow them to fly more easily and one of these adaptations
is the possession of intraabdominal testicles. So here's the puzzle you have to answer.
They have a high body temperature and we know that high body temperature can cause sperm to
become malformed so how is it that birds can reproduce at all? Well I'm not the only one
that was puzzled by this question it appears because when I looked into the scientific literature
some other people have investigated the testicles of birds and they found out that the testicles
of birds contain peculiar proteins called heat shock proteins. The heat shock proteins are much
more abundant in bird testicles than in a million testicles and they protect the developing
sperm cells from high temperatures. So there's always a way around some of these problems that
nature can find and birds have adapted specific proteins to prevent them from having the necessity
of having testicles in a scrotal sack. Well it turns out that each testicle is kind of an oval
shaped organ. It receives lots of blood vessels from the abdominal cavity that migrate along with
it and its journey down into the scrotum and the outer covering of the testicles is a thick layer
of connective tissue that protects a more delicate interior of the testicles. Each human testicle
is divided into a number of compartments and within each compartment there are numerous
seminiferous tubules which amount to about 250 tubules in all. These are the areas in which the
developing sperm cells mature and also there are cells that are outside of the each seminiferous
tubule called leiding cells and these cells are specialized for the production of a male sex
hormone called testosterone. So the testicle functions as both an exocrine organ producing
seminal fluid into and carrying it into ducts and it also functions as an endocrine organ because
it produces hormones. Now as the sperm cells mature they enter a series of very small tubules that
eventually exit the testis. The seminal fluid is first conveyed from the testis into a structure
in the midline of the testis called the reedy testis and then eventually the seminal fluid is
carried out of the testis by smaller ducts called efferent ducts. Ultimately these efferent ducts
are collected into a long tortuous tubule and I already told you where this tortuous tubule comes
from. It used to be the mesinephric duct of the embryonic kidney but now we call it a different
name it's called the epididymis. Now at first glance the epididymis is not particularly interesting
it's just a long tubule that can carry seminal fluid away from the testis but scientific explanations
scientific investigations have identified that the epididymis has its own critical functions
in controlling the reproductive processes of males. It turns out that the sperm cells that
are released from the testicles look anatomically normal and they seem to be fine but if you put
some of them in a petri dish and try to get them to swim they will not be able to swim they're
non-motile so they're not really completely mature when they leave the testicles. They actually have
to be exposed to specialized molecules in the epididymis that hasten their maturation and then
allow them to become active swimming sperm cells. So the epididymis makes a vital contribution to
the reproductive functions of the male organism. It turns out that the epididymis is particularly
vulnerable to a genetic disease which I've talked about earlier in lecture 11. This disease is cystic
fibrosis and as you remember cystic fibrosis involves an improper function of a chloride
transporting molecule in cells. The epididymis is an organ that also transports chloride into
its lumen and changes the volume of the seminal fluid that passes through the epididymis and in
order to do this there has to be lots of movement of sodium and chloride on other ions. While in
cystic fibrosis this transport of ions is impaired and this causes the epididymis to become dysfunctional
or even completely degenerate and of course as a consequence of this the sperm cells never
mature properly and that means that someone with cystic fibrosis has a very low level of
sperm cell production and generally will not be able to have children. It turns out that there
are many causes for improper sperm maturation and cystic fibrosis is only one of those causes.
There are genetic causes of impaired sperm motility and there are also acquired environmental causes
and sperm cells generally are abnormal and not properly able to fertilize egg cells
in approximately about three to four percent of all men. So abnormalities in the function of the
testis and male reproductive system represent a relatively significant health problem for
lots and lots of men in the United States. Well after the testis produces all this seminal fluid
the seminal fluid is conveyed into a long tubule called the vas deferens or ductus deferens.
This is a long muscator organ that ascends into the abdominal cavity by going up through the
inguinal canal. One of the noteworthy features of the vas deferens is that it's surrounded by
large amounts of smooth muscle and the smooth muscle functions during sexual intercourse
to contract very vigorously and the fourth seminal fluid further up the male reproductive system
eventually so that reaches the penile urethra. So contractions of the smooth muscle in the
vas deferens have also a critical role in reproductive activity. As the vas deferens penetrate
up into the abdominal cavity they move posteriorly toward the bladder and then wrap around the
ureters that enter the bladder and at this point they acquire other specialized features.
Outgrowths of the vas deferens on either side become expanded into a structure called
seminal vesicles and these seminal vesicles are contributing their own molecules and own fluids
to seminal fluid that eventually reaches the penile urethra. Finally as each vas deferens
enters more deeply into the male reproductive system they penetrate a gland that's located in
the midline of the pelvic cavity and this gland wraps around the urethra that comes out of the
bladder and the gland is called the prostate gland. The prostate gland is another gland that
contributes fluid to the ejaculatory fluid of the male reproductive system. The prostate seems
to secrete fluid that contains lots of enzymes and some of these enzymes have a role in maintaining
the fluidity of seminal fluid. The seminal fluid has the ability to coagulate rapidly
and some of these enzymes of the prostate have a role in causing the seminal fluid to become
more liquid. Now all these rather obscure enzymes that the prostate produces are basically of interest
only to scientists. Most of us really are not that interested in these enzymes but as it turns out
some of the proteins produced by the prostate gland have a very important role in the diagnosis of
cancer. The prostate gland is one of the organs that very frequently develops cancerous or tumorous
growths. This is partly because the prostate tissue is very sensitive to sex steroids like
testosterone and sex steroids like testosterone or estrogen have the ability to promote cell growth
and frequently this can be overdone so that the cells grow into tumor cells. Prostate cancer is
actually one of the most commonly diagnosed forms of cancer in men and actually is the second
leading cause of cancer death in males so prostate cancer is a very serious form of cancer. It turns
out that cells that are becoming cancerous in the prostate gland overproduce a great variety of
different proteins and some of these proteins instead of being confined within the male reproductive
system somehow manage to reach the bloodstream. So it's possible to take a sample of blood from
an individual and measure these prostate proteins and if these prostate proteins are excessively
elevated this is a warning sign that cancerous growth might be occurring within the prostate gland.
Now for many years a particular prostate protein has been used in the diagnosis of prostate cancer.
This protein is an enzyme produced by the prostate called prostate specific antigen
and for many years physicians measured this level of this material in the bloodstream
and also performed digital rectal examinations of the prostate to see the size of it and if the
PSA levels were high in the bloodstream and if the palpation of the prostate shows that it was
enlarging this were indications that it might be necessary to surgically remove part of the prostate
to prevent the appearance of prostate tumors that could spread to other organs.
One of the problems with measuring PSA levels in the bloodstream is that they weren't always
perfectly accurate in diagnosing cancer. High levels of PSA point to developing tumors in
the prostate only about 65% of the time and sometimes high levels of PSA are not related
any tumor at all and give a result called a false positive. So for quite a few years now
physicians have been seeking better ways of diagnosing prostate cancer and it turns out in
the last several years there's another protein that prostate produces that might be a more effective
diagnostic tool. This protein is called early prostate cancer antigen and it's also overproduced
in tumorous cells of the prostate and if you do statistical analyses of how these blood levels
relate to cancer it turns out that about 95% of the time an elevated level of EPCA is diagnostic
for prostate cancer. So hopefully as research into this protein progresses it will be possible to
devise blood tests that will be much more accurate in diagnosing prostate cancer.
What is the treatment that you can apply to people with prostate cancer? Well many of the
prostate cancer cells are sensitive to circulating levels of testosterone and in order to inhibit
their growth it's desirable to diminish levels of testosterone in the bloodstream. One way to
do that is to administer a chemical that stops the pituitary gland from making LH and FSH and in
the absence of LH which stimulates the hormone producing cells of the testis blood levels of
testosterone will diminish and that has a very positive and favorable effect on the growth of
prostate cancer cells. So hormonal treatments as well as surgical treatments are now available for
the treatment of prostate cancer and they're very effective in slowing the growth of these tumors.
Well a final portion of the male reproductive system that's of considerable importance for the
function of the system is of course the penis. The penis is a musket or tube covered with skin
that attached to the pubic bone in the front of the pelvis and the penis changes its function
during sexual intercourse by enlarging and becoming more stiff. This is accomplished by a number of
reflexes that control the amount of blood that's contained within the the structure of the penis.
There are two masses of connective tissue in the dorsal area of the penis that contain
lots and lots of venous sinuses. These structures are called the corpora cavernosa and in addition
there's another massive very vascular tissue that completely encircles the pineal urethra
and this particular portion is called the corpus spongiosum. These particular types of tissues are
called erectile tissues and they function during sexual intercourse by becoming filled with blood.
As they fill with blood they enlarge in size and become more rigid and that of course facilitates
sexual intercourse. How do these things come about? What what provokes all this to happen?
Well as it turns out the the corpora cavernosa are innervated by tiny nerves that enter the penis
and originate from nerve cells in the lumbar portions of the spinal cord. These nerve cells are
particularly sensitive to circuiting levels of testosterone and in response to the male hormone
testosterone they produce a chemical messenger called nitric oxide. This is a very unusual form
of neurotransmitter. Nitric oxide is actually a gas and it's synthesized at nerve terminals that
terminate upon the corpus cavernosa and the nerve terminals release this gas and the gas
enters the cells of the corpora cavernosa and stimulate the production of another molecule
called cyclic GMP. The cyclic GMP that's produced in response to these nerve impulses
causes the smooth muscle cells around the blood vessels to greatly relax and that causes the
blood vessels to become filled with blood and that stimulates the process of penile erection.
Now it turns out this process of anatomical changes in the penis don't always occur without any
problems and one of the reasons that this can develop complications is that this whole process
is sensitive to circulating levels of testosterone. Now as it turns out levels of testosterone in
the blood are not constant over the course of your lifetime. Before puberty they're very low
and the reasons for this are because levels of LH and FSH are low in the bloodstream and they
don't stimulate the testis very much. Then between the ages of 18 and about 40 blood levels of
testosterone are quite high in response to altered secretion of pituitary hormones. But then finally
as you get to be older than 50 or 55 or so blood concentrations of testosterone starts to slowly
decline and as you get to be more elderly blood levels of testosterone have dropped by about 20%.
One of the curious facts about the physiology of the reproductive system
is the actual signals that cause these events are completely poorly or rather poorly understood.
We really don't know all the factors that initiate puberty for example that we do know
that there are nerve cells in the hypothalamus that contain a protein called chispeptin and these
nerve cells have a stimulatory effect upon puberty and they're probably involved in the onset of
puberty. But what causes these nerve cells to change their function at about age 12 to 15 in
young boys we don't know. Another mystery about the reproductive system is we don't know why
testosterone levels slowly decline. So these are unsolved puzzles about the reproductive system
but they all nevertheless have very serious consequences and here's what one of the consequences
is. As levels of testosterone in the bloodstream fall during older ages and men the testosterone
sensitive nerve cells in the spinal cord are no longer very active and therefore when they no
longer stimulate the corporecavernosa and the penis to function very properly and therefore
with advancing age the ability to undergo sexual intercourse is diminished.
This is something that most of us are already well aware of. For many years of course this
particular circumstance was considered to be an unavoidable side effect of aging and nothing
could be done about it. But Pfizer Corporation kind of coincidentally found a chemical that
was able to reverse this situation. They developed a chemical called sildenafil which is marketed
under the name of Viagra and Viagra manages to encourage penile erection via a mechanism that
we've already talked about. As I said earlier in order for the vessels in the penis to relax
they have to produce a second messenger called cyclic GMP which produces relaxation of the smooth
muscles. Now cyclic GMP is normally degraded in these cells after a certain period of time by
an enzyme called phosphodiesterase so that turns off the sexual behavior in the male
and causes the penis to return to its relaxed state. Now it turns out that you can inhibit
phosphodiesterases and one of the inhibitors of phosphodiesterase is Viagra. So if Viagra is
administered prior to sexual intercourse it can cause a relaxation of the blood vessels even
than the presence of lower levels of testosterone and therefore it can kind of correct erectile
dysfunction. This drug has been used by millions of people over the last 10 years to enhance sexual
behavior and it's very useful medically. One of the cautionary things we have to note about the
use of Viagra is that it can affect other forms of phosphodiesterase present in other blood vessels
of the body. So if you take Viagra it has the ability to relax blood vessels for example in
the coronary arteries. Now if you happen to be taking medicine for coronary artery disease that
also makes these coronary arteries dilated the combination of drugs like nitroglycerin plus
Viagra can cause all the blood vessels in the body to dangerously relax which can cause a very
hazardous fall in blood pressure and when Viagra was first introduced into the market several hundred
people who were elderly and were taking drugs like nitroglycerin died as a consequence of this
rapid release of blood pressure. So now Viagra is only administered to people that are no longer
taking any drugs that can affect the function of blood vessels and as a consequence it's a
relatively harmless and useful type of drug. Now it turns out that the function of the male
reproductive system is not only limited to the urogenital area but the hormones produced by the
testicles have generalized effects upon many tissues in the body. Testosterone is a potent
hormone that can stimulate the growth of muscles and therefore androgens like testosterone can be
used by athletes to increase their muscle strength. This is somewhat dangerous however because in
addition to increasing muscle strength androgens can be carried up by the bloodstream to the
pituitary gland and it'll suppress the production of LH and FSH by the pituitary. The consequence of
this is that the testicles are no longer stimulated by LH and they generally tend to atrophy. So the
use of androgens by steroids to enhance performance has a lot of physiological hazards that have to
be taken in mind and that's probably why it shouldn't be encouraged in these situations.
Androgens in addition to affecting muscles can also affect the anatomy of bones. The bones of the
skeleton of males are generally more rugged and more rough in their appearance because of the
increased tension on them by the stronger muscles which is produced by testosterone.
So the increased muscle strength of men has consequences in terms of the anatomy of the
skeleton and of course finally testosterone can have effect upon behavior by activating
testosterone sensitive nerve cells in the brain. Testosterone has the ability to promote aggression
by acting on particular sets of nerve cells and it can also affect the regulation of appetite and
body temperature. So the testicles have a variety of important functions in the body by producing
these potent hormones and also of course by producing the spermatizoa that are essential for reproduction.
So in the final lecture of this lecture series I'm going to conclude by talking about the details of
the female reproductive system. The organs of the female reproductive system have some things in
common with those of the male reproductive system. The ovaries and the testicles for example both
start out in the same portion of the body. They both differentiate from the mesonephros
but they as the embryo matures they acquire different anatomical features and of course
they acquire different functions. So we'll conclude this series of lectures by talking
about the female reproductive system. This ends lecture 13.
