Human Anatomy, Lecture 14, The Female Reproductive System.
The subject of this final lecture is the Female Reproductive System.
The Female Reproductive System is composed of the ovaries, tubes leading from the ovaries
called the ovadux or fallopian tubes, the uterus, vagina, and the mammary glands.
These structures are, of course, not found in male individuals, and all of these contribute
to female reproduction in their own specific ways.
Let's talk about each one of these organs individually.
The ovaries are almond-shaped organs that are suspended in the pelvic cavity by a sheet
of connective tissue called a mesovarium.
They originate much like the testes from an embryonic structure called the mesonephros,
and they represent a transformation of a primitive kidney into a reproductive organ.
Just like the testes, the germ cells of the ovaries do not actually originate in the ovaries.
These germ cells, of course, will be egg cells or oocytes.
They in fact originate in another part of the body, the oaksack, and once again they
migrate into the ovaries and set up housekeeping there.
It turns out that the majority of the tissue in the ovaries is organized by the presence
of the egg cells themselves.
As the egg cells or oocytes migrate into the ovaries, they secrete a number of proteins,
and one of these is something called growth-determining protein factor number nine.
This induces the cells that are already present in the ovaries to cluster around the egg cells
and form specific structures called ovarian follicles.
In a young baby girl, there's something like 300,000 follicles present in each ovary, and
most of these follicles remain fairly small.
The egg cells are relatively large, but the surrounding masses of cells around them are
quite slim and not very impressive.
There's some mysterious process that takes place within the ovary that selects a few
of these follicles for further development.
So eventually, a few of these follicles will become very much larger, the egg cells will
become very much larger, and eventually a few of these egg cells will be selected for
the process of ovulation.
However, that only accounts for a very small percentage of the follicles that a baby girl
is born with.
Most of the follicles within an ovary are destined for degeneration, and they undergo
a process called atresia.
So only a fraction of a percent of the egg cells will eventually be selected for maturation.
Why some cells are selected for maturation and other cells are not, is still a persistent
mystery.
There are many mysterious things about the reproductive processes of the female reproductive
system, and this is just one of them.
Well, somehow, some of these follicles in each ovary are selected for further development,
and they respond to pituitary hormones like LH and FSH by increasing in size and gradually
accumulating fluid.
Eventually the size of the follicle gets so large, and the follicle fills with so much
fluid that it has the potential for actually bursting, and this bursting process, which
is stimulated by a pituitary hormone called LH, is called ovulation.
After ovulation occurs, the enlarged oocyte within each ovarian follicle is released into
the surrounding fluid, which surrounds the ovaries, and the ovoocyte moves into a hollow
tube called the ovaduct.
The ovaduct is specialized to transport the ovulated egg cell toward the uterus, and
another event that can take place within each particular ovaduct is the process of fertilization.
Sperm cells that are introduced into the female reproductive system by a sexual intercourse
are carried all the way up through the uterus and eventually move into the ovaducts or
fallopian tubes and contact the ovulated oocyte.
This is the spot where fertilization usually takes place.
Unfortunately, this isn't always the best spot in the world for this to happen, because
occasionally a fertilized oocyte will not continue its journey onto the uterus, but
it actually can attach to the inside of the fallopian tube.
This is a process called a tubal pregnancy, and since a developing baby doesn't really
have enough tissue to attach to in a fallopian tube, this frequently results in the rupture
and bleeding of the fallopian tube, and can be quite hazardous.
But fortunately for human beings, this is a fairly rare event, and in most cases the
ovulated oocyte continues on its way into the uterus and implants into the wall of the
uterus, where it has the potential to develop into a baby.
This whole process of the onset of ovulation takes place during puberty, and this is an
event called menarche.
Once again, just like in the male reproductive system, the reasons why this onset of ovulation
takes place are not very clear.
Curiously, the ability of a young girl to undergo a first ovulation seems to be related
to the nutritional state of the organism.
If you have a situation in which there's famine, and young boys and young girls are
undernourished, they all have a substantial delay in puberty.
On the other hand, if you take animals, for example, and give them a high-calorie diet,
you can advance the age in which puberty takes place.
Apparently, the part of the brain that regulates puberty, which is the hypothalamus, is sensitive
to material that is created from fat cells, and one of these is a hormone called leptin.
This material stimulates the hypothalamus to undergo the onset of puberty and turn on
the reproductive system.
It kind of makes sense that there's a correlation between the overall nutritional state of an
organism and the ability to undergo reproduction.
If you're in a condition of famine and there's not very much food around, it just wouldn't
make sense to try to reproduce and have offspring.
The nutritional state, which is signaled from fat cells on the body, does have a substantial
influence on when puberty starts.
In human beings, usually, there'll only be one or two ovulations at a particular time,
so that there's a potential of having one or two babies, generally, at maximum.
But in other animals, this situation is quite different.
For example, in rats or mice or rabbits, the ovaries have the ability to secrete 12 to
ovulate 12 to 15 oocytes at one particular time.
If they're all fertilized, a rat or a rabbit can have 12 to 15 babies and have large litters.
This is probably not desirable for most human beings, because babies grow to a very large
size in humans, unlike in other animals, and babies of human beings are born in a relatively
helpless state.
Their brains are only developed partway because the brain is so large that it wouldn't normally
fit through the birth canal, and so if the brain was completely developed in a newborn
baby, it would be very difficult to give birth.
So human babies are relatively helpless after they're born, and they require lots of care
from their mothers.
And if human beings were constructed to try to produce 12 to 15 babies at a time, this
would be a virtually impossible task.
So somehow, the ovaries are designed so that they only secrete one or two eggs at a time.
How this is actually accomplished and how human ovaries differ from other animals is
not really very clear.
It makes functional and physiological sense, but what are the mechanisms that control the
amount of egg production in humans?
We don't really know.
There is one thing that's been recently learned about ovaries, and that is the fact that as
one particular follicle in ovary enlarges, it has the ability to suppress the growth
of nearby follicles, and one of the proteins that a dominant follicle produces is a substance
called anti-mullerian hormone.
As this anti-mullerian hormone is shed from a growing follicle, it tends to switch off
the activity of neighboring follicles.
That means that the other follicles will never enlarge enough to undergo ovulation, and that
ovary will generally have only one ovulation at a time.
As a result of this, successive ovulations tend to switch between one ovary and the other.
If one egg cell has got so large and formed a dominant follicle, it suppresses the activity
in the rest of that ovary, so that therefore in the following month, that ovary will still
not have matured enough to produce another ovulatable egg, and that means that the ovulation
will take place in the opposite ovary on the other side of the body.
Now, the process of ovulation not only releases the egg cell from the ovaries, but it also
transforms the cells that are remaining behind in each ovary.
These transformed cells form another structure called a corpus luteum, and the corpus luteum
secretes other hormones that prepare the uterus for a possible implantation of an egg cell.
The hormones that are produced by a corpus luteum include a hormone called progesterone.
Progesterone makes the lining of the uterus more suitable for the implantation of a developing
egg, and it also suppresses the production of LH and FSH from the tuatary gland.
Because of that, further ovulations are impossible for at least 10 to 14 days after a particular
ovulation.
Then for reasons that are still fairly unclear, the corpus luteum within a particular ovary
degenerate and they stop making progesterone that releases the pituitary gland from inhibition,
and that permits an ovulation to take place fairly soon afterwards.
Now, in human beings, this variability in hormone levels over time is called a menstrual
cycle, and it turns out that in human beings, ovulation will generally take place once about
every 28 or 29 days.
So the menstrual cycle is approximately the same length as the length of a month.
That means that the menstrual cycle is actually originally named according to the Greek word
for a month, which is menae, or it stands for moon.
Now, we thought it was kind of interesting that the length of the human menstrual cycle
is approximately similar to the interval between two full moons, which is about 29 days.
This might be just a pure coincidence.
It's hard to say why this takes place, but it's certainly not true in most animals.
In animals like rats, for example, the ovarian cycle or the interval between successive ovulations
only amounts to a period of about four to five days, so rats can ovulate four or five
times in the same time that humans ovulate.
It might very well be that this length of the ovulatory cycle in humans is not actually
a coincidence, but does have something to do with the periods of the moon.
It turns out that the amount of illumination that's exposed to the eyes can have a significant
effect upon reproductive cycles in many animals.
If you take a rat and put it into a room that's constantly dark, it eventually will become
acyclic and will stop ovulating.
And on the other hand, if you expose human beings to variations in illumination, this
can also influence the length of the ovarian cycle.
So very speculatively and possibly, it could be that our distant ancestors that were walking
around in the trees millions and millions of years ago were primarily nocturnal and
perhaps the lighting, illuminating them from the moon, might have perhaps had some influence
on their development of reproductive ability.
Or on the other hand, maybe it didn't.
It's hard to be sure about an event that took place so long ago.
The functions of the ovaries are persisting generally from about age 13 to about age 50
to 55 in women.
So we have continuaries ovulations that take place every month throughout this whole period
of about 40 years.
At some point in the life of a woman, the ovulations start to cease and this event is called the
menopause.
The reasons for this, just like the reasons for reproductive decline in men, are still
relatively obscure.
We don't really know why these things happen.
Conceivably, once again, they may be related to some functional changes that are taking
place in the hypothalamus.
As a consequence, the ability of women to become pregnant varies depending on how old
they are.
Women younger than about age 29 have a pregnancy rate of about 14% per year, whereas the pregnancy
rate for older women is much less, maybe a third of that, by age 40.
And of course, after the menopause, with the cessation of ovulation, it becomes impossible
to conceive and to create a baby.
Another complication of this menopause is that the ovaries start to produce smaller amounts
of the ovarian hormone estrogen.
That has some consequences on the body.
It causes the skin to become a little coarser and it also causes a number of peculiar symptoms.
One of the symptoms that you see in menopause is a symptom called a hot flush or a hot flash.
This is a transient sensation of heat that provokes rather intense sweating.
And this seems to be due to the decline in estrogen that's seen at the menopause.
Apparently, this decline in estrogen affects nerve cells in the hypothalamus that normally
regulate body temperature.
Why these nerve cells periodically cause the sudden bursts of body temperature and how
this is specifically related to the decline in estrogen is still not quite well understood.
Well another component of the female reproductive system is the uterus.
The uterus is a hollow, musketer organ composed of two layers of tissue.
The lining of the uterus is an epithelial layer underlined by lots of connective tissue
and blood vessels and this lining interior of the uterus is called the endometrium.
The outer portion of the uterus is a thicker layer dominated by lots and lots of smooth
muscle and this outer portion of the uterus is called the myometrium.
The functions of both layers of the uterus are very responsive to sex hormones.
Now the estrogen produced by the ovaries prior to an ovulatory event causes the endometrial
lining of the uterus to become thicker.
So this is part of the menstrual cycle is called the proliferative phase or estrogenic
phase of the cycle and this part of the cycle lasts for about 14 days as estrogen increases
in the bloodstream.
Then the major event during the cycle is of course the ovulatory event in which the egg
is released from the ovary and coincident with that we have the formation of a corpus
luteum that starts making progesterone.
Now progesterone has different effects upon the uterus.
It causes the glands of the uterus to become much more active and start secreting and it
also causes changes in the epithelium of the uterus.
Now as it turns out all these anatomical changes of the uterus become rapidly reversed when
the corpus luteum starts to cease functioning.
A corpus luteum generally functions for about 10 to 14 days and then suddenly it degenerates
causing blood levels of progesterone to rapidly fall.
As a response to this the blood vessels in the endometrial layer of the uterus starts
to spastically contract and that blocks off the flow of blood into the lining of the uterus.
These layers of cells become starved for nutrition and oxygen and then they start to die and
as they die occasionally blood will transiently flow back into this area and cause them to
be torn off of the interior of the uterus.
This whole process is called menstruation and lasts for several days as the interior
of the uterus degenerates and is basically shed into the interior of the uterus.
Now this drastic alteration in the uterine endometrium is not universal in many animals.
It's much more severe in a few species of apes and in humans but in rats and rabbits
and mice this changes in the endometrial anatomy are much more modest and don't involve so
much loss of blood.
Why these events are so severe in humans is compared to lots of other animals is once
again one of the unsolved questions about reproductive physiology.
Now if the corpus luteum do persist because of the production of a baby the continuous
production of progesterone first by the ovaries and then placenta causes the uterus to become
larger and thickened.
This creates an environment in which the developing baby can implant into the wall of the uterus
and it also stimulates the growth of the smooth muscle of the myometrium.
So gradually the entire uterus becomes thicker and thicker to contain the growing baby.
Later on at the end of the pregnancy the myometrium starts to become much more contractile and
it rhythmically contracts and eventually is strong enough to completely expel the baby
from the opening of the uterus which is called the uterine cervix.
Why do all these things take place?
Well it's been speculated for many years that the onset of labor is not actually controlled
by the body of a woman but an actual fact is a response to signals that originate in
the developing baby.
And a couple recent studies suggest what the signals really are.
You may remember that when we talked about the respiratory system I discussed the production
of something called surfactant by the growing lungs of a baby.
Surfactant makes the surface tension within the lungs smaller and permits the development
of respiration.
Well this formation of surfactant molecules only takes place in the latest stages of development
of the baby and prepares the lungs for the first breath taken when the baby is born.
In addition these surfactant molecules seem to be passed into the amniotic fluid that
surrounds the baby and they stimulate the migration of cells called macrophages away
from the baby into the placenta and finally into the uterus.
These cells that are responding to the surfactant molecules from the baby then initiate a series
of events in the uterus that appears to be the signal for labor.
So now we seem to know that the baby and not the mother is the individual that causes
the onset of labor and that kind of explains why labor usually takes place reliably within
about 9 months after conception because the baby takes about that long to completely develop.
Now as it turns out in about 20% of pregnancies the placenta that surrounds the baby does
not adequately invade into the uterine and ametrium and that means that the placenta
and the baby are potentially in danger of starving because the blood supply of placenta
and that supplies the baby with nutrients may not be adequate.
This is a condition which is called preeclampsia and the placenta actually responds to this
in a very defensive way.
It seems to secrete molecules into the bloodstream of the mother that increase blood pressure.
Now this is a very positive effect for the placenta because it increases the amount of
blood flow into the baby and the placenta but it has a very damaging effect upon the
mother.
You don't want to have a pregnant woman with blood pressures of 150 or 200 millimeters
of mercury because this increase in blood pressure is very dangerous for your overall
physiology.
So preeclampsia which results from abnormality in the placenta implantation of the uterus
can potentially be very dangerous and often requires bed rest or an early delivery of
the baby to relieve the increases in blood pressure that is seen in this condition.
The portion of the uterus that's adjacent to the vagina is called the cervix.
For some reasons this particular portion of the uterus is unusually prone to developing
cancer.
Cervical cancer is a very serious form of cancer.
It's the fifth leading cause of death by cancer in women and it's fairly common about
one out of 150 women may experience cervical cancer during some time in their lifetime.
More recently a major risk factor for developing cervical cancer has been identified.
This is an unusual virus called the human papilloma virus.
Infection of cervical tissues by this virus seems to provoke the development of cancer.
So one of the hopes of public health officials is the development of vaccines that would
eliminate the virus and hopefully could perhaps drastically reduce the incidence of this particular
type of cancer.
The remaining portion of the female reproductive system that's attached to the uterus is a
muscater tube called the vagina.
It is lined by an epithelium that's rather similar to the epithelium that covers the
skin.
It contains small glands that secrete a mucus rich fluid that helps lubricate the interior
of the vagina during sexual intercourse.
And the orifice of the vagina is surrounded by tissues called the labia minora and the
labia majora.
It turns out that these tissues originate from the same types of tissue that form the
scrotum in a baby boy.
So there are lots of similarities between the reproductive tissues of boys and girls.
As the embryos and fetuses develop these different types of tissues form slightly different
structures but they still originate in the same basic type of embryonic anatomical formation.
The clitoris which is located just above these same structures actually originates
from similar types of tissue that gives rise to the penis in a baby boy.
One final component of the female reproductive system that I'd like to talk about today are
the mammary glands.
The mammary glands are secretory glands that are embedded in large amounts of fat in the
adult female breast.
These secretory organs throughout most of life are relatively inactive and only start
to develop and enlarge during a pregnancy to provide milk for a baby.
A curious thing about the mammary glands is that when you look at them under the microscope
the cellular arrangement of the cells in mammary glands are very much similar to the cells
that are seen in sweat glands.
So mammary glands can be regarded as a very enlarged and unusual form of sweat glands.
And when you think about it this kind of makes an actual kind of sense.
During evolution mammals originated as warm-blooded creatures that provided milk for their babies
and this is the basic definition of a mammal.
Well in order to be warm-blooded you have to be able to control your body temperature
so you need to develop sweat glands that can cool the skin off if you get too hot.
Also in order to provide nourishment for a very active warm-blooded offspring you have
to produce some sort of nutritional secretory product.
So sweat glands developed to cool the body and also they developed to form mammary glands
that produce milk.
Now the glandular epithelium of mammary glands is sensitive to a number of circulating hormones.
Prolactin produced by the anterior pituitary and estrogen produced by the ovaries stimulates
the development of these mammary glands to make the cells much larger and more abundant
and to stimulate these cells to secrete milk.
Now milk produced by mammary glands is a complicated mixture.
It contains lots of sugars like lactose, it contains fats and it contains specific types
of proteins that are only found in milk.
And one of these proteins is a protein called casein.
Casein is easily digested by babies and it also has the ability to bind calcium.
So it's a way of delivering lots of calcium to a newborn baby so that the baby can start
developing its skeleton.
Milk is secreted from mammary glands in response to the nervous stimulation of the nipple by
suckling and this triggers a reflex release of a hormone called oxytocin from the posterior
pituitary gland.
It turns out that the milk that's first secreted just after the birth of a baby is particularly
rich in molecules called antibodies and this milk is called colostrum and the antibodies
that are present in this milk are very helpful because they start the activity of the immune
system in the baby and help the baby defend itself against infections.
Mammary gland epithelium is a steroid sensitive tissue and like other steroid sensitive tissues
mammary gland epithelial cells are particularly prone to becoming cancerous.
Breast cancer is a particularly severe problem for women and it can affect approximately
1 out of 10 women over the course of their lifespans.
We don't really know what causes the epithelium of the breast to become cancerous.
There are a number of possible reasons and a few people, there's an abnormality in a
gene called BRCA1 and in these few individuals this inherited mutation in the gene predisposes
for the development of breast cancer.
So people with a mutation in this gene sometimes are encouraged to very carefully monitor the
mammary epithelium for signs of cancer.
But most people don't contain this abnormal BRCA gene and so we don't really know why
some people have a tendency to develop breast cancer and others do not.
One of the things I thought might be a possibility is that perhaps the exposure of the mammary
glands to lots of prolactin could perhaps stimulate and become tumorous.
But as a matter of fact, women that have had children and have breastfed their children
actually have a reduced risk of developing mammary cancer.
They're a little slightly less prone to cancer by a factor of about 10%.
And this seems to be because after you've nursed a number of children, you develop spikes
in blood levels of prolactin during nursing.
But following the development of the babies and weaning, blood levels of prolactin return
to lower than normal levels.
The reproductive activity of women is not necessarily a major factor in determining whether or not
you get breast cancer.
It turns out that in mice, you can develop unusual viruses that are found in cancerous
mammary glands.
And these are called mammary tumor viruses.
So there's some thoughts that perhaps some sort of a virus may be involved in producing
breast cancer.
At the present time though, it's very difficult to predict who might get this form of cancer
and who may not.
There are a number of treatments that are designed to reduce the risk of breast cancer.
One thing that women that have susceptibility to breast cancer can be given is drugs that
block effects of estrogens.
Since estrogens tend to stimulate the development of cancer cells, anti-estrogen drugs can often
be effective in preventing the growth of breast cancer.
And if tumors are detected in mammograms of a woman of the right age, it's possible to
either remove the tumor as an individual surgical procedure and follow that up by exposure to
cancer-killing radiation therapy or to chemotherapies that destroy any remaining cancer cells that
are left behind.
So this concludes our final two lectures, which have given you a brief tour of the reproductive
systems of women and men.
And what we've demonstrated in these two lectures is that the reproductive systems are both
endocrine organs and organs for the elaboration of fertile cells that can fuse together to
form a new human being.
The endocrine secretions of these organs have profound effects upon the entire body.
They're responsible for the sex differences in anatomy between men and women.
They cause a shorter stature in women and a broader hips in women.
They're responsible for the growth of the beard and men.
And both of these types of sex hormones can affect the function of the brain to encourage
the elaboration of sexual behavior.
So the male and female reproductive systems are designed for two roles.
They're designed to produce new human beings and they're designed to alter the entire structure
of the body to facilitate reproduction.
So this concludes this entire series of lectures that presented information to you about the
structure and the function of the human body.
I hope you've all found this an interesting topic.
I think these individual structures in the body are fascinating to study and fascinating
to learn about.
And one of the things I hope I presented to you is that the fact is the fact that while
we understand how lots of the body functions, there are still lots of unsolved questions
that illustrate we really don't know exactly how the human machine operates.
We don't know why reproductive cycles originate.
We don't know exactly why bones grow to the proper length.
And we don't know the molecular basis for the organization of the cardiovascular and
nervous systems.
So while a lot of information has been compiled over the years by scientists that help us
understand the human body, there's still lots of questions ahead of us that we still need
to answer before we can solve the questions of how the body operates and how it can be
repaired to promote a more healthy life.
It's my hope that this course will stimulate some of you to continue to follow these pathways
of scientific and other inquiries and perhaps will let us acquire more information in the
future that will make lives for all of us a little bit better.
This ends lecture 14.
Now that you've completed this course, be sure to test your comprehension by taking
the final exam.
You'll find the exam on this course's webpage at www.modernscholar.com.
If you enjoyed this program, the Modern Scholar series from recorded books offers courses in
a variety of subject areas taught by the world's greatest professors.
Call 1-800-636-3399 or visit the course's webpage for a free catalog.
This course, produced by John J. Alexander, is copyrighted 2007 by recorded books LLC.
The lecture text is copyrighted 2007 by John K. Young.
The lectures were edited under the direction of Ian McCulloch.
