This is Frankie and in this video we are going to talk about configuring Vim.
So just like the previous video, if you haven't seen it, nothing crazy, nothing complicated,
just the stuff that you need to be somewhat productive in Vim. Okay, so this is my Vim
RC, which goes in your home directory. It's slash dot Vim RC. You can just edit it. It should
already exist if you have Vim installed. So we'll just go over this one line at a time.
Set tab stop for, set shift width for, set expand tab. So we're just going to look at these three
first. This means by default indent with four spaces and when I press the tab key I want you to use
spaces. The ruler is, I believe it just displays a ruler and we want everything to be saved as you
TF8 by default. Great. So now what we have down here, I don't actually know what auto CMD file type
means. All I know is that when the file type is YAML or YML, I want you to use two spaces and
when it's fish or make, I want you to not, when I press tab, actually insert a tab.
It is important in make and it's just what people do in fish.
So then down here we get into a little bit of complicated stuff that I copied and pasted
from here to here. So what this does is it trims white spaces at the end of line.
I don't know. I guess there's no way, no button for this in Vim by default. Okay. So trim white spaces
and then when I press F2 it calls trim white space and it gets rid of white spaces at the
end of lines. So I can just go down here add some white space at the end of the line and then press
F2 and it gets rid of it. Pretty self-explanatory. And then what this does here is it displays,
you saw those characters when there's, when you have just like random white space hanging around
at the end of lines, it just lets you know, so you know you have to clear it. That's, that's all that
does. And here's the most complicated thing. I actually wrote this myself. So what it does is
it's a function called toggle with and it checks if the shift width is four and if it is it sets it
to two and then it displays a little thing at the bottom. I'm going to press this set indent to two,
set indent to four, so it just toggles back and forth between them based on whatever the
current shift width is. So if I'm in a file and it's using two indents or I want to use two indents,
I just hit F3 and then it'll use two indents for everything. And down here I just bind it to F3.
Now this is the important part. We're using pathogen, which is the easiest way to install
plugins for Vim and Vim is very light by default. It doesn't have a lot of the useful things you
want. So you need a way to have plugins installed. So we're just going to pop over to Chrome and see
what pathogen is. So it's just a thing and you just run the command and it installs and then you
just put the stuff in your Vim RC, fairly straightforward. And then when you want to
install a plugin, like let's say we want to install Vim Go, which I don't have installed currently,
you just google you know Vim Go because you want to use Go in Vim and then you scroll down
and you see install and then it tells you how to install it with pathogen and you copy
and you paste and it will install Vim Go and it's done. So in your home directory
slash dot Vim is where all this stuff is. So you see you have the pathogen plugin thing here,
which is automatically loaded. And then you have your other plugins, including Vim Go,
which we just installed. So these plugins are anything varying from just here's how you should
highlight this to this Go one, which looks very complicated from this picture here. It looks
like it has a lot of crazy stuff in it. So that's going to be significantly different.
Um, let's see. All of these things for the most part are syntax highlighting
and editor config, which doesn't even work. I don't even know. I should probably just get
rid of that. And you complete me is just, it's just like a general file completion,
like probably if I were to type toggle, yeah, it just like pops up. There's nothing like this
by default in Vim. And I just wanted something that more or less works. So that's just my generic
file completion. It works in especially things that are seed like, it'll actually look across
multiple files in the directory and find things that you probably meant to type there. So it's
cool. And that's it. That's literally everything. A lot of people have like 5000 line VAMRCs and
it's just crazy, but this is all I need at least. I hope this helped you and I hope you can use this
and not too much more to have them working for you. I'll see you in the next video.
