The preservation of the Developmental Biology Film Series was made possible by generous contributions from
Distinguished University Professor of Geosciences, Lynn Margolis
Terrence Malick
Chelsea Green Publishing
The Politics and Practice of Sustainable Living
The Hardy Lane Foundation
The International Symbiosis Society
GeoBook Studio, publisher of The Biggest Picture
Hummingbird Films, producer of the documentary Symbiotic Earth
and supporters of the Lynn Margolis Archive at ScholarWorks
Labyrinthula
Labyrinthula is a common marine microorganism found along the seashore associated with
various seaweeds or marine grasses, such as eelgrass, zoster or marina, from which cultures may be isolated.
Labyrinthula demonstrates a primitive colonial organization characterized by gliding movement of the individual
cells within a continuous filamentous network.
This low magnification scene scans an expanding colony in which the action has been speeded up 2,000 times.
In the older parts of the colony, cells are aggregating prior to the formation of resting structures or cysts.
When the cysts are placed onto fresh nutrient medium, the cells become active once again.
The network within which the cells glide is produced by the cells themselves and is laid down ahead of them as thin filaments which coalesce into larger strands.
The mechanism by which the individual cells move is not understood.
There are no specialized locomotory structures such as cilia, flagella or pseudopodia.
The speed of movement varies in different isolates from a few to hundreds of microns per minute.
This scene has been speeded up 700 times.
Groups of cells appear to move in pulses.
At any given time, all the cells in one area will move in the same direction, but there is no polarity to the individual cells.
Either end may lead the way.
Sometimes cells turn over as they move or reverse their direction.
The cells of labyrinthula move only within strands of the extracellular network or matrix.
Often the cells are constricted by the confining matrix.
The individual cells are about 10 microns long.
A moving cell is able to glide past a stationary one without leaving the strand.
The strands of the network seem to be semi-elastic.
No additional material appears to be added to the strands as the cells move through them.
Observations with the electron microscope show conclusively that the cells are completely surrounded by the material of the extracellular matrix in both longitudinal and transverse section.
Nuclear and cell divisions are frequent.
Some of these cells have recently divided, and this one is about to divide.
In each cell, the prominent central nucleus is surrounded by numerous cytoplasmic granules, mitochondria, and lipid droplets.
Another division.
Many cells will aggregate in the older parts of the colony,
but these aggregations lead only to poorly defined insistent structures.
Cell movement in an expanding colony is generally along roughly radial strands.
But movement within the colony is altered after marginal contact has been made with food material, such as a concentration of yeast cells.
The labyrinthula cells stream toward the source of food.
Simple colonial organization in labyrinthula is exhibited by cell motility within a preformed extracellular network,
movement directed toward a food source, and primitive aggregation of cells.
Cell movement in an expanding colony is generally along a preformed extracellular network,
and primitive aggregation of cells.
Cell movement in an expanding colony is generally along a preformed extracellular network,
and primitive aggregation of cells.
Cell movement in an expanding colony is generally along a preformed extracellular network,
and primitive aggregation of cells.
Cell movement in an expanding colony is generally along a preformed extracellular network,
and primitive aggregation of cells.
Cell movement in an expanding colony is generally along a preformed extracellular network,
and primitive aggregation of cells.
Thank you for watching.
