Lecture 2, Ancient Foundations, Greek Philosophers and Physicians
The topic of today's lecture is the ancient foundations of psychology, the foundations
laid in the ancient Greek world, and I think it's proper to begin with an explanation of
why it is we always begin with the ancient Greek world. If one were providing the foundations
for biology, political science, philosophy, logic, any of the academic subjects, including
mathematics, so chances are that the speaker, the teacher would be beginning at pretty much
the same point I'm beginning. And of course, particularly in our current age of refined
to some extent elevated sensitivities on these matters, it really does become necessary
to explain why we're always beginning in the ancient Greek world. Sometimes it seems
as if scholars believe nothing existed before Socrates and Plato and that crowd, but there
never was an Orient, there never was an Egypt or a Phoenicia or Babylonia or Samaria and
the like. Well, the ancient Greek culture is itself indebted to earlier civilizations,
Mycenaean and Egyptian, African, Northern African and the like. Many controversial claims have
been made about the nature of that death. I think some of the claims are entirely exaggerated
and in fact will simply not stand up under the weight of evidence. If the question is
the ancient Greek debt to Egypt, for example, there's quite a definite debt in monumental
architecture. There's good evidence that the ancient Greek world, by way of its contacts
with Egypt, came to recognize the monumental functions that could be served by architecture.
It is said, by the way, that when the Greeks first spotted the pyramids, it reminded them
of a little triangular cake that they used to make, a little honey cake, which had the
same shape. The story may be apocryphal, but it is said that when the Greeks came upon
the pyramids, they pointed with a sort of chuckle and said, Pyramidoi, they're like
these little honey cakes because they have that shape. The answer to the question, what
shape is pyramid shaped? By the way, in case you're wondering where the current expression
comes from, he takes the cake. Well, these little cakes were often given to winners in
some of the Olympic contests. The fast running and the like, the winner would come up and
the reward would be a cake, and that means that the fast runner took the cake. Well, let
me say a few words about why we do begin with the ancient Greek world. Setting aside for
the question, for the moment, the question of what debts the ancient Greek world had
to older cultures. With ancient Greece, we get the first evidence of a thoroughly self-critical
perspective on one's own basic knowledge claims. We find in the ancient Greek world and in
the ancient Greek world of thought, the first evidence of a people actually recognizing
their deepest convictions, their deepest sentiments as subjects for critical appraisal
and study. The famous inscription at the temple at Delphi, the temple dedicated to the ancient
Greek world, is to Apollo, no they say outone, no thyself, is rich in meaning, rich and subtle
in meaning. It doesn't refer to some sort of cross-legged, lotus position, introspective,
who am I, existential sort of crisis sort of thing. No. Know the sort of being you are.
Understand the kind of life that's right for you. Understand the relationship in which you
stand to other beings and to the world and to the cosmos. So this is the fruitful foundation.
This is the traditional period for what we take to be the academic and scholarly subjects.
The greatest debt ancient Greek thought has to all sources is the debt it has to Homer,
the blind poet, whose name by the way actually means hostage. Who was Homer? Who was she?
Who was he? How many might there have been? Is the one who sung Iliad the same one who
later sung Odyssey? These are the great, great Homer questions and it's not within the purposes
of this course, even to address those. That there was an epic poetry tradition even before
Homer and one on which Homer relied, there is no doubt. Homer himself probably composed
a version of what we now have as Iliad, O. Circa 750 BC. An earlier dating might be
800 BC. The importance of Iliad particularly, but together Iliad and Odyssey, is that these
were epic poems that conditioned the ancient Greek mind to think about certain issues and
to think about them in certain ways. In fact, if you consult the dialogues of Plato and
go down the index of names to see who the most frequently cited people are in these
works, the most frequently cited person in the dialogues is Homer. It will be a passage
from Homer. It will be some image that Homer presents. The epics themselves are extraordinary
works. They still read well. It still repays the effort of the modern citizen to go through
these works in almost any translation. And I should tell you that the work itself begins,
the very first work in Iliad begins with the word anger, noble anger, manine, minas,
noble anger. This is an epic about anger. More generally, it's an epic poem about how
our emotions, flying in the face of the counsel of good reason and prudence, can find us immersed
in what is nothing less than a tragedy. It's a kind of ancient version, a pre-classical
version of what in the 17th century would have been called an emblem book, something
like Pilgrim's Progress. And so when the Greek world would recite passages from Homer
over the evening fire, it was with the intention of raising their children in a certain way
to attach them to certain values and understandings. Homer's epics are the background condition
for much that will come to be the formal philosophical and psychological thought of
the classical world. Homer himself attempts to explain the conduct of the major participants
in the Trojan War. Why, uh, Diomities in a fit will actually turn on nothing less than
a goddess and strike out what carries one forth, why it is that Achilles finally puts
his noble anger aside and joins the fray after his dear friend, his closest friend, Patroclus,
has been killed in battle. And so on every, in every stanza, we find some reference to
motivation to what it is that's moving one. There's always the recognition that behind
the screen, the gods are working their will through these human affairs. They may have
contempt for us. They may have love for us. They may simply be curious about us. They
might have interests in us that border on the prurient. They will occasionally mate
with one of us, but nonetheless they are immortal. They cannot die. It's not blood that runs
through their bodies, but I core and the life they live, they live for the sheer pleasure
of it. They are not burdened by human cares and human woes. We must propitiate the gods
so that they will not take out after us. They might even show us favor, but know this about
the gods. None of them is omniscient. None of them knows the future for certain. They
very often are vying with each other. And so we have, even in the pre-classical religion
of the Greek speaking people, sufficient flexibility so that there is no divine scriptural body,
textual body, traditional body that can be consulted to answer questions once and for
all. There's a very, very happy blending of this rather open textured theology and what
might be called the philosophical frame of mind. Ask Pharaoh the meaning of something
or the nature of something and Pharaoh answers you once and for all. Well, that tends to
be a debate stopper. There are no once and for all answers in Homer or in fact in the
whole of Olympian divinities. This is an important factor.
When Homer does seek to explain why people are doing what they're doing, he offers psychological
explanations. He says, well, the certain part of the chest has been overcome by something.
The person has been occupied with a kind of furor. It might be menos. It might be a noble
anger. It might be lusa, which is the wolf's rage. And if you are overcome by the wolf's
rage, nothing can control you. At this point, you are quite literally possessed. Lord only
knows what you're going to do next. You will turn in feats that are almost divine in their
dimensions and in fact you are being used as it were. A part of your very nature has
been taken over by something actually physical. What I want to say in this connection is that
much of the Homeric psychology is of a quite mechanistic, biological, naturalistic nature.
And this must be because the poet himself is recognizing in himself the signs of anger,
love, joy, disappointment, pleasure, confusion. And since these states carry with them certain
physiological feelings, kinesthetic feelings, senses within the body, the pit of the stomach,
that sort of thing, something welling up in the chest, being heartbroken. Well, he turns
to the body as the place where these influences take place and in fact allow one to explain
the behavior itself. So whether it's a matter of compassion or the wolf's rage or noble fury,
whether it's Psyche who can, or Psyche, as the ancient Greeks would have said, whether
it's Psyche being visited by one of Zeus's dream demons, so that in fact you wake up
in the morning with a resolve you never thought you would have because Zeus is playing on
your dream states as one might play on a concertina. This all is found in Homer. It's a background
consideration for what later will be a quite systematic, philosophical, and even scientific
inquiry into the nature of life and mind. Now, that formal inquiry, that inquiry into
human nature, its very nature and what is implied by that nature, begins in earnest with Socrates.
Now, Socrates is not the first philosopher. There is a rich pre-socratic tradition, but
that pre-socratic tradition finds speculation concerned chiefly with the cosmos, not solely
but chiefly. With Socrates, attention turns to human concerns. His approach is, his interest
is anthropocentric. He's concerned about the human condition, about the kind of life that's
right for human beings, about the relationship between the individual and the state, about
the sources of our ignorances and confusions, about what constitutes a virtuous and decent
life. And these come down to us through the dialogues of Plato, which are very much like
theater pieces. Some of them are quite funny. Some of them are extremely perplexing. Some
of them to this day would work very well as theater pieces. In fact, sometimes the dialogue
symposium is actually staged dramatically with after-dinner libations and then an inquiry
into the nature of love, et cetera, et cetera. Now, with Plato, and whether it's Plato or
Socrates, there's a Socratic Socrates and a Platonic Socrates, and it's very, very difficult
to tease out the two. In one of Plato's epistles, an epistle attributed to Plato, which we think
is authentic, he says, nothing you find in these dialogues is the work of Plato. I just
wrote this stuff down, do you see? Anything in here that's original and worth your attention
is to be attributed to Socrates, to which I would reply, not a bit of it. This is not
just a chap who is sitting there taking notes. These are one of the extraordinary literary
and philosophical achievements of the human imagination. And if one wants to know to whom
the credit belongs, the answer is Plato, which is something of a nickname, Platon, very, very
broad-shouldered, and so he came to be known as Platon.
Now, the Socratic philosophy is indebted, I say, to pre-Socratic sources, and surely one of the
debts is to the great and famous and elusive and mysterious Pythagoras. It was Pythagoras
and his sect that reached the more or less settled position, that ultimate truth expresses
itself in number. That is, mere appearance is a source of deception. Whatever appears
to us through our perceptual and sensory apparatus must be fleeting, material, transitory, ultimately
degradable, ultimately decomposable into mere dust and rubbish. The eternal truths are found
relationally in the form of harmonic relationships, rational order, numerical order, and number.
It is said that the Pythagorean teaching thought that all of reality springs from the first
four positive integers, because one is the numerical source of a point. Two constitutes
the possibility of a line. Three constitutes the possibility of a plane. Four constitutes
the possibility of a solid. And out of these four primary integers, it's possible on the
Pythagorean account for what they call the cosmic soul to generate all of physical reality.
It's also Pythagoras, we are told, who worked out the original theory of harmony in music
and the harmonic scales. Now, not because Pythagoras himself was an avid Banjo player
or a Sathar player. No. Here again was evidence that the human soul is tuned in a certain
way. It's tuned to match up with precise mathematical relationships. And music that is written,
composed, and played according to these pure mathematical relationships will be heard as
harmonic. The reason it sounds right is because the harmonies of the rational soul and the
acoustic harmonies achieved by the right kind of music enjoy a hand-in-glove relationship.
Now, I say this is a background consideration. And what it encourages the Socratics to believe
then, or at least what it encourages them to argue for, is the view that the kind of truth
philosophers should search for is not to be found in the flotsam and jetsam of the material
world, the transitory world of things, things that can become degraded, things that change
even as you look at them, things that give rise to illusions and preposterous beliefs and mere
opinion. No. What the philosopher should seek, the one who really is a friend of wisdom, the
one who is a philos of Sophia, do you see, the philosophos, this friend of the right kind
of truth, the right wisdom? That person looks for is what is immutable, what is eternal, what
never changes, what is not only true once and here, but true always and everywhere. And
that, of course, can't be anything material, because what is material undergoes degradation
and change, the eternally true doesn't. And so we find in many of the Socratic dialogues
a certain skepticism about the evidence of sense and the role of perception. When Socrates
is asked on one occasion whether he agrees with Protagoras that man is the measure of all
things, you know, that each person, by way of his own standards, his own experiences and
perceptions, constitutes the ultimate measure for him of whatever is true. Socrates says,
well, why didn't he say the dog-faced baboon is the measure of all things, because the dog-faced
baboon has more acute vision than we do? And he says further, if each person is the measure
of all things, why has everybody lined up listening to Protagoras over there and paying good
money for the experience instead of just sitting around with chums and divining these things
for himself? So Socrates is arguing that, no, knowledge is not relative here. It's not
relative to time, place, and culture. Certain facts might be, opinions surely are, but the
business of philosophy is to find that which transcends culture, transcends time. Now the
question is, can we ever know such a thing? And if we can know it, how do we know it? One
of the dialogues that takes this on quite directly is the dialogue named after one of the chief
participants in it, in this case, Minos. And Mino is a wealthy young Athenian back in town
now. He's been out of town for a while. He's attended by a young servant, and he and Socrates
engage in a kind of conversation, you know, hello, Socrates, how are you? Well, I'm fine,
and what are you up to? Well, you know, same old stuff, search for truth, et cetera, et
cetera, et cetera. And at this point, Mino pretty much thinks he has Socrates exactly where
he wants him. Search for truth. Well, Socrates, don't you realize that if you know what it
is you're searching for, there's no need to undertake a search? And if you don't know
what it is you're searching for, there's no basis upon which to undertake a search. And
Mino here is quite satisfied that he's got the old boy, and that's the end of it. Socrates
says, this young youngster with you, who is he? Oh, Mino says after that, he's a barbarian,
you know, of course, the ancient Greek meant by a barbarian as anybody who wasn't speaking
Greek. Anything that wasn't Greek sounded to them as if it were kind of ba-ba-ba-ba,
and so you were a barbarian if you were not speaking Greek. Well, Socrates wants to know
whether this youngster has had any education. The answer is no. And with that, Socrates begins
to ask the boy a series of yes-no type questions, drawing some things in the sand. And what
he shows to his own satisfaction is that the boy comes to recognize that the area of a
square is uniquely determined by the length of a diagonal drawn through it, which is to
say the boy knows the Pythagorean theorem. Yet he never learned it in school, and Socrates
didn't give him the answer. So where did he have the answer? Where did he get the answer?
And Socrates replies to that question by saying, look, he always had it. It is a truth available
to the soul in virtue of its having rational power. It takes philosophical guidance to
lead the soul to its own understandings, but they are there. Make no mistake about it.
The reason you can't find these truths easily is because you are saddled by perception. You
are wrapped up in a world of material things, and thus you cannot reach the transcendent
truths to which the soul otherwise has access. So here we get a Platonic psychology that is
skeptical about the senses, skeptical about merely perceptual knowledge, and that defends a much
more rationalistic approach to knowledge and understanding, an approach based on what are
taken to be immutable principles, ultimately taking the form of universal or true forms.
The rectilinear triangle you draw on a pad is never going to be perfect. It will change with
time. It will wither and go the way of all things fleshy and physical. But a square plus b
square equals c square. The Pythagorean theorem itself undergoes no change. So here we have the true
form of that which, when drawn, is just a quite corrupted version. Now what this gives us then
is a philosophical psychology. At once, if it's skeptical about perception and sensation, then
of course it must also be skeptical about experience itself. What is experience except an
accumulation of perceptions? So in fact, wisdom is not going to come simply from having lots of
experiences, and wisdom is not going to come even from the voiced shared experiences of the many.
That is, if it's a nation of fools, finding out what 51% of them want isn't very helpful. So you can't
count on majorities. You can't count on the enumeration of opinions as these show up. What
you're looking for is the person who actually gets it right, the one who does understand what the nature
of the human condition is and what's right for it. What you need then is a philosopher king. You need
someone who by nature and as a result of philosophical guidance has attained a degree of wisdom
otherwise unavailable to the masses. So this is also a politically elitist philosophy, and in fact
it is what is sometimes referred to as a highly nativistic philosophy in that it distinguishes
between and among persons on the basis of a native endowment. In Plato's Republic, he cites the
old myth of Hesiod, or the example served up by Hesiod, of men of gold, men of silver, men of brass,
and men of iron. And there's no pattern of experiences that will make a man of iron a man of gold. You've
got to start off with the right quality of being, and then through the right kind of education and training
you get the worthiest of citizens. Now that's a very, very brief sketch of an extremely deep and vexing
systematic philosophy which did undergo changes over time. There is a fellow who actually was exposed to this
teaching for all of 20 years, and he didn't spend 20 years studying in the academy because he was a slow learner.
He took all this in, he learned it and mastered it thoroughly, and then systematically moved away from it.
And the young fellow, I have in mind, is a chap you may have heard of by the name of Aristotle. Yes, he studied
within Plato's academy for 20 years. He left town. When Plato died, the directorship of the academy did
not go to Aristotle. He did leave town. He got married. He studied the cuttlefish off the shores of the Aegean.
He spent some time teaching Alexander the Great when Alexander the Great was a youth. He comes back into Athens and
founds his own school, the Lyceum, which by the way in 1997 the Greek authorities claimed to have uncovered.
It's many, many layers down over what recently has been a parking lot, which tells us about the nature of things.
Aristotle's approach is quite different from the Platonic approach. Aristotle's approach is one that I think
many of us would feel quite at home with today. It's quite naturalistic, very heavily based on observation.
The answer to the question, what is the nature of psychology is? Well, that depends. It varies in different animals.
The answer to the question, what is the soul? Is not some transcendental entity sitting above the head and shaped like
an ellipse or a little wafer? The soul, he says, by soul, by suke, I refer to the archezon. I simply refer to the first principle
of living things. I refer to that in virtue of which a thing that is alive actually lives. So what he has in mind is a
constellation of processes that are life-giving processes. And he recognizes that living things vary in their complexity,
which means that a psychic process sufficient to account for everything found in a very, very simple animal will be quite different
from the psychic processes needed to account for, for example, complex organisms, the elephant that learns to kneel in the presence of a king,
or indeed the king who learns how to give good laws. But Aristotle still wants to tie even these complexities to very basic processes.
Many of them he marks out as basic biological processes. Much of what we know is based on perception. He begins one of his most seminal
works, the metaphysics, one of the most profound works in all philosophy. He begins it with this sentence, all men by nature desire to know.
An example of that, listen carefully, an example of that is the delight we take in our senses. For even apart from their usefulness,
they are loved for themselves and of all of them none so much as vision. Now here in just a few sentences he says the agenda has changed.
We're not skeptical about the senses. The entire animal economy negotiates the world by way of its senses. So do we when we're trying to find our way home
or read a papyrus or make sure the souffle doesn't fall. So the perceptions count for much. But there's more than perception.
There's also with human beings a rational power that allows us to frame universal propositions and come to understand things that would not be available to non-human beings.
Now coupled with this is the Hippocratic School of Ancient Greek Medicine, which is very observational, very experimental in its approach.
Very much avoiding rational deductive approaches to disease and treatment, instead relying on observable facts systematically gleaned by the experienced clinician.
We do see this very definite naturalistic, biological, scientific approach to matters psychological and mental.
I might mention that the famous Hippocratic Oath, which all the doctors take, may well have been a Pythagorean document.
And the reason for that is that that oath calls for two things, quite at variance with the standard practices in ancient Greek medicine.
First, that you do not let out the secrets of the medical craft. You keep them within the family, so to speak.
And secondly, that you not administer a pessary for a woman to abort a fetus.
Now abortifacients were common in ancient Greek medicine and in fact medical schools existed.
But the one school of medicine or sect of medicine that would have had those two provisions in place would have been the Pythagorean.
So if you want to say that doctors may not know it, but they're taking a Pythagorean oath when they think they're taking a Hippocratic one, I think you'll have some texts to rely on.
What we get in the ancient Greek world is the possibility of a highly rational, abstract, transcendent approach to the understanding of human psychology.
That patterned very much on the lines developed by Plato and a quite naturalistic, even biological and systematic scientific approach,
very much on the order of what was developed by Aristotle in his classical studies of the animal kingdom, animal anatomy, and the relationship between biological processes and psychological functions.
So the foundations are laid. We can say that ancient Greek philosophy put in place a set of questions, ultimately focusing on the challenge and the task of knowing oneself,
and giving us a wide range of options from the transcendent, philosophical, mathematical, and abstract, to the very, very gritty, Hippocratic, medical, biological, and experimental,
and over a course of centuries, both of those influences would find full and rich expression in the activities of those we now judge to be the founders and leaders of psychology.
