Lecture 7 The Visual Process
Aristotle begins his metaphysics with the statement,
all men by nature desire to know.
An example is the delight we take in our senses, for even apart from their usefulness
they are loved for their own sake and none more than the sense of sight.
And I think there probably is general agreement that of our various senses it is the visual
sense that produces such great great sources of information and brings us into direct daily
contact with the most subtle features of the external world, giving us some of the most
enduring images of a lifetime.
So the sense of sight, the visual process in general, has been a subject of interest
to artists, it's been a subject of interest to scientists, and of course with the advent
of psychophysics and sensory psychology it would become the subject of experimental inquiries
in psychology from the 19th century right up to today.
It is probably the most frequently studied of the sensory organs, the eye is the most
frequently studied sensory system.
Now it's also a quite remarkable system, just the eye as an optical device is something
one can devote a lifetime to and still continue to find out new and interesting aspects of
it.
We have this little quasi-spherical entity hanging out of our heads, it's about an inch
in diameter from front to back, it has a little lens hanging down inside it in a watery bath
in a sort of thick saline bath called the aqueous and vitreous humors.
It's a marvelous focusing device, the external world impinges on the part of the eye one
can see which is the cornea.
The cornea doesn't change its shape, it refracts light and brings it to bear on the lens.
The lens can change its shape becoming more spherical or more elongated and the entire
process is designed to bring light from the external world to a point on the retina which
is at the back of the eye.
And the retina itself is like a diminutive nervous system, in fact the retina grows out
of the neural ectoderm embryologically, it grows out of the same embryological substrate
that the cerebral cortex will grow out of and as we've learned through a century of research
some of the information processing characteristics of the retina actually match up with some
of the general processing features of the nervous system as a whole.
The system is designed to pick up electromagnetic radiation that falls in a range of wavelengths
roughly 360 to 760 milli microns, that's thousandths of a millionth of a meter.
The visual system picks up radiation that falls in that range of wavelengths.
The shortest wavelengths are associated with light having a blue or purplish color.
The longest wavelengths are those associated with the experience of red.
When the wavelengths get longer than we can see they move into the region called infrared
and when the wavelengths are shorter than those available to the visual system they
are in the region of ultraviolet.
But between that range of 360 to 760 milli microns or thousandths of a millionth of a
meter the normal visual system can make nearly 200 distinct discriminations of differences
in color and hue.
So it's a remarkable instrument for distinguishing between wavelengths of light which is to say
the psychological correlates or equivalents of color.
Now the optics of focusing is itself a subject of requiring very, very specialized knowledge.
I say that the whole point of the optics of the eye is to take light in the external
world and bring it to bear on the retinal surface.
Indeed bring it to bear on a very, very little pitted region on the retinal surface known
as the fovea and any textbook that has a sketch of the eye will show the cornea, the lens,
the fluids of the eye, the retina at the back and then this little pitted area, the fovea.
If you could imagine the retina as a 360 degree circle, which it isn't, the fovea would be
about 40 minutes in size, it would be a little bit less than one degree and within that little
region are thousands and thousands of what are called receptor cells.
Now a word about receptor cells, all sensation, whether it's touch, hearing, taste, odor,
all sensation begins with a specialized cell capable of responding to the particularities
of that environmental event, a highly specialized cell.
Those cells that respond to events in the external world and respond in such a way as to create
signals that the nervous system can use are called receptors.
In the visual system there are two kinds of receptors on the retina, rods and combs.
I'll get back to that in a moment.
But I want to say something else about receptors because they go by another name.
They are also referred to, not only as receptor cells, they're also referred to as transducers
and the reason they're called transducers, any transducer in electrical engineering transducers
are used all the time, a transducer is a device that will receive energy in one form and then
pass it in a different form, transduce it into a different form.
Now the language of the nervous system is electrical, for events to take place within
the nervous system electrical signals have to be generated, electrical impulses have
to be generated.
So whatever the external world is doing for it to get recorded within our own nervous
systems there has to be some translation of the external event into electricity.
All of the receptors in the animal kingdom take events in the external world and transduce
them into electrical signals.
One way or another the transduction process involves the representation of an incoming
stimulus in electrical form.
Now I said that the receptors in the visual system, in the primate visual system, there
are some pure cone eyes and there are some pure rod eyes.
We have a mixed retina, a retina that has two different kinds of receptors, rods and
cones and these two different classes of receptors serve different visual functions.
This is part of what is referred to when the retina is referred to as a duplex structure
and when we refer to human vision as something answering to the so-called duplicity theory
or duplex theory of visual function.
That's because the rods and the cones have different properties.
Now cones are found in the phobia.
There are no rods in the phobia.
The phobia is that central point on the retina that has all of the light collected from the
object you're actually focusing on.
When you look at any object at all, if you hold your hand out in front of you and look
at your thumbnail, that thumbnail, if it's clearly in view, is being brought to focus
on the phobia.
Within the phobia, within the human phobia, there are only cone receptors, only cone cells.
As you move outside the phobia, you begin to pick up some rods also and in fact the further
and further you move into the periphery, the further you move from the phobia, the higher
the percent of rods, the lower the percentage of cones.
In the extreme periphery of the retina, there are only rods and no cones.
Now, what about the numbers here?
There are about 130 million receptor elements or receptor cells in the human retina.
About 126 million of them are rods and about 4 million of them are cones or 125 million
to 5 million.
In other words, rods greatly outnumber cones.
This is going to have some interesting consequences.
Remember now, rods are in the extreme periphery and only rods are found there.
Cones are within the phobia and there are no rods found within the phobia.
Now the rods and cones make connections with a kind of interneural cell, a cell that joins
the receptors to a genuine neuronal cell.
These little connecting units are called bipolar cells.
So what happens is that the rods and cones converge on bipolar cells.
The bipolar cells then feed what is called a retinal ganglion cell.
Now the retinal ganglion cell is the first true neuron in the visual system.
In fact, a neuron has a cell body and some receiving branches called dendrites and then
a terminal branch that actually carries electrical signals some distance.
That terminal branch that comes out of the neuron is called an axon.
So every neuron has its axon process in the visual system.
The retinal ganglion cell, of course, has an axon.
And what do you think that axon is?
Well, each axon of a retinal ganglion cell, in fact, is a fiber in the optic nerve.
It is the axons all exit from the eye in the same place, running in a common pathway
back into the brain in the form of the optic nerve.
Now here are some numbers that might give you pause.
I said there are 130 million receptors, 130 million rods and cones.
There are one million optic nerve fibers in a human optic nerve.
Now let's do the arithmetic on this.
We have 130 million receptors and we have a million optic nerve fibers per eye.
So obviously there are rods and cones that must be sharing a common optic nerve fiber.
In fact, there must be a substantial amount of pooling of rods and cones down to a single
optic nerve fiber, which means if you take the optic nerve fiber as a channel that's
carrying information.
It must be carrying information from a number of receptors.
This is where the layout of the retina becomes intriguing and quite predictive of the visual
experience.
It goes something like this.
The receptors of the rods and cones.
The rods and cones feed into bipolar cells.
Bipolar cells feed into retinal ganglion cells.
Within the fovea there are only cones.
Now let me give you the ratio of foveal cones to foveal bipolar cells to foveal retinal
ganglion cells.
This is within the fovea only.
Roughly for every three foveal cones there are perhaps a couple of bipolar cells and
for every couple of bipolar cells there are about three retinal ganglion cells.
A ratio receptor to bipolar to ganglion cell of three to two to three.
What that means then is that within the fovea just about every foveal cone has its own optic
nerve fiber carrying information.
Now as you leave the fovea these ratios change wildly.
Once you get into the periphery of the retina for every hundreds and hundreds and thousands
of rods there are scores and scores of bipolar cells funneling down into a single retinal
ganglion cell.
So the ratio in the periphery may be many many hundreds to one do you see many hundreds
of peripheral rods having their information carried by a single optic nerve fiber whereas
within the fovea every cone can claim its own optic nerve fiber.
What's the net effect?
The net effect is that our visual acuity in the fovea is exquisitely precise because
a stimulus moving across so much as one intercone distance will have its information carried
by separate optic nerve fibers do you see whereas as you move into the periphery a stimulus
might be painted across a whole swath of peripheral retina and all that information will be funneled
down into a single optic nerve fiber.
So visual acuity is wonderfully great in the fovea where we actually have focused vision.
Well does this mean that the peripheral retina is just a simple waste of time.
No it doesn't at all because watch what does happen.
Watch what does happen as you move into the periphery.
As you move into the periphery if you if you hold your arm at a right angle to the line
of regard as you're facing forward you start bringing your hand around into the periphery.
It won't be long before you'll see a wig a wiggling finger but if you go to the point
where you will just notice something out there and hold up two or three or four fingers
you won't be able to count the number of fingers in the hand.
You'll know something's there but you won't know quite what it is.
Whereas of course foveally you'll get a perfectly clear picture.
Now what is bought by this arrangement the following suppose we designed a system to
report the presence of some minimum number of packets of light energy.
We will call each packet a quantum and let's say the system is designed so it won't respond
any time a quantum shows up for goodness sake life would be a constant visual blooming
buzz.
Some critical number of quantum must arrive in a given period of time at which point the
system will respond and you will know light is present.
Now suppose that critical number is something like like five which is to say suppose you
have to get five quanta per unit time in order for the system to respond that light is present.
You hit one foveal cone with light no response it's only one you hit the adjacent foveal
cone and the adjacent foveal cone and the adjacent foveal cone and the adjacent foveal
cone.
You've now hit five proximate foveal cones with light but no one of them has got more
than one and therefore you're not going to get a response in the optic nerve because
the optic nerve is waiting for five but with foveal cones you've got a separate optic nerve
per foveal cone.
What happens in the periphery you hit a rod with one and a neighbor with one and a neighbor
and a neighbor and a neighbor but of course those five rods are all funneling their information
down into a single optic nerve fiber so the system responds.
What we say is that the peripheral retina is capable of great spatial summation of energy
which means the threshold is lower in the peripheral retina.
You can see at a much lower intensity with out of the corner of your eye than you can
looking head on if you're out in total darkness tracking around trying to find something hardly
any light there at all if any light shows up you're going to find it first in the periphery
as you turn around and look to see what it is it'll disappear you've got to keep it you've
got to keep it out of you to keep it visually present at all so we get much lower thresholds
with our peripheral vision we get much greater acuity with our central foveal vision now
in evolutionary terms this isn't a bad way to have things after all if you're out there
in the middle of nowhere and some large striped creature is sort of padding around and you're
not quite sure what's going on the first thing you want is a system that will pick up the
presence of anything picking up the presence of anything it then gets you to run like you
know what later on maybe when the sun comes up you can take a look at a distance with
good foveal vision and say aha it was a bangle tiger lucky me or oh well it was just a paper
bag blowing in the wind but good good peripheral vision is a great defensive mechanism the peripheral
field picks up most of the visual field out there the important thing is to know that
something's there you can take appropriate action and then later reflect upon more carefully
reflect upon what it what it is now there's something else in addition to accounting for
the precise visual acuity that foveal vision has and the relatively poor visual acuity
in the periphery the duplex nature of the retina also helps explain something else namely
peripheral vision is acromatic you do not see color with stimuli presented to the rod
only regions of the retina in fact color is mediated by the cones only so that we say
rod vision is acromatic and cone vision is chromatic now you might say to yourself I
don't think that's true because I've spotted things out of the corner of my eye and very
very dim light and I know very very well that it was a red apple but in fact if you
put subjects in a controlled environment and actually present a green apple in the extreme
periphery in a very very dimly lit room they will tell you that what they see is a red apple
because what they quote see close quote has very much to do with what they know is there
but if they have no idea what the object itself is you can readily determine that their vision
in the extreme periphery is indeed acromatic now it's sometimes said in textbooks and it
shouldn't be said that rod vision is acromatic because the cones do not respond differentially
to the color of light I don't want to get overly technical but of course that that's
false if you plot changes in the pigments of the rods as a function of the wavelength
of incident light the pigments which themselves have color obviously do respond differently
to lights of different color what we want to say is this vision that is mediated by
the rod system is not color vision and that has to do really with the optic nerve fibers
that are that are tied in with the rods and where those optic nerve fibers go in particular
regions of the brain so we say the rod system does not feed information to portions of the
brain that are responsible for the experience of color the cones however contain different
photopigments and those different photopigments respond selectively to different colors we
say in fact that there are several distinguishable forms of photopigments each giving rise to
or at least mediating the experience of a different part of the color spectrum roughly
speaking the long wavelength end which we would call the reddish colors the medium wavelength
portion which we would see as the yellows and yellow greens and the short wavelength
portion of the spectrum which would be where we would find light that's blue violet and
so forth and so it is from the overlapping function of these three systems that we then
can see all of the intermediary hues by the simultaneous activation of a red system a
green system and a blue system we get various combinations of hues and color so the normal
the sighted person the person with normal color vision will actually detect the major
components in any colored object no matter what the color is that is that person will
be sensitive to the long the intermediary and the short wavelength components of any
hue or color any hue or color can be matched by the proper manipulation of those three
regions of the spectrum you can produce any color that you like by the appropriate mixture
of lights from the long wavelength the intermediate wavelength and the short wavelength end the
fact that you can achieve any color outcome by manipulating only three primary colors
is what is what is called the trichromatic theory of color vision the normal color recipient
has trichromatic color vision in that the normally sighted person the person with normal
color vision will be able to detect and match any colored stimulus provided that person
can manipulate the three points on the spectrum the long wavelength point the intermediate
wavelength point the short wavelength point what do we say about people who don't have
to manipulate three colors to achieve a match they can achieve any match by manipulating
two colors in fact the person giving this lecture is such a one although although it's
not quite as bad as that well the reason why some people only need to manipulate two colors
to achieve a perfect match is because the system is not sensitive to the third color
that is to say you don't have normal trichromatic vision you have what is called dichromatic
vision and that is a characteristic form of color blindness in the typical case you don't
have a true dichromatic person you have someone who who has a weakness in in one or another
region of the spectrum now this is a sex linked characteristic because it turns out that about
five percent of the males and about one half of one percent of the females have color vision
deficiencies of the dichromatic variety in much rarer instances you have a person who
can match any color by manipulating a single color so that person not only does not have
trichromatic vision that person doesn't have dichromatic vision rather that person has
what is called monochromatic vision just one color sensing color processing system rather
than three and in the rarest cases you actually have people who can match any color by manipulating
only the brightness of a matching field because they don't see any color at all and in that
case you would be dealing with someone who is a bona fide acromat or has acromatic vision
so the normal case is trichromatic the more common form of color blindness is dichromatism
a rarer form is monochromatism and then the absolute absence of color vision would be
acromatism now historically the best explanation of the color processing capabilities of the
visual system is the trichromatic theory and the trichromatic theory put simply says this
the simultaneous activation of three color systems in vision a long wavelength an intermediate
wavelength and a short wavelength system let's call them a red green blue system if you like
or a red green violet system the simultaneous activation of an RGV set of processors stimulating
one of them more than another another less than another and various patterns in the like
is what gives rise to every and any color experience the answer to the question how can I see vermilion
how do I see plaids how do I see these earth tones and the like well you're simultaneously
activating three systems and it's the interplay among those systems that will give rise to
all of the complexities and intermediary color forms all right well now this gives you a ready
answer to the question how will you account for dichromats the two most common forms of
dichromatism involve either an insensitivity in the red end or an insensitivity in the
green end if it's an insensitivity in the green end it's referred to as deuter up deuter
anomalous vision and if it's an insensitivity in the red end it's referred to as proton
anomalous vision so the way you get the the so-called deuteranope on this theoretical
account is are well the deuteranope is obviously missing a green system do you say do you how
do you get a proton how do you get someone insensitive to red light or or anything in
the long wavelength well this is obviously somebody missing the red system and that was
the happy state of affairs until it was observed in the 19th century that both deuteranopes
and protonopes can see yellow normally now if the experience of yellow is the result
of the interplay of a red and green system then anyone lacking either a red system or
a green system shouldn't be able to see yellow yellow at all now what would men and women
of common sense say oh well let's just say there's also a yellow receptor system and
so what the deuteranope and protonope have lost are green and red but they still have
yellow that is let's say instead of a trichromatic theory there's a for process there why didn't
people say well actually someone did propose that Christine lad Franklin had proposed that
the principle of parsimony in science is such that if you can explain a lot of events through
a simpler system don't adopt or invoke a more complex system so the name of the game
was to try to account for these effects staying with the tried and true trichromatic theory
without going to a for process or a five process or an end process theory well it turns out
that probably the best explanation of color vision is is in terms of a three process kind
of mechanism the standard trichromatic one that I talked about which which best matches
up with what we know about the pigment chemistry of the rods and cones or particularly of the
cones do you see but it but color vision doesn't end in the retina it continues back into the
brain now the question is how do we best represent the physiological response of the system to
color the electrical responses in the nerves in the axons and in the brain and the like ah the
best explanation here seems to be this a three process system but not a red green violet system
rather an opponent process system first proposed by Ewald hearing in the 19th century and that
system is as follows the argument here is as follows color vision is mediated by pairs of
opposing processes a red green opponent pair a blue yellow opponent pair a light dark opponent
pair fatigue one it has the same effect as exciting the other which is why if you're exposed to a
high intensity green light shut it off turn on a screen what do you see a red afterimage if you're
exposed to a high intensity yellow light turn it off look at a white screen blue afterimage do
you see an opponent process well it looks very much like the electrophysiology of color vision
follows this opponent process model this opponent process theory very very closely
whereas the known pigment chemistry of the retina follows the classic trichromatic theory of color
vision so we've got two theories it turns out they're both right and we've got a very very good
understanding of the basic chemistry and electrophysiology of the experience of color mediated
first at the level of the retina and then electrically coated in the right way by discharge
patterns in the optic nerves that go back into the brain and feed the various relay stations and
central stations for the visual process culminating in the occipital cortex at the back of the head
part part of the brain associated with all vision in human beings and particularly in color
vision sensitivity if you can get five or six quantum to the retinal layer stimulating the
cones directly the ordinary recipient will see light you can't get anything fewer than one
quantum one quantum in the physical world so as a quantum integrator as a quantum detector the
human visual system is exquisitely sensitive it's exquisitely sensitive to wavelength it's
exquisitely sensitive to shape and form and pattern as a basic sensory device you could
hardly ask for anything better than what we've got and we've got to make make clear how we should
take care of this system all the days of our lives
