Lecture 10 Perceptual Constancies and Illusions
The question often crops up, what is the difference between sensation and perception?
And the textbooks are very often not too helpful on an issue of that kind.
The textbooks usually say something like, perception is rather more complex and sensation
is basic and here I don't think the fault lies so much with the textbook writers.
There is a point where the basic sensory apparatus having processed information is now delivering
information to a recipient who receives that against a background of memories, expectations,
hopes, emotions, states of fatigue or alertness or vigilance.
The outcome of the experience then is going to include ingredients that go far beyond
the mere physics of the stimulus.
So to some extent the distinction is always going to be a rather ambiguous or iffy one,
but to a certain degree at one level of understanding the best distinction is that perceptions
involve complex experiences where sensations refer primarily to the operation of basic
sensory systems where the subject is attempting to keep under control or to eliminate from
the experience itself such things as memory, knowledge, recollection, emotional states
and the like.
It's sometimes said, in fact, Thomas Reid in the 18th century, in attempting to distinguish
between the two, that sensations are experiences that can be had whether or not there's an
external object causing them.
For example, you could stimulate a region of the brain, the result would be flashes
of light appearing though there's no external flash of light, whereas perception does entail
an external object.
When Reid's example, Reid, I say in the 18th century said, look, here's an illustration
of a sensation.
I have a pain in my leg.
Now there isn't some stimulus in the pain actually is the experience.
There's nothing in the external world being sensed.
There is just the having of the pain.
Whereas when I say I see a rose, there actually is a direct object that really exists.
The direct object in that sentence, the rose, is actually out there.
I have a pain.
Well, there isn't a pain out there that I'm having or sensing.
So one can make a distinction between the two in that essentially grammatical fashion.
Well, when we say that a subject brings to bear on any experience, a lifetime of prior
experiences, memories, expectations and the like, this doesn't mean that the matter is
so complex as to be beyond the range of study and in fact, perceptual studies have been
rich and various and productive of most interesting knowledge over the over the years.
The overall perspective is a Darwinian and evolutionary one.
The way to understand perception on this account is to see how it aids in survival.
How at the end of the day, the organism equipped with perceptual mechanisms and processes is
in a much better position to survive than the one with a more reduced set of more sensory,
less perceptual systems.
So the question then would become, how is it that adaptive behavior is guided by perception?
How is it that past experience shapes perception?
How is it that perception abets survival by allowing certain problems to be solved that
could not be solved at a purely sensory level?
Well, let's take a look at a number of instances in which past experience determines the perceptual
outcome.
There's your friend, Bob, coming over to you across a distant field climbing just over
the top of the hill and you've just got to see Bob's head and shoulders.
And someone says to you, that chap who's just coming over the hill, how tall is he?
Now you not only say that Bob is five feet eleven, but you actually see Bob as five feet
eleven.
That is the size of the object you see is determined by the knowledge you have of just
what that object is.
Now suppose instead of Bob coming over the hill, we took a photograph of Bob coming over
the hill and then we blackened in everything that was Bob and we made the rest of the scene
white and we made up a slide of this and we projected it onto a screen and you were
asked what the size of the thing now projected is.
And of course you'd say, well it looks to me to be somewhere between one and two inches.
Now it's not just that you're solving a problem, sort of a projective geometry problem and
attempting to come up with the right answer.
When you say it looks to you to be between one and two inches, you are seeing this as
between one and two inches.
And when you say that Bob are five feet eleven, you're seeing Bob as five feet eleven.
Now this is not a failure of the perceptual systems, this is just a recognition that perception
carries with it the enhanced adaptive potential that comes from having our memories and prior
learning fortify our experiences and give them an informativeness that they would not
have at a basic sensory level.
When you know what an object is, your judgment of it is based on what are called the distal
cues.
That is, you judge it in terms of what it is, where it is, knowing everything you do
about it.
When you do not know what an object is, your judgment of its properties is based on what
are called proximal cues.
In the case of vision, these are retinal cues.
Your judgment of the size of an object is determined by the size projected onto the
retina.
Do you see?
You become very much a sensory system where there is no information in the stimulus.
And you become ever more a perceptual learning memory problem solving system where in fact
the information available allows you to function in that way.
So one wants to distinguish at this point between experiences that are determined by
proximal cues, namely projections onto the retina, experiences that are determined by
distal cues, namely the overall contextual features of the situation plus what you know
about what you are looking at.
The general phenomenon is referred to as a constancy phenomenon.
One objects, which are known, retain their properties in almost any context.
Size constancy and shape constancy are the two textbook illustrations of this.
I mentioned Bob coming over the hill.
Now let me hold up this horribly colored bowl which was containing sugar just a few minutes
ago.
Now you take a look at a bowl like this.
I show you that it is a bowl.
It's a receptacle.
And I ask you what its shape is.
Now of course you know that a bowl is round, but you also know that it is a bowl.
And in fact you're seeing it as round.
And you're seeing it as round, not withstanding the fact that the only projection of this
that really would be round would be one that is in a normal plane with respect to that
camera lens.
And in fact it would not be round on the retina of any recipient in this room.
Nonetheless, it continues to look round even as I rotate it and even as I rotate it in
such a way as to cast not simply some elliptical projection on the retina, but indeed almost
a straight line on the retina, there's still this property of circularity.
Now that instance of shape constancy can be viewed in one of two ways.
You might see it as a failure.
Oh my goodness, there goes the system making mistakes again, making judgments that are
simply in conflict with reality.
Well it's the old argument from illusion.
Don't trust the senses.
Plato was right.
They always get it wrong.
You've got to have some sort of abstract rational power to function properly in the world because
the perceptual systems constantly deceive.
Well, do the perceptual systems constantly deceive?
The fact of the matter is, this bowl is round.
And therefore when you perceive it as being round, you are making what is called a vertical
projection.
That is a correct perception of the object as in fact it is.
What you are not correctly reporting is the distribution of light on your retina.
But of course the distribution of light on your retina can quite flagrantly violate the
true geometric properties of the object that you are looking at.
So we would not want to say that constancy phenomena are illustrations of the failure
or weakness or error-promeness of perceptual systems.
Rather we want to say that perceptual systems, properly fortified by memory, by information,
etc., etc., can overcome distortions that take place at a purely sensory level.
Now constancy phenomena show up in a whole variety of situations.
For example, if I take the pages that are on this podium and I step back and I hold
this bowl up to the light so as to cast a shadow on the paper, but I don't think you
can pick this up on camera.
But the fact is, a true description of what's on the paper would have the paper being gray.
The paper is not perceived as being gray, the paper is perceived as being white.
Now it's perceived as being white in part because one knows that it is white paper.
But that's not to say that I see this as gray and yet since I know it's paper I'm going
to call it white.
No, I see it as white.
Again a constancy effect, in this case a whiteness or color constancy, in the face of environmental
events that otherwise are changing the pure sensory qualities of the stimulus.
So constancy phenomena are part of our overall adaptive resources and are absolutely necessary
to survival and I think if you pause for a moment to reflect on this you'll see why.
You probably will never have in the course of a lifetime two identical sensory experiences.
That is the world will never present itself in exactly the same physical way on two successive
occasions.
As a lecturer stands at a lectern and looks at students in the audience, the mere fact
of moving one's head as one speaks results in an altered distribution on the retina
of the faces of the people in the room.
Thus every one of these transformations is presenting an original stimulus never seen
before.
Head will not move in exactly the same way on two occasions.
If I lean toward the camera then anyone who is looking at this lecture on television would
have to see me becoming larger but that's not what happens.
No one sees me becoming larger and smaller rather one says that a person of the same
dimensions on changing dimensions is changing his distance with respect to the lens.
So as the external world never presents itself identically on separate occasions how is it
we could ever learn about the properties of the world.
We learn about the properties of the world through the process of constancy.
That is the stimulus may change all over the place and yet what we know that stimulus to
represent remains constant.
We understand that the world undergoes physical transformations in time and in space but yet
the thing remains itself even through these transformations.
What Constancy gets at is the sameness or the identity of an object.
It gets at that fundamental logical relationship according to which a thing is necessarily
itself.
A thing remains itself as you turn it upside down as you move it left and right as you
put it in the foreground or the background.
Constancy as a perceptual outcome reflects this fundamental logical precept this logical
principle and it is behind our ability to adapt to an ever changing world.
We wouldn't be able to get across the street without it.
Now context is an important factor in Constancy phenomena that is knowing the overall situation
in which a given stimulus is presented allows the perceptual system to extract the right
kind of information from that stimulus.
Sometimes the context can produce illusory consequences and these have been studied at
great length and often.
Of course one of the most famous of the illusory phenomena at least in general psychology and
it's something that has been written about and studied for centuries is the moon illusion
and everybody experiences the moon illusion and I should tell you that to this day although
there have been some wonderfully inventive explanations for the moon illusion it remains
a rather elusive phenomenon when it comes to figuring out precisely what's going on
here.
Well what is the moon illusion?
The moon illusion finds the moon being much smaller at its zenith than it is at the horizon.
If you take a look at the horizon moon it just seems to be multiples of the moon seen
at its zenith at its greatest height in the sky.
How are we to account for this?
Well let me offer a few incorrect explanations for the moon illusion.
All inventive, all quite clever and all quite plausible.
Well when you look at the moon on the horizon first off you are looking at there are trees
and buildings and other objects interposed between you and the moon.
Now you know these are very very large objects and therefore something that is large and
large relative to these objects must itself be quite large.
So the moon now can be seen against the background of the empire state building or very very
tall evergreen trees and the like and you say oh my goodness look at the size of that
thing.
Whereas at its zenith do you see there isn't any context for this perception, these little
pinpoints of light called the stars and there's the moon up there and so since you do not have
contextual cues, listen carefully now, since you don't have the contextual cues what is
it you're going to rely on?
Well, you're going to rely on the proximal stimulus.
So you'll judge the size of the moon in terms of the size of the retinal image that is projected
by the moon when you look at it.
So you've got the stock case now of the distal stimulus being useful when the moon is on
the horizon because now you can see it in relation to buildings, trees, hills and mountains.
But absent all those guides you must use the proximal stimulus when you're looking at the
zenith moon and therefore you see it as smaller.
Makes good sense does it not?
Doesn't quite work.
We'll see why in a few minutes.
Here's another explanation that I always found as a citizen of the nation of New York City
I always found this to be a quite plausible explanation.
The horizon moon is seen through that murky, dusty, gaseous polluting environment called
urban life.
Oh there you look across the Hudson River when the moon is closest to the horizon and
my goodness you've got bus fumes and emanations from diesel trucks.
Now this thick, gaseous and obnoxious atmosphere is also highly dispersive.
So the light rays that are coming through are being dispersed broadly and this will
give an object a larger appearance.
Whereas when you look straight up in the sky you're freed from all of those contaminants
and you're getting a clearer picture.
Well it should be obvious to a first approximation that that isn't going to work because when
you look straight up you're also looking through the same atmosphere and you should be getting
the same dispersal effects.
Here's another explanation.
Looking straight ahead, that is the angle of regard being straight ahead, has the eyes
in a particular plane quite different from the plane of the eyes when you look at the
zenith moon.
Now there you go looking up at the zenith moon.
Now these ocular cues somehow inform the system of an object being much further away because
the angle of regard is associated with viewing objects that are really far away.
So coming to the conclusion that the object that is not correcting for distance but based
on these past experiences you associate this with a relatively small object whereas looking
straight ahead the angle of regard being what it is you now see the object as larger.
You know the distance is the same in two cases so there you are.
The reason these explanations don't work or at least the experiments that illustrate
why these explanations are not going to work go something like this.
Roll up a little, make a little viewing tube for yourself.
You can roll up something like this so that you're going to look at the moon now just
through a rolled up tube.
You can make that quite small in fact.
Now this will eliminate all of the contextual cues because all you're going to focus on
now is the moon.
In fact you can do this while lying on your back.
You can down on your back now so the angle of regard is straight ahead but since you're
on your back you see you're looking straight ahead but you're looking at the zenith moon
versus standing up and looking at the horizon moon.
All the explanations of the moon illusion based on angles of regard, contextual cues
and the like can now be incorporated into a study to test their worthiness and lo and
behold you cannot account for the phenomenon by these means.
So there are explanations for the moon illusion.
They work more or less.
I'm inclined to think that looked at closely they work less rather than more and I think
the best take on the moon illusion so to speak is that all of these factors are involved
and they are involved in different ways.
All of regard is not something we immediately sense whereas knowing that the moon is the
same size and that the horizon is closer to us than the vault of the sky probably has
us doing all sorts of non-conscious sort of cognitive work on this to come up with a judgment.
By the way in case you're wondering whether photographs of the moon at the zenith and
on the horizon yield the same effect the answer is yes so you can get the moon illusion
by taking photographs of the moon on the horizon and straight ahead.
Well one interesting thing about the moon illusion is that it tends to violate the size
constancy effect.
We do know the moon the way we know George over on the hill don't we?
We know the moon is not changing its size as it moves through the sky we've got as much
knowledge of the moon in fact our generation has a great deal of knowledge of the moon
our gang has actually walked on the place nonetheless the moon illusion is striking
in its effect the horizon moon is manifestly larger than the zenith moon so this failure
of constancy becomes quite quite interesting and yet the moon is a stimulus that we have
been associated with all the nights of our life we certainly have seen it as often as
we've seen our friends so I say on the usual account you would expect the size of the moon
to be invariant in our perceptions and it isn't this is one reason why we refer to it
as an illusion.
Now when I said that absent constancy phenomena we have trouble getting across the street
I meant it in fact absent constancy phenomena we would have trouble knowing that we are
crossing the street recognize that on no two successive occasions are our biological states
constant as I stand here hundreds and thousands of cells are dying new cells are forming as
a result of my tautic division we're getting older not just year after year after year
we get older microsecond after microsecond on no two successive occasions are my physiological
states the same my muscle tension the same my heart rate precisely the same my body qua
body the same how could I possibly then know I am the same that is what's the basis upon
which we recognize ourselves as having a continuing personal identity even in the face
of these ongoing manifest and often quite extreme physiological changes perhaps the
most profound example of a constancy phenomenon is the continuing sense of ourselves as continuing
beings beings who remain the same not only minute to minute but year after year and even
decade after decade now we're inclined to say well this works chiefly as a result of memory
we've got memories of the past that link up with the present and these are our memories
everybody's memory is somebody's memory and by that continuity of memories we are able
to knit together a continuing sense of our own identity this was an argument by the way
put together by John Locke John Locke wrote interestingly on matters of this kind in fact
Locke had a very famous example of the prince and the peasant Locke addressed the question
of personal identity how is it in a constant state of flux physical physiological in the
like there is this continuing personal identity and of course Locke's solution to the problem
was a memory problem and he offers this as an example suppose two chaps go to sleep at
night a prince and a peasant and in the middle of the night all of the memories that the
prince has are put into the mind of the peasant and all of the memories of the peasant are
put now into the mind of the prince so that when they wake up they each have the memorial
history of the other Locke says I do not doubt when they awaken that they remain the same
men but they are nonetheless different persons Locke wants to make the distinction between
being a human being and being a person the person you are is the repository of all experiences
that you've had what is in your consciousness and the like so Locke's solution to the problem
of personal identity is the memory solution well there's a thick literature on this and
many contemporary philosophers have written on it I've taken a turn at bat several times
on this very issue I'd be inclined to say that that theory isn't going to work and it
isn't going to work at all first off there are patients who are totally amnesic who nonetheless
minute to minute day to day and week to week understand themselves as being continuing
personal identities it's not that they're knitting together past past experiences with
the present secondly the fact that one remembers having done something surely does not make
that person the one who did it there are people in institutions all over the world who recall
having lost the battle of Waterloo in Belgium that does not make them Napoleon we'd be inclined
to say that it makes them schizophrenic or mad thirdly when we reflect on our continuing
personal identity we do not make any conscious attempt to string together previous experiences
in the light it seems to be some existential reality there must be something in the system
muscle tone something subtle maybe something psychic maybe something immaterial did he say
that well it's only 1997 we're up for surprises in the future decades and centuries and the
like but a memory theory isn't quite going to do it the plain fact is from very very
early in life children must develop a sense of a personal and continuing identity little
Billy and little Jane must at some point know that that thumb is going into their mouth
and that it's their thumb that's doing it and and little Billy and little Jane must wake
up in the morning with some recognition that they are the ones who went to bed the night
before in fact each of us faces that daunting task we close our eyes and four or five or
seven or eight or nine hours later we open them with absolutely no recollection of what
took place in the intervening time and yet we are doubtless when it comes to the question
are we now waking up as the people who eight hours ago went to sleep now what is it we're
using here if a memory theory won't do it how do we explain that constancy of self and
absent that constancy of self our situation would be hopeless now I might note a couple
of other illusory phenomena some of these are projected now on on the screen if you're
watching this one is the Pagendorf illusion a line enters two vertical parallel lines
and and comes out the other side and it seems to come out in a plane lower than the plane
it entered this is an interesting illusion that has lent itself to a variety of interpretations
and then the famous Mueller liar illusion here you have two line segments that are equal
in length one line segment culminates in outward pointing arrows and the other line segment
culminates in inward pointing arrows and the line segment that culminates in outward pointing
arrows looks much much longer than the one that culminates in inward pointing arrows
now this too is an illusion that has lent itself to some extremely inventive explanations
based for example on the experiences we have inside where the the ceiling lines are like
arrows of one sort whereas when you're outside the outside of the building seems to be pointing
in the other direction and this in our experience somehow matches up with with size but it's
an illusory phenomenon in this sense the line segment even when you block out the arrows
more or less the very hint of these arrows alters the perceptual outcome even for a
subject who can go over and measure the lines the subject himself knows that it's it's an
illusory phenomenon there have also been anthropological studies of people raised in in architecturally
spare environments for a lifetime in tribal communities people raised in what is not what
some sociologists and psychologists call our carpentered world a line and angle world interestingly
enough those who have lived in very very architecturally spare and extremely natural environments
utterly natural environments thatched roofs and and and and under trees and around animals
and even with much of the sky above occluded by foliage and so forth when those persons
are tested on stock illusions like the mule lyre illusion and the pockendorf illusion
they either display no illusory effect at all or a greatly reduced one and so it has
been argued that some of the illusions that are so common to our experience actually are
a result of a lifetime spent in a highly structured environment that that conditions the perceptual
apparatus to find order and line and angle and precision wherever it can raised in an
environment in which one has no experiences of that kind or no regular ones where the
perceptual systems are functioning in a relatively unstructured unconditioned way the illusory
phenomena are greatly diminished or even eliminated so life is filled with illusions depending
upon where you live and how long you live there and we can measure them and quantify
them but we can't seem to get out from under there their influence and that's only about
the ones we know.
