Lecture 11 Learning and Memory, Associationism, Aristotle to Ebbinghaus
In the previous lecture, I noted the influence that learning and memory have on perception,
but in today's lecture, I want to introduce you to some of the early and then 19th century approaches to the subject of human learning and memory.
These topics have been fixtures in the history of psychology, but these topics also predate the history of psychology, at least in the modern sense of the term.
In fact, the ancient world took a great interest in memory and actually paid performers who had prodigious memories.
There were nemonists who could attract a crowd and even earn a living in the ancient world.
Aristotle is perhaps the first to attempt a systematic theory of memory, of learning and memory.
Indeed, Aristotle is the first to develop a systematic psychology at large.
Aristotle understood on the basis of his own experience, on the basis of what animal trainers were engaged in, on the basis of common life, that the things we remember best are the ones we've been exposed to most often.
So with Aristotle, we get not the invention of an associationistic theory of learning and memory, but the reporting of what common sense had long recognized, namely that something you do over and over again and practice and rehearse carefully is something you get to do habitually.
In fact, Aristotle was inclined to incorporate this into a rather more general theory of character itself.
It's not a fit subject for today's lecture, but I should point out that on Aristotle's account, the character we develop is the result of lifelong practices.
What one is supposed to develop is a veritable habit of virtue, such that virtuous behavior becomes second nature.
It's like riding a bicycle. You're no longer thinking about pressing down one foot and then another foot.
This is something so ingrained in one's nature that it comes about quite automatically.
And on Aristotle's account, the way this happens in the formation of character is the way it happens even in elementary forms of learning by constant practice, by the application of reward, sometimes the application of punishment, establishing good examples, et cetera, et cetera.
So the theory here is an associationistic theory, a kind of practice theory.
Now, what associations are formed on Aristotle's account?
Aristotle, as I mentioned very early on in this course, tended toward naturalistic and biological explanations, even of the most complex psychological processes.
And here again, with respect to memory, Aristotle avails himself of a biological process, not one he's able to study and describe directly, but one he infers from the facts themselves.
He says memories are formed in very much the same way that a signet ring will leave its impression in soft wax.
That is, if you heat the wax gently and make it soft, and then you have some sort of signet that you can impose on it and impress on it, it will leave a trace of itself behind.
So too, he says, are the results of sensory and perceptual experiences. Each one of them sets up some pattern of activity.
And when this is repeated over and over again, a trace is formed, as if you're actually cutting a groove into something.
So with Aristotle, we get perhaps the earliest version of what is called a trace theory of memory.
And this same theory, it is alleged, accounts for one of the commonest aspects of forgetting, namely that forgetting occurs with the passage of time.
It's like a trace becoming ever more faded, ever more ambiguous, until finally no real representation of the original event is present at all.
So traces being the basis of memory, and the decay of traces being the basis upon which forgetting takes place.
This, I say, is all in place in 4th century BC in Aristotle's writings.
Now, the ancients also understood that there were many aids to memory.
Aids to memory in general are referred to as mnemonic techniques, or mnemonic devices. That's M-N mnemonic devices.
I remember as a schoolboy, we were required to learn the 12 cranial nerves.
And the mnemonic that was developed for the 12 cranial nerves was on old Olympus towering tops, a fin, and German viewed some hops.
Now, if you just take the first letter of each of those words, you get the olfactory optic oculomotor on old Olympus.
Towering tops gives you the trochlear and the trigeminal.
A fin and German gives you the abducens, facial, auditory, glossopharyngeal, viewed some hops gives you the vagus, spinal accessory, and hypoglossus.
Now, I should say that when I was a lad at Colgate University, and at that time it was an all-male school, we actually had a rather different mnemonic for the 12 cranial nerves.
But it's not one that I'd be, well, let's just say I don't quite remember it as well as the one I just gave you.
Now, a mnemonic is a way of taking a complex array of information and systematizing it in such a way that each of the items is an item that you have a simple Q for.
I just provided a very, very simple mnemonic where you use the first letter of a word.
You might even use a series of words to give you a whole text of something.
Mnemonists who can earn a very, very good living in the entertainment world have developed mnemonics for themselves and availed themselves of traditional mnemonics to turn in absolutely spectacular memory performances.
Where they can greet an audience showing up for a television show, greet them at the door, ask their names and where they're from, and maybe their social security numbers.
And 30 or 40 people providing that information then later during the program will stand up and say, oh, you're John Smith and you're from Long Island City and your social security number is such and such.
Now, how are they doing it?
Well, of course, they've got some very, very good native talent in this regard, but they also have very, very well developed mnemonic techniques for doing this.
Now, in the medieval period, and I should mention this because it sheds light on certain of our prejudices and values and the like.
The manner in which intelligence is held today, intelligence as in the results of IQ tests, that sort of thing, and graduate record examinations and SAT scores and all that, that's the sense in which memory was held throughout much of the medieval period.
To declare somebody to have a truly first rate mind was to reflect on that person's memory, what that person actually could recall by way of detail and serially from some block of information.
What we tend to regard as intelligence records what it is we value in the practical affairs of life, the medieval period in which there was quite substantial illiteracy.
We did not have major urban centers with data retrieval systems and hard disks and public libraries and all that.
Well, much of what the world could know about anything is what it would learn from those people who had recorded and stored and could recite these things.
And so the great, great source of information was the person with the prodigious memory and the great source of information was, by definition, the intelligent person.
So the highest premium was placed on memory and we find long romantic poems and epic poems, the Roman de la Rose, the brightest children of the children who can give you the most stanzas, the most lines of this sort of thing.
Again, a very, very high premium on memory, not so high a premium on what today we are pleased to call creative intelligence or elaborate problem solving strategies and the like.
Before it all, theories of memory have relied chiefly on the processes of association and repetition.
Most theories, whether of an Aristotelian type or non-Aristotelian type, take the core of memory to be something supplied by repetition, practice, over and over again.
These are all associationistic theories of memory.
And the earliest experimental studies of memory are of this associationistic nature.
The household name in this area, the chap who actually put the experimental psychology of memory on the map, was Herming Ebbinghaus, late in the 19th century.
And Ebbinghaus was extremely clever in his approach to associative memory.
Suppose you ask yourselves, how shall we study the ability of the ordinary person, the ability to receive a series of items and commit them to memory?
Now at first blush, you might say, well, let's just come up with some items.
We'll take words out of the dictionary, we'll put them on the page, we'll let somebody read them as long as he likes or for some period of time.
And then we'll say, all right, close the book now, tell me how many of these things you remember.
Of course, if we do that, there will be a contaminating factor here.
Namely, some of those items already will be known to that person and may not be known to some other person.
Do you see?
So Ebbinghaus raises the question, how can we put together associative materials that initially have no associative value at all?
Nobody could actually know anything about them because they're utterly meaningless.
And what he invented for the purpose is what is called a nonsense syllable.
And a nonsense syllable is a trigram.
It's a three-letter syllable that contains a consonant, a vowel and a consonant.
Now you want to make sure that in the language in which you are studying memory, that CVC trigram, consonant, vowel, consonant, trigram, doesn't actually spell something.
T-O-P in English means something.
Indeed, C-O-P means something.
And P-I-T means something.
And P-I-T and so forth.
What you'd want to pick would be consonant, vowel, consonant trigrams that have no meaning, that have no prior associative value.
All right?
Now you have a series of these, some number of these.
Ebbinghaus also put together a primitive sort of memory drum in which you could take each one of these little trigrams presented to the observer in a little window.
And you might pair it with something else.
So you might have a CVC nonsense syllable and you might pair it with the word apple.
You have another CVC trigram and you pair it with clock.
Another CVC trigram and you pair it with shoe.
Now you might have 15 or 20 of these or more.
You can have many of these.
Now the subject goes through one iteration of this in which he gets the nonsense syllable and he gets the word that's associated with the nonsense syllable.
One iteration of this.
You now present him after one iteration of this with the first CVC trigram and ask, all right, what word is associated with that?
Now, clearly on the next go-around it's highly likely that the subject will not remember the word.
So what Ebbinghaus does is he goes through enough iterations so the subject, given the CVC trigram, can tell you what word is associated with it,
errorlessly on two successive iterations.
And the question then is how many trials does it take for a subject to be able to put these associated words in memory,
calling them back in the right order and making no mistakes?
And how are we to quantify the role of practicing all of this?
And finally, if we're working within the framework of a trace theory of memory, how good will subjects be at recall 24 hours later?
Or a week later? Or a month later?
Now Ebbinghaus undertook these systematic studies and came up with, well, what is it once predictable,
but nonetheless useful and to some extent informative, if only by way of introducing a method that proved to be a very worthwhile method.
What generalizations might follow from the work that Ebbinghaus did?
First, well, the trace decay theory, as common sense might predict, does hold up within limits now,
and if you don't do a certain kind of study, which I'll be talking about a little while,
the trace decay theory does hold up in that with the passage of time people lose what they initially were able to retain after these associated learning tasks.
And in fact, if you plot the percent recalled as a function of the interval between initial memorization and testing,
you get an exponential decay function. It looks very much like some sort of a trace is becoming washed out with time.
Another technique that Ebbinghaus used to determine the strength of memory was through a measurement that he called savings.
If Smith has learned a list perfectly, and a period of time elapses, and Smith now no longer turns in a perfect performance,
how many new iterations are necessary to get Smith back up to where he was after the initial learning?
Now if you know that it took, let's just make the arithmetic easy, let's say it took 20 iterations for Smith to get it errorless the first time,
20 iterations the first time. Now let's say three days go by and Smith is making a lot of errors.
And it now takes just two iterations for Smith to get back to perfection.
Well, you now have 18 units of savings, so to speak, do you see?
Whereas if it took 15 iterations, there would have only been three units of savings.
So savings now becomes a measure of the efficiency of the memory for the particular materials that were presented.
And in some studies, even to this day, a century later, savings does become the measure of the persistence and the efficiency of memory.
There's something else the Ebbinghaus paradigm presents.
Suppose we have these CBC trigrams, and let's say a series of 20 or 25 of them matched up with common words.
And we now have the subjects learning these to the point where you present the CBC trigram, the subject gives you the word.
If you now allow the passage of time to start weakening the performance here, the performance is not weakened uniformly across the list.
Rather what Ebbinghaus finds, and what will always be found using this particular experimental paradigm,
is that the earliest and most recent items are best recalled, and the intermediate items are least recalled.
That is, in any serial learning task, retention is best for the primary and the terminal portions of the series,
and retention is worst of all in the intermediary linkages.
This, of course, proved to be a strong inducement to theory.
And I think if you think about it for a minute, you probably would be able to come up with a theory yourself.
The theory that was in place for the longest time is an interference theory.
On the assumption that there's going to be some interference effect in memory between adjacent members of the pair,
well, obviously nothing's interfering with the first item because nothing comes before the first item.
Nothing is interfering with the last item because nothing comes after it that can work back on it.
Whereas the intermediate items can suffer some degree of interference both from the earlier occurring items and the just later occurring items.
So one explanation for the so-called serial position effect is that interference effects are greatest over the middle range
and are least at the beginning and at the end.
These are reduced to principles in associative learning studies, and they are referred to respectively as the principle of primacy and the principle of recency.
According to the principle of primacy, the earliest items in a series of items is best retained.
According to the principle of recency, the most recently occurring items, which is to say the last items in the series are recalled best.
And this, I say, is a rather general phenomenon when one studies associative learning.
Well, there was something else that greatly interested the late 19th, early 20th century psychologist studying memory effects.
How much can we hold in memory at any given time?
And this is a quite interesting question.
Pedagogically, it's an interesting question.
When one sets out to give a lecture on a subject, the question that naturally arises is,
how rapid a rate of information can be supplied still satisfying oneself that the listener is going to be able to hold on to what you just said as you begin to say some other things.
Now, note-taking is a good example of a mnemonic device.
The reason you're taking notes is because later on you want to refresh memory.
You don't have the kind of memory that a tape recorder has where all the information is there,
and it remains there till, you know, planet Earth suffers the heat death.
So for ordinary mortals, we take notes, we develop mnemonics, we do Arnold Olympus towering tops and all that.
But on a moment-to-moment basis, the question arises is, on a moment-to-moment basis, how much information can we hold on to?
For example, every one of you probably can recite your social security up.
Every one of you, I'm sure, can recite your telephone number.
Now, that's a seven-digit number. With area code, that's a 10-digit number.
I still can't recite my zip code now that they've stretched these things out to unimaginable limits,
but the old-fashioned zip code, 21769, I certainly have no trouble with.
Now, although everyone in the room can provide his and her phone number with the area code,
if I were simply to present everyone in the room with a series of 10 unconnected numbers for a second to put them down,
it's highly unlikely that you would, in fact, recall all 10 of them, or if I gave you 10 words.
But I do remember on old Olympus towering tops, et cetera, et cetera.
That's 12 words, the 12 cranial nerves.
And in fact, the actors and actresses routinely commit to memory whole texts without cue cards.
So one thing that has to be distinguished is what we can hold in memory as a result of long practice and rehearsal,
and what we can hold in memory on a one-exposure basis only.
The latter got to be called the span of apprehension.
And I can't tell you the number of studies done on the old span of apprehension.
Laboratories from Leipzig to Cambridge, Massachusetts would find subjects seated comfortably in a chair,
and what would be held up would be a series of numbers or a series of words or a series of pictures
exposed only for a second or two, then put away, and the subject would have to write down just how much of all that was actually stored,
how much of it could be repeated back right away, the span of apprehension.
Well, what is the size of the span of apprehension, and what sorts of things might influence the span of apprehension?
Suppose I were to say, to be or not to be, and ask you to then fill in what comes next when you say that is the question.
Well, to be or not to be, that is the question.
Ten words.
And in fact, if you were Shakespearean actors and actresses, you could provide hundreds and hundreds.
That because of rehearsal.
Suppose we brought in someone who had never heard of Shakespeare, and we just said to be or not to be, that is the question,
whether it is nobler in the mind to take action against a sea of troubles, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
Now write down as much of that as you can.
The plain fact is that subject would write down many, many more words than if we simply provided a random set of words,
because coherence and meaning are aids to memory even on the first presentation.
Similarly, if I brought someone into this room now, let's say just with a broom, that person came over to the front of the lectern,
swept something away, and went out of the room, and I asked you to try to provide a sketch of that person,
say something about the person's height and weight, and so forth.
You would turn in a certain set of recollections.
If a person came into the room, stood in front of the lectern, and said,
the President of the United States has just been shot, and then went out of the room,
the report you would turn in on the characteristics of that person would be much more accurate, much more detailed, and the like.
This because of the meaningfulness of the event that surrounds the stimulus material itself.
So the span of apprehension we know, just in terms of common sense,
is going to be influenced to some extent by meaning, vividness, relevance, and the like.
And I say, from the earliest time on, studies were done that tried to tap into processes of that sort.
Nonetheless, a fairly consistent picture emerged.
The span of apprehension looked to be something like seven or eight items wide, so to speak.
If you had no opportunity for rehearsal, if you had no opportunity for repetitive,
associative learning in the past, the number of items that you could be presented with and hold in memory for an immediate subtest
looked to be something like six, seven, eight, maybe nine items long, wide, and the like.
This could be a fixed limit and a limit on the memorial processing capabilities of beings such as ourselves.
Well, this turns out to be a far more cluttered story than the old span of apprehension studies ever would have indicated,
because what the span of apprehension studies never distinguished between was memory and retrieval.
Might it be the case that we have much greater memorial processes, which is to say we can hold on to much more information
based on a single presentation, but although we're able to hold on to it, we can't retrieve it.
It's as if that is the distinction I'm making is this, a distinction between the file cabinet having a fairly small size
and therefore only being able to hold seven folders, and a file cabinet able to hold many more than seven folders,
but on any given occasion are only being able to retrieve seven of the folders.
Well, let me briefly describe a study that allows one to distinguish between memory and retrieval limits.
Now, this you might find a bit daunting. I'm going to keep it as low tech as I can, and it will be fairly low tech.
First, how are the stimuli to be presented? Well, they're going to be presented with a device called a tachistoscope,
T-A-C-H-I-S-T-O-S-C-O-B-E.
A tachistoscope allows one to present visual material very, very briefly.
In fact, most research tachistoscopes will allow you to present a visual stimulus for less than a thousandth of a second.
It could be a ten thousandth of a second if you like.
Now, we're going to present these stimuli very, very briefly, and what will the stimuli be?
We present a card on which we have arrays of letters. They don't spell words, they're just letters of the alphabet.
And we might have seven across and four down, so there are 28 of them.
Now, we present this for, let us say, 50 thousandths of a second. Pop! There it is, you see it.
Now, your task, good old span of apprehension fashion, your task is to write down as many of the letters as you can recall seeing.
And sure enough, in good old span of apprehension fashion, you write down about six or seven or eight of the letters.
We pop in a new card, do the experiment again, six, seven, eight of the letters.
Over and over and over again, we keep recovering the span of apprehension effect.
And we say, my goodness, looks like memory is limited this way.
Now, we put a wrinkle into the research. This is what we do.
We present the stimulus for 50 thousandths of a second, the array of letters.
When that goes off, we then present in that same visual field a little arrow pointing over one of the letter locations.
And we ask you, what letter occupied that location?
Now, when you do this repeatedly to reconstruct how many letters are actually in the subject's short term memory,
it turns out that a subject can give you 14, 15, 16 letters.
That is, they will correctly identify the letter that had occupied that location.
The technique is called acute retrieval technique.
That is, there always was much more memory capacity there.
The problem was a retrieval problem.
If you now provide an aid to retrieval by actually pointing to the place and saying what was there,
you discover that the span of apprehension studies grossly underestimated the, well to use a high-tech term,
the read-in capacities of the memory systems.
We shall get back to matters of this kind later on in connection with cognitive psychology.
But what is interesting about this, I mean, many things are interesting about this,
but the distinction between limitations on memory and limitations on retrieval is not unlike the distinction between
conscious and unconscious processes as these might be understood in a radically different context, namely the psychoanalytic context.
After all, through slips of the tongue and the interpretation of dreams
and any other number of psychoanalytic techniques and tricks,
it becomes possible to extract to the patient's own satisfaction things from the past that were otherwise entirely, quote, unremembered.
Well, of course, if you can extract all these things from the past, they must be in the system, do you see?
So they weren't really forgotten at all. The problem is the patient couldn't retrieve it.
And if one wants to think of the psychoanalytic context or the interpretation of dreams
or a close examination of slips of the tongue or the particular form of joke or humor that one engages in,
as providing something of a cued retrieval technique,
something of a means by which to cue that patient's, that subject's, that client's memory system,
so that the patient now can come to grips with and uncover and recover what was never really forgotten at all,
well, one begins to see at least the possibility of a parallel
between quite pure science studies of associative learning and cued retrieval techniques in short term memory
and the very, very complex and mysterious and by some accounts even mystical domain of psychoanalysis
and the distinction between what is forgotten and what is in fact repressed
and where repression now can be overcome by developing techniques that will improve and permit the retrieval of information never lost,
but so otherwise difficult to find.
Now, this is a bridge that's shaky to say the least, and I mean it at this stage of the game to be perhaps more metaphorical than actual,
but after all, all these events are going on under the same set of skin.
It would be highly unusual if in fact the mechanisms of repression as understood psychoanalytically
were radically different from mechanisms associated with memory, retrieval and the like.
So there we are, a little bit on memory from Aristotle to Ebbinghaus.
Thank you.
