Lecture 12, Pavlov and the Conditioned Reflex
If associationism is the oldest theory of learning and memory, certainly the most venerable
mechanistic theory to account for associational learning and memory is the theory of the reflex.
As we shall see in today's lecture, this is a theory that will be developed ably by Pavlov
and will become one of the stock notions in the experimental and theoretical psychology
of the 20th century.
The first developed theory of the reflex was that served up by René Descartes, whose
dates are 1596 to 1650. Descartes was a famous figure in his own day. He is often credited
with being one of the founders of the modern philosophical movement because of his insistence
on a skeptical approach to our own knowledge claims, adopting a position of doubt until
the clearest ideas tell in favor of one view over another view. Descartes was also instrumental
in developing analytical geometry. He was a figure of great expertise in the field of
optics and he was also very much concerned with developing a psychological theory that
would account for the behavior of human and non-human animals. One of the things that
encouraged Descartes in the direction of what I've referred to as the reflex theory or
the reflex model were certain features in the gardens, the royal gardens in France. These
were developed in such a way that you could go to a certain place in the garden and stand
in front of a statue, very often involving a pair of figures, and you'd be standing on
a platform that was covered over with grass or otherwise camouflaged. But once you stood
on it, you would release a hydraulic system that actually would move through these objects
and cause them to move, give them little pirouette movements and the like. Descartes, looking
at this and being expert for the time anyway in human physiology and animal physiology as
well, reasoned that if you can have an inanimate object made to move this way, why not the
same principles responsible for movement in animate objects, including the entire animal
economy, human beings included as well. So Descartes put together a theory according to
which nervous tubules, no one knew about neurons at the time, enough anatomy had been done
throughout the Renaissance for Descartes to have a fairly good knowledge of general gross
anatomy. He took the nervous tubules to be tube-like or hose-like processes filled with
a very vaporous kind of fluid, which he referred to as animal spirits. Those fluids would infiltrate
muscles, and when the muscle filled up, if for example the biceps muscle were to fill
up with these fluids, the effect would be to pull the arm in this direction. If these
muscles were filled with fluid, the arm would be moved in this direction, and by the proper
application, the proper movement of these fluids throughout the body, you could get
any degree of fine coordinated movement that you wished. As far as Descartes was concerned,
the movement taking place, the sensations and movements taking place in the entire animal
kingdom, except for human beings, were of this hydraulic mechanical nature. In fact,
I think much of what we've been doing to animals in laboratory settings for centuries
probably is grounded in Descartes' notion that animals really are a kind of mechanical
device not to be viewed as having the conscious deliberative rational processes of human beings
and therefore not really triggering in us any moral or ethical regard. There's a controversy
about this wonderful paper by a philosopher titled, was Descartes a Brute to the Beasts,
and it has been argued on two sides whether Descartes really thought that animals were
so lacking in psychological attributes as to deserve or warrant or be allowed to be treated
in this way, subject for another time of course. But what Descartes did put in place was an
essentially hydraulic mechanical model of movement in which human movements too were
to be understood in such terms. Now, the question that naturally arises is how these
movements of fluids of the animal spirits are regulated, and Descartes again recognizes
that the brain is of central importance here, and so he's going to try to find somewhere
within the complexities of the brain the place that will serve as the traffic manager for
the movement of the animal spirits, which in turn move the body. Well, ever the Geometer,
Descartes locates a place that you'd reach if you went in through the ears and went down
through the middle of the cranium. That point of intersection, which is very close to the
center of the cranium itself, actually has a gland there, which unlike much of the brain
that would be available to Descartes' inspection, is not duplicated. There's only one of these
as opposed to there being two cerebral hemispheres and two thalamuses and the like. There's only
one of these, and it turns out to be very, very close to the center, which is where a
Geometer would want this to be, and what gland is it, but the pineal gland. So Descartes
identifies the pineal gland as some sort of valvular mechanism that will regulate the
flow of the animal spirits. As that gland allows certain animal spirits to move in one
direction, you get movements of a certain kind and a paralysis or limitation of movements
elsewhere in the body. So that's the general framework for what might be called Cartesian
reflexology. More speculative than scientific, more suggestive than substantive, but authoritative
if only because served up by Descartes himself. Now we get to what might be called the science
of reflex physiology, chiefly in the 18th century, pioneering research done by the Scottish
physician Robert Witt or White, W-H-Y-T-T, who among other things was physician to the
King of Scotland, and with Witt we actually find stimulation of the spinal cord in living
animals and the demonstration that you can get quite coordinated reflex movements by
stimulating specific regions of the spinal cord. In fact, you can get reflex movements
that would overcome what are otherwise the voluntary movements of the animals. So in
the 18th century there is already a recognition, by the way certain reflex movements had been
demonstrated even by Robert Boyle in the 17th century at the Royal Society, but with Witt
you start to get systematic studies of the organization of the spinal cord, the segmental
organization of the spinal cord, the recognition that at various levels different regions of
the body are being served and movements in the extremities can be initiated by stimulating
the right spinal cord segment. By the 19th century work has proceeded to the point where
Marshall Hall in Britain can put together a quite developed theory of reflex physiology
and a theory according to which even the complex behavior of complex organisms ourselves included
can be accounted for in terms of the sensory motor connections mediated at the spinal level.
Information, as Descartes sought, coming into the organism through the sense organs, setting
up patterns of activity within the medullary substances, these activities then being, get
the word, reflected outward into the organs of movement, reflex here, referring to a kind
of reflected activity, the input being reflected in the output, deflected to the output, and
what we've got is now a machine capable of quite sophisticated movements.
So that's background and that gets us to the early 20th century and to the pioneering
research and the great, great influence of Ivan Pavlov. Now a few words about Pavlov.
Pavlov, everybody knows about Pavlov and the conditioned reflex, conditioned salivation
in dogs, bell food, bell food, bell food, you ring the bell and then the dog salivates.
Well, let me, let me provide the larger context within which this work was done. Pavlov was
a physiologist. In fact, he was one of the leading physiologists of his day. He had studied
at some of the major centers in, in Germany before returning to Russia and setting up
his own laboratory. His particular interest was in digestive physiology. He wanted to know,
he wanted to, to examine how the various places within the overall digestive or elementary
tract actually worked on ingested food. And to study this, he developed techniques. I
don't think you would want to be an experimental subject of these studies, but he developed
techniques that allowed him to put chemically known substances into the mouth of the experimental
subject. In Pavlov's case, these were always dogs. Substances of known chemistry into the
mouth. And then through cannulas inserted into the body of the animal, you would be able to
extract these substances at specific places in the elementary pathway so that you could see
how the known chemistry was changed by, for example, saliva, gastric juices produced in the
intestines in the stomach, small intestine, large intestine, stomach, et cetera, et cetera.
Thereupon providing a fairly accurate statement of the chemical changes imposed by the digestive
processes themselves. This work was so pioneering and exceptional as to earn Pavlov the Nobel Prize.
He received the Nobel Prize for his pioneering studies of gastric physiology. Now, when people
give Nobel Prize addresses in science, these addresses usually take one of several forms of
how I became great or what we did that got us this prize in the first place are quite commonly
what we're doing now. And Pavlov used the occasion of the Nobel Prize address to explain to a
community of scientists and influential scientists what was going on in the laboratories in Russia
at this time. Well, he begins the address by saying, this is the 1904 or 506. He begins the
address by saying, surely everyone in this room has had the experience of coming home after a day's
work on a cold day, entering one's residence, aromas wafting from the kitchen, and you find
yourself salivating. So it comes as no surprise that a hungry person smelling food will salivate.
Well, in our studies of gastric physiology in the dog, we soon discovered that when the
assistants would wheel in the chemically precise powdered food that we were going to be putting
in the dog's mouths, before we ever brought this stuff over to the dogs, the dogs would begin to
salivate. Well, far from being surprised by this, we had every reason to believe that sort of thing
would happen, and we wanted to determine quite precisely the conditions under which it would
happen. Well, the rest, of course, is history. The way Pavlov proceeded then was that the dogs
would be placed in a Pavlov frame, which essentially locked the forelimbs and hind limbs in place,
and kept the head stationary. You would then go over and put a quantity of powdered food in the
dog's mouth after presenting some stimulus, which would initially have absolutely no effect on
salivation at all. What Pavlov chose were bell sounds, tone sounds, and the like. So there'd be
then powdered food in the mouth, a repetition of that tone, powdered food in the mouth, a repetition
of that tone, powdered food in the mouth, and after a very few trials, if you presented the
tone alone, the animal would salivate. Now Pavlov recorded the quantity of saliva produced as a
function of the number of pairings between the tone of previously neutral stimulus and the
effective or adequate stimulus of powdered food. And of course, as associational theory would predict,
the greater the number of pairings, the more reliably the previously neutral stimulus would be
in eliciting this response. Pavlov began to develop a nomenclature or sets of terms to cover the
major variables in these studies. He referred to the effect food has on salivation as an
unconditional effect. That is, food in the mouth causes salivation first time out. It's a natural
physiological response to salivate when food is put in the mouth. So food in this case,
Pavlov referred to as an unconditional stimulus. That is, its efficacy is unconditional.
In modern parlance, we've come to refer to such stimuli as, quote,
unconditioned stimuli. Now, what about a tone? If you walk up to a dog and just go,
the dog doesn't start salivating all over the place. So the ability of a tone to elicit salivation
is conditional on its being associated with what? With an unconditioned stimulus.
So such stimuli, which originally have no efficacy at all, but come to be effective in virtue of
being associated with an unconditioned stimulus, those stimuli are called conditioned stimuli.
In Pavlov's idiom, initially these were called conditional. We call them conditioned stimuli.
So the typical Pavlovian conditioning paradigm involves the presentation of a conditioned
stimulus followed by the presentation of an unconditioned stimulus, that pairing taking
place often enough so that at a certain point the conditioned stimulus alone will produce what is
now properly called a conditioned response. Salivation to food is an unconditioned response.
Salivation is unconditionally produced by food. Salivation to a tone is a conditioned response.
It is salivation conditional upon a tone having been associated with an unconditioned stimulus.
Well, here you have the basic setup for Pavlovian conditioning because it is the first form of
conditioning reported in the literature. It's often referred to as classical conditioning.
Classical conditioning, Pavlovian conditioning refer to the same thing.
Now Pavlov made a number of observations having established conditioned responses that would
prove to be seminal in their influence on learning theory and behavioral psychology in general.
Let's go back to the standard paradigm. A pure tone followed by food. A pure tone conditioned
stimulus followed by food unconditioned stimulus. Let's say the pure tone we present is 500 cycles
per second, something close to middle C on a keyboard, which is an octave above middle C on a
keyboard or an octave below middle C or middle C, something like that sort of thing. We're going
to keep this the same tone trial by trial. Now we have tone, food, tone, food, tone, food.
Let's say there's 100 pairings like this and now we present the tone without any food and we
collect the saliva, so many milliliters of saliva. Let's say the tone we used was 500 cycles per
second. Now we present a tone of 600 cycles per second, 400 cycles per second, 700 cycles per
second, 250 cycles per second, 500 cycles per second. We present a range of tones and what
we're going to plot, what we're going to graph now is this. On the ordinate, the vertical line,
we're going to plot the amount of saliva produced. On the horizontal line or the abscissa, we're going
to put the frequency of the tones we've used. The conditioned stimulus, let's say, is 500 cycles
per second. What we discovered during these test trials is the greatest amount of salivation is
to the conditioned stimulus. The greatest amount of salivation is to the tone of 500 cycles per
second and then there is a systematic reduction in salivation the further and further the test
tones get from the conditioned stimulus. So if the conditioned stimulus is 500 cycles per second,
you will get much more conditioned salivation to 400 than you will to 300, then you will to 200,
then you will to 700, 800 and the like. The ability of a stimulus that is not the conditioned
stimulus but is physically similar to it. To elicit a conditioned response is what Pavlov
referred to as stimulus generalization. That is, the conditioned response will generalize around
a range of values. It will generalize to values of stimulation different from the conditioned
stimulus but lying on the same physical continuum with the conditioned stimulus.
Now suppose you do the experiment in a rather different way. You present a conditioned stimulus,
500 cycle tone, followed by food in the mouth. But during this very training procedure,
you also present stimuli that are 400, 300, 600, 700. But when you present those,
there is no unconditioned stimulus delivered. So on all the trials in which the conditioned
stimulus is present, food follows. And on any trial where any tone other than the conditioned
stimulus is presented, no food follows. Well in this case, when you later test, you discover
that there is much, much less salivation to those stimuli that are not the conditioned stimulus.
Pavlov went even further. Suppose you mildly shock the animal if there is any salivation to
a stimulus other than the conditioned stimulus. Well, you now can make this response even sharper
and sharper and sharper. This tendency now for conditioned responses to be confined to the
conditioned stimulus through training procedures is what Pavlov referred to as stimulus discrimination.
Well suppose you so tax the animal by punishing salivation to stimuli other than the conditioned
stimulus, by not presenting rewards whenever any stimulus other than the conditioned stimulus is
presented. You keep this up to make the discrimination sharper and sharper and sharper. What Pavlov
found is this. At a certain point, the animal psychologically breaks down. The animals will
be found to quiver. They might urinate and defecate in place. Their eating habits become
entirely different. They might become extremely passive or extremely irascible. Pavlov referred
to this condition as experimental neurosis. And the model that he was advancing, if I can give
a more modern terminology to it, but the model he was advancing was a model of psychological
breakdown arising from an organism having to make discriminations that go beyond that organism's
discriminative capacities. It's almost as if Pavlov is understanding early in the 20th century,
but a certain degree of information overload simply results in the failure of the system
to preserve intact its resources and adaptive capacities. And this line of thinking in Pavlovian
in Pavlovian theory would come to influence clinical thinking as well, particularly in the 1930s
and 40s. I don't know that too much of that kind of thinking survives now. Now Pavlov was not simply
a skillful investigator and a Nobel Prize-winning physiologist. He was also a man with a mission
in life, a mission in life in what we might call philosophy of science and in what we might call
theoretical psychology. Pavlov was relentless in insisting that the language of psychology,
the theories of psychology, referenced to mental life, referenced to thought that all this was a
residual of superstitious ages of ignorance that in fact, when psychology finally was developed
in a scientific way, it would just be physiology by another name, that the ultimate explanations
for psychological processes are physiological explanations. He wrote essays to this effect.
He wrote a very famous essay titled, which was published in the United States in the
Psychological Review titled, A Physiologist Replied to Psychologists, in which he again
insists that psychological talk about mental life and thoughts and cognition and consciousness and
the like, it all made quite good sense, but it should be understood as a kind of folk understanding,
and as scientific understanding replaces folk understanding, the language of psychology gets
replaced by the language of physiology. Now he put his theoretical money, I should say,
where his philosophy of science mouth was, in attempting to explain the very effects that
he found in his research, for example, stimulus generalization, stimulus discrimination,
the theoretical account he puts forward is based on what he assumes to be processes in the animal
cerebral cortex. How do we account then for stimulus generalization? What's the basis upon
which animals will salivate to stimuli different from but lying along the same physical continuum
with the conditioned stimulus? Ah, if you present a sound to an animal, Pavlov says,
you excite the nervous system. There are regions in the brain that respond selectively to sound.
Now Pavlov at that time did not know about primary and secondary auditory areas, but he
reasoned quite correctly that sound is represented in the nervous system somewhere in the cerebral
cortex of animals that have a cerebral cortex, do you see? All right, now it doesn't take much
imagination to suppose that a given frequency of sound will have a special locus of representation
in the nervous system, that is, the place where a 500 cycle per second sound has its greatest effect
will be an identifiable place and trial to trial to trial, that will be the same place
maximally activated by a 500 cycle per second tone. But surely the system is not so exquisitely tuned
that only one tiny place responds, rather says Pavlov, find the place maximally excited by a
500 cycle tone and regions just adjacent to it will also be excited by a 500 cycle tone, but
not stimulated as much. Ah, well, suppose the layout for the auditory system in the brain
is such that in fact frequencies are adjacently represented, that is, the region of the brain
maximally stimulated by a 500 cycle tone is next to the region of the brain maximally stimulated
by a 490 cycle per second tone, 480, 400, you say, ah, well, now look what happens.
We present a 500 cycle tone, 500 cycle per second tone. Here's a region maximally excited,
but the adjacent regions are also excited. From the point of view, if you could talk this way,
from the point of view of the adjacent regions, it's as if a 490 cycle per second tone had been
presented somewhat less intensely. And a 480, 450, 400, 300, 600, 650, 700. So what you are getting
is a spread of excitation, the magnitude of which diminishes the further away you get from 500
cycles per second. So Pavlov says, the best explanation of stimulus generalization at the
level of behavior is in terms of the spread of cortical excitation at the level of brain physiology,
so that the behavior, stimulus generalization behavior observable in the animal now reveals
underlying cortical processes just as systematic, just as tuned, just as mapped to say as what
the behavior itself is reporting. What do we want to say about this theory? Well, we want to say this.
If the entire nervous system were arranged the way the auditory part of the nervous system is
arranged, Pavlov really would have been on to something because, in fact, auditory cortex
does display what is called, quote, tonotopic organization, T-O-N-O-T-O-P-I-C. That is to say,
adjacent frequencies are adjacently represented in the auditory cortex. But this is unique to
auditory frequencies. The loudness areas are not adjacent to each other and color isn't adjacent
shape and form. The whole domain in which we get reliable stimulus generalization effects
includes cortical representations that are not at all so topographically organized. So the theory,
the theory was a nice try and a failing try. Nonetheless, Pavlovian conditioning
was powerfully influential in psychology and this for the following reasons.
First, it provided the means by which behavior could be scientifically studied,
the complexities of behavior scientifically studied. Secondly, as a result of Pavlovian theory,
the behavior was very closely tied to the discipline, the science of physiology. Psychology
from the outset has labored valiantly to earn and enjoy scientific status and there is always an
attempt by psychologists to render the discipline ever more scientific. Historically, this has been
really an attempt to render it ever more physiological. That would clearly be the
absorbing science or the covering science. Thirdly, Pavlov provided a model that would allow one to
understand the breakdown of psychological processes. The effect of experimental neurosis is quite a
dramatic effect and so long after Pavlovian conditioning ceased to be dominant in behavioristic
American psychology, there were still clinical applications of the model in which for example,
phobias would be treated by a kind of counter conditioning, the young school phobic, the
child who won't go near the school building. Well, you provide a little furry animal that the child
likes and in order to get the furry animal, he's got to walk halfway down the street, then two
thirds of the way down the street, then the animal is left at the school door and this is a very,
very Pavlovian kind of operation in which you are pairing off aversive tendencies with quite
positive tendencies and extinguishing the former. There still to this day are behaviorists that
use Pavlovian forms of counter conditioning for such things as the treatment of phobias. Now,
I can't say that contemporary behavioristic psychology continues to be indebted to the
Pavlovian model and that departure from Pavlov will be the subject of subsequent lectures.
But the background influence of Pavlov is still there. The physiologized psychology that he so
vigorously defended is still very much with us and he is certainly the opening chapter of a 20th
century behavioral science. I'm Tom Rawlins, President of the Teaching Company. We hope you've
enjoyed the lectures on these tapes. To order more courses or to receive a copy of our most recent
catalog, call 1-800-TEACH-12. That's 1-800-TEACH-12. Or visit our website at www.teachco.com.
Thank you very much for listening.
