Lecture 15, B. F. Skinner and the Engineering of Society
B. F. Skinner's behaviorism is not merely a descriptive science of animal behavior, a
descriptive science seeking to account for what rats and pigeons do in small boxes.
Skinner intended his behavioral psychology to be nothing less than a means by which to
engineer society as a whole and make the world a better place. There is a very definite
utopian theme in Skinner's writings, both his fictional writings. He did an interesting
book called Walden 2, which presents a world that would be regulated according to the principles
of operant conditioning. And he wrote a quite interesting nonfiction work, which I'll refer
to later in lecture called Beyond Freedom and Dignity, in which he tests the moral implications
of a developed descriptive science of behavior. But in Skinnerian psychology, the stakes are
very high. This is not simply an attempt to get better at animal training or to make
circuses more orderly affairs. The bottom line here is to change the world. And Skinner
is confident that behaviorism is the right way to do that because Skinner is confident
that the world as we find it is itself the outcome of reinforcement histories that have
been entered into by the people of the world. Children, after all, are shaped. This is the
whole process of socialization and acculturation. The idea that there's something sinister in
behaviorism because by the application of M&M's or kisses or hugs and the like, you're systematically
manipulating the behavior of someone else. Well, for goodness sakes, this is what goes
on 16, 18 hours a day. So it's not a question of whether one is going to attempt to control
the behavior of others. It really is a question, practically and pragmatically, of whether
you're going to do it well or poorly. And in fact, parents have already settled the
question about behavioral control. They're desperate to be able to control the behavior
of their children. So with John B. Watson, Skinner is prepared to say, we'll show you
how to do it. Now, is this a threat to the notion of human autonomy, free will and the
like? As you might guess, Skinner regards this very terminology as a throwback to ages
of superstition, to religio, mystical notions and the like. What do you gain through the
idea of autonomy over and against what you already know when you see an environmental
option being presented and Smith behaving in such a way as to secure it? If you know
this is something Smith is going to do, do you know anything further by saying he did
it because he wanted to do it or he did it even though he didn't want to do it? The datum
that counts is his doing it. The world gets in trouble not as a result of free will versus
determinism or autonomy or moral theories and the like. The world gets in trouble because
of behavior that takes place in the world. Not because of the hidden dark, deep Freudian
motives that preoccupy the realms of the unconscious. Who knows about that? Oh, I guess psychoanalysts
do or at least claim to. But Skinner says this isn't what actually causes murder, mayhem,
death, destruction, thievery, sainthood, etc. Behavior is what enters into descriptions
of people as felons, saints, heroes and the like. I should say that when I find myself
in a behavioristic frame of mind, which to be perfectly candid about it is extremely
rarely, and I usually will find that frame of mind dissipating very quickly just by opening
a window and perhaps putting on a Schubert quintet or something. But when I do find
myself in a behavioristic frame of mind and want to inform students that they are the
products of this sort of reinforcement history, I like to take the example of freshmen coming
in for advice on what courses they should be taking in the spring term. It's always
good to do this with freshmen. They have very few presuppositions and there's still a kind
of academic innocence about them. And so you say, well, I see that you've tentatively
put down chemistry and biology and calculus. Why is that? Why is that? Oh, well, I'm pre-med.
Oh, I see you're pre-med. Is your mother or is your father a physician? Oh, no, no, no,
or an uncle or an aunt. No, no, no. Actually, there aren't any doctors in my life. I see.
Are you strongly encouraged to go into medicine? Because it's a very demanding form of life
and of course you've got four more years after college to study medicine and then internships
and residencies and with managed health care, you might actually find yourself standing
out with a tin cup trying to raise enough money to send your children to Georgetown
and so on. No, there's no encouragement at home. This really is my own. I mean, I just
freely arrived at the idea that medicine is for me. Oh, I see. And when did that happen?
Well, I always wanted to be a doctor. Did you want to be a doctor when you were six
weeks old? Oh, no, no, no. Not as an infant, you know, but as long as I can remember. I
see. And as best you can tell, this is something you arrived at on your own. Yes. Well, now
that by the way, is something of a parody, but a parody of a conversation that I have
had hundreds of times over a course of 30 plus years of university teaching and my colleagues
can add their experiences to these. This is a quite common discourse that takes place
between academic advisors and undergraduate students. Well, suppose we entered into the
life of this young man or young woman to see what actually was going on. Well, I say in
my Scenarian frame of mind, I would argue this sort of thing is what's going on. We'll
just call the student Billy. Well, little Billy comes home and Billy is six years old
and he comes running into the house and his mind is made up now and he comes over to his
mother or today, perhaps a caregiver of one sort or another, but he comes running over
and he says, I'm going to be a fireman. And whereupon he is told to wash his hands and
get ready for supper. And that's the end of it. Short shrift is made of this, not much
of a discussion. Now at seven and a half years old, he comes running in again. This time he's
just come back from the local movie theater and he tells his parents in no uncertain terms
that he has now found a mission in life. He's going to be a cowboy. Well, they start to
make Lady Macbeth out of this poor child because he's again told to wash up and get ready for
supper. So off he goes and he starts washing up again. Now at 11 years old, he comes in
and says something that I actually think I said when I was 11 years old and that is
that I was more or less committed to pitching for the New York Yankees. And I recall my father
saying, everybody in the world wants to pitch for the New York Yankees. Now my father didn't
sell me, but at that point I should wash my hands or anything, but it became quite clear
to me that he didn't think this was a particularly promising prospect. Well, now Billy comes
in, let's say at 12 years old and he has just applied scalpel to the abdominal wall of
a dead frog. He has opened up the visceral cavity and he now starts seeing the organs
of circulation and digestion and the like and his mind is made up and he comes home
and still in a kind of reverie from this experience. The frog is in something rather
more fatal than a reverie, I should point out, but still in something of a reverie from
this experience he says quietly over supper, people talking about the Dow Jones average
or what the President's State of the Union address might have been, and then they notice
that Billy hasn't had much to say tonight and the parents say, and how goes it with
you, Will? And Will looks up in a kind of philosophical way and says, you know, I think
I want to be a surgeon. Well, things start changing fairly quickly in this household.
For example, on his next birthday, Will discovers, wrapped up very, very fancily, a microscope
of all things with little slides with blood cells on them and that kind of thing. Christmas
time, there's the old Gilbert chemistry set or Grey's Anatomy. Turns out that when Aunt
Martha comes over for tea, she wants Will to take her pulse. She thinks maybe she might
be running a bit of high blood pressure or her cholesterol might not be properly balanced
and Uncle Jack's arthritis is acting up and do you think it's a good idea to take aspirin?
Well, the long and the short of it is this, Bill, Will, Willie, Billy Boy, with this one
utterance, this one single word, surgeon, has garnered the attention of a significant
fraction of the world's adult population. I mean, just short of getting into movies
free. Now, the point one wants to make is that a fair amount of reinforcing is going on in
a highly incidental way. You don't even have to set out to shape behavior and control it.
It doesn't have to be some sort of fascist motive. It just happens. People smile at each
other. They compliment each other on their dress. They use facial expressions and posture
and the like. All this reliably matching up with a certain effect one knows this will
have on others. If you do have a significant other in your life, and I'm sure you have
some significant other in life, and significant other comes in and says, by the way, I just
bought this tie and the reply is, oh, did you? This one, remember now, it's just three
words. Oh, did you? This can have a devastating effect, do you see? Whereas my how nice has
a radically different effect. Now, what is the effect? The oh, did you effect is no more
plaid. Do you see? I think this one is plaid. Yes, no more plaid. The oh, how nice is plaid.
Positive reinforcement. Do it again. Increase the response rate. Of course, on this account,
people would have closets filled with plaid ties. So there's obviously a problem here.
We will get into that and on. But incidental reinforcement is the order of the day. Now,
there are other occasions in which you see this operating. I find it particularly manifest
at Christmas time in these shopping malls, these abominable places that obviously were
put up as sort of upper middle class concentration camps where you get privileges to leave for
a few hours, whereupon you must be back first thing the next morning, usually to return
what it was you took away the previous day. Now, I sort of traipse around, as you might
guess I would. I sort of traipse around as the major decisions are made by my beloved,
who's in a much better position to do this than I am. And I usually say, yes, Jack will
like that. Mary surely will like that. No, I think they'd probably want a blue one and
you, you mope around. But while this is going on, I usually check out the behavioristic
dimensions of the operation. What you'll find is this. Parents are unbelievable. They're
so easily embarrassed. So there's mother and dad or mother or dad trailing little Jane
up and down the aisles and little Jane says something fairly harmless like, I'd like some
candy or let's have candy. And the parent says, no, it'll support your supper. I want
candy. No, you'll have some candy after supper, but you can't have any now. Now, do be still.
I want some candy. Will you please quiet down? I want all right. Here's some candy. Now, ask
yourself, what is being reinforced here? What's being reinforced as the following? If at first
you don't succeed, shout louder. So, so without, surely if you said to the parent, what kind
of behavior are you trying to shape or train into, to this little girl? She'd say, well,
I'm trying to shape in to use a rather implicit expression is courteous and decorous behavior.
Well, then don't give candy for shouting and screaming. Well, what should I do? And you
know what the answer is? The behaviorist's answer is nothing. I want candy. Oh, this is
a nice vase, isn't it, George? Yes, it is. I want candy. By the way, do they have furniture
on the third floor here? I want some candy. You know, we parked the car a little far from
the entrance. I hope it isn't raining out. Can I have some candy? And you know, more
over, oh, did you just say something? Can I have some candy? You see, you're now shaping
the volume. Now, I know this looks terribly sinister. But of course, this is what is done
all the time, whether one wants to house break a pet or house break or toilet train a child,
or in fact, encourage a loved one or deal with a colleague or get a president to propose
a certain course of action or have your congressman represent a favorite cause. We are shaping
each other's behavior, at least on the behaviorist's account, all the time. And the question is,
how can we do it effectively? And how can we do it in such a way as to secure the behavioral
ends we have in mind without bringing a lot of woeful behavior along with it? So on the
question of the ethics of behavioral control, Skinner would argue that that actually is
not on the table. We must control behavior. It's part of creating a civilized ordered
life. So that it's going to be controlled, there is no doubt. How and by whom and toward
what end happens to involve yet other considerations. But behavior control, qua behavior control
cannot possibly raise an ethical issue because it's an absolutely unavoidable practice. Now
consistent with this is the view that everything we take to be a social problem is indeed a
behavioral problem. So correctional institutes, prisons, psychiatric wards, psychotherapy,
so called, in all the instances in which what we seek to achieve is some improvement in a
social condition. Skinner would argue that at the end of the day, what you're really attempting
to achieve is an alteration in behavior. If you can change the behavior, you have the
desired outcome. Whatever theory you might have about what's going on inside to produce
that outcome. So as you might guess, behavioristic forms of therapy became very, very popular
and indeed enjoyed quite a good press for quite some time. I think it's fair to say
that the behavioristic approach to psychopathology was quite oversold in the 1950s and 60s. There's
still room for it here and there. I might mention one experiment that was done that attracted a
lot of attention at the time, though I don't think much happened to it afterwards. There's a
particular form of schizophrenia, a type of schizophrenia known as catatomia, in which the
means by which the psyche removes itself from a threatening or hostile environment is a sensory
and motor means. The catatonic schizophrenic is unresponsive, very often sits silently for days
and weeks. It might display utter passivity, a condition called Wexiflexibilitas. You raise
the hand, the hand stays up, you bend the wrist back. There's almost so total passivity that forced
feeding can become necessary from time to time. There seems to be no sensory or motor contact
with the world, no plan to be realized, no purposes or intentions. Well, behavior therapists
back in the 1950s thought that this would be an ideal patient population to test out certain
behavioristic principles. That is, shouldn't it be possible to get the catatonic patient moving
in a purposive way using precisely the techniques that are used to control organismic behavior
anywhere else? Well, I shall make this a short tale and the details are not all that important,
but the procedure was as follows. An apparatus was brought into the hospital, a vending machine
type apparatus, which had different items in it, and it was put at the foot of the bed
of the targeted patients. Initially, to activate the machine, all the patient had to do was look
at it. That is, if the patient with one way mirrors allowing an observation of the patient,
if the patient made sustained eye contact with the device, the device would deliver something.
It might deliver sound, it might deliver an object, it could deliver a candy bar, whatever.
Over a course of days, gazing at the machine was not sufficient. You actually had to make
physical contact. You could stretch out and touch it with a toe, but if you did that, it would pay
off, and it would only pay off if some physical contact was made. Now, as the results of this
study were written up, what the investigators claimed to have established is this. In a course of
months, not only were the patients actually operating the levers to secure various items
in the machine, but where the machine contained items of only one kind and a neighboring machine
items of another kind, there was actually trading going on between patients in adjacent beds.
And in fact, in some cases, this got the patients to the point where they actually could work in
the hospital cafeteria, make change, provide items and so forth. Now, I mention this not as a new
approach to the dreadful, woeful condition of catatonic schizophrenia. I mention this because
it raises a very interesting question. Suppose, in fact, schizophrenia, as I think most contemporary
experts on the subject would argue, is a genetically predisposed condition that comes
about chiefly as a result of alterations in the interior media of the nervous system,
particularly the transmitter pathways in the brain, and in fact is best approached therapeutically
through some neuropharmacologic procedures. Suppose we take that to be the right view of the
case. It's obviously much too complex to be reduced to a few certainties of that kind.
But as an overview, we say, look, schizophrenia is essentially a neurochemical disturbance
ultimately, effectively to be treated by neuropharmacologic approaches. And suppose it were
also the case that through a regiment of behavioral conditioning, you could start getting a catatonic
schizophrenic to behave in an unremarkable way, maybe even to the point of holding down a job
and the like. What I find interesting is that in just that case, you might find yourself inclined to
say, ah, so the behavior after all doesn't represent what's going on and would give you an entirely
distorted picture of what's going on. It would be very much like giving a diabetic insulin and
saying the diabetic is cured. The diabetic is only, quote, cured in the sense that the symptoms are
relieved by way of insulin. Well, some have argued that the achievements behavior therapy
can claim are not really achievements in the sense of clearing up a disordered or diseased
condition, but in providing a kind of behavioral camouflage for an underlying condition that is
still in place. I mention this because it shows that the same behavioral datum, the same symptom
pattern, will lend itself to a variety of interpretations entirely incompatible with
each other and each of the interpretations coherent within its own framework. Now,
I mentioned at the beginning of lecture that one of Skinner's influential nonfiction works
was titled Beyond Freedom and Dignity. In fact, Beyond Freedom and Dignity got Skinner to the cover
of Time Magazine. This is not a place occupied by many psychologists. I think if Freud had lived
long enough, he surely would have made the cover of Time Magazine, but you won't find many psychologists
on the cover of Time Magazine. And in fact, Skinner was already one of the premier psychologists in
the world long before he wrote Beyond Freedom and Dignity. Well, he made the cover of Time Magazine
because this was an extremely controversial book. I can give you a couple of phrases out of Beyond
Freedom and Dignity. Well, one phrase stands out, perhaps above all, no praise, no blame,
no praise, no blame. Now, what is Skinner getting at with this? And what is he getting at with the
phrase Beyond Freedom and Dignity? He's getting at this. Humanistic perspectives on human nature
have emphasized our moral autonomy, our fitness for praise and blame, our requirement to seek
heroic levels of achievement, condemnations of those of us who do not have such aspirations,
the blameworthiness of people who do not live up to the expectations of others,
now blamed because they are regarded as being morally faulty, morally deficient. Something
inside them isn't good. They have to be changed. They're the wrong sort, the wrong type. They're
defective. Skinner says this is the traditional view. The hero is the hero because the hero is
possessed of some extraordinary inner strength, inner spirit. The coward is a coward because the
coward lacks that special ingredient. The saint is the saint because of some transcendent level of
grace enjoyed by the saint, such that the saint is able to do what an ordinary mortal can't.
It's something inside the saint. And the criminal is the criminal because of something inside the
criminal, the bad type, the bad sort. Skinner says this is what you get when you fail to appreciate
that the determinants of behavior are not inside the organism. They are in the environment. So the
behavior that you're looking at and prepared to condemn is behavior that was engineered into that
organism. Thus there really are no moral grounds for blame at all. It certainly isn't the behavior's
fault thus to have been shaped. And when you stand around applauding this or that performance,
this or that achievement, understand that again what you're looking at is the result of a lifetime,
a lifetime reinforcement history that has inclined that person's behavior in directions that gain
the approval, support, applause, and commendation of society. Why praise it? You're simply praising
the well-trained animal for doing what the well-trained animal was well-trained to do.
Now once you get out of this award of the week or dunce cap mentality, once you give up the easy
habit of bringing moral judgments to bear on those who have been conditioned to be the way they are,
you can turn your attention to the real sources of commendable and condemnable behavior and the
real sources are found in the environment. The child who is reinforced for shouting becomes the
bully, becomes the persistent, aggressive, never had enough, do what I tell you, give me what I want.
If you don't, I'll keep this up and up and up. Everybody finds such a person obnoxious and
everybody wants to blame that person. If you want to blame anybody, blame those who were applying
positive reinforcers for a form of behavior that now has become habitual. And if in fact you want
Billy to get into Harvard and Jane to get into Yale, then early on Billy and Jane are to be exposed
to a reinforcing regimen that will incline behavior in that direction. The question then of human
freedom and human dignity, needn't ever even be brought up. It's something we are to get
beyond. The question really shouldn't be, did Smith do what he did, freely, volitionally,
autonomously and the like. The question shouldn't be, are human beings in their very nature as
dignified entities worthy of respect and the like? Understand that the essential fact of human life
is the essential fact of all animal life. Adaptive behavior designed to meet the demands
and challenges of the external world. A conditioning history that inclines that behavior in one
direction rather than another. And depending on the actualities of the environment and the
conditioning history, the behavior may be adaptive or maladaptive, successful or unsuccessful,
triumphant or failing. None of this best understood in terms of something going on
inside the organism or inside the person, inside the neighbor, inside the spouse,
rather understood in terms of the environmental contingencies that rewarded certain responses
and punished others. Well, this of course challenges ancient philosophical, moral,
religious propositions. It tests what we might be inclined to take to be the
certainties of common sense. It certainly violates what we take to be the sources of
our own behavior, or at least is entirely contrary to what we take to be the sources of
our own behavior. Most of us take a look at an external world that summons us to do something,
and we believe that we step back at that point and ask, is this really something I should do?
And if we reach the settled conclusion that it's something we shouldn't do,
all the rewards on heaven and earth will not be enough to get us to do it.
That's the picture we have of ourselves. Now Skinner says there's a reinforcement history that
goes into shaping people to have judgments like that themselves. After all, you can wield a great
degree of power in the world under the rubrics of praise and blame. As long as we can single each
other out for rewards, commendations, and punishments, we can shape behavior through these things.
These only work, of course, if the recipient of the reward and the recipient of the punishment
regards himself as autonomous, free, and therefore responsible for what it was he did.
Once you take away this notion of freedom and autonomy, of course, handing out rewards or
punishments would strike the recipient as unintelligible. Why is this going on? I did what
I did because the, that narrative that constitutes the history of rewards and punishments that have
shaped me into the sort of being I am, made it essentially inevitable that I would do what I
did. Skinner takes the same perspective and brings it into the classroom. The reason people fail is
because they're not emitting the right responses. If you want them to emit the right responses,
put together the material to be learned in small steps as if it were bar pressing,
and step by step the organism never makes a mistake. He fills in the blank. He learns the
right word. He goes through at his own pace. He defines his own reinforcements. You specify in
advance what are the, to use the argot, what are the terminal stimulus response connections,
and in systematic workbook fashion, you put together materials that students master because
the steps are so small and intelligently laid out that they can't get it wrong. Skinner says the
school systems that we have are designed to fail people. You know you're doing it right
when some fraction of the class fails. What sort of attitude is that about education?
So, behaviorism and the engineering of society plans to touch us at the level of education,
at the level of moral philosophy, penology, child rearing and the like. Extremely influential,
a very, very broad database, and at the same time a system that is bloated with controversy
and contradictions in its own right.
