Lecture 16 Language
B. F. Skinner well recognized that the fate of a behavioristic psychology depended on the ability of that psychology
to reach what we take to be the most defining marks of our own humanity and our own human nature.
And anyone compiling a list of uniquely human attributes is certainly going to begin with language.
Indeed, some might say that you can begin and end with language.
Going back to Stoic philosophy in the third century B.C., the understanding was that what distinguished humanity
from all other forms of life was just this unique power, linguistic verbal power,
such that we could represent the world abstractly in propositional form and solve problems
that are far beyond the range of possibilities for the non-linguistic creature.
Well, Skinner wrote a book. This is the way you change the world.
I guess Skinner wrote a book called Verbal Behavior.
Note the title, Verbal Behavior. The book was not titled Language.
It was titled Verbal Behavior because one of the main points of the book is that all language is yet another kind of behavior
as responsive to the principles of conditioning as any other kind of behavior.
Yes, language is rich, various, detailed, subtle, all those things.
But at the end of the day, it is the production of sound by a certain apparatus for the purpose of achieving certain events in the world
for the purpose of adapting to the demand characteristics of the environment.
Well, you might guess that the behavioristic account of language is going to be very much like the behavioristic account
of bar pressing or key pecking or running down runways or operating slot machines and the like.
The scenario goes something like this. The baby is born, is dressed up and clean and comfortable and has been fed
and now finds himself perched on a knee.
Looking into the eyes as this head wiggles back and forth a bit and the conjugate movement of the eyes isn't quite perfect,
but you can still sort of get a bead on this wonderful person who's looking at you and saying such things as baby.
Now, as baby is uttered, the baby utters something like baby.
Now, if this goes on long enough, just on an accidental basis, you know, like the rat accidentally leaning on the bar,
well sooner or later, the baby is going to put the top lip against the bottom lip and make some sort of kind of sound.
The net effect of that, of course, is you start saving for the tuition at Harvard.
There are hugs and kisses and there's a quick phone call made to all the relatives with the unbelievable news.
Jane is speaking. You say, well, in a manner of speaking, I guess Jane is doing something. She just went, brr, brr.
Now, brr, brr is a long way from dark night that does from the eye his function take, et cetera, et cetera.
Or when I behold upon the night starred face, huge cloudy symbols of a high romance.
So we've got a ways to go. But what works here, Skinner says very effectively, is this.
You're not simply reinforcing the production of a sound. You're reinforcing a kind of mimetic behavior, a kind of imitative behavior,
so that once the reinforcement contingency requires the production of any sound just heard,
the time it took to get from brr, brr, brr is very, very long relative to the time it's going to take to get from baby to dada to mommy to good boy,
good girl, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
So language understood in these terms then just becomes a species of behavior and it is musculoskeletal behavior.
It's like gripping something or moving or turning and the like.
But in this case, instead of producing an effect on the world through mechanical means, you're producing an essentially acoustic effect on the world,
and that acoustic effect becomes the necessary condition to be satisfied for some reinforcer to follow, a hug, a kiss, whatever.
So there's the account.
Now, the question then is whether things like baby, mama, dada, and the like is language.
What do we mean when we refer to some form of communication as linguistic?
The question arises regularly.
Do chimpanzees have language?
Do dolphin have language?
Do birds have language?
Are parrots merely parroting or is there something else going on there?
What is it about what we're doing that clearly establishes it as language?
Some of these questions are of an ineliminably philosophical nature, which means any answer we serve of should end in a semicolon and not an exclamation point.
Some of these questions are technical questions, scientific questions, and presumably will surrender to the usual experimental and observational modes of inquiry.
Now, as language is traditionally understood, it contains at least these two elements.
It contains denotative elements, which is to say elements that represent actual objects in the world, which can be defined, as is said, ostensibly.
An object is defined ostensibly by pointing at it.
So if you were to ask me to define eyeglasses, I would give you a definition that involves my holding up something answering to the category eyeglass and pointing at it.
Now, the term eyeglass, then, is a denotative term in that the word denotes an actual object.
But language also contains connotative terms or terms that have meaning, not representing an object, but representing a meaning.
If I asked you to give me your eyeglasses, you would hand me an object.
But if I asked you to show me justice, you certainly would have no object you could hold up at all.
To show me justice, you would have to engage in certain conduct, certain behavior, a certain performance, that matched up not with an object in the external world, but with a principle.
For example, equal cases should be treated equally. Everyone should get his due.
No one should be used merely as a means to an end, but always as an end unto himself.
So we'd be engaged in patterns of meaning, and the linguistic elements here would be irreducibly connotative.
They would be wrapped up in cultural considerations, anthropological considerations, the habits of a tribe, the way the world is understood through a particular set of prisms at a particular time in cultural history, etc., etc.
Now, without attempting to answer a profoundly deep question once and for all, or even answer it at all, I would say when questions arise as to whether non-human animals have language,
the answer to that question is going to depend on whether you require for something to be classified as a language, not only denotative, but connotative elements, patterns of meaning.
Whether these meaning patterns have to be organized in a grammatically coherent rule-governed fashion, and I say the more you require for something to be a language that it match human language in all of its attributes,
well, the less likely it is that you're going to accord linguistic ability to non-human entities.
If, on the other hand, you will regard as a language any symbolic mode of communication, that is, any mode of communication in which some output on the part of one animal reliably controls the behavior of another,
and does so in a way that constitutes some sort of dyadic relationship where it isn't just a bat squeak and an insect someplace flies to a different tree,
but where, in fact, the communication really is achieving a kind of interpersonal influence.
I say if that's the criterion adopted, then it would seem undoubtable that much of the animal economy has something akin to linguistic prowess.
Obviously, the animal economy, first of all, our part in it is rather more recent.
Other animals have been here a lot longer than we have, quite effectively.
The best evidence seems to be that the cockroach will outlast us.
Insects lay down pheromones that allow other insects to know who was there and what they were doing and where they're going.
And so we probably should get out of the habit of puffing up our own pride by declaring for ourselves attributes nothing else has.
Birds fly and weed out, fish live underwater.
We have this extraordinary linguistic prowess that allows us to achieve certain things extremely important for the form of life we live.
Chimpanzees and dogs and cats and birds and the like have extraordinary prowess allowing them to enter into the form of life that's right for that species.
So do chimpanzees have language?
Yes and no, depending on how you define it and how strictly you take the necessary and sufficient characteristics of a language in your definition.
Do infants have language?
I think a much better case can be made out for chimpanzees than for infants.
And you would be in the same bind where infants are concerned.
When an infant babbles and the babbling results in nothing, the babbling tends to go down.
When infants cry and the crying ends up with a bottle being put in the mouth, crying tends to go up.
Is the infant intentionally, linguistically or vocally conveying a state of distress for the purpose of receiving warm milk?
Who knows?
One doesn't know.
Understand the difference between doing something with a purpose and doing something for a purpose.
The infant surely may be crying so that some condition of need does get satisfied without the infant intending to see that that cry be followed by warm milk.
So the infant may have purposes but not in the sense of a sensed intentional purpose.
It may serve a purpose without proceeding from a purpose.
I hope that's clear.
It's just another way of observing that from external behavior, you're not inevitably in a position to determine what internal motivational conditions are producing that behavior.
Now, how do we get language in the first instance?
Is it really the case that we come out, as the behaviorists would have it, where emitting a lot of behavior, the baby's wiggling its fingers around and is spitting up lots of things and babbling away.
These are sort of random outputs.
And then in good Darwinian fashion, the environment selects some of that behavior to survive and the rest of it is extinguished.
In that, the crying behavior gets milk.
Random babbling doesn't.
When baby comes out, good things happen.
When mommy, daddy, ba-ba, when these sounds come out, good things happen.
And therefore, many, many other verbal operants go the way of all flesh.
Nothing good follows them so they become extinguished.
And gradually what is fashioned is linguistic proficiency.
Is that the best account of language?
I think not.
And I shall be adducing some information and data in support of the proposition that that probably is a hopelessly spare and defective conception of how language comes about and indeed what language is.
John Locke had a theory about language which is a conventionalist theory.
Locke should not be surprising in this context.
He's one of the fathers of empiricistic philosophy.
When Locke addresses the question, how do words come to have the meaning that they have?
How is it that language takes the form that it does?
Well, this has to be by way of certain conventions.
It can only be conventional that we all agree to refer to what I'm holding in my right hand as eyeglasses.
Now if we had a non-English speaking audience, in fact if we had an audience that never had any exposure to anything like an eyeglass and without holding this up one just looked at the audience and said eyeglass, this would be as meaningless as a baby's babbling.
So the way this sort of object comes to be denoted by the term eyeglass is conventionally.
We come to agree that eyeglass as a word will refer to an object like this, necktie as a word will refer to an object like this.
So the meaning of words is established by conventions and language then becomes an essentially cultural affair.
Not only does one learn French because one is brought up to learn French, but one learns the meaning of terms by the common agreement of those who use these terms.
Thus you have an empiricistic theory of language.
Language is formed through practices that are sanctioned by the controlling society, by the language using society.
Now this doesn't sound at all controversial and in fact it has such a mark of obvious truth to it that you might be inclined to let the matter stop just there.
Well in the 18th century, the century following John Locke, Thomas Reed took up this question and found that the conventionalist account really won't quite work and it won't quite work for this reason.
How is it that I can establish by custom or practice that the word that will denote this object is eyeglass only if in fact we have some way of signaling our agreement.
Now how can we possibly signal our agreement or enter into agreements of any kind unless there is already some way of representing that agreement, symbolizing that agreement.
So as Reed argues, for there to be an artificial language, what I'm using now, Reed would call an artificial language, there must be a natural language in place.
Now what would the natural language look like?
It would look like a collection of postures, perhaps vocal utterances, holding one's hand up this way means stay away, doing this means come, smiling may have a certain meaning, frowning.
Reed says the entire animal kingdom has some of these natural linguistic elements as it were that it uses for the purpose of attracting or repelling for the purpose of hunting or escaping and the like.
And that it is out of this bedrock of a natural language that it becomes possible to enter into just those agreements and covenants according to which the word eyeglass denotes an object of this kind.
So back in the 18th century there is already an argument in place that for there to be language something must be innately present.
There must be something naturally in place in order for this artificial system of signs and symbols ever to come about and to be used in a conventional way.
But surely the most famous nativistic theory of language or innatist theory of language is the one developed in this century by Noam Chomsky.
And a few words now about Skinner's verbal behavior and Noam Chomsky.
When Skinner's verbal behavior appeared, the reviewer selected for it for one of the linguistics journals was a young chap and I suspect would have been known to very, very few psychologists.
In fact, perhaps a young chap known by nobody outside the community of linguists.
A young chap by the name of Noam Chomsky was asked to review Skinner's verbal behavior.
Well, what a dazzling, blistering review this turned out to be.
A long, truncated, ad hominem, two-fisted, smirky, brilliant, somewhat quirky review.
A verbal behavior, well my goodness it was a review of verbal behavior of Skinner, Pavlov, Watson.
Just about anything answering to the description of behaviorist found itself dragged into this review and held up to scrutiny.
Well, as a piece of scholarship I think that what Professor Chomsky served up had its limitations.
I think the brush he was painting with was rather broad.
But within this review he presented some evidence that of just the sort that a behavioristic theory would have to acknowledge is a worthy test of the theory.
Evidence that I think very few psychologists, including psychologists who had been interested in language, knew much about.
Some of the evidence was cultural and anthropological.
Now let me run down what Chomsky takes to be evidence decisively confuting the behavioristic theory of language.
First Chomsky says, rearing practices all over the world as regards language, language training the world over, varies tremendously.
There are communities that place an extremely high premium on the acquisition of language and there are communities that are largely indifferent to it.
Billy is strapped to the back, out to the field goes mom or dad and four or five hours later they commit and take some refreshment and babies put on the back.
And nobody's sitting there saying mommy, baby and the like.
So there are some cultures in which there's no conscientious regular attempt to train in language.
And there are other cultures very much like our own, I say, that place a very, very high premium on acquiring language at the earliest possible time.
Notwithstanding this riot of approaches, the age at which youngsters begin to frame grammatically coherent expressions is about the same the world over.
That is, children will be doing this on average within months of each other, just a couple of months of each other.
So here you've got a case in which the reinforcement histories are radically different, but the relevant operant behavior is coming about at about the same time.
Chalk up one mark against the behavioristic account, not decisive but suggestive, shall we say, extremely suggestive.
Secondly, Chomsky says, when you examine what parents actually reinforce, they do not reinforce grammar, they reinforce content.
That is, if you take a look at parents anywhere, working on the linguistic abilities of very, very young children, and take what behaviors take to be reinforcing operations, hugs, kisses, nods of approval, M&M's or whatever.
What the linguistic community reinforces in the very, very young is not the grammatical structure of the utterance, but the content of the utterance.
Well, to give it a laughable twist, we can say this. Suppose Billy comes home, walks into the house, let's say Billy is three years old, extremely precocious, walks into the house and says something like,
Mother, Dad, your performance last night reached the level of the ludicrous, absolutely risible. You've been a cause of great, great consternation and even shame to me, and I hope that in the future you'll comport yourself in a manner more in keeping with the station you would hope I would enjoy in life.
I think Billy is going to end up with a red backside or at least the likelihood of a new bicycle at birthday time just dropped precipitously.
But as I sometimes tell my university students to test this out, why don't you go home at Thanksgiving and walk into the house. Of course, George sounds very expensive and you're very, very bright and this will be somewhat disarming, but just walk into the house and walk over to your mother and say,
You, Mommy, nice girl, girl. Now, I doubt you're going to be punished for that. There might be a look of surprise. You might be wondering exactly what it is you're reading and writing at Georgetown, but the general reaction will be a positive reaction because the content is right.
Now, if it really is the case, as Chomsky argued, that what gets reinforced in early language learning is content rather than grammar. And nonetheless, again, you find the young language user from the very, very outset putting things together in a grammatically structured rule governed fashion.
This can't be explicated on the basis of reinforcing operations. Something else must be involved. Two marks against the, at least the radically behavioristic account.
Third, a native language speaker can comprehend and utter a veritable infinity of coherent, intelligible sentences.
There's no limit to the number of ways you can express even the same idea. I can express the same idea with great, great variety in innumerable fashion.
Ideas very much like the idea I just expressed can be expressed time and again through a variety of different techniques using, you see, I'm doing this over and over again. I'm saying the same thing.
And you're understanding the utterance even though some of these utterances are first time experiences for you. I would guess that many of the sentences that I've used in the lectures to date are sentences that you've actually never heard before.
Never precisely those words, in just that sequence, and yet no difficulty comprehending it whatever. This says Chomsky does not match up with the behavioristic scenario.
What you're getting is competence both in comprehending and producing what? Behaviors that have never happened before. Therefore they couldn't have been reinforced before.
You can only reinforce the behavior that takes place. So it turns out that the linguistic domain and the ease with which the competent linguist moves in that domain just won't match up with what a behavioristically implanted or conditioned repertoire would allow.
So again, you might want to mark the anti-behaviorist column with one more. I think if you're keeping score, it looks something like three to nothing, I think so far.
That's assuming these are only worth a unit a piece. On some accounts, it's now 700 to nothing, but different scorekeepers have a different metric.
Something else that strikes Chomsky's fashion as fancy as he reviews this book.
The age at which children can follow verbal instructions is considerably earlier than the age at which they can produce the very same sentences.
Billy, tidy up your room and put your shoes in the closet and then come down to supper is something that finds Billy doing just those things at an age when Billy could not possibly produce those sentences.
Now, I leave it to students in the course to consider how this is not consistent with a behavioristic scenario.
Ask yourself on a behavioristic account what the operant conditioning history must be for me, A, to understand that sentence that I just...
That is to have my behavior controlled by that sentence and B, the operant conditioning history that would have me producing that sentence.
The history should be the same. Find the age at which one of those things happened, both should happen, and the age is quite different.
4 nothing, 40 nothing, 54 nothing.
Now, what about people who have been isolated from a linguistic community since birth?
There aren't too many of these cases. They're pathetic and tragic cases very often.
Children raised by deaf mutes in rural settings in which they've never participated in a linguistic community and when they are found have no linguistic ability whatever.
In some horrible cases, children who have been chained in closets or small rooms and left in isolation, not nurtured in any way at all.
Well, there are several generalizations that come out of studies of the few cases that are on record.
One, of course, is that the ravages of this kind of isolation are either permanent or correctable depending on the age of the child at which you now begin some therapeutic regimen.
What that means then is that there is a critical period which, if passed, probably can never be compensated for again.
But if you reach the child during that critical period, there can be a degree of successful nurturance that renders that child a competent language user almost without flaw or fault.
Now, this doesn't quite match up with a merely associationistic reinforcement history account.
The reinforcement history account makes no provision for a critical period, an ideal time for language learning.
On a behaviorist account, it shouldn't matter when you begin. As long as you train in the right number of associations, that's what the competence is all about.
You could begin it when Jack is 15, when Jack is 10, when Jack is 5, when Jack is 2.
All that should matter as you enter at these different points is where the curve begins.
If it takes, let's say, 100,000 reinforcers to get somebody to write poetically and the 100,000 reinforcers begin at age 12 versus age 1, then the one who got it at age 1 is just 12 years earlier on two curves that are essentially parallel curves.
Jack will catch up 12 years later.
But that isn't what the data show. What the data show is that there are actual relatively narrow critical periods of time during which the acquisition of language is extremely efficient and earlier than which or later than which the acquisition is not nearly as efficient.
Now, these are studies of linguistically deprived people.
Now, what are we prepared to say about this? Let's run down the list very, very quickly again. Language training practices are highly various.
The age at which language takes on a grammatical structure is about the same the world over.
Parents reinforce for content, not for grammar. Yet, language takes on this grammatical structure from the very first.
Children reared in isolation or in linguistically deprived environments will either recover or not, depending upon whether the recovery period falls within that critical period in which language acquisition is most efficient.
Native speakers of a language can produce and comprehend a virtual infinity of grammatically correct intelligible sentences, this being a behavioral domain far larger than anything envisaged by an operant conditioning paradigm.
Well, all this suggests then that the best account of language is that it is the result of some internal process that is actually part of the innate endowment of the language, of the little linguist himself or herself.
The fact that from the very first language takes on this rule-governed grammatical structure suggests that there's something in the very mechanism of language production that is itself rule-governed and structured.
And Chomsky's theory is that the grammatical rule-governed nature of language is an expression of underlying brain processes that themselves have a certain structural, logical property.
There seems to be a universal grammar. There seems to be something common across all languages, something grammatically structured across all languages that must match up with what is innately common across all nervous systems capable of sustaining linguistic performances.
And so this universal grammar is reflective of an underlying neurological and universal neurological endowment available to those who have language.
So here is the nativist or in nativist alternative to the empiricistic behavioristic account, and the facts and nature of language still constitute one of the great and grave challenges to any behavioristic psychology and notably Skinner's own.
Thank you.
