Lecture 21, Piaget's Stage Theory of Cognitive Development.
Contemporary psychology, as with all of the life sciences, is deeply indebted to and in
fact hopes to be absorbed within a more general evolutionary theory of the sort famously developed
by Charles Darwin and being developed even as we meet.
And evolutionary theory produced renewed interest in the processes of development.
Evolutionary theory itself is a theory about the development of different types, the ontogenetic
development of the individual member of the species and the phylogenetic development that
takes place within the animal economy at large.
In fact, Charles Darwin himself published an unsigned essay in the journal Mind that
described a father's observations of his infant son.
It's a very interesting essay because you can see in this that Darwin is bringing the
same natural history method to bear on the examination of an infant that he brought to
bear so productively in his touring around the Galapagos Islands.
He wants to observe the infant in a naturalistic setting, not interfering with what's going
on and making a very careful record of the sorts of things infants do to fill the unforgiving
minute.
Now, those who were very much in the thrall of Darwinian theory, but with a particular
interest in psychology, undertook systematic studies of infant behavior.
And a number of these studies were quite summoningly illustrated in James Sully's
Studies of Childhood, which was published in 1896.
In fact, a fair amount of contemporary research in child development and particularly studies
of infants, sometimes without knowing it, actually repeats observations summarized by
Sully and discussed at length by Sully.
I recall not too many years ago a great interest was shown to the fact that infants at a certain
age will look in a mirror and recognize if there's something on their own face, whereas
at an earlier age looking in a mirror carries no personal information at all.
Well, studies of the recognition of self using this mirror technique and something marring
the face in the mirror actually are summarized by Sully in this work of 1896.
I don't mean to wage a priorities war.
This is always quite tedious, but I do want to point out how committed the late 19th century
investigators were to studies of infant and childhood development.
And this was something that more or less left the scene of 20th century psychology for some
time.
It is now enjoying not only renewed interest, but it's one of the dominant areas of contemporary
experimental psychology and contemporary developmental psychology.
Now part of the impetus here comes from the important research and theoretical writings
of the Swiss scientist Jean Piaget, whose own work begins to appear in the late 1930s
and finally catches up with the English speaking, English reading world of psychology only in
the middle to late 1950s and then becomes increasingly influential in the 1960s.
Piaget's theory is a stage theory of psychological development, or as he puts it, cognitive development.
And as we put it now, cognitive development, I think it's important to recognize the significance
of a stage theory.
A stage theory explicitly rejects the notion that psychological or cognitive development
is a continuous affair involving the gradual accretion of the same kind of ability that
is more and more of the same thing.
A stage theory instead emphasizes distinct and significant qualitative changes in how
thought proceeds, in how the external world is organized, how it comes to be understood.
So it's not a behavioristic associationistic theory, according to which with the passage
of time you just acquire more and more and more associations, rather with the passage
of time and at key points in development the cognitive faculties or powers actually display
qualitatively different, unique, first time only ways of dealing with the external world.
And Piaget's theory is famously a stage theory.
A stage theory is the concept of the schema, the Latin term here being chosen by Piaget,
so the plural would be schemata.
I think in most of the literature today schema is treated to the plural form schemas, psychologists
reserving the right to do whatever they wish to do to Latin, I should think, or any other
dead language and several of the living ones too.
So a schema in Piaget's theory is a central concept in that it constitutes what might
be called the unit of knowledge.
It's the building block on which further and more elaborate knowledge systems are erected.
It comes about as a result of the infant's actual experiences in the world.
These experiences provide the basis upon which a schema might be formed.
One schema illustrated in Piaget's writings, this one applying to infant life, is the sucking
schema.
Now, when the infant is born, nutrition is taken by way of sucking.
This can be in the form of breastfeeding.
It can be in the form of a bottle with a nipple at the end.
The infant then proceeds to suck its own thumb.
If you give the infant some soft piece of cloth, the infant will suck on a soft piece
of cloth.
What's forming here is a schema, a framework that is capable of supporting a particular
kind of behavior that is gratifying and pleasing behavior.
And the infant is absorbing an increasing number of external environmental stimuli into
this sucking schema.
All sorts of things now become candidate objects for this desirable behavior.
But look what happens.
At a certain point, of course, through trial and error, the infant starts confronting objects
that cannot easily be absorbed into a schema of this kind.
Mother puts a cup in the crib, and of course, if you take a look at infants when they first
give an exposure to something like this, the infant will pick up the cup and try to suck
on the cup.
Now, this is an object, the very shape of which tends to defy behavior of that kind.
So you've got conditions that give rise to a kind of frustration.
What is it the infant can do when attempting to absorb into an existing schema some object
in the external world that simply won't comply, won't behave, won't do what it's supposed
to do?
Well, this gives rise to another basic cognitive process that the infant must possess for knowledge
to proceed.
To say that stimuli are absorbed into an existing schema is to say to use Piaget's theoretical
language that the infant is able to assimilate objects in the external world to an existing
cognitive structure.
That process of assimilation is a kind of generalization.
Any number of objects that will serve the task or allow the function or allow the behavior
will be assimilated into this schema.
Now we have an object that simply won't behave.
We have a cup that will not allow itself to be sucked in the lack.
Well, this engages this second basic process which Piaget calls the process of accommodation.
Now what accommodation requires is that the cognitive system, the infant, the infant's
overall intellectual, growing intellectual powers, be able to accommodate just these
environmental challenges that result in a resistance to assimilation.
New schemas must be formed, new schemata must be formed.
The cup, for example, might be among a number of objects thrown out of the crib.
But if you keep throwing the cup out of the crib, there's someone there who keeps putting
it back, and more to the point, if you happen to get thirsty, it's going to be something
in that cup that will allow you to slake that thirst.
Now in time then, this new schema forms according to which a cup is not just some random object
in the environment to be flung out the way a cloth might or a rattle might and the like.
It's something that contains within it something very, very special and something especially
needed.
And through this process of accommodation now, cups and cup-like things enter into a new schema,
the schema of things that can be held, not sucked but used, perhaps used to make noise,
certainly used to consume fluids.
And it's throughout this early infant development that assimilative and accommodative processes
and functions result in the elaboration of ever more complex, various, flexible, serviceable
schemata.
Now it was Piaget's intention, and he did this with mixed results, to examine children
in settings as non-antiseptic as possible, as ecologically valid as possible.
The infant in the crib, the child in the playpen, the child sitting on the floor with any number
of objects around.
Piaget's approach here being a quite naturalistic one, something that surely Darwin would have
applauded, and James Sully would have been writing on lengthfully.
Note that what is not involved here is an experimental setting, a highly antiseptic
controlled environment.
You can always tell when a Piagetian psychologist is studying a child, more likely than not,
the child will be in a room not unlike the room children would be found in, and the psychologist
might simply walk over and flip a hat over to where the child is sitting, and the question
is, does the child start sucking the brim, or does the child put it on his head?
And if the child is sucking the brim, this is one stage of cognitive development, and
if the child is putting it on its head, it's quite another, and you don't go from sucking
a hat to wearing a hat by a series of successive associative bonds of a behavioristic type.
Rather what happens going from A to B is you come to understand what hats are for, which
is a bona fide cognitive achievement.
So the Piagetian approach is this quasi-naturalistic approach in which children are given real
live objects, real life problems, and you see how they deal with them at various stages
of development.
The earliest stage on the Piagetian account is the sensory motor stage, and I think the
right way to remember what the sensory motor stage is all about is out of sight, out of
mind.
This is a stage in cognitive development in which the objective realities of the external
world more or less exhaust what the infant has access to.
There is very, very little evidence, at least in Piaget studies, more recent research will
challenge some of this, but on the Piagetian account at the sensory motor stage of development,
there's virtually nothing by way of internal mental representations of objects no longer
present.
Here you see the infant transfixed by its own hands, it's looking at these as objects
in the environment.
It clearly is beginning to form a conception of itself as being able to alter the external
world by its own movements, and so a very, very important schema is forming.
You might consider this to be the foundation of a causality schema in virtue of my doing
things like bringing my hand this way, an object in the world is getting larger, it's
getting smaller, and this is something that's going on all during the waking hours of the
infant in this sensory motor stage.
So although there isn't the representation of missing objects, there is great, great
knowledge coming about as a result of dealing with the objects that are within sight.
Now this is a period that goes from birth to about two years of age, and of course the
infant gets better and better at doing things as time proceeds.
So toward the end of that sensory motor period, toward the end of that second year, the infant
is obviously doing things that could not possibly be done at month four, month five,
and month six.
In fact at the end of the sensory motor stage, we get the first evidence of what Piaget calls
the concept of object permanence.
Now this is a very interesting concept indeed.
For example, if you show a two or three month old an object and then occlude it with another
object, put something in front of it, or put a napkin over it, or a towel, or a blanket
over it, once that object has disappeared, interest in it is gone, the infant starts
looking somewhere else, and if you then reveal the thing again, it's not treated in any way
as something known and now returned, it might just as well be a new object.
But by the end of the sensory motor period, if you occlude an object, you see that the
infant is looking for it, is waiting for it to reappear, will resume behaving toward
it in the way that that behavior was taking place before the occlusion, it's quite clear
through these indirect means, it's quite clear that the infant is now aware of the fact that
something can be out of sight, but retains its existence, there is a continuing existence
even though I can't see it.
And so if something goes behind a curtain, you now find, with a certain velocity, you
now find the infant tracking through the curtain and looking at the other end to see that it's
coming out.
The recognition being that during that period of occlusion, there is a continuing object,
a continuing physical object, it retains its permanent features even during this null or
blind period, and sure enough out it comes at the other end.
You can see quite manifest evidence of surprise if what comes out the other end is physically
radically different from what went into this end.
So you do have again this very strong circumstantial evidence that the child knows what went behind
the curtain and is expecting just that object to come out the next end of it.
Now the stage after the sensory motor stage is the pre-operational stage, what Piaget
calls the pre-operational stage, which comes in two stages itself, one lasting roughly
from two to four years and another picking up at about age four and culminating at about
age seven.
In that latter period, that period from four to seven years old, the important functions
of language become available to the child, and of course with language, cognitively now
all vets are off, all sorts of things become possible with the acquisition of language
that would not be possible beforehand.
What you do get in the pre-operational stage early, the period two to four, is evidence
that the child actually can think in terms of images.
You don't actually have to have the physical object present, there's evidence that the
child can deal in a cognitive way with the image of things, with something once seen,
of course with concept of object permanence, this also becomes possible.
The idea that what comes out on the other side of the curtain is what went in is only
possible if you are able to retain an image of that object even when it's no longer in
view.
But what you don't get in this pre-operational stage according to Piaget and even at the
end of this pre-operational stage is the concept referred to by Piaget as the concept of conservation.
This rather requires the stage of concrete operations which is roughly seven to eleven
years old.
Now conservation problems are very interesting and if you look at children dealing with these
problems they behave in quite interesting ways.
A standard conservation problem is this, we go to the chemistry laboratory and we get
two beakers.
We get a long cylindrical one and we get a short one that has a relatively large diameter.
So you've got this tall cylindrical beaker and a short fat beaker.
Now in the short fat beaker you put something like colored water, ink and water and let's
say it comes up maybe a third of the way in the short fat beaker.
Now the child is watching you as you do this and you say I want you to look very carefully
now at what I'm doing, look over here now Billy, and you take the fluid that's in the
short fat beaker and you pour it into the tall cylindrical beaker.
Of course it comes up much higher in the thin tall cylindrical beaker.
Now the question Billy has to answer is this, does this beaker, this tall beaker now, have
the same amount of fluid that was in this one or less fluid or more fluid?
Clearly what governs the child's judgment is the height of the column.
So if it goes up to a higher point the child says that the tall thin beaker now has more
in it.
At the very point you take the contents of the tall thin beaker, pour it back into the
short fat one, well now the short fat one has less.
The child seems controlled, this very young child now seems controlled by a physical feature
of the stimulus which trumps all deeper thought.
I mean on PRJ's account there isn't this deeper thought but the child is very much in the
thrall of the sheer physical geometric character of the situation.
There isn't any resource available to the child other than the objective facts of the
case.
Now at a later age when the child has actually reached the stage of concrete operations problems
like this become really quite trivial.
The child sits there, 6-7 year old sits there and you do this experiment, I've seen films
where the child looks over at the experimenter, I mean children are fairly innocent, they're
not wise guys actually, but the very question, now does this beaker have more or less or
the same amount?
With some particularly precocious kids seems to constitute a source of mirth, they sort
of look at the psychologist and then they say rather sheepishly, well it's the same.
I can tell you that Georgetown freshmen immediately say it's the same, can't imagine why you'd
ask such a question, I hope it's on the midterm, you know that sort of thing.
So this is not the result of associative learning, bar pressing, M&M pellets and the like.
On Piaget's account, when you go from the stage where a child's judgments of the quantity
of something is uniquely determined by the shape of the receptacle that's holding it,
to the stage where a child knows that quite independently of any of the morphological
features of the receptacle, a thing remains itself do you see, that quantity is conserved
throughout all purely spatial transformations, that as you move something from here to here,
nothing of a quantitative nature happens to it, merely in virtue of the fact that the
thing holding it is different.
This is a profound transition in cognitive life and it's something on which the child
can build, build.
Now at this very stage, the child can handle what might be called certain logical features
of objective reality, for example, a thing cannot simultaneously be and not be, a thing
remains itself, everything is identical to itself, but at this stage the child is not
able to handle abstract logical operations of the sort, if A is greater than B and B
is greater than C, then what's the relationship between A and C?
Now of course everyone in attendance knows that if A is greater than B and B is greater
than C, not only is A greater than C, but A is necessarily greater than C. If someone
said to you, if you asked, if A is greater than B and B is greater than C, is A greater
than C and if they turned around and asked, well what is A?
Well you'd say they just don't get it, I mean this is somebody that just doesn't understand
the very logic of the case.
Now children who can solve the conservation problem cannot solve abstract logical problems
and cannot deal with abstract logical relations.
That takes place on Piaget's account roughly at age 11, 12 and thereafter when one enters
the cognitive stage of formal operations.
Now at this point we have the young cognizer who is able to form all sorts of abstract
conceptions, can handle analogies and metaphors and similes, very, very difficult Miller analogies
type questions, you know, capuchin is to pre-late as such and such as to such and such, things
that used to drive us crazy when we were taking these SAT exams and all that.
Well this is something the 11, 12, 13 year old just handles like candy, nothing to it.
Whereas just months earlier these problems would be not simply daunting, they might
actually be unintelligible.
The child might not even know what you mean by something being metaphorical, not because
they don't know the word metaphor, you don't have to use the word metaphor, but they can't
understand a relationship that is a metaphorical relationship, do you see?
Well what do we want to say about this extremely influential theory of Piaget's?
Of course what we're prepared to say about the capacity of infants and young children
is going to depend mightily on the methods that we use to examine their abilities and
this will be true in every field of psychology.
What we're prepared to say about the capacity or prowess or potentiality of one or another
organism, including human organisms, is going to bear the indelible mark of the method of
observation, the method of experimentation that we employed.
Piaget's are quite realistic methods.
In fact early on when Piaget's influence began to be felt in the world of American psychology,
as you might expect, the behavioristic psychologists were quite skeptical of all this.
This notion of cognitive stages and things going on in minds and children's conceptions
of universals and all that seemed to be fairly hokey, quasi-superstitious, recidivistic,
adivistic.
Isn't this what we worked so hard to get away from all this mind talk?
So any number of experiments were done with children in the various Piagetian stages by
behavioristic psychologists who used operant conditioning techniques to get the children
to solve the problem.
For example, the conservation problem.
Well, let's say you take a child too young to handle conservation, too young on Piaget's
account, to handle the problem of conservation.
All right, so here's the child now.
You've got this beaker and you've got this beaker and you do the experiment and the
child says there's more in this one and you say no.
That's not right.
Now you pour it back and the child says, well now there's less in this one.
You say, no, that's not right either and you keep doing this.
Now finally, the child hits it and you say that's very, very good Billy and here's a
toy and you keep this going to the point where Billy solves that problem errorlessly
every time you present it.
Now, the behaviorist orientation is such that you'd be inclined to sit back and say, see,
this is obviously the result of a trial and error process.
Learning takes place.
You don't have to assume some new way of doing it.
Learning takes place.
You don't have to assume some new qualitative cognitive stage never before seen in the like.
Well, when the Piagetians started looking at this contrary literature, the question
that arose was, look, of course, you could probably train a mouse to make that kind of
discrimination if all that's involved here is a learned discrimination.
But will that learning generalize to a comparable task?
Suppose you've trained the child, you've operantly conditioned the young child always
to give you the right answer when you're pouring fluids from one sized beaker into another
sized beaker.
Now fill the beakers with marbles and ask whether the number in this beaker is greater
than, less than or the same amount.
Well, the child that's been operantly conditioned before the right cognitive stage, do you see,
to get the right answer gets the right answer on that problem.
But it doesn't generalize to comparable problems.
Whereas when the child is in the right Piagetian stage to handle problems of conservation,
that child will handle all problems of conservation, beads and fluids and pieces of clay and you
take a piece of clay and you roll it up and make it very small.
Is there more clay or less clay, do you say?
Well, at a certain age, the child will tell you the amount of clay is, it's quite clear
what's determining the child's judgment.
That's the actual physical size of the objects.
If you now flatten the clay and stretch it out, oh, there's much more clay there.
Now find the age where the child understands that no matter how you shape this, it's the
same amount of clay and that's the age where the child has no trouble with the fluids,
no trouble with marbles, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
So the behavior, the attempted behavioristic reduction did not, did not succeed.
Rene Bayarjan has done any number of wonderful studies to tap whether infants may have much
more by way of a cognitive appreciation of the physical world and reality than anything
you would guess from, for example, Piaget's writings on the sensory motor stage.
One study that illustrates Dr. Bayarjan's approach is this.
The child is able to look at a platform that has a box on it.
And there are several scenes presented.
In one scene, the box is quite firmly sitting on the middle of the platform.
In the next scene, the box has been moved very, very close to the edge of the platform.
In the third scene, the box has been moved right off the platform.
If we looked at it, we'd say this thing is being suspended in thin air and there's nothing
holding it.
Now, the technique that Dr. Bayarjan and many other infant development specialists use
is inspection time, the amount of time a child actually looks at something as evidence of
recognition or interest and the like.
Well, a child, an infant of three months old, will spend very, very little time looking
at the depiction of a box on a platform.
The child will spend a little more time, but not significantly greater time, looking at
a box that is more or less at the edge of that platform.
Now if you've got the box off the platform, suspended in air, without any supports whatever,
this three-month-old infant veritably gapes at the scene, the evidence of manifest surprise
shall I say, do buy any, shall I say, what is going on here, is quite clear when you
look at films of infants doing this.
Now this suggests that the infant already has a conception of how objects in the external
world are supposed to behave and when an object in the external world, even in the form of
a depiction, violates what might be called the laws of physics as these are understood
within the experiential context of infant life, well, this is an attention getter.
There have been other studies, she takes a look at infants now six-and-a-half months
old, now this is a long time in development from three to six-and-a-half months.
Now the box is either in the middle of the platform or it's at the edge of the platform
half on and half off or it's a little bit more than half off the platform and of course
as you might guess, this arrests the attention of the six-and-a-half month old because the
six-and-a-half month old is having one of these uh-oh perceptions, this thing is obviously
very close to going off the deep end.
Now I just want to mention that research of this kind has, is part of a large realm of
findings.
Challenging the stock Piagetian stages, the more we learn about infants, the more we discover
that they're a lot smarter than we ever thought, they're able to do things at much earlier
points than the Piagetian theory would suggest.
It's not even clear that the stage concept is the right concept, different infants differ
in these abilities, some have argued that cognitive development is more a kind of undulatory
rising and falling of certain waves of ability and prowess.
The story is not told entirely on this, the data are not all in, but we can say that the
more we learn about infants, the smarter they get.
