Lecture 22 The Development of Moral Reasoning
One of the most interesting and indeed one of the most significant aspects of human psychological
development has to do with the development of moral thought, coming to know right from
wrong, coming to reason through issues of an essentially ethical or moral nature.
How do we do this and what light might psychology shed on these processes?
Of course, even to begin an inquiry of this kind, one must have some position on just
what it is that makes an issue a moral issue, just what it is that makes a judgment a moral
judgment.
And as you might expect, philosophers have debated this since a time out of memory and
have served up a number of theories, all of them quite compelling and interesting and
usually no two of them agreeing with each other.
Probably the moral theory that undergirds much of the moral reasoning of the person
we're inclined to call the plain man or the person who rides the clapper-momney bus, namely
all of us except when we're sitting down and taking tests in moral philosophy or serving
as Supreme Court judges and the like, the background moral theory is generally one or
another version of utilitarianism, which is to say an act is regarded as right when it
does serve some useful purpose, when it seems to serve what we take to be the best interests
of ourselves and others, and it's regarded as morally wrong or unethical when, with some
intention, actions are performed that have a deleterious effect on others, causing them
harm or suffering or loss.
And so as a general principle then we would say that what we set out to do in our actions
is maximize their usefulness or to use the technical term maximize their utilities.
Much of this is indebted to the writings of Jeremy Bentham toward the end of the eighteenth
century in his essays on morals and legislation, in which Bentham points out that, quote,
nature has placed us under the governance of two gods.
And the governance of two gods here refers to pleasure and pain.
We are constituted physically and physiologically and psychologically in such a way as to act
so that we can minimize pain and suffering, act so that we can maximize pleasure.
Now this of course came to be known as a hedonistic moral theory.
Here's Bentham declaring that the only real good in the world is that which conduces to
pleasure and the only real evil in the world is that which conduces to pain.
And so here's a hedonistic moral theory according to which something is right if it pleases
and it's wrong if it causes pain and suffering.
Now John Stuart Mill in the nineteenth century would tidy up this Benthamist version of
the pleasure principle and serve up a moral theory, a utilitarian theory, much more sophisticated
so to speak.
Mill thought it was outrageous to think that what the world inevitably finds useful, that
is what maximizes the utilities, are these merely vulgar forms of pleasure or pain avoidance,
still insisting that what is useful includes personal refinement, personal development,
intellectual growth, aesthetic richness, etc., etc., and that human beings left to their
own devices and not facing the coercive power of the state or opinion mongers and the like
would find a form of life in which these various features are prospered and flourished.
So utilitarianism is in place, it's a very important influential moral theory.
Well let me give you some of the counterintuitive features of utilitarianism and you see if
you want to, if you are a utilitarian in your moral thought whether you would want to remain
one.
Suppose we have a situation like this, we have apprehended someone in the context of
a very grave crime that's been committed.
And in the course of interrogating this person and checking out his identity and the like,
we discover that in fact the person is innocent.
Now there is a mob assembling outside the prison and the leader of the mob shouts up
and says, you either hang this person or we burn the town down.
Now here we have the choice of executing someone we know to be innocent in order to save many
many lives or standing by the proposition that the innocent never should be punished
no matter what, that we're not going to cave into terrorists, we're not going to do this
sort of utilitarian calculation that would have us believe the death of one innocent
person is more or less compensated for by the survival of five or six other people.
We want to say that there are certain acts that are wrong and that if we are coerced
into performing them that doesn't change their wrongfulness.
So what we might want to say is this, look if the terrorists make the stakes high enough,
conceivably we will do what the terrorists demand, but we certainly will not argue that
what it is we're doing is right.
Now you must understand that a utilitarian moral theory isn't just a prediction of what
you will do when the stakes are high, it's the declaration that when the stakes are of
that nature, you're conceding to the demands is the right thing to do, that is you must
try to optimize the utilities.
Now the moral theories that oppose utilitarian theories come in several forms and surely
the most influential is that form referred to as deontological moral theories.
Deontology is an unfortunate choice of terms.
I believe the first one ever to use it was the philosopher C. D. Broad.
But a deontological moral theory is a theory according to which the rightness or wrongness
of an act is determined by the maxim or principle that that act instantiates.
That is whether an act is right or wrong is not to be determined by the consequences it
has, it's to be determined by the principle that would justify it or explain it.
And I should think the most famous and influential deontological theory of morals is the theory
developed by Immanuel Kant.
Kant illustrates the core deontological principle in what he chose to call the categorical imperative.
The categorical imperative is usually expressible in several forms.
The textbook form is act in such a way that the maxim of your action would be instituted
as a universal law of nature.
That is, so act that the principle on which you are acting would be a universal law if
you could make it one.
It would be a law that operates without exception, everywhere and for all time.
It would apply universally, not just here and now, not just in this situation, but always.
Another version of the categorical imperative, which is derivable from the version I just
gave you, is that man is never merely a means to an end, but always an end unto himself.
That is, on the assumption that you could not even have morality unless we had autonomy,
you could not have morality unless we had the freedom to choose one course of action
over another, that in order to preserve myself as a moral being, I must be sure that others
will not use me as a tool or an instrument.
If I'm the tool or instrument of another's purpose, then my actions are not the free
actions of a moral being, rather they are the mechanical actions of a kind of device.
So anyone that would use another as a tool or an instrument is in principle denying that
very autonomy on which morality itself depends.
The wrongfulness of slavery on this account is grounded in the fact that to enslave another
is to eliminate the very possibility of a moral life.
So whatever you might say about an institution like slavery, you couldn't say that it's morally
right.
Maxim, that warrants slavery or would justify slavery, virtually eliminates the categories
of right and wrong, do you see?
Well, Kant was extremely influential and is extremely influential in his arguments for
a deontological moral theory.
What makes an act right or wrong is the principle it instantiates, not the consequences.
If I'm behaving in such a way that has only consequences in mind, I will do this because
it pleases me, I will do that in order to avoid pain, then I am functioning essentially
as a physical biological system.
I'm functioning as part of what Kant calls the merely natural world.
But when my conduct is regulated by principle, when I am acting as an autonomous being,
choosing a course of action because it is the right course of action, then I am not
merely in the physical world, I'm in what Kant calls the intelligible world and it's
as a citizen in the intelligible world that I'm subject to praise and blame.
So utilitarianism and deontological moral theories are the dominant moral theories that
we wrestle with to this day and there are other versions of both and yet other kinds
of moral theory.
In the 17th and 18th centuries, sympathy theories were quite abundant.
The question had to do with the basis upon which we come to judge things as right or
wrong and the answer was that, well, we're constituted in such a way that sympathetically
we respond emotionally to certain kinds of events and when the sympathies are right, we
just find some kinds of conduct so deplorable and disgusting that they find universal condemnation
among human beings and other kinds of conduct just excite in us such feelings of approval
and pleasure that indeed they become the subject of commendation and the like.
And sympathy theorists came in a variety of forms, extremely influential.
Adam Smith, the founder of Economics, was one of the British sympathy moralists.
David Hume famously, Shaftesbury and others and to this day, we recognize that one of
the characteristics of courses of action we regard as morally right and morally wrong
is that they do seem to evince in us certain sensations or sentiments of pleasure or revulsion
and the like.
Kant, of course, would reject the proposition that what makes something wrong is that it
causes in us a sense of revulsion because a sense of revulsion is simply a property
we have as biological creatures, as biological creatures we're in the natural realm, not
the intelligible realm.
So you begin to, this can't be an exhaustive lecture on moral theory, but you begin to
see how the lines of argument are going to develop within the moral domain.
Well, does psychology have much of a place in this?
Well, of course, it should have a place in this.
After all, one of the most significant goals to human action, perhaps what is behind most
of the consequential actions taken in the course of a lifetime, are just these considerations
of moral right and wrong.
Am I doing the right thing?
Is this the sort of thing a person such as I should find himself engaged in?
And why is it I feel so guilty whereas friends of mine do the same thing and they don't?
We're constantly wrestling with questions of this kind and we would expect to develop
psychology to be helpful here.
Well, it has been, shall we say, moderately helpful and predictably in an area like this
it has also added to the confusion.
I should think the psychologist who probably has devoted more time to this than any other,
now deceased, was the Harvard psychologist Lawrence Colberg, that's C-O-H-L-B-E-R-G.
A very interesting and thoughtful man prolific in his writings and in his research, one that
I'm proud to identify as a friend of mine and one I say with great sadness, a man who
took his own life.
He had had a long history of physical illnesses and I think this coupled with some personal
crises and the like proved to be too much for him.
But he contributed mightily to the subject of moral psychology and even his critics will
say that he probably contributed more by way of sheer weight of thought than any other
psychologist who has approached that subject with any seriousness.
Colberg adopted a method that actually had been introduced many, many years earlier by
Piaget.
Back in the 1930s, Piaget got interested in the basis upon which children would judge
actions to be right or wrong and the technique he employed to get children to make these
judgments was a storytelling technique.
So Piaget would tell the child a story about somebody doing something and then he'd ask
the child whether he thought that that action was right or wrong and the child would say
whether it was right or wrong and then the Piaget experimenter would ask, well, why do
you think it was right or wrong?
And what Piaget discovered to a first approximation now, Colberg will be doing this in a much
more systematic way years earlier, but what Piaget discovered to a first approximation
is this, very early in life, whether or not a child judges something to be right or wrong
depends entirely on how the adult community is going to respond to it.
Now if you tell a story like this, Billy comes home from school and he sees that the breakfast
dishes are in the sink and he knows that mother and father work very, very hard and will probably
be tired when they come home.
So Billy decides that he will wash the dishes and put them away and in the process Billy
breaks all the dishes.
Now when his parents come home, his parents see all the broken dishes on the floor and
they say, Billy, you broke all the dishes.
Now do you think what Billy did was right or wrong?
Well, of course, the child said, oh, what was wrong?
And why do you think, oh, he's going to be punished for this?
I say, OK.
Now you tell children precisely the same story, except this, when the parents come home they
say, oh, Billy, we see you've broken all the dishes.
Now we won't have to take time to wash them.
Well, now, of course, what Billy did was the right thing because it made his parents happy.
Now of course, at an older age, the judgments are rather more sophisticated than that.
And you hear people saying things like, you hear the older child saying things like, well,
Billy obviously did not set out to break the dishes.
He wanted to do the right thing.
And certainly within the context of his own thinking, as Billy saw the situation, he was
doing the right thing.
It was a mishap that the dishes broke.
But you know, it's the thought that counts, that kind of thing.
Now Piaget took this as establishing two quite distinct categories of moral reasoning.
One that he referred to as heteronomous, and the other which he referred to as autonomous.
The heteronomous moral reasoner is the one who judges right or wrong in terms of what
others will say.
The autonomous moral reasoner is the one who makes those judgments on the basis of some
internal standard, do you see?
That was a head start, and Kolberg built wonderfully on that head start, putting together any
number of stories that could be used across culture, across age groups, children speaking
different languages, and getting at, in a much more granular way, getting at the kind
of reasoning that is at the foundation of judgments of right or wrong.
Well let's take a stock Kolberg story.
Here's the story.
You can see how you could adapt this to tribal communities.
You could adapt it to urban communities, children of different ages, ethnicity, and the like.
Here's the story.
I'll give a version of it that would make sense to audiences for a lecture of this sort.
Smith's wife is deathly ill.
They live in an extremely remote area.
And in fact, there is only one pharmacy within traveling distance, only one.
The disease that Smith's wife has requires fairly immediate treatment, or she will die.
And by immediate treatment, I mean a treatment that must be provided within the period of
time Smith could get to this pharmacy, get the medicine, come back, and administer it.
Smith takes off for the pharmacy with the speed of light.
He gets there breathlessly.
He explains to the pharmacist that his wife is dying, and that he needs a certain kind
of medicine, hopeful that the pharmacist has it.
As it happens, the pharmacist does have the medicine and says that he's prepared to turn
it over to Smith immediately for a consideration.
The consideration is an amount of money Smith doesn't have.
Now the pharmacist refuses to give it to him on credit.
He's never seen Smith before.
The pharmacist has his own needs and requirements and the like.
And that's really the beginning, middle, and end of it.
No money, no medicine.
It's just about closing time.
This altercation can't go on any further.
Smith is highly agitated, but Smith leaves.
Within a matter of minutes, the pharmacy lights go out.
The pharmacist leaves, locks the door, and goes home.
Smith thereupon breaks in, takes the medicine, brings it back, administers it to his wife,
and her life is saved.
Now here are the questions.
Did Smith do the right thing?
Did Smith do something that you would regard as the right thing to do in the circumstance?
And if you think that, then do tell me why you think he did the right thing.
Now if you think he did the wrong thing, do tell me why you think he did the wrong thing.
If you think he did the wrong thing, do you think he should be punished for having done
it?
And if you think he should be punished, what do you think the punishment should be?
Now those are the questions.
What kinds of answers do you get?
Well, on Kohlberg's account, if you give a story like this to very young children, the
first thing you'll hear from the very young child is he did the wrong thing.
Now why do you think he did the wrong thing?
A, he's going to be punished.
He's going to get punished for this.
You're not supposed to steal.
If you steal, you get punished.
Not you're not supposed to steal, period.
If you steal, you get punished.
You see, this is back to Billy, what did you do to those dishes?
You see, it's that sort of thing, sort of.
Now if you ask a child a little older than this, if you give the same story and ask the
child older than this, these questions, then what you hear is not you're going to get punished.
You hear, he did the wrong thing, and why is that?
It's wrong to steal, and how do you know that?
My parents say it's wrong to steal.
That is, parental authority is sufficient to settle the issue.
What mother and dad say is wrong is wrong because they said it's wrong.
By extension, the child will also bring in teachers, policemen, adult figures in authority.
But they declare to be wrong is wrong, and it's wrong because they say so.
Now if you get children older than that, then you're likely to find that the answer is either
the husband did the right thing or the husband did the wrong thing, but this established
in terms of what that youngster's peer group would be expected to do in the circumstance.
You get things like, hey look, I break in, everybody I know would break in.
You might find another community where someone would say, no, no, no, you mustn't do that,
you'll have your hands cut off.
Nobody I know would violate the law, even in that circumstance, but it will always be
in relation to a peer group.
You've moved past the stage of adult authority having dispositive power in the moral realm,
but the dispositive power now seems to be distributed more generally within a peer group
or reference group in which you identify yourself as having membership.
Now at the next stage, you finally start getting fairly sophisticated moral reasoning of a
quite interesting sort.
In fact, when Larry Colberg would develop his theory before audiences, he would point
out that at this next stage, we're going to find such people as, for example, Plato
and Socrates and Aristotle and the like.
In other words, we haven't got to the peak of moral reasoning yet, we're just going
to be finding the world's greatest philosophers, etc., etc.
Well what do you get at the next stage?
And by the way, I've given these questions to university classes and the like, and you'll
usually get some number of hands at this level of moral reasoning, and the account goes something
like the following.
Look, it's quite understandable why the husband would break in and steal this medicine.
Obviously, he's in love with his wife, he cares deeply about her, he wants to do whatever
he can to save her life.
By the same token, he clearly is in violation of law.
He's guilty of breaking and entering, he's taking property that is not his own, the pharmacist
also has certain interests and rights and expectations in life.
We surely cannot have a civilized world if each time somebody has some burning desire
to do something, or has some deeply cherished object of affection, or some surpassing interest,
then on that basis and that basis only, he can start knocking doors down and absconding
with the possessions of other people.
The world would go to hell in a basket in no time.
You cannot have a rule of law, an ordered state, the very context in which there might
be discoveries of life-saving medicines and enduring institutions with scientific progress.
You couldn't have any of that if people willy-nilly could act on their passions no matter how
noble and just take the law into their own hands.
So what he did was wrong and if he's apprehended, he should be punished.
His wife's illness should constitute a mitigating circumstance, but he should be punished nonetheless.
Now I've tried to give this to you in a fairly firm and convincing fashion.
This is what Lawrence Colberg in various contexts referred to as something of a constitutionalist
stage of moral development.
This is the, as Larry said in my office once, this should be used to determine who should
go to law school and who might, but certainly not who should be appointed to the bench.
And that distinction I think will become clear in a moment or so.
Well, I can tell you that at least in the years in which I've raised questions like
this with university students, the large, large majority of students don't buy a bit
of this.
The greatest show of hands comes from those who say that what the husband did was the
right thing.
He did the right thing, meaning that if he's apprehended, of course he shouldn't be punished.
He shouldn't be punished because he did the right thing.
Nobody should be punished for doing the right thing.
Well, why did he do the right thing?
Now students will skirt around this and when you try to focus on what principle seems to
be controlling their thinking, and it might be controlling the thinking of many in the
audience for this lecture, it's something very much like this.
Look, we definitely have here a conflict of rights, right.
We have a conflict between what might be called a life right and a property right.
There's no denying that the pharmacist has a right to be compensated for the sale of
goods coming from his establishment.
But in order to honor that right, we simply have to trivialize the importance of keeping
a human being alive.
Now where there is a conflict of that definite a nature where it's quite clear that either
the drugist gets his farthing, do you see, or whatever the cost of this thing is, or
somebody has to die in place at that moment, lest the profit motive not be honored, this
is a non-starter.
It's obvious what the right answer to this is, you save the life.
In fact, there are students who have said the pharmacist should be punished for actually
jeopardizing a life on this basis.
So the argument is not only that the husband did the right thing, but that the husband
in doing the right thing escapes all of the claims of law to punish those who have engaged
in violations of the law.
Now why is it that dear old Socrates doesn't quite make this highest level of moral reasoning?
Well remember when Socrates is found guilty on these utterly trumped up charges and spurious
testimony and all that, he's told by his chums, look, nobody wants you to drink the
hemlock for goodness sake, the God won't even look if you walk out the door, get yourself
out of town for a while, you'll return in a triumph, beat a path of escape, and let's
put this stuff behind it.
What does Socrates say?
He says, look, I've devoted my whole life to arguing for the rule of reason over passion,
the disposatory power of the rational over the purely personal or emotional or passionate,
do you see?
And here now that my own life hangs in the balance, I should engage in an act of treason
against reason itself, which after all finds its fullest expression in the laws of the
polis, oh no, I'm not going to run out on this, I'm going to take my punishment.
Now of course what has a Kohlberg moral theorist concerned here is this, if Socrates knows he's
doing the right thing, if Socrates knows that he would be punished as a result of purged
testimony, he should not allow himself to be punished, just as he wouldn't allow someone
else to be punished on that basis, do you see?
If there really hasn't been wrongdoing, then it is wrongful to allow oneself to be punished.
So you've got the sort of the moral free spirit who says about the husband, look, he saved
a life, and nobody should be punished for doing that, and it actually should be the
druggist here who is called on the carpet.
Now Kohlberg says this is an instance of truly autonomous moral reasoning.
You are not looking at the Constitution of the United States or the statutes of the
state of New Jersey, you're not asking what some peer group would do, it has nothing to
do with what mommy and daddy said, or what the policeman on the beat says, you have a
personal moral standard that tells you where life hangs in the balance, you are under an
obligation to save it, and that's the beginning and middle and end of the story, and anyone
who disagrees, well we'll simply have to agree to disagree, but I don't get my marching
orders in an area like this from anybody but my own conscience.
So that's the fully morally autonomous entity.
Now as it happens there are yet other things to say about this, in fact when you make these
questionnaires a little more granular you say this, well if that's the case then actually
it would have been incumbent on anybody to break down the door and steal the medicine.
I say from the mere contingent fact that the victim of the disease happens to be this chaps
wife, well that's not what establishes a kind of moral immunity.
If life always takes precedence over property then anybody should have broken down the door.
And suppose it's the case that the pharmacist has three sick children upstairs and can only
treat them with the profits.
So the story is not quite as simple as Professor Colberg's stories would make it out, of course
I might be showing myself to be a broken down gray gluey Aristotelian after all, meaning
that I'm at level five instead of level six, but I say there's much more to be said on
this.
Carol Gilligan, a colleague of Lawrence Colberg's at Harvard wrote a very influential book some
years later protesting Colberg's theory and offering a quite different account of it,
a book titled In A Different Voice, in which she notes that men and women are quite different
in working through morally delimatic situations.
Women tend to be more intuitive, they tend to be more empathetic, they tend to ground
their judgments more in a concern for the feelings and the consequences to people that
a course of action will have are less given to logic chopping, propositional analysis
and the like.
This is a literature still arguing within itself, it's a worthy literature, it summons
our attention as it should.
What the end of the story will be I have no way of knowing, are there gender differences
in moral reasoning, perhaps, is it because of gender or early experience or whatever,
I don't know, this is work in progress, it's something we should be doing more of, even
if it means having fewer rats pressing bars in fewer cages and getting fewer pellets.
Thank you.
