Lecture 23 Knowledge, Thinking, and Understanding
The subject of knowledge, thinking, and understanding is the subject that dominates contemporary cognitive science,
and it's an area in which psychology has been making great strides in recent decades,
after long seasons of avoiding things mental and focusing chiefly, as I've said before, on matters behavioral.
And as usual, it's the ancient Greek world we look to for the foundation of some of the problems that we wrestle with to this day.
In the ancient Greek world, knowledge was actually understood, as we understand it ourselves, in very, very different terms.
There was the kind of knowledge that we might be inclined to call scientific knowledge,
in which you know the causes of things, you know the rules or the laws that govern various transactions,
and the Greek word for that was epistemi, from which we get epistemology.
But there was also the sort of knowledge that a practical person, a person of practical affairs had,
knowing the right course of action to take in a given circumstance,
the kind of knowledge we would identify with the good political leader or the good corporate executive,
the person who understands the subtleties and complexities of a situation and finds the right path to a good and useful solution.
And the Greeks there used the word phronesis.
And then there is the knowledge that we attribute to persons of great wisdom, surpassing wisdom,
the sort of thing you would hope to find in your guru or what we would expect of Buddha.
Certainly what everybody among his contemporaries agreed they found in Socrates,
and that was knowledge as a kind of wisdom for which the Greek word is Sophia.
And to befriend that, to fall in love with that, to remain close to that all of one's life is to be a philosophos.
It's to have a friendly feeling, a kind of philicon toward Sophia or wisdom.
Now when psychology, experimental and cognitive psychology, deal with knowledge and knowledge structures and the like,
generally the concern is not with wisdom per se, Sophia, as much as it is with phronesis.
Is the right solution to a difficult social or political or moral problem of a certain kind?
Or what is the knowledge structure, the epistemi, the epistemic structure that one is dealing with in order to solve different kinds of problems,
the kinds of problems you might find on tests or in puzzles and the like.
How do we come by the capacity to solve problems at all?
Metaphorically we talk about working things through in our head, as if actually we knew there was a little machine shop up there that was going to work.
But on what basis do we develop these strategies and come to recognize that certain solution approaches are non-starters
and others have a high likelihood of payoff?
Is it possible that some of the things we know, we know as a very condition of being rational beings,
is people learning at all is necessary, they're innate in a certain sense.
We've discussed the different senses of our priority in an earlier lecture.
Well I think one of the earliest examinations of the possibility that what really counts is known innately,
or is an innate or intrinsic feature of the rational mind itself, is what we find in several of Plato's dialogues
particularly the dialogue named after one of the chief actors in the dialogue, namely Meno, Plato's Meno.
The scene, I'll dramatize this for your amusement, and of course I've got to contract the story, but it goes roughly like this.
Meno is a young Athenian aristocrat, he's back in town, he apparently has been away someplace.
He's attended by a young servant boy, he passes Socrates on the street,
there must be some sort of a greeting, you know, good morning Socrates, oh hello Meno, that sort of thing.
And casual, how are you, and what are you up to?
And Socrates mumbled something about the usual search for truth, that kind of thing.
And at that point of course Meno has him just where he wants, and Meno has studied with the Sophist philosophers
and he knows the right kind of question to ask, and here's this aging philosopher Socrates talking about searching for truth.
And so Meno says to him, but look, if you know what it is you're searching for, there really isn't any need to conduct a search.
And if you don't know what it is you're searching for, there's no basis upon which to begin the search.
So that should be the end of the story.
Now at that point Socrates notices the young servant and he says to Meno, this youngster who's with you, is he an educated person?
No, no, no, he's a barbarian, I see. Barbarian just means not fluent in Greek, you know.
But any non-Greek language struck the ancient Greeks as a kind of ba-ba-ba-ba,
and so they would simply genetically refer to non-Greek talk as barbarian.
Has he studied at school? No, he hasn't studied at school.
Do you mind if I ask him some questions?
Now at this point Socrates engages in something of a colloquy with this youngster.
Socrates is drawing some figures in the sand and he's asking, now do you see this, and do you see that, and do you see this?
And this goes on for a time.
I don't know how convinced you'd be if you actually read through these parts of the dialogue,
that Socrates achieves what we're led to believe he achieves, but this is what we are led to believe he achieves.
At a certain point the youngster recognizes that the area of a square is uniquely determined by the length of the diagonal that's drawn through it,
which is to say the youngster knows, without knowing it so to speak, the Pythagorean theorem.
He knows a fundamental principle in geometry, a subject he has never studied, and he has arrived at this knowledge,
not by being taught the answer from the outside, but by being led to it as it were.
In fact when Socrates raises the question, well if he didn't learn this in school, and if I didn't tell him the answer,
how did he come to have the answer, Socrates has to answer his own question.
He always had the answer, which is to say the soul or the rational principle, mind as such, is in possession of certain fundamental eternal truths,
which the person daily never gets to recognize or know or come to grips with, so overcome are we by the flotsam and jetsam of sensory experience.
If we can get out from under the clouds of irrelevant information descending on the sense organs and engage instead in pure reflective inquiry
of a deep and directed philosophical sort, well then we come to discover things, not learn from the outside,
but we come to discover truths, principles within ourselves that in fact were always part of the possession of the soul,
even before it entered this particular body.
So back in Plato's Mino and in other dialogues in Protagoras and yet other dialogues, we get this nativistic theory according to which the mind,
part of the very definition of mind, the essence of mind, or of mental life, rational life, includes certain truths, certain fundamental principles
that could not be learned by experience and yet are known by all rational beings.
After all, the Pythagorean theorem, a square plus b square equals c square, is going to be true of virtually no actually drawn right angle triangle.
You never get it quite right. If you do it in chalk, in time the chalk flakes off the board, the blackboard undergoes degeneration and decomposition,
planet earth endures the heat death, entropy is becoming maximized all the time, the universe culminates in an infinite distribution of particles in space,
but the Pythagorean theorem was true before anybody could have drawn a triangle, it was true before anybody got here, it will remain true after everyone leaves.
Here's an eternal relational principle, it's the very definition of a right angle triangle, that equation.
So what the equation gives you is the true form and what the triangle itself is, is just a kind of faded empirical representation of it.
Now this is an ultra rationalist, ultra nativist perspective on the nature, not only the nature of knowledge, but the nature of knowledge worth having.
What one should strive for is this knowledge of what is true in all circumstances and that does not undergo the kind of degeneration that sensory knowledge undergoes.
Well Aristotle was a much more practical person, he was a biologist, a naturalist, an ethologist, he took the world as he found it, both feet on the ground so to speak,
he had studied for nearly 20 years in Plato's Academy, he obviously learned his lessons very well, but this was somebody with a mind of his own.
It's interesting that when Aristotle gets to the Mino type problem, in Aristotle's own treatises when he gets to the Mino type problem,
he understands that there are really two senses of knowing at work here.
You can have Smith and you say to Smith, does this triangle contain 180 degrees?
Now Smith gets out an instrument and he measures things and he says yes, this triangle contains 180 degrees.
Now you have Jones over here and you say does this triangle contain 180 degrees and Jones says yes it does.
Now Jones says yes it does because Jones knows that all triangles contain 180 degrees.
Smith says yes it does because he's actually made the measurement.
So from the fact that both of them know that the triangle contains 180 degrees, it does not follow that they know it in the same way.
One knows by direct observation and measurement, one knows how, one knows conceptually, cognitively, relationally, theoretically.
One has a true knowledge of the relationship and that will allow that person to say correct things about a whole range of events in the external world
and one knows it only empirically.
Now in some instances, our knowledge grows by leaps and bounds because we develop certain tricks of the trade,
rules of thumb, shortcuts, ways of getting at something.
We don't have to engage in trial and error all the time.
Sometimes we develop some trick, some aid, some help that will allow us at least on occasion to get to the heart of things very, very quickly.
This by the way is the sort of thing that even the highest powered computers with very, very sophisticated programs still have a lot of trouble doing.
These tricks of the trade or rules of thumb that we use are referred to as heuristics, heuristic devices.
As a mnemonic is a device for aiding memory, a heuristic is a kind of device or rule of thumb for solving certain problems.
The trick here of course is not to become so much the slave of our own heuristics that we allow ourselves to be misled by them.
Let me offer you an example of what's sometimes called the representative heuristic.
This is where you answer a question or solve a problem or make a judgment based on the judgment that X is representative of a class.
So here's a so-called representative heuristic.
I present you with a person who is quite thin and short, is wearing thick horn rim glasses and a tweed jacket and is very soft-spoken.
That's the person.
And the question I want you to answer is this, do you think this person is a librarian or do you think this person is a farmer?
Now, most people given something like this will declare that the person is a librarian.
Now, if you step back from this for a moment, just think about it, think about it a little more clearly.
First off, you have no way of knowing where this person comes from and what you should know and what you do know, what you factually know is this.
There are many, many more farmers in the world than there are librarians.
There are probably two this day.
I hope this is true, though maybe it isn't any longer, but there are probably more farmers in the United States than there are librarians.
On a purely probabilistic basis, you certainly have no basis upon which to conclude right off the bat that this bespectacled, short, thin, soft-spoken person is a librarian.
The reason you make that judgment is, given these characteristics that you see, you regard this entity as representative of a class.
Now, this is not something that one should be scolded for doing.
We do this all the time.
We do it all the time because, as was noted in an earlier lecture, the world seldom presents itself in an identical way on successive occasions.
We usefully employ heuristics to allow us to get to the bottom of things very, very quickly without having to examine the details of every single situation, every time it presents itself.
Nine times in ten, ninety-nine times in a hundred, nine hundred and ninety-nine times in a thousand, the car behind you with the flashing light and the badge on the side with a megaphone speaking,
pull over to the service road is a figure in authority who does have the power to arrest you.
Now, every now and then, it might be a movie being made at that time and you just happen to be driving by.
It might be somebody play-acting.
In fact, it might be some felon who's taking advantage of your representativeness heuristics and getting you to pull over when, in fact, you shouldn't.
But if you're a betting person, the odds are very, very much in your favor if you respond to a situation like that, as if indeed it is an instance, it is representative of that entire class of events that call upon you to obey legitimate authority.
It's generally the case, by the way, here's a good heuristic.
It's generally the case that where there is a subject followed by a verb followed by a noun, that indeed the subject term through the verb is having an action of some sort on the noun.
So one of the heuristics that we use when we get these three-word sequences is a causality heuristic.
We assume that if x, y'd, v, then there was something xy that did something y-like to something v-like.
And indeed we can substitute nonsensical terms here and still find that subjects believe a causal sequence has been presented.
Are we sometimes wrong?
Yes, heuristics are not unfailingly correct in the solutions that they find. They're quite often misleading.
But over the long haul, and by and large, and in the variety of situations in which we find ourselves, these rules of thumb prove to be quite serviceable.
They're serviceable in opening strategies and chess games.
They're serviceable when one sits down to take true-false tests and the like.
You just say to yourself, well, I wonder what they're trying to get at here.
Most of the time when questions are like this, they expect a false answer.
And of course, if you don't bias the question sets in such a way to give an equal distribution, or even if you do, skeptical students who know you're up to something would usually provide more f's than t's, almost no matter what the question set is anyway.
And that's based on a heuristic. The heuristic here being, this is a trick question.
So sometimes they hurt. Most of the time they help. The ones that don't help, we generally give up.
Of course, advertisers have a way of establishing rules of thumb for us, or at least playing into what we take to be rules of thumb.
You pull up to a surface station and you discover that there's a cash discount.
If you buy your petrol and you pay by cash, you pay less for it. And these are called cash discounts.
Now the discount heuristic is the one that helps us in our buying practices because what is discounted is the sort of thing we should be looking for.
And this is why the service station does not put a big sign up that says credit card surcharge, do you see?
Now a credit card surcharge means drive on. A cash discount says pull in.
And again, we're not the only ones walking around with heuristics and we're not the only ones who know our heuristics.
The world of commerce is on to us.
Heuristics are rules of thumb. Algorithms are something else. Algorithms are devices. Sometimes they're actually physical devices.
Algorithms are devices that will always give a correct answer if in fact there is a correct answer.
They will always solve a problem if in fact the problem is solvable.
And in the course of a lifetime we develop any number of algorithmic approaches to problem solving.
A quite conventional algorithm. It's usually not described as an algorithm, but it is one.
A quite conventional algorithm might go under the title English French Dictionary.
What that means is if you look up red it will always and reliably give you rouge.
This is a way of solving a kind of problem. The problem here is find a French word that means what an English word means.
And the algorithmic device is called a dictionary. It's called an English French or French English dictionary.
Here's another algorithm that is unfailing in its problem solving ability, the rules of arithmetic.
If in fact a problem is of a certain numerical type, that problem can be solved arithmetically.
The rules that cover addition, subtraction, multiplication and addition are unfailing in their ability to solve problems of a certain kind.
One of the tricks of course is to determine whether there is indeed an algorithm for a given kind of problem.
Whether a problem is in fact solvable. One of the great achievements of Alan Turing at the start of the age of computers.
We will get to this, but was developing a technique to determine whether a given problem was a computable problem.
Whether in fact it was of a nature that there could be a computational algorithm found that would solve it.
This I say was a great achievement of the imagination.
Now there are any number of heuristics and algorithms available.
As I say, we sometimes get bogged down because we keep applying an algorithm that's entirely serviceable for one problem set,
but really has not shown itself to be serviceable for another.
But for goodness sake, the thing has always worked over there, so maybe I'll drag it over here and use it.
This is using the rake to stir the soup. In a way you can stir the soup with the rake, but what a way to stir soup.
It's almost like using the soup ladle to rake up the leaves.
This tendency now to take something that worked someplace and to apply it willy-nilly almost any time we see another kind of problem actually has a technical term in psychology.
It's called functional fixedness.
I should tell you that I'm not a clinical psychologist, but clinical psychologists often find functional fixedness in those they are pleased to label neurotic type personalities.
There's something obsessional that is Smith discovers that a particular heuristic has been quite serviceable.
Every time Smith finds himself in an ambiguous situation, that's the heuristic he relies on, sometimes utterly non-contextually.
Or you'll hear people say, if it was good enough for Grandpa, it's good enough for me.
Of course, Grandpa died in 1942, and in fact, Grandpa wasn't dealing with jet noise in the neighborhood.
Grandpa was happy to get solutions to the early morning garbage truck sounds and so forth.
So this functional fixedness, this tendency to hold on to a heuristic, not only after it's outlived its purposes, but in contexts in which it was never intended to be used anyway, can be our undoing.
Functional fixedness often comes about as a result of a tendency we have, sometimes described as the availability heuristic.
Now, the availability heuristic can lead to fairly humorous consequences, particularly when you see children governed by the availability heuristic.
You give somebody a rule of thumb for solving a problem, and for, let's say, confirming a hypothesis.
There a piece of candy under the pillow, and the most heuristic, the most recent heuristic they have is, you know, when in doubt, lift something up.
You know, the way you see where the piece of candy there is, you go over and you pick up the pillow and you look.
You provide a whole range of new situations, and whatever the physical environment affords gets translated into lifting a lid or opening a door, it may have nothing to do.
Problem solving here may have nothing to do with lifting something up, disclosing what's behind a curtain and the like.
But the most recent heuristic that worked in solving a problem was this kind of look underneath or look behind, and you find the individual using it over and over again.
It's the heuristic most available.
It was used most recently.
That's the one we reach for.
Sometimes this has quite extraordinary consequences.
Does the sun move or does the earth move?
Now, the Ptolemaic view was that the earth is stationary and that the sun rises in the east and sets in the west.
Copernicus comes along centuries later with a heliocentric theory rather than a geocentric theory,
according to which the sun is stationary and the earth and the other planets move around the sun.
Now, how does everything look to us when we get up in the morning?
Well, when we get up in the morning, the sun is in the east, and when we go to bed at night, the sun is in the west.
Now, nine times in ten, if you hear people talking about the celestial dynamics, they are using the language of Ptolemaic.
Or if they sit down and take an examination, obviously they will use the language of Copernicus.
But in fact, their explanations, day to day, based on the availability heuristic goes something like this.
If the earth were moving, then like anything else I'm on when it moves, I'd feel it moving.
The heuristic goes something like this.
If you feel yourself moving, you're on something that's moving.
Well, the contrary is, if you don't feel yourself moving, then you're not on something that's moving.
Well, I don't feel the earth moving.
Therefore what?
Well, therefore it must be the sun that's moving.
Now, the textbooks correct us, so on an examination, we all turn out to be Copernicans.
But in daily discourse, we all turn out to be Ptolemaicists.
There's an encounter that Wittgenstein and Bertrand Russell allegedly had in which Wittgenstein asks Russell why he thinks it took the world so long
to adopt the Copernican view and abandon the Ptolemaic view, and Russell allegedly said,
well, that's because when we get up in the morning, the sun is in the east,
and when we go to bed at night, it's in the west, so that the world sort of looks Ptolemaic,
to which Wittgenstein replied, how would the world look if it had looked Copernican?
Well, of course, it would have looked exactly the same way.
And maybe the best answer to the question then, why we held on to one theory rather than the other, is the availability heuristic.
It accounts for us moving in a carriage, moving on a horse, moving in a car, moving as we move our feet.
It also should be accounting for the sun and the moon and the like.
What's called for in developing our own cognitive prowess is certain flexibility,
the ability to abandon certain heuristics, no matter how useful they've been,
once we find in a situation that they're not doing the kind of work we want them to do, and to adopt some other heuristic.
There are stock problems. You give somebody a stack of matchsticks,
and you say, arrange these matchsticks so that they're all tangential to each other
and that they form a certain kind of figure.
It takes the relatively rare bird to realize that a given problem of that sort might only be soluble
if you actually put the matchsticks together in pyramid fashion.
That is, the problem can't be solved by laying them out on a flat surface.
Rather, you have to build them up. You have to build them up in three dimensions.
You can watch extremely intelligent people spending not simply minutes,
but hours pouring over a matchstick problem, and you might find someone else coming in and saying,
well, look, have you thought of building it up this way?
Now, thought of building it up this way is adopting a new heuristic.
Very often we solve problems by laying them out in two dimensions.
But sometimes problems cannot be solved by laying them out in two dimensions.
They have to be understood in three dimensions,
and this requires a sufficient flexibility of thought to give up on something entirely serviceable in other contexts
when we find ourselves not able to solve a problem in this new context.
Newton, I think, is a wonderful case in point.
All schoolchildren, I hope they're still taught this,
and I hope that when they get a little older, they're then taught something else about this.
Schoolchildren hear that Isaac Newton sat under a tree,
and fortunately for Isaac Newton, on just that day, at just that time,
an apple fell and hit him on the head.
I can't tell you that tens of thousands of people who probably go to bed at night
confident in the belief that if an apple had ever fallen on their heads,
they would have become as famous as Isaac Newton.
The whole focus seems to be on the fact that an apple hit Newton in the head,
as if apples had never been seen to fall by anybody else,
and even if they had been seen to fall, they just didn't fall in the right place.
They didn't hit the head correctly.
Now, Newton, of course, was not the first person to observe apples falling,
and Newton did not spend lots of time under trees anyway,
and I doubt that Newton actually had to have an apple hit him in the head.
But suppose you were Newton, and you were sitting under that tree.
I should tell you, by the way, that Newton had any number of eccentricities.
At age 86, the year before he died,
he declared that his greatest lifetime achievement was lifetime celibacy.
Now, this tells us, by the way, that geniuses are not always the best judges of their achievements.
If I were to rank order Newton's achievements,
86 years of celibacy might be on the list, but I'd put the optics before that.
I think I'd certainly put the universal law of gravitation before that, and the like.
But, no, there's Newton, and there's the apple, and it hits him in the head.
Now, here's the question.
With all those apples falling, how is it the moon isn't falling?
You see, this is a different kind of question now.
That is, what Newton is observing, what Newton is creating in his own mind,
is something of a figure-ground problem.
All sorts of objects behave in very predictable ways when you let them go.
But objects we know to be absolutely massive,
great, great sizes and weights of things, are suspended.
Therefore, something must be operating in such a way as to prevent these mammoth apples from falling.
Now, once you start framing the question that way, answers begin to dawn on one.
What are your options?
I mean, you can reach for certain heuristics here, can't you?
Well, all right, the moon isn't falling.
Maybe there's a hook holding it up.
That's not a plausible explanation.
Well, something must be holding it up.
Well, what tends to hold things anywhere?
What tends to pull things?
Well, forces do.
Well, suppose it just is the case that there are forces operating everywhere,
and they just balance out in some way.
Now, by the time Newton was finished with this line of thought,
what he was able to present to the world was this.
Every object exerts a force on every other object.
It exerts a force directly proportional to the product of the masses of the two objects
and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
So the earth is pulling the moon, which is pulling the earth,
which is pulling the sun, which is pulling Mars.
Everything is pulling everything else,
with forces that are proportional to the masses of all of these objects
and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
The reason the piece of chalk falls toward the center of the earth
is because the piece of chalk has a mass, and the earth has a mass,
and they are attracting each other.
The chalk is pulling the earth up somewhat.
The earth is pulling the chalk down somewhat.
That force weakens as you increase the distance between the piece of chalk
and the gravitational center of the earth.
Now, that's something you don't get just by being hit on the head with an apple.
That's something you get when you decide to employ a serviceable heuristic.
Things are kept in place by patterns of forces,
and you then apply that heuristic to nothing less
than the entire cosmological domain, the entire cosmos,
the entire philosophy of cosmic events.
Newton's achievement was a great, great achievement.
He had to invent a mathematics for all this and the like.
But within that inventive sphere,
what he had, I should think, that establishes his genius,
is this ability to abandon heuristics that are unserviceable,
to find heuristics, sort of interim heuristics, to help,
and to press on until, in fact, observation is confirmed by theory.
And this is something we all do sometimes, and Newton did quite often,
perhaps to some extent because he was so celibate.
