What's Your 26, Language and the Brain?
When Descartes raised the question, this fascinating question which we still address,
we address it now in the context of artificial intelligence, the question of whether you
could ever make a machine that so approximated, indeed even duplicated the characteristics
of a human being, that indeed you could not tell the two apart. Descartes had developed
his reflex model of sensation, perception and behavior. He had seen in the royal gardens
these statues engaged in quite sophisticated patterns of movement. He thought that the
entire animal economy, human beings included, at least in their ordinary sensations and
movements were engaged by essentially mechanical and hydraulic processes. And so the question
that arises is whether you could actually achieve an essentially human kind of performance
just by getting the machinery right. Well Descartes concluded that there would always
be three things that such an entity would never achieve and that would allow you to
distinguish between it and a genuine rational human being. First he says such a device will
never attain to the idea of God. Now I don't want to pour over that one whether any machine
would attain to the idea of God. But this seems to be tied to the second criterion
that Descartes offered and that is that such a device would never be able to hold abstract
conceptions. It would never be able to frame such abstract conceptions as one finds in,
for example, abstract mathematics and jurals, science, theories of justice, that sort of
thing. Thirdly he says it would never engage creatively in language. And I think the accent
here, the stress here should be laid to the adverb. Never be able to engage creatively
in language. Descartes knew all about parrots. He knew all about parroting. He knew all about
the imitate of behavior even of very, very young children who otherwise did not have
a passable language. But what Descartes has in mind is much more the sort of thing that
Chomsky has in mind when he says that a competent native speaker can comprehend and produce
a virtual infinity of intelligible and informing sentences, that there really is no limit to
the linguistic competence, the creative linguistic competence of a native language speaker. And
what Descartes wants to argue is that this is the sort of behavior you'd never be able
to get out of a machine. So Descartes would not be surprised, I shouldn't think anyway.
He wouldn't be surprised if we produced tape recordings and video recordings and the like.
But to bring in a machine that actually generated in a creative way novel utterances, nonetheless
meaningful and coherent and sound, that Descartes says is uniquely reserved to human beings.
Now in this Descartes is part of a very, very long tradition which I think we can say begins
with Stoic philosophy, according to which our linguistic prowess is what separates us
from the balance of the animal economy. That we as language users, to use an expression
that Stoics would have been quite at home with, form a common family. All language users
can be viewed as members of a common family, the Koine Oikos. And the non-language user
just falls outside this and it's with Stoicism circa 300 BC and thereafter that you begin
to see human beings as forming not just a distinguishable class of animals. After all, Aristotle
knows that fish form a class and birds form a class and human beings form a class. But
now human beings not really as a distinguishable class, but as a very, very special class able
to do things nothing else can do and that nothing else even approximates, do you see?
Well, if you are part of a materialist tradition in psychology and are firmly one over to the
view that indeed any definable psychological process finally refers to an underlying physiological
process, then of all the processes you might be deeply interested in in this regard, certainly
language would be very, very high on the list. And as the human brain, at least on a gross
examination compared with the brains of apes, the brains of monkeys and the like, well,
it's different, but you certainly on inspecting it don't see something there that is sort
of flashing language, language, language. The question has long been whether our linguistic
prowess really is reducible to something biological and physiological, or whether there's something
quite transcendent involved, something that transcends the level of matter in motion.
Well, of course, debates on this raged, as you might guess. And in this area, as in so
many areas, the first crack in the door, I say from the point of view of a developed
psychobiology or physiological psychology, the first crack in the door comes with the
famous patient studied by Dr. Broca in the 19th century. A few words about this patient,
not a person who was insane or feeble, or in most outward respects, unusual in any way
at all. But nonetheless, this person could not utter a coherent sentence. Indeed, on
countless opportunities, many, many interviews and clinical studies of the patient, the most
broker could ever get out of this one was the utterance, which in his language had no
meaning at all, T-A-N, tan. He would just say things like tan. Broca would ask a question,
and that's what would come back. So the person for all practical purposes was incapable of
expressive language. He could follow things that Broca said. He could hand things over
when Broca asked for them. He got to the clinic and got back home and the like. That is, he
could live a reasonable life except for this profound deficit. He could not express himself
in language. He had what is called today a broker's aphasia or an expressive aphasia.
He could comprehend language, but he could not produce it. When this patient died, it
became possible to perform a postmortem and do a fairly close examination within the limits
of 19th century techniques. Do a fairly close examination of the brain, and what Broca discovered
was that there was indeed a lesion. There was a region of brain that was destroyed, and
that region of the brain was on one side of the body. It was on the left. It was in the
left hemisphere in an area that's referred to as the third frontal convolution. It's
a region that we now refer to as Broca's area. It is not present on the other side, which
is to say that a lesion on the corresponding point in the other hemisphere will not produce
this deficit. Indeed, there's fairly good evidence to suggest that Broca's area is thus
lateralized even in people who are left-handed. We no longer say that language is uniquely
associated with one side of the brain and not the other, but that it is disproportionately
represented on one side, and that side tends to be, almost invariably, is the left hemisphere.
The side that controls the right side of the body. All right-handed people have their
right-hand movements initiated by events taking place in the left hemisphere. Any person who's
using the left hand will have those movements initiated by events taking place in the right
cerebral hemisphere. There's a crossing over function. The dominant hemisphere we refer
to as the hemisphere controlling right-handed people. I, being a left-handed person, regard
this as highly discriminatory, but nonetheless, that's the way it works, and Broca's area
is in what is called the dominant cortex. It is in a region of the cerebral cortex, which
actually is primarily association area. That is, if you take a look at the function served
by the cerebral cortex, as I mentioned in the previous lecture, there is a strip of
cerebral cortex that is motor cortex and has the specific function when activated of moving
specific parts of the body. There is a strip adjacent to this, the sensory cortex, which
in fact is the cortical representation of the body surface. So when the body surface
is touched, different parts of the body are touched, those stimuli, those events ultimately
are projected to discrete places along the sensory cortex. In the posterior of the cerebral
cortex, we find the occipital lobes primarily associated with visual function. The temporal
lobes, the surface of the temporal cortex, includes areas primarily associated with auditory
function. But there are large areas of the cortical surface that do not have specific
sensory and motor functions, and these are referred to as association cortex, and Broca's
area would fall within association cortex. Now, aphasia is not the only disturbance in
what might be called symbolic functions. There are persons with cortical lesions, and I think
we want to be clear on what the term lesion means. Lesion is any pathological disturbance
of tissue, any pathological process in tissue. It can be a tumor, it could be a vascular
lesion, it could be as a result of a traumatic injury, it could be as a result of a surgical
severing of pathways and the like. So lesion is just generic for a pathological process
or something that seriously disturbs the normal functioning of an area. And I say lesions
in the cerebral cortex as a result of a stroke, for example, or tumors, benign and malignant,
anything that exerts pressure on a given region, can produce any number of disturbances in
what we regard as symbolic functions. For example, the inability to write. The person
can speak normally, the person can read written text, but cannot write it. Agraphia is the
term of choice for that. There are some instances in which the most profound disturbance is
referred to as a calculia, an otherwise perfectly normal person, cognitively adept at all sorts
of tasks, cannot perform routine calculations. I mean the most trivial arithmetic calculations,
that is a particular disturbance. More rarely we have instances of what is called a melodia,
and this is an instance in which the person's speaking ability may be entirely undiminished,
speaking ability, writing ability, but after this lesion, as a result of this insult to
the nervous system, they are no longer able to detect the melodic qualities of sound.
They're simply flat when it comes to the perception of musical melodies. Now these are all symbolic
or quite complex cognitive type functions, writing, calculating, the kind of relational
perception associated with recognizing melodies and of course speech itself. And so we discover
that these very, very rich psychological processes can be wiped out or very significantly diminished
even by punctiform lesions in the cerebral cortex. It's really quite remarkable to see
these effects. Now posterior to Broca's area and more lateral than Broca's area is a region
referred to as Wernicke's area, and Wernicke's area when damaged or destroyed, when there
is a lesion in Wernicke's area, the symptom pattern is quite different from what you get
with a Broca's aphasia. Now you have a patient who can speak. Now the speaking might be quite
peculiar, but you do get whole patterns of sentences and paragraphs and the like, but
there is not a comprehension of spoken prose. So what you have now is a kind of receptive
aphasia. It's the read-in part of the system that's most seriously degraded rather than
the expressive part. Now in saying that a Wernicke's syndrome patient is able to express himself
or herself, but has a receptive problem, I don't want to suggest that the expressive
performance is invariably good. Let me give you a passage from a Wernicke's syndrome
patient studied by Professor Norman Geshwin, who is a leading figure in the area of brain
mechanisms and language for many, many years at Harvard. The patient has shown a scene
of a boy stealing cookies behind his mother's back, and the patient is asked to describe
this scene. Now this is a Wernicke's syndrome patient, and this is what the patient says.
Mother is away here working her work to get her better, but when she's looking the two
boys looking in the other part, she's working another time. Now you have sentences here,
and in fact they're complete sentences, and I haven't paused these, but I think they're
actually grammatical sentences, and indeed there's a certain coherence to them. They're
conveying some kind of meaning, but it is quite clear that the person uttering this
sentence has some kind of cognitive and linguistic disturbance. So although it is the case that
Wernicke's syndrome often will spare the expressive capabilities of the speaker, very, very often,
even in sparing these expressive capabilities, the syndrome includes certain telltale signs,
certain utterances that surely the skilled clinician would, that would give pause to
the skilled clinician. Now one way we've advanced in our understanding of linguistic functions
in relation to brain mechanisms has to do with a very, very peculiar set of phenomena
arising when the interconnections between the two hemispheres are severed. Now the two
hemispheres are functionally and anatomically joined by rich fiber pathways running left
and right and left and right, I say, and joining the two sides of the brain at several levels.
The major interconnections are what join the two great cerebral hemispheres, and the band
of fibers connecting the two great cerebral hemispheres are referred to collectively as
the corpus callosum. Now you might ask, under what conditions would anyone actually sever
the callosal connections between the two hemispheres? Why and under what circumstances would one
ever do this to a human being? You certainly don't perform experimental neurosurgery on
even college sophomores who otherwise are used for all sorts of research in psychology
departments. Well, this surgical procedure has a quite interesting history which I will
summarize all too briefly. It begins with intractable epilepsies, that is, with forms
of epilepsy that finally will not respond to medication. Indeed, the first use of this
surgery was with great, great, great trepidation, but in the face of the fact that absent something
radical the very life of the patient was in jeopardy. Now in forms of epilepsy that might
lend themselves to this surgical procedure, the clinical and physiological picture is
as follows. An EEG will show certain discharge patterns in one side of the brain, these being
discharges referred to as epileptiform. They have a characteristic EEG feature. Actually
while that discharge pattern is going on, the patient does not behaviorally show any
sign of seizure. But after this discharge pattern has gone on for some period of time, what
is called a mirror focus develops. That is to say you start getting the same discharge
pattern in the mirror image part of the cerebral cortex on the other side. And as the mirror
focus develops, you now start generating the characteristic epileptic seizure activity,
seizure behavior. So it's when the two sides in a kind of resonant way are discharging
that the behavioral manifestations of the seizure become obvious. Now once that takes
place, the great risk of course is that the patient will go into what is called a status
epilepticus that it will simply continue to the point of total physiological exhaustion
and indeed death. And of course the less grave but terribly worrisome possibility is that
these seizures have a kind of functional scarring effect on the brain. Every one of these
seizures is in its own right an insult to brain tissue. And so for that reason also
something has to be done to bring these under control. Now medical or pharmacological approaches
have long been effective. Delantin was long a drug of choice. There are even more precise
and more effective treatments now. But in some small fraction of the cases, a medical control
proved to be impossible. And of course what was most desired was some way of preventing
the formation of the mirror focus. The idea was that the mirror focus develops because
the discharge patterns on one side are sending signals through the corpus callosum and driving
the other side. And when that circuit is complete, you now have the mirror focus and the full
fledged epileptic discharge. Well of course you might say fine so the best thing to do
is to remove a flap of bone from the patient's head and just cut the corpus callosum. Now
obviously this is not something you're going to do willy nilly. Well there had already
been a quite substantial literature based on research with experimental animals in which
the corpus callosum and other connections between the hemispheres had been severed. This
was work done by the eminent neurobiologist, Sperry. Sperry would ultimately win the Nobel
Prize for an entire career of research in neurobiology. But Roger Sperry with a number
of collaborators including John Stam and students over a course of years did systematic research
studies of learning and perception and memory, maze learning, tests of coordination, tests
of agility, animals balancing themselves on wires, a whole variety of tasks, perceptual
and behavioral, in animals who had had the sectioning of the corpus callosum. A what
is sometimes referred to as a commissure otomy. By the way the suffix O-T-O-M-Y, otomy, refers
to the severing of pathways. So commissure otomy is a severing of the pathways that form
that great commissure. Whereas the suffix Ectomy refers to removal. When an appendectomy
is done the appendix is removed. When a thalamotomy is done fibers and the thalamus are simply
severed. The thalamus isn't removed but fibers are severed. So a commissure otomy is the
severing of these interconnecting pathways. Well what Sperry and his collaborators discovered
is that the commissure otomized animal is into all outward appearances quite normal. And certainly
physiologically quite healthy. There didn't seem to be and indeed there doesn't seem to
be any profound life threatening or even debilitating consequence of commissure otomies and experimental
animals. They did however show some rather interesting perceptual peculiarities which
I won't discuss here because I will discuss them in connection with commissure otomized
human patients. Well to make a very very long story short commissure otomies were done in
a number of patients suffering otherwise intractable epilepsies. By intractable I mean
epilepsies that could not be brought under pharmacological or medical control and which
were life threatening. Well what does the commissure otomized patient look like under
gross examination under clinical examination. You ask the commissure otomized patient now
who has recovered postoperatively walk across the floor close your eyes and touch your index
fingers to your nose stand with your legs apart and hold your arms out straight. You
are looking for various signs Romberg signs Argyle Robertson pupils at the usual neurological
examination two point thresholds on the skin and perimetry to see whether the visual fields
have contracted. Well again the patients are normal. You give them memory tasks. They are
fine. You get short term tasks. They are fine. You ask them. You test for so called
organic mental syndrome. Do they know who they are. Do they have a good sense of time.
Do you think it is right now. Did you have breakfast this morning. Do you recall what
you have for breakfast. Why do you think you're in the hospital. That sort of thing. And I
say in any number of ways the patients turn up quite normal. Now you give this sort of
task. You give them a split screen. So so that when they look at the screen what appears
to the left eye can't be seen by the right eye. What appears to the right eye can't be
seen by the left eye. And you present these stimuli sufficiently eccentric to the line
of regard. So that you know given the visual projections one stimulus is going to go to
the left hemisphere primarily if not exclusively. And the other stimulus is going to be projected
on to the right hemisphere. Now you might show the patient the picture of a key. Let's
say an automobile ignition key. You project this in such a way that that key is delivered
to the dominant hemisphere. The patient can't name what he sees. Can't name it at all. In
fact can't name any object whatever. If you take the same object and put it in in front
of the person and ask him to pick out what it was he saw five or six objects one of them
being the key. There's no trouble at all picking out the key. That is there is a recognition
of what the object is. And indeed there's sound knowledge of what the object is for.
This is not the sort of loss that we sometimes refer to as an agnosia where the patient actually
can't can't interpret what he's seeing. It's not a form of a praxia where the patient can't
engage in certain kinds of otherwise habitual coordinated motor acts. In fact let me mention
agnosias and a praxia so you see how different these are from what the commissure atomized
patient is producing. If a patient post stroke for example has what's called a visual agnosia
you do a test of visual perception color vision color naming and the like. Everything turns
up really quite normal. At that point you might take out a fountain pen and and say
to the patient do you see this. And the patient says yes. You say what is this. And the patient
starts doing something like this. Well now if while that pausing is going on you put
it in the patient's hand so he can feel it. The minute the tactile cues are presented
the patient says fountain pen absentee tactile information. The patient simply can't interpret
visually what it is he's looking at the tactile interpretation is flawless. The visual interpretation
is virtually impossible. Now that's what we would mean by a visual agnosia. The commission
commissure atomized patient does not have an agnosia. The commissure atomized patient
sees the thing sees it for what it is knows what it's for. You can't name it. Now what
about an apraxia. Well within apraxia you might have a patient whose whose sensory motor
performance looks just fine. If you ask the patient to touch the tip of the nose with
an index finger there's no trouble. Sometimes you ask the patient to step back and to turn
hands over and palms over on the thighs as quickly as possible. You look for some lagging
on one side versus the other. This is perfectly normal in the commissure atomized patient and
it's normal in the usually normal in the apraxia. What the apraxia often has is is what might
be called an interpretive motor problem. So that you say to the apraxia would you take
the apraxia might not have a jacket on. You hand him a laboratory coat or a jacket and
you say would you put this on for me. And you'll find him very much like the visual agnosia
sort of handling the thing and looking at the thing and maybe twisting it a bit and moving
it to one side or the other but simply can't go through the habitual well trained behavior
of getting an arm in the sleeve and getting the jacket on. Now I say this is not the sort
of thing you get with commissure atomized patients. If you now reverse the presentation
so that the projected object is going to the brokers area side the patient names it immediately
names it accurately. What you're getting here is very definitely the distinction between
linguistic functions being served by one side of the brain and non linguistic much more
visual functions being served by by the other side. Now the patient can point to things
correctly. He subsequently can tell you when he sees them with both eyes no trouble at
all. That's a key. This is what it's for. Indeed. It's my own key. So it's only under
these unusual circumstances that the person can perceive but not name because the naming
function requires linguistic abilities matching up with what is perceived. And as a result
of the commissurotomy the perceptual information is not getting to the side where the language
mediation is going on. Now I think it's quite important to reexamine the question is language
on the dominant side is language only in one side when these findings first came out. Most
of the writers were arguing as if there were a little box inside one half of the cerebral
cortex and that box was labeled language and anything linguistic was going to come out
of that box and it would have to go into that box and that box was on one side only. Any
number of studies indicated this sort of thing. For example with significant damage on the
language side of the brain subjects have no trouble understanding and telling you what
a melody is. But they have trouble with lyrics for example so that you could actually partition
out the linguistic and the melodic part of an input depending on whether it was the language
side that was disturbed. The best evidence now is that indeed there is a far richer disposition
toward linguistic functions on one side of the brain that those functions are more lateralized.
Indeed recent evidence suggests that on average women have a rather more elaborated linguistic
side than relatively men do. I mean these of course are quite average and indeed provisional
data but they are clearly linguistic functions on both sides and the more sophisticated we
become in testing for linguistic functions the more obvious it is that there really is
bilateral representation of linguistic function even if there is a disproportionate representation
on one side only. Is Chomsky right then is the universal generative grammar expressive
of underlying brain mechanisms and entirely innate. Well let's put it this way there does
seem to be a genetically predetermined pattern of information processing on one side of the
brain the form of processing that is disproportionately involved in linguistic functions. Now I don't
think that confirms a theory like Chomsky's there are other ways of accounting for these
effects but the general Chomsky an idea that some significant aspect of language does not
arise from learning but is there at the outset is confirmed by data of this sort thanks.
