Lecture 29 Violence and the Brain
The topic today is violence and the brain.
I concluded the previous lecture by mentioning research in which human patients, or at least
one human patient, actually could have something as basic as his sexual orientation altered
by stimulating regions of the limbic system and being exposed to certain graphic materials.
It's also known that patients with right hemisphere damage, for example, will not laugh at jokes
whereas damage to a corresponding part on the other side of the brain doesn't have quite
that effect.
It's also known that patients with amygdalas that aren't functioning properly, a damaged
or lesioned amygdala, will fail to appreciate the emotional quality of the facial expressions
of others.
So there's an entire litany of clinical findings and research findings suggesting profound
alterations in emotional life attendant upon disturbances in the brain in the nervous
system in general.
Of course, this can only raise a question about the extent to which anyone is actually
responsible for what one does in emotional states, in states of intense anger.
And needless to say, the courts gradually and kicking and screaming have more or less
begun to catch up with the data, the clinical findings, the research findings and theory.
And so we find contemporary adjudicative processes involving the insanity defense now weighed
down with all sorts of medical, physiological, neuropsychological testimony and the like.
It's something that very often amuses when it doesn't deeply concern the average citizen
and it seems to be a topic worthy of our attention at this time.
Well, let me begin by saying a few things about the insanity defense itself and about
how the law has traditionally understood the exculpatory power, the power of forgiveness
contained in such states as irresistible impulses and intense emotional states and the like.
The first thing to keep in mind, particularly if you're a skeptic about the insanity defense,
is that there is no time in the recorded history of Western jurisprudence in which there has
not been an insanity defense. You will find it as early as the homicide laws of Draco in
the ancient Greek world. You'll find it on Rome's 12 tables. Rome's 12 tables includes
a provision where if somebody because of insanity or madness of some sort is squandering the
family fortune, someone else can be appointed to preside over the management of the family
affairs and the like. So this has been a fixed chapter in the history of jurisprudence from
the very outset. And of course it has to be. The very concept of law presupposes the citizen's
ability to control himself and comport himself according to the requirements of law. That is,
the very concept of law assumes that a being has sufficient rationality, sufficient self-control,
so as to be able to regulate his conduct according to the law's requirement. Punishment then is
imposed on those who fail to do so. But if in fact one is so lacking in mental power, remember,
known compost mentis means literally no power of mind. If one is profoundly retarded, if one is
hopelessly insane, then in fact one lacks the requisite powers to conform oneself to the requirements
of law. So the very concept of crime and punishment, crime being men's rare, there has to be the
power within the mind to frame the evil act, do you see? The very concept of crime, the concept
of punishment, the concept of law itself presupposes those rational and emotional attributes
that render one fit for the rule of law. So the issue, to the extent that there is an issue,
has never been an issue about whether there should be an insanity defense. I should think
everyone understanding the very notion of the rule of law would accept the proposition that if one is
actually hopelessly insane or profoundly retarded, the law's punishment should not be brought to
bear on such a person. The issue has always been what criteria have to be satisfied to qualify one
as insane for purposes of law? And I should say these criteria have had a quite shifting history.
It's a history, in fact, worth examining. I'll only touch the highlights of it in today's lecture.
But if we go back to the words that were used in ancient Rome to cover insanity, at least as
judges would regard a defendant as insane, the words we confront are words like furiosis,
fanaticus, known compos mentis, idiotus. And what these words are seeking to get at is one so
bereft of reason as to be a furiosis in the sense of a wild beast, an absolutely unconstrained
creature of the wild beyond the reach of reason. And in fact, this came to be known as the wild
beast criterion. And it remained in place until well into the 18th century. That is from the
ancient Greek and Roman time to well past the time of the first Queen Elizabeth. The grounds of
forgiveness at law included someone so destitute of reason as to be really, really beast like.
The earliest trial for which we have a complete trial transcript involving the insanity defense
was the trial of Edward Arnold in 1723, a trial in history of law referred to as Rex versus Arnold,
Rex v. Arnold. I won't go into the details just to say that Edward Arnold was a very,
very strange fellow. His sister testifying at this trial said that as a child when he'd engage in
some sort of disagreement with the family, it was not unusual for him to attempt to burn down the
family house. His barber reported that when he would come in for grooming, he'd tilt his head
back and tell the barber to cut my throat. So Arnold was a man of manifest eccentricities,
no doubt about it. What brings him before the bar of justice is he makes an attempt on the life of
Lord Anzlo, a nobleman, and this on the grounds that Lord Anzlo has been sending imps to disturb
Arnold's sleep, do you see? He only very likely wounds Lord Anzlo, but nonetheless the law at
that time called for the maximum penalty in cases of attempted murder. That is, you didn't
execute people merely because they were good shots. If you attempted to kill someone, you would
done in. The idea was that the realm should not be depleted of all of its good shots with only
the bad shots surviving. Now, when Robert Tracy, the judge in this case, instructs the jury,
he reviews for them the historic insanity defense going back to Roman standards and through to
British common law understandings of insanity. And then he says to the jurors these words,
after establishing that there must be an insanity defense, not to fret over that. The very concept
of law entails as much. He then says, but it is not every idle humor of a man that spares him
the burden of his crime. It must be one so destitute of reason as to have no more rational power than
doth an infant, a brute or a wild beast. So here we have at the beginning of the 18th century,
first quarter of the 18th century, just a rehearsal, a repeat of the wild beast criterion.
This very much gets turned around in a famous 1800 trial, the trial of James Hadfield,
in which Hadfield is represented by the greatest trial lawyer in the United Kingdom at the time,
Erskine, who will become law chancellor. Erskine is a very, very interesting chap. He
defended Tom Paine in absentia when Tom Paine was declared persona non grata in Britain. And although
Erskine lost this case, and Paine was convicted of seditious statements and the like, his defense
of Tom Paine is one of the great, great defenses of freedom of ideas, freedom of expression and the
like. Erskine would die a pauper, by the way. He deserves a biography, quite an interesting
fellow. Hadfield's situation is a hopeless situation. This is a man who had been so utterly
wounded in battle, in fact, serving the very king. He is now charged with attempting to kill.
The charge against James Hadfield is that he made an attempt on the life of George III. I
should tell you, by the time Hadfield was doing this, attempts on the life of George III were
becoming something of a national sport. But Hadfield was a person who had sustained horrible
injuries at war. In fact, those who were present in the battle in which these injuries were sustained
said that, this is rather ghoulish, I'm loath to report it, but that the sword wound to his neck
was so extreme that as his torso turned, the head would not move in place. He was then hit with
the butt of a sword, and in fact, the wound was so deep that you could see the convolutions of the
brain, even at the time of trial in 1800. He had taken up with a banister, Trulok, and the two of
them would exchange roles and tales and functions, which one was Satan, which one represented God,
who would be responsible for doing God's work in the world, who would take out against this
reigning monarch and create a climate in England that would host the return of Jesus Christ, our
Lord and Savior. All this going on, do you see? And on the fateful day, he gets himself a brace of
pistols and goes off to the theater at Drury Lane, and he waits for the king and the king's entourage,
and then he fires wildly, missing the king and the like. But of course, the nation itself is the
king in parliament, and so an attempt on the life of the king is an act of treason for which the
penalty is the maximum penalty. Now, Erskine mounts a wonderful spirited defense. It's one of the
great tour de force performances, I should think, in the history of legal defenses. One should read
Erskine on this. Erskine complements the prosecution for summarizing the history of the insanity
defense, and says, of course, he's told you all the things you're supposed to know. He's told you
about the Furiosis and Fanaticus and known compost vendors, and most importantly, he has summarized
the reasoning in Rex versus Arnold, the wild beast criterion, and then Erskine says,
if you were to accept these criteria, then you must wrestle with the fact that no one answering
to these criteria has ever existed in the history of the world. That is, what Erskine wants to make
clear is if, in fact, you had no more rational power than an infant, a brute, or a wild beast,
you couldn't commit a crime. That this is just a fictitious entity. No one answering to this
description could so much as load a gun, do you say? Erskine points out that although these
understandings had a place in their time, we must not be held hostage to antique ignorance, as he
says. Science knows much more now. Medicine knows much more now about insanity than the
ancients could have known, or than anyone could have known even 50 years ago. So we begin to see
this, actually, there's a tradition being put in place. Namely, the insanity defense must be
reconsidered in light of recent knowledge. And of course, in the trial of Hadfield, Erskine has two
medical experts, one of them a Dr. Creighton, who's actually Christian, who has recently
written a treatise on criminal insanity and the laws that pertains to insanity.
And so, Erskine is in a position to change the law within the British context. He's going to
overturn earlier precedence by introducing a concept that he impresses the jury as being
the right standard in trials of this kind, in cases of this kind. He says, what we now knew,
that the ancients couldn't possibly know, that until recent times wasn't known as this,
that the one true mark of insanity is delusion. And if you are satisfied that at the time he took
the act against the king, the defendant was deluded as to matters of fact, you must find
him not guilty by reason of insanity, more. If the delusion is of such a nature that you are
satisfied were its contents true, you then must ask yourself how the law would deal with such a
case. That is, suppose in fact Hadfield was fulfilling commandments given to him by our
Lord and Savior. Erskine asks, is there a court in the realm that would convict a man for doing
what is nothing less than the will of God, do you say? So, you're to ask yourself first,
does the person suffer from an insane delusion creating within him motives irresistible?
And secondly, if you are satisfied that he does suffer from a delusion, then you ask yourself
this, just in case the contents of that delusion are true, what would the law's position be in
regard to the act the defendant has been charged with? So, Erskine is very, very influential in
having the law understand in a new and different life the very nature and mark of insanity. And
this is circa 1800. Hadfield gets off on this, by the way. And in fact, 1800 is also the year that
the insane offenders bill is passed by parliament so that Hadfield now can go to a place reserved for
those who are criminally insane. Here to fore, persons found not guilty by reason of insanity
was simply walk out of the courtroom and very often proceed to do the very things that they had
that they had been brought in and tried for in the first place. So now we had facilities set up
to warehouse the criminally insane. Well, I mentioned the trial of Hadfield because first of
all, it's a consequential trial. But secondly, to point out that the criteria developed to
establish insanity for purposes of law have had this shifting history. Let me go down a list of
criteria that have been offered, oh, let's say in the past 30 years in insanity trials or trials
involving the insanity defense. Premenstrual syndrome. Instances in which as a result of
premenstrual syndrome, women have taken assaultive acts against others and have successfully pleaded
diminished capacity on the basis of the tumultuous hormonal changes that take place during this
particular time. Responses to toxic substances. I give you a quite famous trial here. It involves
a person maintaining lawns or groundskeeper who's going from house to house in the suburbs and doing
the usual sort of work that groundskeepers do. On one of these occasions, he has to relieve himself.
And so he goes to the front door, knocks on the front door, and when he gets no reply,
he goes around to the side of the house and relieves himself there. During which time the
owner of the house comes to the front door, walks around and sees what's going on and is
chagrined and in fact rebukes this person for behaving in such a way on her own grounds,
whereupon he proceeds to assault and kill her. Now at trial, the defense of insanity was mounted
and the insanity was said to arise from his frequent handling of toxic materials associated
with lawn care, weed killers and the like. And in fact, one of the experts summoned a trial
points out that when you give quantities of this substance, for example, to domestic pets like
cats, in fact, he presents evidence based on findings with his own cat, the cat becomes violent
and aggressive, lashes out, scratches and so forth. On the basis of this testimony and Kindred
testimony, the defense of insanity succeeded. That is to say, it was plausible to the jury
that as a result of handling these materials over a sustained period of time, the patient
suffered from some sort of toxic reaction that rendered him unable to conform himself to the
requirements of law and indeed rendered him a violent assaultive criminal.
Well, skeptics have labeled one of the recent defenses, the Twinkie Defense and many in the
audience of this lecture probably are familiar with the Twinkie Defense. Here again, we have an
aggressive assaultive murderous act, a plea of insanity grounded in the claim that on that day,
the youngsters involved in this behavior had been taking in a fair amount of junk food. In fact,
in this case, they were on a fairly steady diet that day of Twinkie, some horrible chocolatey
sugary sort of thing, which so altered their blood chemistry and thus so altered their brain
chemistry as to render them irresponsible or non responsible for purposes of law. And here again,
we have a defense that has succeeded. Sleepwalking and automatism, persons committing violent acts
while asleep and indeed provable sleepwalkers who as part of the evidence mounted in their
behalf are filmed during 24 hour periods and are seen to get up and engage in what appear to be
purposeful forms of behavior, which they are later totally amnesic to totally oblivious of.
And yet if you watch them during the act itself, it seems that what they are doing
is indeed quite purposive. There are instances in which husbands and wives have not been able
to sleep in the same room for years because the husband would have regular nightmares,
a World War Two veteran, regular nightmares of being attacked by Japanese infantrymen with
fixed bayonets and would take defensive maneuvers against these assailants and indeed the assailant
happened to be his wife lying next to him in bed and in nearly killing her on several occasions,
he and she agreed that they would have to be separated and indeed she would have to lock her
door. Now when one sees events like this filmed and they have been filmed, one says for goodness
sake, you can't possibly hold such people responsible for what they're doing. Here is a deranged
nervous system. There's something entirely quirky going on under the skin of this person
such that he cannot possibly be held responsible for what he's doing. Drug induced states,
things done by persons on so-called LSD trips, people who suffer from alcoholic psychoses.
These also have resulted in quite successful and quite plausible insanity defenses.
And then of course you always have the celebrated case that leaves everyone
agogged, not quite figuring out how this ever worked and thus resurrecting the question of
whether there should be an insanity defense at all for the contemporary generation. I need only
mention the famous trial of John Hinckley. Now examine for the moment the facts in Hinckley.
Hinckley was a sort of wandering young chap from an affluent family in which his older brother had
been entirely successful and in which he seems to have disappointed the expectations of his parents.
He tries first one school and then another, doesn't quite finish anything, roams around with a guitar
strapped to his shoulder and takes a fancy to a young Anjanu who subsequently becomes a quite
famous actress, Jody Foster. He has seen her in a film and he becomes obsessed with her.
She at this time is now studying at Yale and he starts sending notes to her. He wants to attract
her attention. He sends her a tape recording of some ballad that he wrote or sung and strummed away
on and at one point he says that if she doesn't pay attention to him he's fully prepared to do
something that will attract her attention like, you know, shoot the president. So this is on the
record. This is a fellow who's already declared the sort of thing he's prepared to do and in fact
he specifies a particular thing that he actually there upon does. Much earlier he's apprehended
for attempting to board an airplane with a weapon. Now this of course is and was then a federal
offense. Had he been convicted of this and sentenced properly he actually would have been in jail
on the very day that he shot at President Reagan and other members of the president's
entourage. But of course the judge in the case sees that there's no prior record and this is a young
chap and all that and so Hinkley doesn't do doesn't do doesn't serve any time for that offense
which is a quite serious and egregious offense. All right now he goes ahead and does what he does
and it's on camera. Understand that the insanity defense is very often the defense of last resort.
This is where the prosecution has everything and defense counsel has very very little and if there
is a basis upon which to plead insanity. This is where you're going to find it pleaded which is
one of the reasons why the defense usually fails and indeed is rarely raised. I don't want to make
too much out of it as a threat to justice statistically. But we're not concerned so much
with the statistics as we are with the rationale. Are we to understand significant human actions
as causally determined by events in the brain such that the actor is not to be regarded as
responsible. Now at trial there were psychiatrists on both sides and as a modern audience is very
well aware. Side A says A and side B says not A and the jury has to listen to these experts
in tumultuous disagreement with each other though they're all properly credentialed and the like.
One of the telling pieces of evidence was that they had done brain scans and Hinckley had shown some
edema some swelling of the cortical tissue which experts pointed out very often links up with
schizophrenia. Of course it'll link up with any number of infectious processes. You could have
mumps and show something like this and the like. But at the end of the day the jury found
John Hinckley not guilty by reason of insanity chiefly because the state did not adduce positive
evidence of sanity. All the state was doing was attempting to rebut the expert testimony of the
Hinckley defense. And until the law was changed on that it really was the state's burden to prove
sanity where insanity had been successfully raised as a defense. Now what do we want to say
about the history of this whole subject. Do we want to declare people innocent although their
brains are guilty. I mean what would be the fate of adjudication just in case we assumed that all
of our actions lawful and unlawful are causally determined by events in the brain. The law specifically
has resisted that notion. In fact the reason the ancient world adopted standards like the
furiosis or wild beast standard was precisely because the very concept of law was predicated
on the assumption that we will have bad days. There will be days when we eat junk food. There'll
be days when we handle toxic materials. There'll be days when Jane doesn't smile at us and our
homeroom teacher is absolutely ferocious. Days when we don't get hugged and kissed. There will be
troubled times and restless sleeps and all that. There'll be days when we're sure somebody is sending
inch to disturb our sleep. And the law says that on those days you can fret. You can be angry. You
can snarl. You can pace. Thus far may you go and no further. So the requirement in the ancient courts
and certainly until the time of Hatfield included that you be so bereft of reason that you really
were indistinguishable from some non-rational creature some irrational creature. Now the law
can't survive a totally deterministic neuropsychology. That in fact events in the brain or in the body
in general for that matter in the environment incline one in a certain direction. There is no
doubt and indeed the law is in place as a helpful guide to say when you are thus inclined stop short
of doing something irreversible and irretrievable. The law here seeks to teach and understand as
Hegel understood that the law encourages what it permits. So in in in adopting an essentially
scientific or physiological or neuropsychological perspective and increasingly courts have adopted
that perspective. They find themselves at cross purposes with very concept of law itself. The
concept of law I say is predicated on the assumption that although we are strongly inclined by any
number of factors internal and external to behave in unlawful or antisocial ways if there is evidence
of sufficient power to constrain ourselves in those circumstances then we are understood to be
responsible. Indeed we are understood to be beings fit for the rule of law. Now to take that away
and to adopt a more deterministic outlook according to which having a lesion having alterations in
blood chemistry having a junk food diet having an unfortunate childhood and the like are all
exculpatory. You simply go about rediscovering the very conditions that that the law of since
a time out of memory already anticipated and and recognized had to be brought under a kind of
control and that is the control of the rule of law itself. Well is there a compromise position?
Deborah Denneau who has written on this subject has has recommended in in one law review article
that we consider something called degree determinism that is a midpoint some sensible
midpoint between a radical determinism that would be at the expense of adjudication itself
and so totally a so totally voluntaristic perspective that there almost could never
be anything counting as a mitigating circumstance. Somewhere in between she argues you will find
you will find the right position for purposes of law and at the time of sentencing or even
for the purpose of determining guilt juries should be fully acquainted with some of the things that
so strongly inclined behavior in a certain direction that they might be regarded as determinative
surely automatism sleepwalking manifest palpable measurable tumors in the nervous system known
to be associated with violent aggressive behavior as you move away from conditions like that more
toward the he's misunderstood he's got a successful older brother he seems to be out of sorts you're
obviously moving far and far further and further away from the deterministic and much more toward
a voluntaristic position violence in the brain maybe but the law must punish if society is to survive.
