Section 5, Psychology and the Social Context.
Lecture 33, What Makes an Event Social?
I've tried in recent lectures to do justice to empiricistic, rationalistic and materialistic
psychologies.
You've probably noticed that almost all of the research and theory have been devoted
to individual processes in individual organisms and individual persons.
What's been left out, of course, is the very complex domain of interpersonal influence,
the social context in general.
I touched on this in the previous lecture in bringing to bear a Vittgenstinian critique
on the artificial intelligence program, a Vittgenstinian critique that locates the very
concept of meaning within an irreducibly social context, within an irreducibly cultural context
in which persons are engaged in a common and shared form of life.
Well, in today's lecture and in succeeding lectures, the focus now will shift to domains
in which we find multiples of organisms, at least two, dyadic relationships, interpersonal
influence, and the influence of culture and society in general on the development of psychological
beings, and more specifically on the development of human beings.
Now, the question, of course, that lingers from a materialistic perspective is whether
we need explanations as we move into this domain, any different from the explanations
that prove to be so serviceable in the physical and natural sciences.
After all, although social phenomena are very complex, well, planetary phenomena are also
complex and yet Newtonian laws or relativity, physics and the like, can explain these complexities
very, very well.
Why would we assume merely because social phenomena are complex that they require a
level of explanation or a form or quality of explanation different from the explanations
that work so well in the natural and physical sciences?
There has been a long debate on just that point whether there's something about human
social activity that not only cannot be explained in physical and scientific terms owing to
reasons of complexity, but cannot be explained in such terms because such terms result in
the very elimination, the very cancellation of the phenomena that one is setting out to
explain.
I should try to illustrate that with several examples or at least a couple of examples drawn
from writings as early as Aristotle's.
Aristotle raises the question, how should we best explain someone being angry?
And he says, there really are two classes of explanation available to us.
There's the explanation that the natural scientist would provide, the person identified in Greek
as the physikos, the natural scientist, the physiologist, for example.
Now the natural scientist will explain anger in terms of changes in the temperature of
blood so that if in fact you had some way of recording the temperature of someone's
blood, when you saw it exceed a certain level, you'd be in a good position scientifically
to say there must be some angry state.
I'm not suggesting, by the way, that the temperature of the blood actually changes
when one gets angry, but that was Aristotle's theory.
Aristotle also thought that the cranial cavity had as its particular function, the brain
had as its particular function, the cooling of the blood that passes through.
I sometimes say that Aristotle had a very good head on his shoulders, though he sometimes
regarded it as a kind of refrigerator.
But as I said before, he died in 322 BC.
He knew a lot.
He wasn't expected to know everything.
But in fact, if you query a person who is angry as to the reasons for his anger, he almost
certainly will not refer to the temperature of the blood.
Rather he will say something of the following sort.
I was wrongly slighted by someone.
Someone said something that was gravely offensive.
My anger is based on the fact that I was dealt with in a manner that is unfair.
Now the explanation that takes that form, Aristotle says, is what you are likely to
receive from, this is in contrast to the Fusicos, the dialecticos, the person engaged in a kind
of argument, a kind of dialectic, a kind of rhetorical examination of the conditions
and circumstances under which an emotion of a given kind arises.
Well, here then are two different models of explanation.
One explanation is based on the physics and physiology of a biological system so that
the right explanation of anger is in terms of events taking place within that system.
And the other is based on something rather different.
It's not based on physical causes as such.
Rather it's based on what might be called reasons, having a reason to be angry.
And the argument that has been advanced over the centuries is that explanations grounded
in causes are quite different from explanations grounded in reasons and that the right kind
of explanation for social phenomena, and this would include phenomena in the juridical context
in courtrooms and the like.
The right kind of explanation is framed in terms of the actors' reasons for acting,
purposes, goals, aspirations, motives and the like.
One might not always be quite clear as to one's reason for acting, but at the end of
the day the right account of just why it was that Smith and Jones did what they did on
that occasion is finally going to have to unearth patterns of motives, reasons, purposes
and goals that would not only be concealed, but in a way would be eliminated if we started
talking about their respective physiologies.
Now I think one can make this even clearer by taking a bona fide historical event.
Let's take the Battle of Waterloo, the famous Battle of Waterloo in which Napoleon's forces
lost.
There they were in Belgium and when the dust had cleared, Napoleon's forces had been vanquished.
Now suppose we ask, what's the best explanation of Napoleon's defeat at the Battle of Waterloo?
You can imagine a tremendously thick book of fact being passed on containing all of
the physiological events that took place in all of the bodies that were participating
in Belgium those days so that you would know what the heart rate and blood pressure and
respiratory activity, the oxygen tension in the blood, you'd have EEG traces and evoked
response data, measures of muscle potential and the performance of certain gravity reflectors
and the like.
You'd have all this, page after page after page, reduced to numerical precision.
Now guess what?
You would never be able to discover turning those pages.
Things that include every physiological event occurring in every body that was participating
there.
What you would never be able to extract from those data, what you wouldn't have the remotest
clue to is that those data were associated with a battle, with a war of any kind, with
opposing forces, behaving according to the orders they received from general officers,
armed with weapons of a certain kind, acting in such a way as to realize or fulfill a certain
strategy, a strategy that tied up with long range aspirations and expectations regarding
the political order of Europe.
None of that would be present in these data.
So what the data would do, far from explaining the Battle of Waterloo, would, for all explanatory
purposes, eliminate the very category of wars, battles, strategies and the like.
Far from explaining the events you set out to explain, you wouldn't have the phenomenon
at all.
Let me take one more example to make this perhaps overly clear.
A courtroom is assembled for the purpose of trying Smith, who has been charged with let's
say first degree murder.
The scene that gives rise to this action is the following.
We walk into the room and in the corner of the room slumped over and quite clearly dead,
even getting rather bluish, is an elderly gentleman and standing over him in livery is
a fellow with a smoking pistol by the name of Smith.
Well, we've got fairly good circumstantial evidence here.
The fingerprints are all over the weapon, he's holding the weapon.
The bullet that was the fatal bullet actually came from the weapon that he's holding and
so forth and so on.
And so now the trial is held and by the way, there will not be an insanity defense launched
here.
So the trial is held and testimony is taken and evidence is given and the like.
So the question before the court has to do with why this fatal event took place.
We want to decide what the causes were that culminated in an event of this kind and just
what part the defendant played in all this.
Now suppose the first expert that was called here was some physiologist, an expert in human
physiology who explained with the utmost clarity that the reason that chap died is that his
brain ceased to get requisite supplies of blood and oxygen.
Well, this of course is an explanation of sorts, but it is an explanation that really
is neutral across cases.
I mean, the hundreds of thousands of deaths arise from the fact that the brain is deprived
of blood.
So this doesn't really pick out anything that the court has any reason to be interested
in.
Suppose we then have a metaphysician or poet summoned for expert testimony who says that
all those born of women must die or that dust thou art to dust return.
Well, of course, in this case, the deceased is simply one more example of the ultimate
mortality faced by biological entities.
We don't have an explanation for this particular death.
We just discover that all men are mortal.
We discover the major premise of the textbook, syllogism.
Now frustrated while all this is going on is the defendant.
He's sitting there listening to all this, biting his nails, wishing they'd get on with
it.
And finally in desperation, he stands up and says, look, I shot him.
I knew that I was the primary beneficiary in his will.
My children are sick and I can't meet the medical payments.
And I knew that he also had a fatal disease and I figured I'm just going to spare him
some suffering anyway.
And I'm going to get a bootle of money when this is all over.
And that's why I did it.
Now I submit to you that it's at that point that the court, the jury, all in attendance,
everyone listening to this lecture, breathes something of a sigh of relief and says, aha.
Now we know why this person was killed.
That is to say, we now have a larger narrative context within which to locate these events
and render them intelligible.
Smith had a reason to do what he did.
To use the old mystery show language, there was opportunity and motive.
And the two came together, the act joined the will and Smith perpetrated this horrible
and heinous crime against another.
We now have an explanation that never could have been provided at the level of basic physiology,
biochemistry, physics, Newtonian or otherwise.
Now what we say here is that these are explanations grounded in reasons and they are sometimes
referred to in the literature as reasons explanations contrasted with causal explanations.
The argument that has been advanced by a number of influential philosophers is that
social phenomena, phenomena of a bona fide psychological nature, inevitably require explanations
of that kind and are inevitably insufficiently explained in the language of causal explanation.
So this then leads us to yet a general proposition that is quite momentous.
This leads us to a proposition regarding what it is that makes an event social in the first
instance, what it is that makes an event historical or economic or for our purposes directly,
what it is that makes an event psychological.
And the argument I say that has been advanced quite influential by a number of leading scholars,
both ancient and modern, is that these events, unlike anything taking place in the natural
realm, these events can only be explained by appeals to reasons, motives, aspirations,
purposes and the like, and that reasons, motives, purposes, goals and aspirations are not translatable
into the basic stuff of the physical world.
I think it's time to name some names, Aristotle of course appreciates the distinction between
causal explanations and reasons explanations.
Aristotle has a very famous fourfold theory of causation.
Suppose we examine a work of sculpture, we go to Rome and like all good tourists, the
first place we go to is not the Vatican, the first place we go to is the Piazza Navona
to sit down and have overpriced coffee so that we can look at this fantastic statue that
Bernini did called the Fountain of the Rivers and also see a lot of other tourists, mostly
American, also drinking overpriced coffee and staring at the Fountain of the Rivers.
Now suppose one asks for an account, points to this statue and says, I want to know how
this came into being, to be.
Now on Aristotle's theory of fourfold theory of causation, a complete account would require
one to include the material cause, the formal cause, the efficient cause and what Aristotle
calls the final cause.
This is a fairly well-known part of Aristotle's metaphysical writings and scientific writings.
Now what does he mean by a material cause?
Well look, if you want to have something like the Fountain of the Rivers, there must exist
in reality something that will retain a shape.
If all reality consisted only of vapors and gases, you could never have something like
the Fountain of the Rivers.
So if you take a cause to be, that in whose absence an effect is not possible, then indeed
one of the things absolutely necessary for an entity like a statue is that there be material
things capable of taking on and retaining a shape of a certain kind.
So some kind of material entity is needed or you couldn't have this and that is just
the sense that one of the causes can be called a material cause.
Now there's something else involved here.
The Fountain of the Rivers might be different from all other works of sculpture that have
been done, but there's something common to all works of sculpture.
We have a certain form or formal quality that makes them recognizable as representing
something, do you see?
They have just the right form and Aristotle in using formal here is using it in more than
one sense.
Form as in shape, for the Greek here it would be ethos, form as in shape, but also the form
of the right triangle is the Pythagorean equation, a square plus b square equals c square gives
you the form of the rectilinear triangle.
So there's also that mathematical sense, that formal sense of form, but this formal property
has to be present for there to be something like a statue.
Now of course you're not going to get the Fountain of the Rivers simply by taking a
clump of something and leaving it out to be weathered, do you see?
In fact Aristotle makes this statement quite explicitly in his treatise on physics.
He says if the art of ship building were in the wood, we'd have ships by nature.
Now you can't just take a pile of wood, leave it out there indefinitely and end up with
a beautiful ancient Greek trireme ready to set sail to rescue Helen or whatever.
What you need is workmen actually working away on this.
If you're going to get the Fountain of the Rivers, you actually need somebody with hammer
and chisel going at it assiduously until the job is done.
And every one of those blows, every one of those blows is transforming the matter and
the form in such a way as to begin to yield a certain kind of identifiable thing.
Ultimately it's going to reveal what we call the Fountain of the Rivers.
Now every one of those blows and interactions constitutes part of the pattern of what Aristotle
calls the efficient cause.
In fact efficient causation is what contemporary science focuses on and ignores and tends to
ignore the rest.
Efficient causation is exemplified by one billiard ball hitting another billiard ball
and the second one moves.
Well of course the question then is why are the hammer and chisel strokes taking the form
they're doing?
Well the hammer and chisel strokes are taking the form they're doing in order to realize
something that Bernini had conceived of initially.
Do you see absent Bernini's conception?
None of these causal modalities would have been operative at all.
That is the temporally first cause, the idea that Bernini has of what kind of statuette
is he wants to do.
This is the first in conception, it's the last in realization, it's the final cause
in that it manifests itself finally at the end when all of the other causal modalities
have been recruited and you cannot fully explain the fountain of the rivers unless you consider
the plan or goal the Greek tell us, the goal that the sculptor had in mind when he set
out to do this initially.
Now explanations based on considerations of goals or purposes are referred to as teleological
explanations that is it is an explanation given in the form of this is caused, this
is brought about so that that might be achieved, so this might be achieved in order to for
the purpose of as a result of this pattern of desires and aspirations.
Smith took the lethal action he did against his employer because he was impoverished, his
children were ill, he very much needed the money and in order to pay the medical expenses
he thought he had to do this, this is the goal that was realized, his now coming into
the sort of fortune that he needs desperately if he is to save his family.
Now that kind of explanation, an explanation based on Smith's reasons or motives or purposes
or goals is just a teleological explanation.
So I say it has been argued since the time of Aristotle that explanations of that sort
inevitably will trump merely causal explanations when one is actually attempting to figure
out why persons are doing what they are doing in the actual contexts in which we find human
life lived or for that matter the life of all of the social members of the animal kingdom
whether it's nest building or the activity of bees and hives, all sorts of behavior going
on is best understood in terms of certain goals realized, certain purposes fulfilled.
And I think at this point one should be clear on the distinction between acting for a purpose
and acting with a purpose.
Now in Smith's case we know that Smith really did have a purpose.
He acted with a purpose, he also acted for a purpose.
You can imagine an entity and one cannot get into the mind of anyone else let alone into
the mind of non-human animals but you certainly could imagine bees what they are doing in
hives achieving purposes that serve the interests of bees without each individual bee doing
it because that individual bee has a purpose or has an intention.
So we can say, for example as I will be saying in a later lecture, we can say that Darwinian
theory, evolutionary theory provides teleological explanations in that certain purposes or goals
are realized as a result of certain instinctual behaviors or patterns of behavior without
necessarily assuming that the participating organisms have some conscious sense of a purpose
being served.
And when I discuss Freudian theory, psychoanalytic theory, you will see in that theory any number
of goals being realized but not to any conscious extent in the actual participants themselves.
The psychoanalytic notion of unconscious motivation makes quite clear that important ends can
be achieved without the actor being consciously aware that those are the ends he or she is
seeking to achieve but I say more on that later.
Now I said in the context of the law case that once Smith stands up and says I did it
and I'm going to tell you why I did it, we more or less breathe a sigh of relief.
After all we were getting rather bored with the physiologist running down all the conditions
necessary to get bodies to stop breathing and although the poet was quite eloquent in
pointing out that dust thou art, and dust, returneth and all that was good grief.
This is a busy life.
Let's get on with it.
When Smith finally stood up and said, look, I agree with all of you, I'm tired of this
too.
I did it and this is why I did it.
I said that one thing that comes about as a result of that kind of explanation is the
event now is intelligible.
It makes sense to us.
It has been fit into a kind of narrative context and we can stand back and say, we don't have
to accept the truth of what Smith's saying but we can say this, if he's telling the truth
then what he did made sense.
It matches up with a standard that I've got that renders certain kinds of activity intelligible
and coherent, understandable.
Well this is a characteristic that we never require of scientific explanations, explanations
based on physics or based on matter in motion.
Let's take a standard law in physics, a law that we can trace back to the great 17th
century scientists, Newton and Galileo.
F equals MA, force equals mass times acceleration.
Now what does that tell us?
That tells us this, if you want to impart an acceleration to an object, you will have
to exert a force that's proportional to the mass of the object.
If you're in a constant gravitational field, if you're on earth, this is going to match
up with the weight of the object.
If you want to impart an acceleration, if you want to change the velocity of something,
you have to impart a force to it that is proportioned to its mass, F equals MA.
Now if you stand in front of physics students who are learning this for the first time and
maybe had no physics training at all, you could look them in the eye and you could say
this, Newton and Galileo and other great figures in the 17th century did a number of
experiments and developed a theory of mechanics, we call it classical mechanics, and according
to that theory, F equals one-third MA.
Now nobody in the room at that point would roll and laugh, or that's ridiculous, I never
heard anything so foolish in my life, do you hear what he just said?
He just said that F equals one-third MA.
If you looked at them and said F equals MA to the one-point-three exponent, they would
dutifully write that down, and if you then gave a quiz the next week and asked the question,
that's the answer that you'd get, and if you asked them to calculate the amount of force
needed to impart a certain acceleration to an object with a certain weight, that's the
equation they would use.
Understand then that the laws of physics, we can say the laws of physics work or don't
work.
We are confirmed or disconfirmed in our experimental attempts to test them, but we never require
of a scientific law that it be intelligible, that as it were it makes sense that it somehow
match up with our own feelings and sentiments and the form of life we're living.
Whereas social phenomena, bona fide historical, economic, social and psychological phenomena,
we regard as insufficiently explained or not explained at all unless the explanation
contains within it the ingredient of intelligibility, something that actually makes sense.
We can go even further than that.
We can say that when an explanation is offered to account for social events or psychological
events or economic or historical events, the battle of Waterloo, the trial of Smith on
the charge of first degree murder, that in fact when explanations are offered there,
they have to have yet another quality.
They have to be able to evoke something in us of the form of empathy, that is the explanation
has to provide the means by which we might get into the life or the mind of the participants.
And given the explanation we've received, be able to say something like, well I might
not have done that in the circumstance, but I quite understand why that person would have
done it in the circumstance.
I can imagine myself in comparable circumstances doing something like this.
This quality of empathic evocativeness is what the successful novelist achieves.
And indeed the successful novel or play is successful in that its plot is credible.
The participants do what they do for reasons that are not so transparent as to be trivial,
but for reasons that are plausible, that intelligibly unite the sequence of events that constitute
the story.
We say of bad literature that the characters are not credible.
And what we mean by that is that persons of taste and literary judgment recognize there
are no grounds of empathy here, that the characters are rather wooden, they're behaving as stick
figures.
They don't really show the protean nature of human personality when it's found in such
various contexts.
The plot doesn't work because when we put together in our own mind the kind of narrative
that has real life people facing real life situations, they don't do things like this,
do you see?
Now this has given rise to an entirely different approach to explaining social phenomena and
historical phenomena, an approach that's sometimes called a narratological approach.
That is the right kind of explanation is a narrative explanation.
You explain why people are doing what they're doing by incorporating their actions into
what really amounts to a kind of story.
The best explanation then is the one that actually works as a story.
You don't ask the question whether the explanation is true or false, the way you might grade
someone on a physics examination.
You ask whether the account is a credible, reasonable, intelligible one that does match
up significantly with the kinds of experiences the rest of us have had.
And then getting back to Wittgenstein that these explanations become explanations for
those who actually are participating in a common and shared form of life.
Thus a narrative that works in one cultural and social context might not be explanatory
in a radically different cultural or social context.
Sometimes the explanations are referred to as hermeneutical explanations in that they
inevitably require interpretation, hermeneutics at one time being reserved to biblical interpretation,
now more generally referring to the various arts of interpretation as we try to make sense
of complex events.
This is being the very events that psychology concerns itself with.
