Lecture 34 Socialization, Darwin and the Natural History Method
If the later medieval period can be said to be much in the thrall of Aristotle's philosophy,
so much so that its science, its logic, its larger projection of thought somehow fits itself into the framework provided by Aristotle,
then I think we can say that the modern social and behavioral sciences, psychology and kindred subjects,
are very much in the thrall of Darwinian science and the theory of evolution.
It has guided thought, theory and research almost since the time it was first introduced to the world of science,
and with that comes any number of assets and indeed a few liabilities.
But I think what we can say about it, and in connection with the contents of my previous lecture,
is that it's very much a biosocial theory, it very much incorporates the social, environmental and contextual aspects of the world's surrounding organisms
as a way of explaining the variety of organism types and indeed their adaptive modes of behavior.
So here we do have not a psychology of the individual, not a psychology of individual processes,
but rather a very broad, ethological psychology, a very broad social science that pays as much attention to context as it does to process
and understands the two as constantly influencing each other.
The Darwinian framework is going to be the framework at once for Freud's psychoanalytic theory, for B.F. Skinner's behavior of organisms.
It's a highly elastic, highly adaptive model in its own right, and there probably hasn't been a theory as influential in psychology.
Since Aristotle's own, indeed in another context, in a book of mine on Aristotle,
I point out that Aristotle was the first truly systematic psychologist who psychology includes the biological, the social, the cultural, the political and the like,
and I think I say that he will not be matched in this regard, if at all, until the time and the works of Charles Darwin.
So Darwin is a figure to be contended with, but as with any great intellectual achievement, any great movement of thought,
the Darwinian achievement does not occur in a vacuum. There are ample precedents for it, both ancient and contemporary with Darwin himself.
The ancient world, Empedocles, to mention just one of the ancient philosophers, had very much an evolutionary type theory of a sort that could be matched up with Darwinian theory,
but of course not beginning to approximate Darwinian theory in terms of the breadth and thickness of its database and indeed the genuinely scientific elements of it.
The 18th century might be said to be the century of evolutionary thinking without there actually being a theory of evolution put in place.
After all, the 18th century is the century that hosts one of the summoning ideas in intellectual history, which is the idea of progress.
And I think it's worth noting, although there has been scholarly controversy surrounding this general proposition, but I think it is worth noting that there's a quite radical departure
between the medieval worldview and what we take to be the 18th century Enlightenment worldview with Renaissance developments serving as the bridge between those two worlds.
One is the world that as conceived by those who regard the order of reality to be essentially harmonic, symmetrical, rhythmic, cyclical and recurring.
And that is, to a very considerable extent, the medieval worldview.
Each thing having its place, its proper location, its part within the overall whole,
hierarchic organizations that begin with the church and the crown and work down to the duties and obligations of the peasant class, the faithful,
the chivalric knight being a kind of secular priest, the executant limb of the world of theology and deep conviction.
And all of this intended to be as it is and intended from the very birth of the heavens and earth to be the way it is,
and anything departing from that to be a corruption and a deviation and needing correction.
This world of harmony and place is not unlike, by the way, the ancient classical conception of things having their place, the natural order.
Only such tempestuous influences as eros threatening to destroy that order and destroying it by impaling us at the level of emotion and passion and sexuality.
All this very much having to be controlled so that culture in its form can approximate the lawfulness and orderliness of the cosmos itself.
Now there we have an idea of harmony.
We have it in a classical period that actually will be discovering the laws of musical harmony.
And this is recovered and repeated.
It's rehearsed and reinforced throughout much of the medieval period.
The 18th century is impelled by the idea of progress, which is a radically different idea.
In the medieval world, what your father did to support a family more or less predicted what you would do to support a family.
The likelihood was very much that you would die in the village you were born in.
Indeed, you might very well die in the house you were born in.
By the time of the later Renaissance, all this has begun to change.
Urban centers have appeared.
Florence and the Quattrocento is the first city in the modern sense of the word.
It's designed to be a city.
It's designed to be a place where people from all over the known globe will bring their wares for pride and profit.
Where banking industries are formed, where you can borrow money and actually the lender can earn interest on it.
Something that just a century earlier was regarded as nothing less than sinful.
And indeed, if you don't like it on the feudal estate where you were born, you can journey into the city.
You can find a new identity and a new place.
You can become the person you want to be.
And you're not saddled to pedigree, to family occupations, to a family history.
You can enter the town in unknown and leave as celebrity.
Now, this is a momentous event in social history.
This entire Renaissance achievement is one of the great social upheavals in modern history.
And of course, supporting this at a philosophical level is just this idea of progress.
That indeed, the world is to be understood in organic terms, not in terms of harmony,
not in mathematical and formal and logical terms, but in organic terms of growth and decay and renewal and transformation.
Renaissance science featured those today we would call magicians, alchemists who would take elements of one form
and through the right kind of mixture be able to create anew something that the world had not seen before.
Perhaps a technique for making gold.
There was this view that the universe itself was a highly malleable thing.
It's something we could bring under our control.
Lorenzo Valle, for example, writing for the period, along with Ficino and Papam Nazi and the like, they raised the question,
suppose I could be an angel or a human being?
What would I choose?
And the answer served up is, I would choose to be a human being.
And why is that?
Well, angels are perfected, do you see?
And therefore, they can't change.
I can always progress.
This is very much now the personal expression of the idea of progress.
The idea of progress, of course, is fortified by the notion of perfection through collision and conflict.
That is, we progress to the extent that we outpace the competition.
We do better at something that the world very much wants,
whether it's in the mercantile domain or in the scholarly domain or the medical domain or the political domain.
Machiavelli would be almost unimaginable in the medieval period,
not just because the works would have been censored and the like,
but it would be very difficult to imagine someone actually thinking like the author of The Prince, circa 1250, let's say.
Machiavelli is a wonderful spokesman, all the more wonderful for the transparency of his moral frame of mind,
writing as he does in an age in which fortunes are won and lost overnight,
in which the role of luck, chance, accident, fortuity, political favor, duplicity, personality and all that
are figuring in a complex mixture such that one really doesn't know on Thursday what Friday might bring.
Now perhaps I'm giving a more exaggerated and dramatic sense to this period of change
than one living in Florence and the Quattrocento would actually be experiencing day by day,
but if you stand back and look at this period at an historical distance
and compare it with the European continent 200 years earlier,
you would certainly see much more by way of dynamic social change,
by way of personal initiative, by way of a personal sense, a sense of oneself,
as also a protean organic entity that can metamorphose into something different from what it was at the beginning.
So we have this renaissance anticipation of the idea of progress
and it will become the animating idea of the 18th century Enlightenment,
where it will be translated into a quite definite political and social agenda.
What after all is the Enlightenment all about, at least if you accept the leading writers of the period,
the French philosophes, Condorcet writing on the stages of human development,
Diderot and company putting together an encyclopedia that has as its principle mission
eliminating superstition and the fear that's grounded in superstition
and replacing these superstitions with the facts and methods of science.
D'Alembert, Diderot, Helvetius, Voltaire, Condorcet, Hume coming over from Scotland
and mixing it up in the wonderful salons of Paris where the women speak French prose
and write letters that now fill out anthologies on what a great, great letter should look like.
I should tell you that Hume, whose philosophy I occasionally find myself criticizing
being very much in the thrall of his contemporary critic Thomas Reid.
But I do have a certain personal fondness for Hume.
He apparently was one of the most likable people who ever lived
and he's also one of the few celebrated philosophers who was quite chubby.
You don't find that very, very often and I think when you find a somewhat rotund philosopher
if you also are cursed with what now are referred to as fat genes
you have a kind of kinship with such person.
Now when Hume would show up in the Paris salons, he was a great, great conversationalist of course
and the ladies of the salon would immediately surround David Hume
and engage him in colloquies of one sort or another.
There's evidence to suggest that his French contemporaries, all of them quite spelt mind you,
were put out by this sort of attention he was getting
and it is said that on occasion they would point over to where Hume was talking to the ladies
and they would say snidely and the word was made flesh.
So this sort of thing goes on in polite philosophical circles.
But I say when the polite philosophical circles gave way to the serious sustained
philosophical treatises of the period, the idea of progress is everywhere.
What's wrong with the world is it has been impelled by the authority of revelation
and scripture and the clergy.
It has not been impelled by the facts and methods of science.
When science is brought to bear on social problems,
you discover these problems are solvable.
The political world should organize itself around the methods and precepts of the developed sciences.
The methods of Bacon and Newton are the order of the day
and when you attach yourself to this agenda, you will discover that once intractable problems
now become quite easily, if not easily, quite imaginably solvable.
Progress is the order of business.
Getting ourselves from a worse state to a better state and we can do this.
We can always make things better because science has invented the very method of invention.
Where do we find the fullest expression of this view?
In the literature on freedom.
The whole point of freedom is that it becomes the basis on which we can metamorphose
into something better than we were.
We can liberate ourselves, unshackle ourselves from the heavy weight,
the dead hand of tradition, the dead hand of superstition and the fear that it spawns.
We can get suits that fit, so to speak, and get out of the straight jacket of habitual ignorances.
This is very much an 18th century idea.
When applied to economics, it gives us the economic theory of Adam Smith, for example.
We start seeing the concept of freedom now applied to economic transactions.
If you let everybody go at it with the best resources that he can summon to the task,
at the end of the process, the best will succeed and the worst will sort of go the way of all flesh.
By a kind of open competition, the best succeed, the worst don't,
and the world progresses on the strength of this kind of dialectic, this kind of dialectical tension.
It really is a kind of historical dialectic, what Marx will feature in the next century
as the foundation of his own economic and social writings.
But I say this is very much, as Charles Darwin will be very much,
in the intellectual tradition of the Enlightenment.
The idea of progress, progress through competition, competition matching up various types.
Nature produces a great, great variety of types.
Give them free and open access to the competitive domain.
There'll be winners and losers, but over the long haul, it's the human race that's the winner
because the best succeed and the less fit don't fit.
So we find in the economic theory, Turgio and the physiocrats in France, for example,
are agitating for the same approach to national economic policies as it happens.
And of course, one of Darwin's own relatives, Erasmus Darwin,
will be writing a much more biologically-based evolutionary progressivist treatise
in that same 18th century in his zoonomia.
So I want to make clear that evolutionary theory has a deep, rich philosophical and intellectual tradition.
This doesn't diminish, it rather clarifies Darwin's place in that arc of thought
that begins in ancient Greece with Empedocles and company
and continues on to this day in the work of leading sociobiologists
and psychobiologists and the like.
Now what about Darwin himself?
He had studied for a time at Edinburgh.
He hated the schooling that he was getting.
It wasn't much better at Cambridge.
And this was a fellow who set out, it looked early on that he would be trained for the ministry
after all what does an upper-middle-class chap do in the middle of Victorian life in England.
If he's got the right sort of fortitude and skeleton,
maybe he goes into the military service, otherwise he goes into the clergy.
Terrible things happen to him, he might become a schoolmaster or something.
And Darwin is casting about, he's not quite sure what he's going to do.
The family is rather concerned about this.
But during his Cambridge days, he does match up with a naturalist teacher
who takes walks with him and sits under trees and talks about the flora and fauna.
And it wets his appetite.
It wets his appetite in ways that classrooms never quite did.
Well, famously, he comes to apply for the position of naturalist on this exploratory project
featuring the famous ship Beagle, whose captain will be the famous Captain Fitzroy.
A little more on Captain Fitzroy in a later lecture when we get to theories of personality types.
Darwin goes off to the Galapagos.
He makes his very, very famous observations.
He records extensive notes.
He's already got a good idea of what's going on here as he observes the conditions
under which various characteristics or phenotypes come about.
And he plods along.
He had a quite plotting style, a systematic plotting style.
And it's long, long after he has the basic idea that he actually starts putting it together
in a form fit for publication and consumption by the scientific community.
Meanwhile, another naturalist and a great, great scientific figure, Alfred Russell Wallace,
is coming up with very much the same idea.
The idea being that there is a struggle for existence in the natural world
and that those types, especially well adapted to the current conditions,
are the ones that last long enough to breed true,
that is to produce offspring with just those favorite characteristics.
And the breeding pool is constantly emptied of those who fail at the level of adaptation.
You've got the essential ingredients of a struggle for existence, the survival of the fittest,
and the gradual improvement now in quotes.
But let's say the gradual improvement in adaptability,
the continuous improvement of a given species as a function of its interactions
with a demanding and threatening environment.
So Wallace is pulling this together and it comes to be known to mutual friends of theirs
that these two chaps are coming up with very much the same idea.
Darwin is concerned, not in the vain sense, I should think he wasn't a vain man.
He is concerned about questions of priority of authorship and the like.
Everybody wants to do the fair thing.
And this was an occasion in which the fair thing was done.
It was agreed by the best heads including Wallace and Darwin themselves
that in fact their papers, redactions of their works,
would be read jointly at a meeting of the Linnaean Society
so that on the question of priority, well, the theory of evolution
in much the form that we would recognize it,
is presented jointly at a meeting of the society in which Wallace's works
and Darwin's work, Wallace's theory and Darwin's theory are presented.
Now what do we want to say about the reception to this work?
So much ink has been spilled on the difficult time Darwin had
and clergymen thundering against the theory of evolution
and the seeds of controversy now being set
so that science and religion will never be able to achieve any sort of rapprochement again.
This is a very complex story.
There are some wonderful recent biographies of Darwin
that chart this troubled sea and the like.
Let me just say a few words about the reception
that was enjoyed by origin of species when it appeared in 1859.
Some years ago I edited a multi-volume, a 28-volume collection
on works that were important in the history of psychology
and that would now be fairly difficult to lay one's hands on.
Both of volumes I titled Darwinism and what I included in that
were the lengthy reviews of origin of species that appeared at the time of its publication
in the major journals of opinion at that time, the London Review,
the Fortnichle Review, Edinburgh Review,
the review that probably came as close to being the official voice
of Roman Catholic opinion and that was Ireland's Dublin Review.
Well let me just say, the reviewer for the Dublin Review
does give himself the pleasure of referring to something in evolution
in origin of species which he refers to as the author's quote,
horrid genealogy, close quote.
But in fact, the review itself is quite positive
and all the reviews are positive.
The reviewer's pointing out when this book appears
that this is the work of someone already quite celebrated as a leading naturalist,
a man whose reputation precedes this book.
The book is treated in a highly respectful way in these major journals
and of course there are some reservations
but the reservations quite interestingly are scientific reservations.
One of the reservations is based on this fact.
There are species which human beings have had domesticated
and have been in breeding since a time out of memory
since going back to early medieval periods.
No one through selective breeding has ever been able to produce a new species
and this was regarded as telling very much against the theory of evolution.
The theory requires that in order for us to achieve new species,
for new species to come into being,
this is a result of the continuous and selective work
that the environment does on a given type
over a very, very long course of time.
First changing it a little bit here, a little bit there,
lengthening the neck, shortening the feathers,
that if enough time goes by
and if the adaptive requirements of the environment are of such a nature,
in time there is through this process of progressive modification
a new type created.
Well as some of the critics point out,
look, selective breeding is a way of hurrying this up.
We can inbreed game birds and the like to our hearts content.
This in some instances has gone on for centuries.
No one has ever produced a new species that way.
So there's one argument against the notion
that new species are created by purely natural forces.
Obviously the orthodox clergyman is committed to the view
that God made a fixed number at the outset,
somewhere after the flood, you know,
no, it took two of every kind.
That's what you've got, that's the way it goes,
nothing will change it.
But I say very, very few people that would be drawn from the thinking classes
were so wed to a view like that
as to be inaccessible to evolutionary theory.
The problem with the theory was that it didn't quite match up
with the sort of scientific data that you would expect
if the theory were correct.
Others argued that where the theory shows gaps,
Darwin's explanation is that the fossil record is incomplete.
Some of his critics point out that not only is the fossil record not incomplete,
it's entirely complete,
and that when you examine the fossil strata,
you do not see the species transitions that are predicted by the theory.
Now at that time, people were less aware of the fact
that these strata have undergone upheavals
that in fact when you discover them,
they are not in the order that was formed
in the pristine condition and the like.
But I say these are scientific disputes
by people in possession of relevant facts,
but not all the facts that will prove to be relevant
as the science develops.
So I want to make clear that the reception that Darwin's book enjoyed
was a generally favorable one,
and that Darwin himself was the subject of commendation
and respect.
Of course in 1871-72, he serves up two quite different books,
that strike neither the tone nor the content of origin of species.
He serves up the descent of man,
and a book called The Expression of the Emotions in Animals and Man.
Now these books are decidedly psychological.
They do address what his contemporaries would take to be
the essence of human nature.
And the books are highly speculative,
where origin of species had focused on natural selection,
the later works focused on sexual selection.
And this is a rather different process,
and the database supporting this is much thinner,
not nearly as broad, scarcely as convincing.
Now those who had a certain skepticism about origin of species,
now seeing the later work say,
look, it wasn't too many years ago that this author told us
in no uncertain terms that you can account for the diversity
of animal types, indeed plant and animal types,
through the process of natural selection.
Those of us who criticized that were regarded as sticks in the mud.
Now this same author comes along and tells us,
no, it really isn't just natural selection,
it's primarily sexual selection,
and he adduces radically different evidence in support of that.
Perhaps we should wait until the author's own mind is settled
before we take any position on these matters at all.
And of course, by this time clergymen have heated up the debate,
there's the famous Oxford dispute featuring Wilberforce and Thomas Henry Huxley.
Wilberforce gets up in a marvelously effective rhetorical way.
He's got the audience in the palm of his hand,
and at the end of his critical exegesis of the theory,
he would ask the learned Dr. Huxley,
he would ask Mr. Huxley whether in his own case,
in Wilberforce's own case,
he should regard the monkey in his ancestry
being on his mother's side or his father's side.
Ha, ha, ha!
By the way, at this point Huxley turns to the chap
sitting next to him on the dace and says,
the Lord hath delivered him unto my hands,
because this is going to give Huxley an opportunity to stand up and say,
I would rather have, I would rather have a monkey as an ancestor
than to be blessed with the sort of intelligence that Wilberforce has,
and nonetheless will get him to make statements like that.
So I say this really was a heyday for rhetoric
and for science to assert itself against, shall I say, traditional family values.
One thing that we do get out of the theory of evolution
is an emphasis on the collective.
Do you see the function of the individual organism now
is understood in terms of that organism
being uniquely adapted in such a way
as to pass on through a genetic process
that Darwin and his contemporaries did not know about and did not understand,
but in fact Darwin attached himself pretty much to a Lamarckian theory
according to which you could pass on acquired characteristics.
The textbook example of this being that the shoemaker
who's flailing away with the hammer in his right arm
has offspring that have strong right arms.
This is a travesty of Lamarckian theory, but it does convey the idea.
But I say, Darwin's contemporaries were not aware of Mendelian genetics
and discreet genetic entities and the like,
but the individual organism on the Darwinian account
is of interest in that, some peculiarity in that organism
that renders it more successfully adaptive,
then gets passed on to the progeny
and you will get the progressive refinement of the collective
as a result of the unique idiosyncratic characteristics
that individual creatures have.
The individual creature then is interesting only to the extent
that it contributes to the greater adaptive potential of the group.
And so science now, and particularly as psychology picks up the theme here,
will be concerning itself more with collectivities,
perhaps less with individual processes,
more with change than with fairly permanent characteristics of organisms.
And the emphasis will be on fitness, on adaptability.
This immediately draws attention to behavior,
because that's the means by which organisms adapt to the demands of the environment.
So you can already see a behaviorism in the offing.
And the theory fixates on instinctual patterns of behavior,
and as we shall see, Freud will have a heyday with that.
