Lecture 35, Freud's Debt to Darwin
Some years ago when the public broadcasting and the British broadcasting system entered
into a co-production of a series titled The Mind, the first program was to be titled The
Search for Mind and I discovered that I was going to be filmed briefly for that program
in several venues, Darwin's House at Seven Oaks and Kent being one, but Freud's House
also in London in Merseville Garden where Freud's House had not yet become the Freud
Museum, just about anybody can go in now and I would strongly encourage people to go.
It's an extremely interesting place to visit and Freud, his daughter, had labored valiantly
and successfully to reacquire as much of the Freud-Vienna furnishings, books and the
like that had been expropriated or left behind when Freud and his family had to escape Vienna
because of the oncoming Nazi persecution. In fact, I might mention that when the word
got out that Freud was going to take his family out of Vienna, the Burgermeister of Vienna
wrote to Freud to say that there really wasn't any need to do this and no need for precipitous
action. He's an important figure in the Viennese community and the Burgermeister goes so far
as to say indeed your celebrity, Dr. Freud, extends to the very borders of our country.
Now you might know that the Viennese medical community never paid much attention to Freud
and whenever they paid attention to Freud it was primarily for the purpose of criticizing
him and so when Freud replied to the Burgermeister explaining that he and the family were going
to leave, he takes this occasion to say to the Burgermeister in a characteristically Freudian
whimsical hyphen savage way, it has always been my opinion, sir, that my reputation begins
at the borders of this country. So there is, well, in any case, the one thing I noticed
as we were preparing to film at Freud's house was that Freud had Darwin's works prominently
displayed in his study. They were very, very much worked over and of course you wouldn't
have needed that experience to appreciate the great indebtedness that Freud had indeed
that all of the life scientists, medical theorists, psychologists of the second half of the 19th
century would have to the theory of evolution and to Darwin's extraordinarily fertile notions
about human psychology and its origins. Well, where does the debt begin? First, let's recall
that what Darwin employed is what in the 19th century and earlier was referred to as the
natural history method. Darwin describes his method as the natural history method. Two
lectures ago I dilated on the difference between explanations grounded in causes and explanations
grounded in reasons and noted that evolutionary theory would be a form of teleological theory
in which complex events are explained in terms of the goals or purposes that are served by
those by those very events. Well, the natural history method is in its way a kind of historical
method of inquiry and its explanations like explanations in history, like explanations
in the social sciences are going to try to make natural events intelligible by placing
them within a larger framework. And if I may say so, a framework which in its largest projections
is a kind of narrative framework. Evolutionary theory is a form of story. Now, I don't mean
by that that it's a fiction or merely the creation of a fertile imagination. It's obviously
a story about the observed world, but it's not simply a compilation of observations.
It is the locating of these observations within an essentially narrative context. These things
take place because they bear directly on the survival of a given species. And indeed,
had these changes not taken place in members of that species, the world around that species
would have proven to be not merely inhospitable, but entirely destructive. And so you get
something of a saga, something of an epic account of how it is that plant and animal
kingdoms came to feature the types and forms that one now finds there. So it's the natural
history method. Now, there's a comparability between the natural history method and the
method that we identify with depth psychology, the sort of psychology famously attributed
to Freud and psychoanalytic theory. What do we mean by a depth psychology? We mean that
we're going to go past the level of mere observation. We're going to try to get to the bottom of
things to see how a particular pattern of symptoms fits into a narrative and that that
narrative itself accounts for the attempt on the part of the patient to adapt to situations
that are otherwise vexing or challenging or threatening. The depth part of this is to
get to those reaches of mental life that are not accessible to the patient himself or herself
to find out what is going on at an unconscious deep level to account for the surface features
of behavior and social life. Now, what's the comparability between that method and the
natural history method? Well, I think to address that question, we have to return to the distinction
between acting for a purpose and acting with a purpose. On the Darwinian account, the changes
that take place within the animal economy are not to be understood as animals getting
together in council, having lengthy discussions on what it's going to take for the herd or
the collective or the flock to survive, and then taking appropriate measures so that a
threatening environment can be brought under control. No. When Darwin writes about sexual
selection, he's not writing about creatures developing certain attributes as if these
would be costumes so that George will find Helen particularly attractive at this party
because George happens to like blue very much and Helen knows that. And in an attempt to
please George, she says, you know, I'm going to wear only blue dresses from now on. It
isn't that sort of thing at all. Rather, it is this. There must be some basis upon which
organisms engage in procreative sex. And if the species is to be refined and improve itself
and survive, then the members that get together, that is, the most frequent pairings should
be pairings of organisms that are especially well adapted to the conditions that species
faces. Now, those conditions conspire with certain phenotypic characteristics so that
in fact the right matings, I put that in quote, the right matings, the matings that
are going to work for the species are the ones that are the most frequently occurring
and the way this works out is that nature equips the right pairings with characteristics
that are going to make them more attractive to each other. It's not some conscious design
on the part of the participating animals to secure a better place for the species within
a threatening environment. This is simply a kind of to use an Adam Smith term. This
is sort of a gray eminence, a background consideration. This is the wisdom of nature
operating through organisms that are doing what they're doing for reasons that really
don't match up in any conscious way with the order and the requirements of nature. It is
done unconsciously. Organisms here are acting in such a way as to achieve a certain end,
but not necessarily by having that end in view. So again, you can act towards some end
or for a purpose without having a conscious possession of that purpose as what is instigating
the behavior itself. Well, it doesn't take space physics to make clear that this is
precisely what is going on in the Freudian notion of unconscious motivation. Some things
are going to be achieved at the level of the unconscious. If the actor himself is asked
why he's doing what he's doing, he's going to serve up an account that indeed is intelligible
and that discloses certain reasons and purposes as the actor understands these. But through
depth psychology, we begin to realize that the actor's actual awareness of what is impelling
conduct of a certain kind is extremely limited. And it's limited for reasons of selectivity.
What really is impelling the behavior indeed are factors that the actor has very, very
good reasons never to recognize. More on that in a later lecture. But I do want to make
this comparison between the natural history method and the depth psychology method. In
both cases, there is a very, very close examination of individual members of the species in order
to determine what finally is some universal property within the species. And let me take
just a few minutes on this quite important and often neglected point. I want to make
a contrast here between what is sometimes referred to as nomathetic explanations in psychology
versus what are called ideographic explanations in psychology. And let me give some flesh
and bulk to those two terms. Nomathetic, as discussed in an early lecture in connection
with Hample's model of scientific explanation, the so-called nomological deductive model,
nomathetic is drawn from the Greek nomos, which means law. A nomathetic explanation is an
explanation framed in terms of a general scientific law. F equals ma, for example. We understand
that an object is moving with the acceleration it's moving because a particular force has
been imparted to it. And the explanation of that relationship just is f equals ma. So
here we have a nomathetic explanation. The event is understood to be an example of a
universal law. It's an instance of a universal law. Now, in previous lectures, I made clear
the grounds on which some have argued that this is uniquely inapplicable to the human
condition, to explaining historical phenomena, to explaining events that take place in a
courtroom, social phenomena, psychological phenomena. What is it we need if we would explain
why Smith shot his benefactor? Well, we have to get into the details of the life lived
by Smith, the fact that he figured in the will of the deceased, that he has sick children,
that he's run out of money, that his situation is desperate. The physiological account of
the benefactor's death is in terms of not enough oxygenated blood getting to the brain.
And as I mentioned in that lecture, that explanation is neutral across cases. That's going to account
for an indefinitely large number of fatalities. What the courtroom is looking for is the unique,
is the explanation of the unique event, this person's death, this person being the target
of a fatal assault. So we're looking for the unique explanation. Now, in the ancient Greek,
unique or singular is referred to by the Greek word idiom. When Aristotle says that a given
species has a unique task or a unique function, a unique kind of work that it must do in the
world, the Greek expression is idiom ergon, do you see, unique in that sense. Idiographic
explanations are explanations of the individual case. You begin to understand why Smith is
doing what Smith is doing because of an exacting study of Smith, the particularities of Smith's
life, what his background is, what his religious profession might be, the circumstances facing
him, the people he's been associated with, the contextual factors that are working on
him. And thus you can't account for what Smith is doing by referring to some law of science.
Rather you have to understand Smith in terms that match up with Smith's actual life. Now
this distinction between the nomathetic and idiographic is a distinction that figures
in theoretical psychology. What model is the right model for psychology? The nomathetic
one, Fechner's law, Weber's law, metabolic physiology, Kreb cycles, brain function, that
general scientific laws that apply equally willy nilly across cases or an idiographic
approach that takes each individual case as unique. Well, to some extent, the contrast
between the idiographic and the nomathetic as featured in the literature of theoretical
psychology has actually put at war approaches that properly understood might enjoy a certain
degree of quite constructive compatibility. Let me refer to clinical medicine to exemplify
this. What do we find the good clinician doing within a medical context? Well, the good clinician,
first off, takes an extensive life history. You begin with what diseases, disorders did
you have in childhood? Did you ever have mumps? Anyone in your family died of stroke? This
is a very, I don't know if this still goes on in medical practice and in managed healthcare
and the like, but I recall in my own childhood that when my parents would go to the doctor,
they were in there for the longest time because they'd be answering questions like, did any
of your parents have diabetes? And they'd just long sort of come to say, how have you
been feeling lately? Do you find that these aches and pains crop up when the seasons change
and so forth? Now, this is not some idle conversation. The understanding within the context of clinical
medicine is that a thorough examination of the individual case will exemplify those general
laws of physiology, pathological and normal, that must be understood if diseases are to
be diagnosed and proper therapeutic modalities implored. So it isn't some war between the
nomathetic and the ideographic, rather it is the understanding that the best way to
arrive at general principles regarding health and disease is through an exhaustive study
of the individual case. The individual will at some level and properly examined instantiate
certain general principles of health and disease. Darwin, of course, and the natural
history method itself are examples of the compatibility between the ideographic and
the nomathetic. The very, very close examination of the adaptive behavior of the individual
organism, the mating behavior of a pair of organisms, the maternal social interactions
between a given organism and members of that litter, but a close examination there, a close
examination of types and colorations of feathers, of how the quail actually looks, what the
peacock does just before mating behavior, the individual stickleback fish attempting
to mate with what has a reddened and swollen abdomen, that an examination of these individual
cases, sort of a life history of the individual organism or very small groups of organisms,
provides just the basis upon which you discover the very, very general and universal principles
operative in the animal kingdom and ultimately responsible for the forms and types of behavior,
coloration, the whole phenotype of a given species. So Freud and Darwin here are really
representative of a certain scientific approach that probably would be skeptical and maybe even
would bridle in the face of the claim that the nomathetic and the ideographic constitute
an either or proposition, that the study of the individual case is invariably at the expense
of discovering general laws. No, a careful study of the individual case is the way of
unearthing general laws. So there is that point of compatibility. Of course, what else
is featured in evolutionary theory that will profoundly influence Freud's thinking is instinct.
The fact that complex organisms throughout the animal economy enter the world with quite
fixed behavioral dispositions that indeed absent these instinctual dispositions, not
enough time would be available for the animals to learn what they have to learn. Do you see
even with human beings, and we think, and I don't want to convert this into a law because
I don't think it really is a law, but there is a certain generality that is worth attending
to if we recognize it merely as a generality. As animals become ever more complex in their
neural organization, in the ratio of the weight of the cerebral cortex to the weight
of the spinal cord, that by the way is, if you want to establish yourself as superior
to other primates, it's going to be that ratio that does it, not the total weight of the brain,
but the ratio of cerebral weight to spinal cord weight. As those ratios increase, evidence
for what might be called instinctual patterns of behavior will get ever weaker, and evidence
for learned, acquired, adaptive behavior ever stronger. So I say to a first approximation,
and I don't want to be the victim of a lawsuit here. This is just a first approximation,
the exceptions are numerous, they're not rare, but to a first approximation, it does seem
to be the case that highly stereotypical modes of behavioral adaptation are much more common
where nervous systems are simpler and rather rare where nervous systems and particularly
cortical elaboration is ever greater. I say even there, there's ample evidence to suggest
that important aspects of human psychology are not acquired, but are more or less in
place, and even if they're not present at birth, they are very, very likely to surface
when the requisite degree of maturation has taken place, and they do not seem to require
any intentional training from the outside. Need I mention anything more than the age
at which youngsters begin to impose grammatical structure on their linguistic utterances?
This of course is what Chomsky's theory is all about. Even though child rearing practices
regarding language vary the world over, the age at which you begin to detect a grammatically
structured form of language is essentially the same in children around the world. So
since the rearing practices vary all over the place, but the achievement in question takes
place at just about the same time, it does seem that the achievement in question is part
of an innate, instinctually predisposed pattern of behavior, pattern of linguistic generation
probably as a result of certain inborn tendencies in the organization and function of the brain,
the regions of the brain most closely associated with expressive language. Now Darwin's theory
of course is, in so many respects, an instinct theory. Organisms, whether it is in the matter
of mating behavior, reactions to pain, finding and recovering a path to home territory, recognizing
their own offspring, leaving pheromonic traces so that other members of the species will
find the way to a food supply. Darwin didn't know this, we know this in the 20th century.
The dancing behavior of bees, the aerodynamics of the bee, constituting information back in
the hive as to what the flight pattern should be to get to sources richest in pollen, these
are not learned. These patterns of behavior, very, very complex behaviors, will show up
in members of the species that in fact have been denied access to adult members of the
species that have never seen another bee do the dance and so forth. Now Darwin, of course,
and he's not the first here, the ancients understood this, Darwin recognizes that absent
these instincts, time would not allow members of the species to learn what has to be learned.
Indeed, some of the behaviors would actually beggar the learning capacities of the organisms
in question. Suppose you try to teach the individual ant to engage in those maneuvers
that take the form of what we call army ant behavior or the warfare or enslavement practices,
these are highly anthropomorphic terms, but the enslavement practices of colonies of ants.
Well, we happen to know from studies in insect psychology that ants can't learn behavior
that's this complex. Ants put in fairly simple mazes cannot master the kind of maze that
would be rudimentary to any organism consciously engaged in warfare and an attempt to enslave
members of the enemy's fighting force. But if ants are going to survive as ants, some
things must happen and nature has worked on these creatures and refined their behavior
and built in instinctual patterns of adaptation such that every member of that species, if
it is at all normal at all, comes into the world equipped with behavioral dispositions
that are going to appear on the environment affording the first opportunity for the behavior
to appear. Now, all Freud has to do with this line of thinking is ask, what is it about
the human condition that requires certain instinctual tendencies in us if indeed we
are to survive? What is it we simply wouldn't have time to learn? What is it we must, as
it were, know as a condition of our very nature in order for us to last long enough to learn
anything? Now, the list that Freud comes up with is to say no more right now on the subject,
a quite controversial one that has powered original and creative and critical thoughts
since Freud's earliest writings. Let me just begin with perhaps the most obvious example.
One thing that you've got to do to survive as an organism is take in nutrients. That
is, to live for another day, to live long enough to learn anything, you have to live,
and to live you've got to take in sources of energy capable of sustaining life and growth.
How do infants do this? Infants do this by sucking. They will suck nipples on bottles,
they will suck nipples on breasts. Suppose you had to teach an infant to do this. Suppose
you had to take a neonatal infant one hour old and then through some kind of conditioning
procedure teach the infant to suck and perhaps teach the infant only to suck when something
indeed had the right caloric and nutritional content and let's say not suck if it had Pepsi
Cola or Scotch and soda and the like. Well, of course, this baby would not live long enough
to learn the discrimination. So the baby must be instinctually impelled to sucking behavior.
Now this raises a very interesting question. Here we obviously have behavior that is taking
place for a purpose, the purpose here being sustaining life. Do we have any reason to believe
that the baby is engaged in this behavior with a purpose? Is there any reason to believe
that the baby is reclining there now and going through cogitations of this sort? Well, I'm
no longer in that womb where all this stuff was done in a fairly automatic way. Now I've
got to engage in this extremely laborious task. By the way, as you might guess, psychologists
have not been negligent here. We've hung little strain gauge transducers on cheeks and we've
measured the amount of work it takes for a baby to drain a bottle and let me tell you
without getting into calculations of ergs and all that, it takes a lot of work. This
is extremely laborious. Any adult now would find it very, very difficult to drain a bottle
that way. So we've got this blessed little being sucking away, generating all sorts of
calories in the process. It's a wonder that he can get as much back in as he's pumping
out. And why is he doing it? Well, he certainly isn't doing it because at some cognitive and
conscious level, he says, well, if I don't do this, I surely won't live long enough to
play for the New York Yankees. There isn't any reason to believe that there's any such
cognition going on at all. So the $64,000 question is why does the baby do it? And Freud
has a very good answer to the question. The baby does it because the activity itself yields
great sensual pleasure. And the way you spell sensual in Freudian psychology is S-E-N.
X-U-A-L. That is sensual as in sexual as Freud reported on more than one occasion. When
I say sex, I mean sex. Now he also said sometimes a cigar is a cigar. But there's no question
in Freud's mind, but that activity of this kind would not be engaged in unless it were
pleasure producing. The answer to the question, why does the baby do it? Is the baby really
likes doing it? And if the baby didn't like doing it, it wouldn't do it. And if it didn't
do it, it wouldn't live. Well, now we have the interesting melding of instinct, natural
selection, selection pressures, and indeed, survivalistic and adaptive behavior engaged
in for a purpose by an organism which in the circumstance cannot be said to be doing that
with a purpose. The purpose the baby has, if we can say the baby has a purpose, and
I think we have every right to say that, the purpose the baby has is self-gratification.
Gratification of essential, hyphen, sexual nature. Interestingly enough, nature fits
the organism out in such a way that it derives sensual pleasure from doing what is essential
to survival. In fact, this reminds me of Sir Thomas Brown, who's one of the great 17th
century figures, the author of Religio Medici and himself a stoic, a practicing physician,
a great, great, great essayist, always worth reading. But Thomas Brown, long before Freud,
and in passages devoted to appreciatory comments on a providential garden like says that,
but all things considered, you would have thought that our creator, in his wisdom and
in his genius, might have found a way of populating and repopulating the world that did not require
us to engage in such unbelievable antics, such preposterous forms of behavior, such athletic
gyrations that are at once degrading and ludicrous, why anybody would have us going through this
sort of thing as the only way of keeping the world peopled.
Well, Brown, of course, as I understand it, I think Thomas Brown had eight or nine children,
so he was capable of overcoming his scruples in this regard, and I think Dr. Freud would
have explained to him that although at a conscious level he might regard activity of that kind
as at once awkward and ridiculous, there must be something in it that otherwise inclines
him toward that behavior, and Freud thinks he knows what it is, and more on that in the
next lecture.
Thank you.
