Lecture 39. What is personality?
What Erickson and Freud and Jung and Adler have in common for all the differences between
and among their various theories is that they put forward theories of personality. And the
question that naturally arises is what does one mean by personality if one is actually
going to develop a theory of it. In ordinary parlance, we still talk about people having
good personalities, which generally means no more than that we find their company pleasant.
I don't know that we quite use the expression that Smith has a bad personality, but we might
say that we don't particularly like a personality like Smith. And in any case, we're quite happy
that our personality isn't anything like Smith's personality. But usually in polite
conversation and in a busy life, nobody stops to say, well, what do you mean by that? Well,
of course, it's one of the one of the rituals of the academic life constantly to stop people in
mid sentence and ask them what they mean by that. Just what is it that's being developed when we
say that a personality is being developed when Erickson talks about the integration of
personality at a various stage in life? What is it that's being integrated? What do we mean by
a persona? Is it really a mask in the ancient sense in that it is concealing the real thing
behind it? Or is the persona the reality itself? And anyway, how many masks might there be? How
many personalities might there be? I believe Oscar Wilde at some place commented on a critic
declaring him to be to be duplicitous and the like that duplicity would suggest there are only
two personalities, whereas each of us has an indefinitely large number of them. We have
instances, clinical instances of something called multiple personality. And of course, this is
enough to scare the wits out of out of out of anybody. I do recall some years ago in a public
broadcasting series devoted to the subject of the mind that on one of the programs, a program
dealing with the insanity defense and psychology and law and the like, what was featured was a
defendant whose problem was multiple personality. And as one of the advisors to this program, I
was required to sit and watch the taping of a lengthy interview with this person who would sit
in a chair. And I think he was talking to a sister or some other relative, I believe it was, it
was his sister. And he was arguing with his sister about whether or not he should and could afford
to buy a new car and the like. And she was resisting what he wanted to do. And then at a
certain key point, he'd show some sort of funny facial expression or the eyebrows would wiggle
and the like. And someone else would quote, come out, do you see? I mean, there was another
personality coming out. This thing, I believe I sat before this screen for something like 12 years.
It was two hours, but it just seemed like a very substantial fraction of a lifetime. And one asked
to comment on it. I, the thing I found so remarkable, I forget just how many personalities this
fellow embodied. I think it was 13. But what I found most remarkable is that they were all boring.
They, they, it just seems statistically unlikely that if you could have 13 distinguishable
personalities, you know, not one of them would have shown up on your dance card, that sort of thing.
But nonetheless, there is an entire clinical literature on multiple personality, the view
being that within a given body, there, there may be three faces of Eve or in this chap's case, 13.
There may be any number of highly integrated, highly defined and distinct quote, personalities,
close quote. What does one mean by that? Obviously, there's only one body. So just what is it?
We're getting three or four or 10 or 13 pop. In an earlier lecture, I mentioned John Locke's
theory of personal identity, which shows up in his, in his famous essay on the human
understanding in which Locke offers the example of the peasant and the prince, the peasant and the
prince both go to sleep at night. Magically, their memories are transferred in the course of an
evening sleep. They wake up the next day. John Locke says, of course, I grant that when they wake
up, they are the same men, but they are not the same person. The prince is now the peasant in all
respects except outward appearances and the peasant is now the prince in all respects against, except
outward appearances. And that because they are now carrying around with them the accumulated
experiences of a lifetime in the form of these stored memories. So what Locke is saying is that
the personality of the individual or what he would call the personal identity, that sort of
psychological fingerprint, that which lets you know just who this is you're dealing with in the
most fundamental sense, do you say? Well, that's what goes with memory. And so personality now is
just the accumulation of experiences of a given type. Well, in this Locke was just rehearsing and
repeating and recording his essentially empiricistic psychology that personality is formed as a
result of experience. There are, of course, highly nativistic or genetic alternatives to this. Indeed,
most of the dominant theories of personality from ancient times to the present have focused on
hereditary predispositions, giving rise to the view that there are certain types of personality,
that one actually, all other things being equal is much more inclined to be X in one's
dispositions, attitudes, actions and the like than Y. And this not because of a difference in
environmental history or experiences, but because of something more basic, more innate, genetic,
and the like. And I want to explain and test out and illustrate ideas of that kind.
When Aristotle died in 322 BC, he died the year following Alexander the Great's death,
the Lyceum passed to the directorship of the Lyceum passed to Theophrastus. Now, Theophrastus is
wrote extensively, many, many, many books, but books were not quite as voluminous as the term today
suggests, but Theophrastus was an extremely productive, fertile thinker. We have very,
very little that survives of the work of Theophrastus. We have a botany work of his,
which is quite, quite interesting. But Theophrastus also had a theory of personality types, a theory
of types. And how did Theophrastus want the notion of a personality type to be understood?
Well, I think Theophrastus's notion is not far removed from what we take to be
the notion of a personality type today. Namely, a set of dispositions and orientations,
more or less constant, even over a great variety of situations. That is something about the person
that is revelatory, and that will appear in a variety of different and highly various contexts,
something largely resistant to alteration by experience and learning, something that seems
to, something that seems to attach itself in, in that most fundamental way to the very person,
the person at the core. Greek tragedy also reinforces a view like this. With Greek tragedy,
it's a, it's a rather more, shall I say, it's a rather more metaphysical notion. And indeed, it's
a rather more, it's a rather more mysterious process than ordinary psychological processes,
because certain things attach themselves to people as a function of the history of their families,
but not in the sense of hereditary transmission, rather in the sense of a continuing curse,
a curse on the house of Atreus, something done by one member in that pedigree chart,
that now will read down to the disadvantage of his offspring and their offspring in perpetuity.
Of course, Greece is nothing only place with legends like that. Some of you may have heard of
that chap, Adam, who bit an apple, and I believe that famous diagnostician John Milton actually
begins a work of his with, of man's first disobedience and the fruit of that forbidden tree whose mortal
taste brought woe unto the world. So here's the case of her, of something awful rolling down across
the ages as the result of an initial indiscretion, but roll down the ages it does, and we are marked
by that primal and primary sin. Well, the ancient Greek tragedians were very much of the view
that an act of such decisive consequence would so, would so excite the gods, and indeed
fatalistic sources that the gods themselves could not control. That far into the foreseeable future,
the progeny of this family would bear the stamp and mark of that crime or indiscretion or hubristic
act or act of treason or act of villainy. And so you could look at the descendants and say, well,
we know why they're doing that. And interestingly, when you consult the ancient literature and you
find one of these people, and you know why he's doing that, and then he turns around and does
something very, very nice indeed, and you sort of step back a bit. Do you see the ancients would
step back? Herodotus would step back and say, oh dear, hmm, hmm, and there's a pause. And then
later in the story, the chap turns out to do something really, really awful, and Herodotus
will stand up and say, well, you see, that's the type of person he was. And so ultimately,
he will, what's the expression in English? He will revert to type. Do you see? Ultimately,
the true person will come out. All you have to do is test him properly, get him in the right
circumstance under the right set of conditions, and this essential nature of the person will
reveal itself. And I say this is close to the popular and to some extent even the professional
conception of a personality type. Now, the notion that all of this could be incorporated into
something quite systematic and even scientific is a particular gift of the 18th century, a
particular gift of the Enlightenment. And from the middle to the end of the 18th century, any
number of, quote, scientific, close quote, psychologies were developed to give us predictive
power when it comes to personality types. There were, for example, criminal types
are recognized by Lombroso, and you could recognize the criminal type by examining the
facial features, the overall facial skeletal formation of persons, criminals having a quite
distinct, reliably, predictably distinct set of facial characteristics. And so there were
articles distributed with sketches in them in which the Lombroso criminal type could be looked at,
and then you could search around in society, and with greater than chance accuracy, they are
greater than chance accuracy, they are, there's a criminal type, and sure enough,
not only is there a criminal type, but it happens to be a criminal.
In previous lectures, I discussed Gaul's phrenology, and here now by the careful palpation of the
conformation of the skull, you're in a position to make better than chance statements, better than
chance predictions about the fundamental moral and intellectual qualities of the individual,
or characteristics, or faculties of the individual. That is also an attempt at a scientific,
systematic psychology of types, in this case, intellectual types, or emotional types,
temperamental types. Joseph Lomiter was a late 18th century naturalist, and often regarded as
the father of physiognomy, and physiognomy, again, is the quote science close quote, according to
which certain facial characteristics, certain characteristics, the cephalic index, the length
of the nose, the conformation of the lips in the mouth, the dominant facial expressions,
these tell you something, these physiognomic profiles tell you something about the underlying
personality, the really true, authentic, personal nature of that person whose face this is. And,
of course, the physiognomic drawings were widely distributed. You can guess that people were very,
very taken by this sort of thing, and indeed quite convinced by this sort of thing. Now,
you might say to yourself, well, this surely would only be the case with those who are subject to
what some writers refer to as village credulity, you know, sort of the tar brush we use to paint
people who seem to accept things we regard as ridiculous. They're either hicks or village types
or the easily gulled. Well, let me tell you somebody who doesn't fit that description at all,
Captain Fitzroy. Now, if you don't know about Captain Fitzroy, it's not for one of biographical
sketches of Captain Fitzroy. As soon as I tell you of what he was captain, if you didn't know who
Captain Fitzroy was, you'll know at that point, he was the captain of a ship that was assigned
the task of naturalistic explorations. In fact, the name of the ship was the Beagle. And Captain
Fitzroy had a very, very interesting long term passenger on the Beagle, a young naturalist by
the name of Charles Darwin. And because the Beagle did not have separate accommodations for the
naturalist, Fitzroy and Darwin shared the captain's quarters for most of the voyage, and indeed they
became fast friends. Although Darwin's account in origin of species is a great and properly famous
work, Fitzroy's account of that voyage is a very, very interesting work too, and it's a parallel
work very much worth one's attention. Well, Darwin tells us that on the occasion he was interviewed
for the position of naturalist on the Beagle, throughout the interview, he discovered that
Captain Fitzroy kept looking at his nose. He kept staring at Darwin's nose. Darwin couldn't make
hot in the hair of this sort of thing. Anyway, Darwin got the position and off they go, and the
voyage begins, and there he is, having Sherry with Fitzroy, this and the other thing. And
after they became friendly enough to have a personal conversation, it turns out that Fitzroy
informed Darwin that, you know, you almost didn't get this position. And Darwin says, why is that,
Captain? Your nose. You don't really have the sort of nose that goes along with being a first
rate naturalist. It's not a nose that goes along with the kind of acidity and focus and
commitment to precision and the like that one would expect of the naturalist. Darwin discreetly
let the conversation wander on to other topics, but where in his memoirs he recounts the story,
he concludes this part of the account by saying that he was quite pleased that in the
circumstance the Captain was prepared to accept the possibility that Darwin's nose had lied,
Darwin said. And if ever a nose lied, it was Darwin's nose. If what that nose said was,
this is no naturalist, whatever you might say of Darwin, Darwin was a naturalist.
Well, we don't find psychologists any longer looking at noses. I mean, they may be looking at
noses, but they're not looking at noses in their capacity of psychologist or personality theorist.
Nonetheless, there is no end to the number of personality types and traits that have attached
themselves to one or another theory in psychology. Now these days, I should say the stars of the
show come under the famous heading of The Big Five. That is, if you want to know what most
personality psychologists will stand behind as regards personality types, most of them,
I haven't conducted a poll, but you do thumb through the textbooks in personality theory.
And what you'll see more often than not are the Big Five. Well, what are the Big Five? And you
decide for yourself whether this more or less exhausts types of personality as you know them.
Well, first on the list is neuroticism as a personality type. Neuroticism. Here the dominant
features are tenseness, worry, anxiety, a general skittishness. That is, whatever else you might
say about the individual, you find this person in a variety of situations. You go to theater,
you go to dinner, you meet each other on the street, you meet each other in the market,
you meet each other at the filling station, you get together for coffee after supper,
you take a walk in the park, you go mountain climbing, you take a long bicycle ride. It doesn't
matter. This person is anxious, always anxious. There's always a sense of foreboding. If anything
can go wrong, it will go wrong. There's a kind of clamminess about the person. You find yourself,
you know, one definition of the neurotic, which I think is very serviceable, and I quite forget
where I heard it, but it is quite accurate. You know you're dealing with a neurotic when,
after an encounter, you're absolutely exhausted. Well, this characteristic of neuroticism is such
that you actually begin to, I don't know whether it's empathize, it triggers some degree of solicitude
in one where you're constantly reassuring the, no, it will be all right. You know, the sun will
rise tomorrow. And no, I think that little bit of water that you got on your lapel will dry,
you know, that sort of thing. And they'll call you up two and three days later and say,
you know, I said something at that cocktail party that they're never going to forgive me for this.
And you wonder what it was they possibly could have said. Your interior decorating is offensive
to every aesthetic cell in my body. Your children are barbarians. You're wondering,
what unforgivable utterance did you make? I think I said something like I generally don't
use iceberg lettuce and salad. That's the unforgivable utterance and this person may not
want to revisit the host for fear of having so gravely offended them that indeed it was unforgivable.
Extraversion. The life of the party doesn't matter where you're sitting in church pews or going off
to synagogue. You're at a funeral service. People are lined up around the coffin.
The reverend is beginning to utter the last final words that will now
send this spirit on to Valhalla or wherever. And here's this person right next to you,
giving you one liners and telling you that, well, I remember the night we were out,
he wasn't dead then. And then when you've made it clear that you don't want to hear
any more of this because of the occasion, you find this same person sort of sidling up to
somebody else. Wherever it is in whatever the occasion, this person takes on the personal
responsibility of picking the place up and being noticed. And it has to happen. And there's
noticeable frustration when it isn't happening and an avoidance of situations where it's unlikely
to be permitted or encouraged or openness. And when you read the literature on the personality
trait of openness and what goes with it is what the theorists describe as a certain intelligence
and creativity. Now here, of course, I'm going to date myself and namely as somebody who died in
the fourth century BC and the like. This seems to me to be a personality type that comes into being
chiefly in a world filled with fairly affluent suburbs because it's not that you need suburban
American life for intelligence and creativity. But I do think you need East Coast, West Coast,
suburban American life for what are offered as instances of intelligence and creativity.
This openness is, of course, mind you, mind you, the true mark of it. It is non-judgmental. And,
of course, the last thing anybody wants to be in a proper suburb with highly educated people is,
I hesitate even to use the word, judgmental. You're really open to things. You have a kind
of broad bandwidth. You're not easily shocked. In a full, rich, Maoist sense, you want a thousand
flowers to bloom, et cetera, et cetera. And it's in virtue of that, well, it isn't tolerance. It's
in virtue of that sort of lusty pleasure that you take in variety that the very possibility of
creative combinations might come about. Well, I'm being a bit smug in my orthodoxy, but I just
tell you that one of the big five is openness. And if you find a personality psychologist
describing that to you, be sure to accept it as a compliment because that's how it's intended.
I do remember once a quite famous psychologist, so famous that I can't mention his name,
staying with us in one we had a house in Georgetown many years ago. And this is a California
psychologist. And I won't identify the university because I think that in five guesses you'd know
who I meant. But he came down and after lengthy conversations, knowing us for a period of time,
he described me as the most centered person that I had never heard that expression before.
And I thought it was a political description. And I said, well, I said, I don't actually fall
quite in the center on these issues. I said, my people who know me very well would think that I
might be perhaps a bit to the right on some of these matters and a bit to the left on others.
But, you know, surely not centered. And he looked at me as if I was speaking a foreign language.
He said, I'm not talking about politics. I said, what are you talking about? And then I got
one of these sort of West Coast sesame seed yoga things about about being centered and the like.
And I knew that this was a language I was never going to learn. I was already too old to pronounce
it correctly. But but that was the openness centeredness sort of thing. Well, if you think
openness is a good thing, then of course, number four on the list of the big five is agreeableness.
And we do know people. And I think it's a relief to know people who are agreeable in this regard.
And in my own notes for today's lecture, where I would try to convey to you what what the personality
theorists mean by agreeableness, what I wrote down is nice, nice, nice. And and we I don't want to
depreciate people who are nice for goodness sake, what a world it would be if there weren't people
who were nice. The agreeableness that the personality theorists are talking about is a
niceness that at least to this aging exiled New Yorker actually would probably prove to be somewhat
wearying. I mean, one does want a little bit of friction if only to keep the brain cells warm,
you know, but but but agreeableness here means that if it's a choice between a confrontation
or a concession, for goodness sake, concede, we don't have to be warlike. We can always find
something nice in another person to focus on. We don't have to be tiresomely critical. We don't
have to be negative. We don't have to be steeped in these judgmental tendencies toward rebuke
and refinement. And when you get the story right, and you're dealing with the world in a sensible,
open way, and you are an agreeable person, the world is better for everybody and yourself included.
And therefore, one of the traits, a defining trait that we find in individuals that allow us to spot
that individual in a crowd is just that person's agreeableness. And of course, the contrary renders
someone comparably identifiable, the disagreeable person, the person who isn't open, the person who
is utterly introverted, the person who who far from being the victim of of neurotic tendencies,
anxiety and the like is so utterly laid back, so utterly flaccid in the face of life slings and
arrows, but it's not quite clear that you could actually get him up in time for World War Three.
So these personality characteristics are are polar. And of course, you find persons occupying
the extreme positions and all the positions in between. And as you might guess, there are scales
that have been developed, tests that have been developed, that will give you degrees of neuroticism,
extroversion, introversion, openness, agreeableness and the like. And fifth on the list, conscientiousness.
Now, this should be understood in in its broader extension, conscientiousness as in
reliability, devotion to duty, someone you can count on, reliability. There are people we
know who are like that. I think they are almost always admired. They are universally admirable.
Persons you can count on to do what they say they will do. Persons who don't have to be reminded
because they have a sense of duty. And the sense of duty gets them to do things not out of reluctance,
but out of the great pride that they take in fulfilling the terms of duty and obligation.
And of course, this moves to the entirely opposite extreme, where you have people who are indeed
irresponsible and unresponsive, not summoned by the call of duty, much more self-serving in their
activities and the like. Well, if there are these basic personality types and various combinations
thereof, and running the extremes from most to least as regards to these dispositions, if these,
more or less, cover the human race, if these five do it, well, for goodness' sake, since we know
rearing practices differ the world over, since we know that cultural standards and standards of
social acceptability and the like are various over time and over geography and so on, you might
be inclined to think then that the best explanation of why it is these five types, more or less,
exhaust the pool, is some sort of hereditarian explanation or genetic explanation. That is
what we finally are seeing with neuroticism, extroversion, openness, agreeableness, conscientiousness,
and their opposites are dispositions of a temperamental nature that, more or less, and more
rather than less, express internal states, physiological, biochemical states, yes indeed,
responsive to certain aspects of the environment and society, but indeed, notwithstanding that,
very much biologically and genetically driven. Well, there are, as you might guess, within
psychology, more than two views on that subject. If one had to take bets on where the leading
people in this field would fall today, I should think most of the leading people in the field
today, though paying proper attention to genetic predispositions and the like, probably would
adopt a social learning theory as a more accurate account of how these tendencies are put in place
and sustained. Nonetheless, we do have studies pointing to significant gender differences when
it comes to just these personality characteristics. The gender differences, of course, can be explained
by way of social learning theory, but can also be explained in terms of hereditary differences
in the genders. And indeed, we know from animal studies that you can gender brains by introducing
various male or female hormones into the cerebral circulation during early development,
and will then get personality characteristics and social relationships within a community
of those animals that are quite gender specific to the gendered brain rather than the actual
sexual gender of the organism. So, the last words are out on all of this. Social learning
theory accounts for much, heredity accounts for much, and as usual, the answer to the question
which is more important is, I don't know.
