Lecture 41, Altruism
In recent lectures, I've noted the place of evolutionary theory within contemporary psychology.
Evolutionary theory itself is located within the larger framework of evolutionary theory.
And so one question that arises repeatedly is the extent to which that is the right framework
to understand all of the complex social and intellectual achievements of human beings,
the sort of achievements that make psychology the nasty little subject that William James ironically referred to.
One of the challenges to evolutionary theory was served up by Alfred Russell Wallace himself,
the co-discoverer of the theory. In fact, I think to this day, one of the most able defenses of the general theory of evolution
was the defense mounted by Wallace in a book called Darwinism, in which he took on all comers.
He pointed out that certain very, very current criticisms of Darwinian theory, based on fossil records and the like,
were indeed based on a misunderstanding. He cleared up much, and then in the closing pages of the work,
he recorded his own reservations about the theory, that is, certain aspects of the human achievement which he thought the theory could not embrace.
It's interesting to recount the grounds on which Wallace himself thought that the theory had its limits.
One ground was in the domain of aesthetics, that there seemed to be so much energy and effort expended by humanity
solely in the interest of beauty, solely in the interest of creating visual forms and auditory forms of harmony,
and that it just wasn't imaginable how this would serve some explicit adaptive requirement
or how selection pressures would favor a species that devoted itself thus.
He also noted the attention that we've given since the earliest recorded history of the human experience on Earth
to matters of an entirely abstract nature, particularly matters that show up within philosophy and mathematics.
Here, he perhaps is taking a page from Descartes, that we busy ourselves with things that have never figured
and indeed can never figure in the daily life of human beings, abstract mathematics that refer to realms that could not possibly exist,
abstract mathematical notations that match up with nothing in the physical world.
These are quite interesting considerations, but the topic of today's lecture is what Wallace identified as the third domain
in which aspects of our nature, our psychological nature, don't seem to fit in with the overall evolutionary scheme,
and that is our tendency toward altruism, that is our willingness to be self-sacrificial in behalf of the good of others,
in behalf of contemporaries, in behalf of generations not yet born.
That is, Wallace saw a certain tension between a theory based on the proposition that each organism does what it takes to survive
and through the initiative of the individual organism, the species itself is preserved, all that on the one hand,
and this altruistic penchant reliably displayed by human beings on the other.
After all, if significant numbers of people will operate in such a way that clearly opposes their own personal interest,
their self-interest measured on any modulus or scale of your choosing, then there clearly are members of the species that are operating in such a way
that cannot possibly serve the best interests of the species as the theory requires,
because the way that the best interests of the species are served is by each individual organism having this self-regarding, self-preservative instinct.
So the question then is, are there acts of pure altruism, and if there were acts of pure altruism,
might a biologically based or evolutionarily based psychology be able to accommodate those facts,
and indeed interpret them within the larger framework of the theory?
More than that, if there is altruism, is it confined to human beings?
Is it something about our developed moral sense that renders us altruistic?
Now, I might note that before the theory of evolution took hold, there still was something of a comparative psychology.
There were writers comparing human and non-human psychological attributes.
This was undertaken in ancient times, couldn't say Aristotle spends a fair amount of space on just that question,
comparisons of human and non-human psychological attributes.
Earlier in the 19th century, however, the ethologists were really having great, great fun and providing rich texts on this.
Indeed, I remember one work going back to the 1830s or 40s in which the writer raises this question,
suppose you did have, now evolutionary theory has not been put on the map yet, Darwin hasn't written his book,
but suppose you had to put together some sort of scale of nature, the old scale and not try,
and locate animals at the right positions on that scale.
Of course, we're going to culminate with human beings, we always do.
We're at the top of the hill or top of the heap, whatever.
At least as long as we write the books, I think that is the way it's going to come out.
Well, then the question would be, on what basis would you put other animals proximate to us and then more remotely associated with us?
Well, this writer, and he was not alone in this, this writer thought that perhaps the best grounds on which to determine degrees of proximity
were tendencies toward affiliation, that is, find a creature that most wants to be with us,
and indeed one we are most inclined to be with, though not a human creature,
and that tendency towards social affiliation would be the right basis upon which to construct your scale.
So, any guesses as to who comes right after us?
Well, right after us comes the dog, of course.
It's the only species we know that seems to prefer us to its own,
and indeed I must say that there are many occasions on which we can turn up people,
one of them might even be standing before you, who, given a choice,
might indeed choose a dog to at least certain persons to remain unnamed,
who have crossed my screen in the course of a long and otherwise very, very happy life.
So we'd have a scale that goes, let's say, human being to dog, and then you'd work your way down.
Now, of course, one of the things that moved this chap to construct such a scale
was the well-established record of altruism among dogs,
that is altruistic behavior dogs display toward human beings.
Not just in their capacity as guard dogs, but rescuing children from fires
and waking up the family and frightening away dubious types,
and otherwise giving up meals, and anyone who's ever seen one of the 1940s Lassie movies
knows the sort of thing that that colleague did for the war effort,
and for virtue, and for the triumph of good over evil, and the like.
There's really, really no end to it.
Not to mention the sorts of things you can tuck under the chin of a Saint Bernard
to help out on a cold day, et cetera, et cetera.
So the record of helping behavior in the canine community is a very fine one.
How about dolphin?
Dolphin quite reliably will come to the aid, come to the rescue of those drowning in the sea.
There are ancient stories.
Boy on a dolphin is based on an ancient story of the ancient Greek world's greatest player of the liar
who was thrown overboard when he was sailing from one place to another
by people who wanted to steal money from him.
Actually, he pitched himself into the water rather than have them kill him and throw him in,
and then he was carried by a dolphin to the shoreline.
Now, dolphin go out of their way.
It seems that dolphin go out of their way to do this sort of thing.
Do we want to call this altruistic behavior?
The problems of definition when it comes to the moral realm are legendary,
and indeed they're not going to be solved within the ambit of a single lecture or a single course.
We do have to raise the question of what it is we mean by a genuinely altruistic motive behavior,
and is it the case that for something thus to qualify,
it has to be grounded in motives that cannot possibly include anything of a self-regarding nature.
Is it altruistic only if, A, it costs the actor something material and substantial,
and B, there could not possibly be any expectation of a return in kind.
It must altruistic behavior invariably be of that kind.
Or can we regard behavior as altruistic even if there is some gain,
but if indeed the behavior was not engaged in for that gain,
that is the actor might realistically expect to be praised for what he or she did,
but the actor did not do the altruistic act for that praise or for that reward.
It's entirely possible, it's a double effect sort of thing,
it's entirely possible for someone to perform a civic duty at great risk and cost,
knowing by the way that there is a reward on offer for someone who does this,
but not doing it for the reward, though accepting the reward.
So I think we've got to keep clear that if we make the criterion for altruistic behavior utterly saint-like,
obviously there will be very very little in human behavior or the behavior of non-human animals that will qualify.
My own inclination would be, and I think here that we can find some support
within contemporary ethical scholarship, is that altruistic behavior is altruistic
when the motive behind it is not a self-serving motive,
that notwithstanding to the contrary the possibility that when the behavior is emitted,
the actor knowingly understands that there may be some reward at the end of it.
So what we're really talking about then is a set of dispositions,
such that we couldn't tell from the behavior itself whether what the actor did was altruistic,
we would more or less have to debrief the actor, we would have to engage in the kind of colloquy
that lets us know and that has the actor given an opportunity to explain just what the motivating factors were.
Now social scientists have been rather skeptical toward altruism, toward the authenticity of altruism.
I should think the more dominant perspective on this whole subject comes under the general heading
of what's called social exchange theory, that is we do what we do, let's say in behalf of others,
on the understanding that something is going to come our way as a result of this investment also.
Now this need not be viewed as a kind of scurrilous quid pro quo item by item, I did this, you do that,
but social scientists are inclined to think that where A makes a significant investment in time,
energy or resources in behalf of B, there's going to be something about B that positions B to do something comparable for A,
and that social practices as instantiated by bartering for example, bartering is the model here,
that social practices that otherwise look altruistic are really instances of a kind of principle of social exchange.
Indeed, social scientists have devoted much time and study to what is called the reciprocity principle,
and this is what engenders in us great, great feelings of indebtedness when others do something for us.
We inevitably, now note this, what the reciprocity principle makes clear is this,
we feel indebted to someone who does for us something that we didn't want done,
I mean the proverbial helping someone across the street who didn't want to get to the other side, you know,
that is the mere act of doing something for us qualifies that donor as someone we owe something to,
even though what was done on our behalf was nothing we asked for, nothing we expected,
and in some circumstances something we really didn't want.
I don't know how many pairs of socks you've gotten at Christmas time on birthdays,
or ties that you, I mean you just out of love for Aunt Martha, you didn't have the nerve to take it back to the store,
but it's something you've never worn around your neck and the like.
Well, nonetheless, even as you open that box and say, oh dear me, not another one of those,
there is that feeling of indebtedness that indeed something is owed because something was done.
It has even been shown that this reciprocity principle can be used to the advantage of the donor,
that is there are even tendencies to create an indebtedness by doing something not asked for
on the understanding that once that act has been performed, you now have a debtor mentality
or perspective on the part of the recipient.
These things can get out of hand if one isn't careful.
Well, what brought the question of altruism to the forefront of social psychology was,
as I mentioned in a previous lecture, this notorious case of Kitty Genevies.
This is the woman in Queens who's standing under a lamppost.
She's shrieking out, begging for help.
She's making quite clear to anybody within earshot that her assailant is out to kill her.
She makes no mistake about it.
There are people who roll up their shades and windows are open given the season.
They hear this going on.
It turns out that at least 38 people witnessed this event.
She was being assaulted.
This took a period of time that would have made it quite easy for anyone to pick up a telephone
and summon the police to her aid.
Nobody undertook to do anything in behalf of this woman's life.
And indeed, it shocked everyone who read these accounts, was shocked by it.
And of course, there's the usual reaction.
Well, if I were there, I would have behaved entirely differently.
And my guess is that the 38 people, had they lived someplace else and read about this,
would have claimed that they'd behaved differently.
And so, both the nation and the professional communities that look into matters of this kind
had a reawakened interest in the whole notion of altruism, helping behavior,
the breakdown of community and all sense of community, what kind of country have we become.
It's very much like the insanity defense when there's a celebrated case like Hinkley.
Everybody gets interested in the insanity defense and then the interest wanes.
Well, on the basis of the Kitty Genovese event phenomenon, a number of studies were undertaken
under the general heading of bystander effect.
What determines the behavior of bystanders in social contexts in which altruistic behavior
might be what most of us would regard as the right sort of behavior.
Any number of studies of the bystander effect can be found in any introductory textbook.
They run a wide range of scenarios or narratives.
Some of them are quite imaginative. Some of them are quite humorous.
I'll give you a couple of instances.
Here's a, shall I say, a typical bystander type study.
Smith is in cubicle. A, Jones is in cubicle. B, and they're talking to each other.
And it's a kind of, I'll tell you some things about myself and I work here.
I'm a student here and blah, blah, blah, blah.
And then in the course of this discussion, Smith makes clear that among other problems that he's facing in life,
he's also epileptic.
Now as the conversation proceeds, Smith then feigns something of an epileptic seizure.
This is all feigned, of course.
And the question is what will Jones do?
Now there's a typical instance of a bystander study.
You've got A, engaged in a form of behavior that otherwise would summon the altruism in us,
the desire to help, do you see?
Now you've got Jones and the question is, of the various factors that are going to incline Jones to come to the aid
or not come to the aid of Smith, which ones can we identify in this laboratory study?
Here's another bystander effect.
A paid collaborator is willing to lie down on a street in a major metropolitan area in New York.
There he is, falls down and is sort of moving in a not entirely coherent way.
And he's on the ground.
Now the question is, do you come to his assistance?
And if you don't, why don't you?
People will then be asked why they don't.
Here's another one.
You have a classroom with the young children in it.
And there's an adjoining room.
The teacher comes in and the teacher starts talking to the class and she says something like this.
She says, now I'm going to have to leave the room for a few minutes and I want you all to keep yourselves busy in your work
and then I will come back and out she goes.
Now in the adjacent room there is an event staged and what the children here is a chair crashing to the ground
and someone vocalizing something like a sound of distress and a loud owl or oo and the like.
And a few minutes later the teacher comes back in the room and asks the class,
did everyone behave themselves while I was gone?
Did anything unusual happen and the like?
Now you can do this over age groups from childhood through adolescence, university level people and the like.
The pattern that arises is a fairly consistent pattern.
The first generalization that holds up is this.
The likelihood that one will engage in helping behavior or altruistic behavior does turn out to be a function of what other people are doing in the circumstance.
And the larger the number of people, the larger the size of the group not doing anything,
the more likely it is you won't do anything.
That is to say if you find yourself in a group in which others take the initiative,
you certainly become a participant in what might be called helping behavior or altruistic behavior.
If you're in a group and it's a group of collaborators that doesn't even acknowledge something is going on,
then your tendency or the tendency of people in these studies to come to the aid of others drops very, very sharply.
Now there are reasons for this and what are they?
Is it just the old reciprocity principle or the social exchange theory?
That chap lying on the ground can't do anything for me, why should I do anything for him?
I'm not going to get up out of this classroom and go into a room where I hear loud sounds.
We've got a teacher coming back, we've been told to behave ourselves.
Is this some sort of standard obedient situation and the like?
Well when one actually debriefs people, depending on the situation they find themselves in,
one factor and I think those attending this lecture, hearing this lecture,
will recognize this as a factor in our own experience is ambiguity.
But as in some of these situations, it's not entirely clear what kind of situation one is facing.
Someone on the ground in a city street might be in a kind of drunken stupor.
And you know there really isn't anything you can do about that.
It'd be one thing if the weather were freezing and so forth and you had an extra blanket or a blanket.
But I say the mere spectacle of someone stretched out in a doorway or on a city street is ambiguous in its own right.
It's not entirely clear that what one is dealing with is a problem of health.
It might be some sort of self-inflicted and ephemeral state.
And given the ambiguities, you just swear off on that occasion.
Then of course there is the powerful influence that comes under the general heading of diffusion of responsibility.
After all, if nobody else is taking the initiative here, these are all sensible, decent worthy people.
They're compatriots. You find yourself. These are studies done within your own culture,
very often within your own community, sometimes within your own school or office.
You don't know the identity of those you're in the room with, but they do seem to be reasonable, decent people.
They haven't found any reason to take the initiative here, so why should I?
That is, there is that momentary goodness knows how much processing is going on in that moment.
But there's that momentary canvassing of the situation, and in that moment the information you extract is nobody's doing anything.
And this then is played out against non-conscious or pre-conscious or merely surface sorts of considerations.
You might, without even thinking of it, you might be rehearsing the settings in which you've done something nobody else in a group was doing,
9 times in 10, it's the wrong thing, you see. It's the faux pas, the crack fall, the joke that nobody laughed at.
So there is in the history, the social conditioning history of the individual, lessons to the effect that when you are doing something that nobody else is doing,
by and large you're doing the wrong thing. You're doing something that's subject to condemnation and criticism.
So it could be argued then that the diffusion of responsibility explanation is not a fault-finding explanation,
that indeed in the majority of situations we really should depend on what the majority of persons we are associated with are engaged in, are doing, are inclined to do.
Why should our moral judgment or moral perception, why should our inclinations have trumping power over the behavior of a peer group?
Now if you reflect back on Colberg's multi-stage theory of moral development, that very rationale, at least on the Colbergian scheme,
is essentially at the level of the teenager, the adolescent, who uses the standards of a peer group to determine whether something is right or wrong.
So I should think from the point of view of the moralist, the person who perceives the situation in those terms, namely what's everybody else doing,
is already displaying such a paucity of moral refinement that indeed you can understand this to be a rationale for non-action,
but you scarcely can accept it as a good reason for not participating.
Now you can't raise an issue like this without getting back to perhaps the most momentous moral event of the 20th century, namely the Holocaust.
And it's almost impossible even to summarize what gives this event the momentousness that it has.
To a first approximation, the body count alone seems to be off-scale, even given the long history of savage behavior that human beings have displayed toward each other.
That is, the sheer magnitude of the injustice, the sheer quantitative magnitude, the robustness of the evil.
But the other part of it has to do with the world in which this took hold and took place.
A European world based on a highly developed culture, a long philosophical tradition, a great commitment to deep, thoughtful and sustained scholarship,
a respect for the products of the mind and the products of thought, to a very great extent a classical worldview,
a culture very much shaped by Hellenic and Hellenistic influences at the level of art, at the level of literature and the like.
That is to say, it happened in a place where you might be least inclined to expect this sort of thing.
And so one wonders then why the relatively low instance of altruistic behavior,
why the relatively, now of course we all very well know there were resistance movements, there were heroic measures, there were assassination attempts on the life of Hitler.
There was nobility found every day of the week in one place or another all over Europe and within Germany where the costs surely would have been greatest.
The police power of the state was devoted relentlessly to cedar with that there could not be this successful form of altruistic behavior.
That all is a matter of record. This is not a case where we identify an ethnic group and say, shame, shame, shame.
That's not the burden of this lecture. The burden of this lecture is to point out that diffusion of responsibility is an extremely powerful influence.
That is of all the cultural, of all the contextual and cultural influences that weigh on the individual.
The behavior of those that individual takes to be peers turns out to be an extremely powerful source of behavioral control and the direction of behavior.
I want to bring this back then to the evolutionary context itself.
Not by way of saying that the best explanation of this tendency is in the biogenetic terms or the sociobiological terms of evolutionary theory.
That may or may not be. We're really in the middle of a story that has a long way to go on that account.
My sense is that the sociobiological account is a rather extravagant one and a rather extravagant use of evolutionary theory.
But when I say let's locate this back within evolutionary theory, Aristotle teaches us that we are by nature social animals and that our strong inclination is to live in the company of others.
Now of course he says the same about bees and swan and the like, but there's something special about our affiliate of tendencies because these are tendencies that are ultimately grounded in principle.
We not only have a strong tendency to live in the company of others, but it is a strong tendency to live in a certain way in the company of others.
And we do understand when we are relating to others that they have their needs and expectations, they have their values, they have their rights, they have duties of course.
But they have lives they're living, they have a story, a narrative that they are living through, they have terms of meaning that are unique to them.
It would be impossible for us to live socially with others if we were aloof to their understandings and their perceptions at that most foundational level, which is the level of principle itself.
So it isn't condemnatory to say that in ambiguous situations we do look left and right, we do pay attention to what other reasonable, decent people or those we have every reason to believe are reasonable and decent people are doing in the circumstance.
I wish the record of altruism were much stronger and much more highly individuated than it is, but I do want to tell the side of the story that often doesn't show up in textual accounts of this.
More heroism is always better than less heroism, and heedlessness of course should be avoided.
But on this general tendency to pause and to see what others are doing, there are grounds for applauding that sort of thing, even in circumstances in which you wish the individual would do more.
Perhaps the individuals that inevitably would do more would be individuals who inevitably would do more of the sorts of things that make group coherence itself weaker.
This is a mixed story, and we don't tell it well when we only tell one side of it.
