Lecture 42 Prejudice and Self-Deception
My topic today is Prejudice and Self-Deception.
These being matters that come under the general heading of social influence and social interaction.
These are also topics that bear directly on problems that every society has, ancient societies and modern,
and problems, of course, that have had a racking influence on American society as well,
particularly the subject of racial prejudice and racial discrimination.
Now, in the preceding lecture, I was at pains to point out that there are forms of non-helping,
non-assistance, that is, a submission to what seem to be the standards of a peer group.
That should be understood as growing out of the very tendencies and dispositions that make social life itself possible.
We can't constantly be running to the head of the parade and telling everybody to go left or go right.
For there to be a coherent form of social life, some degree of accommodation is required,
and accommodation includes a sort of empathic understanding of how others are perceiving the situation
and behaving in a way that honors their perceptions as well.
So I say this is not, in any case, a blanket defense for not doing what one by one's moral rights, one knows one ought to do,
but it is rather to understand that some of these pressures to which we're particularly responsive
are pressures that also have a very positive side as well.
Can there be a positive side to prejudice?
Well, I don't think there can be a positive side to prejudice because, after all, let's understand what prejudice means.
It means prejudging someone, that is, reaching a judgment about someone before the evidence is in,
and reaching the kind of judgment that can have damaging or injurious or pernicious effects.
So we don't want to say that prejudice understood in those terms has a positive side,
sort of the friendly face of prejudice.
But I do want to make a few introductory remarks about the general processes out of which prejudice grows.
The general processes are just those processes that underlie stimulus generalization.
And let's recall some of the earlier lectures on constancy effects, object permanence, and the like.
Recall this.
I think in one earlier lecture I noted that as one moves forward and backward toward a recipient,
the projection of one's size on that recipient's retina is changing.
What an absolutely unintelligible world it would be if, moment to moment,
you concluded that the size of the person in front of you was growing and shrinking and growing and shrinking.
Well, we don't do that.
Rather, once we get a certain conception of what something is, we recognize it as being that thing,
even as its physical properties vary all over the map.
Similarly, if one goes back to the Pavlovian study of generalization,
well, a conditioned response that is conditioned to a 1,000 cycle per second tone
is a response that can also be elicited at 900 cycles per second or 1,100 cycles per second.
When we pull up to a red light, now that red light is not going to be physically the same as the first red light we learn to stop at, do you see?
At different times of day, the spectral properties of the light will change.
The brightness will change.
Its height off the ground will change.
Now, stimulus generalization is one of the great guides to our fluid behavior in the world.
It's what allows us to behave in the same way towards stimuli whose physical properties are varying greatly,
but which nonetheless remain within the same genre, you see?
We recognize a red light, a traffic signal is a red light, over a whole range of reds,
whether it's laterally placed, whether it's vertically placed, whether it's at sunlight or evening and the like.
So these tendencies toward generalization are one of the great achievements of organisms
able to operate with plasticity and flexibility in a physically varying world.
Well, now prejudice is something that can be tied in with that otherwise quite normal process.
This tendency to regard representatives of a type or what one takes to be a representative of a type
as having characteristics that qualify the type as a type.
For example, you meet someone at a party and that person tells you that she plays cello for the New York Philharmonic.
Now, this immediately informs you of many, many, many things without that conversation going any further.
One thing you know, for example, is that this is a person who has spent many years studying music,
which is to say this is a person who has spent many years studying.
It's almost certainly going to be a person who enjoys classical music, perhaps not only classical music, but surely classical music.
It also must be a person of great discipline because many, many people undertake the study of cello.
Not many of them are going to end up playing for a major symphony orchestra.
Now, if you turned around and said, oh, I see.
Well, you must have studied music with great, great discipline and ferber for many years,
and that person were to shoot back.
What an absolutely prejudicial statement.
You don't know anything about me.
Why would you make such a statement like that on the basis of such flimsy evidence?
Well, I think you'd say, you know, you were either born with some prodigious talent
so that you sort of came out of the womb making cellotype movement.
No, this would be quite a plausible set of inferences, do you say?
Now, it's from the fact that these inferences succeed far more frequently than they fail,
that these inferences proceed from an essentially rational reconstruction of the narrative
and some key information that you do have,
that there is a tendency to employ this, let's recall an earlier lecture,
employ this heuristic in a great variety of situations.
It's a time saver.
It's a way of cutting across the field.
It's a shortcut.
It collapses things into a sort of manageable whole.
And to this extent, certain tendencies of this kind, do I want to call them prejudicial?
Let me say certain tendencies toward generalization based on limited but what one takes to be
significant information constitute the basis upon which we have coherent social relationships
and make very, very important predictions and rational reconstructions and explanations for ourselves
as we enter complex and ever ambiguous social situations.
So prejudice is, to use Aristotle's old example of every vice being of virtue in the extreme,
we might say that prejudice is the extreme application or the misapplication of a process
which when properly managed is an important and positive contribution to social life
and to our relationship to others.
But the prejudice that I'm talking about and the prejudice that the word itself is used to describe
is not wholesome.
It is a shortcut and it's a shortcut to disaster.
It's a shortcut to injustice.
It takes a variety of forms.
Out-group homogeneity is the social science term for the tendency to make judgments predicated
on the notion that, quote, they're all alike.
How often have we heard the mindless voice of the bigot standing behind that slogan,
standing under that banner, holding up as a kind of escutcheon.
What finally is that perilous trio of words, they're all alike.
They're all alike.
The first thing we discover in utterances of that kind, which indeed the utterance is seeking to establish,
is the elimination of the individual.
The great grave moral offense is that prejudice taking that form is at the expense of human individuality itself.
They're all alike means there isn't any need to make any careful distinctions within that group at all.
You can treat the individual as a fiction.
It's only the group that has bona fide ontological standing.
And then, of course, you can just pick your group so they can be blacks or Jews or women
and the list, I should say historically, the list is gruesomely long.
It is sometimes said that the first step in committing an act of aggression unjustly
and wantonly against another is to dehumanize the other.
Well, I think very often the language of propaganda is a dehumanizing language,
but it doesn't have to be dehumanizing.
It can simply be collectivizing.
I would say that the first act of injustice against the individual
is the absorption of the individual into a collective
and the elimination of that individual's defining features.
The formal denial that there is in the ontological domain
something we can properly regard as an individual, unduplicated, not like any other,
never before achieved in the entire history of the cosmos,
never to be seen again, and thus authentic, original, special, precious,
properly demanding of treatment based on his or her own individual merits.
So outgroup homogeneity is the sort of thing that we will find lurking each time
an act of prejudice is perpetrated and justified.
Sometimes the tendency is rather harmless.
The studies have been done.
Let me give you a typical approach to something like this.
We tell you that we're going to introduce you to someone
and we want you to guess what that person's profession is.
When they come and they're wearing horn-rimmed glasses
and they're rather soft-spoken, rather introverted,
probably a three-button suit and perhaps looking down quite a bit
and very, very well groomed, rather meticulously groomed,
and the tie has a fairly sharp knot to it.
And when they sit down, they sit with their legs fairly close together
and their hands are on their laps and the like.
That's one person that you meet.
You meet a variety of people, three or four people,
and then a questionnaire is handed out and your task is to match up
each person with what you think the profession is.
Now this person that I just did describe for you,
you might have the following categories of employment available.
Farmer, Librarian, Butcher, heavy equipment operator.
The majority of subjects in a study like this
will certainly not pick farmer.
Nonetheless, statistically, there are far more farmers
than there are Librarians.
Indeed, there are far more male farmers than there are male Librarians.
So if you were just guessing, if you said to yourself,
look, I've got very limited information here,
I really have no basis to judge except what might be called
some broad epidemiological basis.
What's the a priori probability that a chap brought into the room
somewhere between 30 and 50 years old is going to be one of the following.
Nurse, farmer, this and the other thing.
Well, epidemiologically or statistically,
demographically, the right answer would be farmer.
And indeed, the wrong answer would be Librarian.
Why is everybody saying Librarian?
Well, people are saying Librarian because there is this view created by film,
perhaps part of one's own experience that Librarians,
all things considered, perhaps tend to be rather soft spoken.
And indeed, people around books for long periods of time
maybe are more inclined to be spectacle than those who aren't.
The chap who works with heavy equipment and outdoors
and has to shout to be heard is generally not the chap
who is meticulously groomed, nails cleaned and clipped
and sitting there, hands on, laughing, so forth.
So what one is engaged in here is a species of prejudice.
It's a kind of typology.
You've got this picture of what a Librarian type is.
And when someone comes in, the question is,
what type does that person answer to?
Aha, not farmer.
Now, I say, how often are you going to be wrong
when you make a judgment like that is the wrong question.
Because in this case, indeed, if we brought every male
between 30 and 50 into the room,
you're going to be wrong much more frequently saying Librarian
than you would be saying farmer.
Rather, the question should be,
using this as a heuristic,
not just in identifying persons with occupations,
but in coming to judgments in ambiguous situations,
how likely are you to be wrong?
Well, there I think you get a rather different answer.
Tendencies of this kind hold up
because tendencies of this kind work in practice.
There's a version of this.
The illusory correlation
is what it's sometimes referred to in the literature.
Where you take the exception, do you see,
as instantiating a rule that doesn't really apply,
you take the exception as if it were a rule.
And I say these are very strong tendencies
that feed into what I would call the typological bias
in our perceptions and judgments.
In order to make the world manageable and tractable,
we tend to categorize.
And in the process of categorizing human beings,
we typologize.
We locate human beings into categories called types of persons.
The physiognomists did it.
This is why Darwin's Nose is being looked at by Fitzroy.
The question Fitzroy wants answered is,
what type of person is sitting before me?
And Fitzroy, among other considerations,
thinks that looking at Darwin's face will supply that answer,
just as Gaul might have thought
that feeling the top of Darwin's head would provide that answer.
And we might think looking at horn-rimmed glasses
in a quiet, reserved, mile-mannered person
is just the way to do this sort of thing
because when you're finished, you'll learn,
aha, I've got a librarian in front of me.
Now, you can establish types.
In fact, experimentally, you can establish types.
And in real life, we establish types.
Here's a way of establishing types.
Put people in uniforms.
Zimbardo's study established guards and prisoners
and uniformed them properly.
And lo and behold, what did he get?
Well, he got the form of behavior
you generally get from such types.
You see, what happens when the uniform is donned
is there is a tendency now to regard oneself
as being a certain type.
There's a fairly famous study done by Mustafa Sharif
called the Robbers Cave Study,
which involved youngsters.
Sharif was a premier figure in social psychology.
Died about a decade ago.
Here you have youngsters who are going to be...
Robbers Cave was sort of a camp
where they were brought for a period of time, a summer camp.
Now, the way you can do studies like this,
they're done all the time,
you give the youngsters different team uniforms
and you treat them as in competition with each other
and competition for a scarce resource.
And they are appealed to at the level of team work,
defeating an adversary, et cetera.
This doesn't have to go on very long
before their behavior toward each other
is an adversarial mode of behavior.
These are people who had no relationship
with each other to begin with
or might even have been friends to begin with
and now just the arena of competition itself
establishes not only an adversarial tendency
but typological thinking on the part of members
of each team regarding the others.
They tend to regard the others in increasingly negative terms.
The only difference between them now
happens to be which uniform you're given to wear.
The same study is replicated
where the uniform differences are eliminated
and where they are merged into a common effort.
Now both groups have to work together
to achieve an end that could not be achieved
by either group alone.
Now what happens?
Well, now it turns out that the former bad guys
are the good guys.
That is, it is the context again.
It's the very terms of relationship
established from the outside
and then feed into judgments about
what type of person he or she must be.
Just look at the uniform.
Look at the nose.
Feel the bumps on the head.
Look at the prize, do you see?
All these guides which are generally not good guides
but are used nonetheless.
What the uniform establishes is group identification.
We know exactly who we are in the world
by the color of our school tie,
by the name of our team,
by the fact that we are addressed
as Colgate's red raiders
or old Eli and the like.
Now is this something to be condemned
to be eliminated,
to be that society would be better off ridding itself of?
Well, look, these same practices
are at the foundation of important
and indeed contributory affiliate of tendencies among people.
How can you have a community
in the absence of community spirit?
And in what is community spirit grounded?
In a sense of communal affiliations,
common purposes, common cause.
Inevitably then, those who are not in the community
are not in the community.
They are quite literally an out group.
That doesn't mean an enemy,
but it certainly means an out group.
And if the question finally boils down to
yielding to members of the out group
in a way that members of the community regard
as inimical to the community's interests,
then of course one does not yield
to the expectations of the out group
because one is trying to preserve the community.
So this is always Janus-like.
Do you see these prejudicial acts, discriminatory acts
are engaged in because in significant parts of life
they work.
They really are quite adequate to the task.
They're good heuristics.
They help us achieve ends.
They help us solve problems
that otherwise might be entirely intractable.
Similarly, cooperation presupposes
some grounding of affiliation,
some grounding of social assimilation.
We engage in cooperative enterprises
because we recognize a common cause.
To recognize a common cause is to recognize another
as having aspirations very much like one's own.
Inevitably it is to recognize yet others
as not having those aspirations, do you see?
So a cooperative spirit, a cooperative venture
is very often abetted by song, by flags,
by uniforms, by titles, and the like.
These are things that do very, very much
to hold societies together.
And in their absence,
their societies can become quite fractious
and indeed can begin to unravel.
Of course, as with our general perceptual,
cognitive heuristic devices,
things get out of hand sooner rather than later.
We all are prone to what is called
the fundamental attribution error.
It helps in some situations.
It hurts in many situations.
The fundamental attribution error
refers to the relative weight,
the relative emphasis we're inclined to give
to traits in explaining someone's behavior
or to the context in explaining someone's behavior.
The relative stress we lay
to what might be called dispositional factors,
factors operating within the person
for which the person is blameworthy or praiseworthy,
versus contextual factors
over which the individual is understood
to have very little control indeed.
So, what do people say when they discover
that somebody has for a long time been on welfare?
Unemployed and on welfare?
Well, if your answer to that question,
nine times in ten, is that people are on welfare
for a long time because they're lazy,
that's one explanation.
Here's another explanation.
People are on welfare for a long time
because they've been unable to find work.
Now, take a look at the difference
between those two explanations.
One explanation is grounded in assumptions
about the traits or characteristics
or dispositions of the persons themselves.
The best explanation for somebody being on welfare
is that they personally are lacking in something.
Now, there is another explanation.
The other explanation is that,
given the overall social economic climate,
these happen to be people who,
for a variety of reasons,
are trying, have been unsuccessful
in gaining employment.
The fundamental attribution error is this error.
Wherever you have these two explanations available,
you invariably rely on the one
that grounds the phenomenon
in something within the person
rather than something within the context.
You attribute the cause to dispositions
within the person himself.
That person is a certain type,
and we know what type that person is.
That person is the type that is too lazy to find work.
Thomas Pettigrew and others have developed
the idea of the fundamental attribution error
into what is sometimes called
the ultimate attribution error.
And this is where you locate
within an entire definable group
certain dispositions and tendencies
that account for the failure of that group
to measure up to what you would expect
or to distinguish that group from your own group.
Now, let's take a look at our group.
Well, our group is engaged in serious study
and the systematic improvement of oneself
and considering all the things that Matthew Arnold once called
the best things said and thought by the human race.
And, of course, we're doing all this
because we are, in a manner of speaking, virtuous.
We're good people.
Now, suppose you find some other group doing things like this,
and let's say it's a group that you don't like very, very much.
Well, of course, if they're doing something very much like this,
they're obviously doing it for money.
Now, the ultimate attribution error
is attributing to the outgroup,
or the group that's judged negatively,
sources of motivation that are themselves
unworthy sources of motivation.
While attributing to one's own group, the in-group,
the right group, sources of motivation that are virtuous,
these in contexts in which the behavior in question
is exactly the same, indeed, is not distinguishable.
Going along with this is the very strong tendency
to blame victims, and this can be found in children.
Indeed, I'm inclined to think that this probably begins
with the explanations children are given
for why it is bad things happen to people.
As parents try to make the world intelligible to a child,
a child wonders why someone is losing a job,
or they're losing a house, or they have to move away.
Well, at the end of the day,
an explanation that's going to make sense
in the idiom of childhood is served up,
and before we know it,
there could be saying things about the people
that might leave the child to believe
there was something about them
that made this more or less inevitable.
It could be something quite simple like,
well, you know, fortunately for us,
your father works very, very hard,
and this is why we don't have to move, you see,
because we're able to pay for the house and all that,
but the people across the street, unfortunately,
just something little like that's slipping out,
and before you know it, it's,
my father can beat your father, my uncle can beat your uncle.
It's that kind of thing.
But, of course, this also is one of the bases
upon which the integrity of the family is preserved.
There's something special about us.
I know who my parents are, and my relatives are,
and we get together at holidays,
and we're very, very good people, and so forth.
So, again, the integrity of the family is preserved
by a process of generalization that is serviceable
and has worthy ends, but, again,
can lead to quite, quite pernicious outcomes.
Why was the Holocaust perpetrated against Jews and Gypsies
and the mentally defective and others,
famously the Jewish people of Europe, but other groups, too?
Groups, listen to the explanations given.
Listen to the explanations given during the Nuremberg trials.
The explanations very often were grounded in
something blameworthy about the victims,
something the victims did.
Hitler's own policy of having Eastern Europeans relocated
back to their country of origin
because of the high unemployment rate
suffered by native-born Germans.
Now, if you step back from this,
there's a certain rationale or logic to the policy.
Until you realize that this is a policy
applied willy-nilly to people who had every expectation
of continuing employment, who indeed had taken positions
that nobody else wanted.
It's not unlike the situation that we have with certain
illegal and legal immigrant populations in the United States.
Hard-working, making a definite contribution
to the economy and the like.
You take a look at them, very often living in conditions
that are squalid.
The income is horrible.
The support facilities for children and other members
of the family negligible and deeply resented in certain parts
of the United States, certain communities.
And what do we discover?
Well, they're here because of the hopeless situation
they face in their own land.
Well, that's because they never made anything of their homeland.
They ought to go back and do that.
That is the very conditions that forced them
to leave the country they love,
where their language is their native land.
All of the things that got them moving in the first instance
now turn out to be their fault for having created.
Now, I don't, obviously, these are complex social
and political issues, and I don't want to plead the cause
for one side against the other.
I want to say, however, that when these social issues
crop up, when they become burning issues
and headline stealing issues, you inevitably see
typology at work, blaming the victim,
the theory of types, out-group homogeneity,
the illusory correlation.
My side speaks this language.
The other side speaks that.
We dress differently.
We go to different churches.
Our accents are different.
Our cuisines are different.
Every possible ground of difference is established
for purposes of making the moral judgment,
where the moral judgment is going to be a negative one,
where the victim is going to be blamed.
And note what is never invoked.
The grounds of similarity, a common humanity,
a common set of aspirations and purposes,
patterns of love and affection, family cohesion,
a sense, a desperate need for the transcendence
that is achieved through religious belief
and religious experience and the like.
So it's the accentuation of difference,
the systematic ignoring of similarity,
and this as a way of doing what?
Well, here again, you find an element of nobility
even in the most pernicious of circumstances.
As an attempt to justify a set of attitudes and behaviors,
an entity, a creature, a social creature
who, at his most prejudiced,
still looks for some basis upon which to justify
what finally is a judgment warranting rebuke and condemnation.
The hope lies in the fact that he seeks to justify his sins.
Thank you.
