Section 6, Enduring Issues, Lecture 44, Intelligence
Today's lecture is devoted to the topic of intelligence, and this is going to be picked up in one of the concluding lectures.
It's devoted to the topic of intelligence because the concept of intelligence brings together a number of themes and issues and methods that have surfaced throughout this course of lectures.
The concept of intelligence has to do with perception and cognition. There are motivational aspects. Intelligence itself, we take to be at the very foundation of life's most significant achievements.
Complex societies place a very high premium on intelligence, though from society to society and over the course of history, the concept of what intelligence is varies considerably.
In the medieval period, for example, intelligence was understood chiefly in terms of memory. To have a prodigious memory was to be an extremely intellectually able person, the right kind of person.
As I mentioned in an earlier lecture, this is an age in which memory really is a substitute for or an augmentation of written records that are scarce, distributed, and otherwise not accessible to what are largely illiterate populations.
So the person who was the walking textbook, the walking handbook, was revered much the way today we tend to revere people with very high IQ scores.
At least they tend to revere themselves that way and suggest that if we want to get with the program, we should revere them that way also.
IQ scores, the idea that this is something measurable and quantifiable. How much intelligence does one have equals what's your IQ?
I think there are probably settings in which the major social question of the evening is what's your sign, and there are other settings in which it's what's your IQ score, what are your SAT scores, where did you get in, what are you majoring in, and the like.
In fact, typologies are everywhere, of course. They tend to replace the arduous work of honest labor, the honest labor associated with really getting to know who a person is and what makes that person so special.
It's a lot easier to say what's your IQ or SAT and the like.
Well, the measurement of IQ has a fairly humble beginning and I think a beginning that we would all regard as laudable. Let's pick up the story at the turn of the century and we pick it up in France.
Now the situation that we face is this. During the closing decades of the 19th century and chiefly for economic reasons, there is a substantial exodus of agricultural families off the farm and into cities where employment prospects are better and where the promises for life in general are better.
The net effect of this migration is that children who had been reared in agrarian settings now find themselves in the cosmopolitan urban setting of the Parisian classroom, the classroom in Marseille.
They're in there with a fairly fast crowd moving right along, children who have been brought up in cities and have a kind of street savvy brought up by families placing a high premium on education and the like.
The net effect of this is that significant numbers of the children from agrarian settings are doing poorly and in fact many of them are being classified as mentally defective.
That is, they're being classified by teachers whose standards really are limited to how well the children are doing in their coursework and in their classwork are judging them to be and correctly judging them to be mentally deficient in that they cannot do what these other children are doing.
Everyone knows, the teachers know and the authorities know, that a large fraction who knows what size fraction but a substantial number of children so classified are really showing the results of a background that didn't prepare them for what they're facing and are not genuinely mentally defective as in someone incapable of learning owing to some basic hereditary or biological deficiency.
Well, what do you do about this? You call in one of the best psychologists that your country can produce and the person called in to address this issue was Alfred Binet, B-I-N-E-T.
And Binet was, I should think we could say Binet was France's leading experimental psychologist, not known for any interest in intelligence per se, but a first rate experimental psychologist now given the task of coming up with some way of measuring or quantifying the abilities of children so that a more sensible approach could be taken to determining which children can remain in these schools and which children are going to need some special kind of instruction.
Binet is ably supported in this venture by Henri Simon, S-I-M-O-N, and a number of studies are then undertaken by, as we say in America, Binet and Simon, Binet and Simon.
Now, the approach that Binet takes is a quite sensible one, at least to a first approximation. How would you determine what a six year old child should know?
Now, you can't sit back in the armchair of the philosopher and speculate on something like this, not if you're France's leading experimental psychologist.
Well, what you'd say is this. What a child should know at five years old is what five year old children know. I mean, the best answer to the question, what should this five year old know is, well, what do five year olds know? Six year olds, seven year olds, eight year olds.
So the tactic Binet and Simon take is this. Let's put together questions and administer them to large representative samples of children at different age groups to see what the average performance is month by month.
Then what we can do is this. We can compare each child with that child's chronological reference group, chronological peer group, and we will know that that child's score matches up with or falls below or falls above.
What would be normal in the statistical sense of normality? That is to say what the average performance of the cohort group is. Certainly nothing to be faulted here. It's not clear that you'd have much of an alternative to this mode of representing performance as normal or abnormal.
It's not unlike what you might do if the question were how many children are diabetic or how many children have a sugar concentration in the bloodstream that is above or below what they should have.
Well, you would go out to a population you have every reason to regard as a normal population. You'd make the measurements and then you'd compare the individual case to the average of the group.
Well, by the time Binay and Simon got the first round of studies, it did become clear that some items were so obviously sensitive to cultural and class backgrounds that what you were picking out, what you really were rediscovering was the child's background, not the child's academic abilities.
So the tests had to be refined. And by the way, for those who have lamented the use of IQ tests as being culturally loaded and culturally unfair, I should mention that Binay at the very outset of this psychometric movement as one of the founders of intelligence testing records his full awareness of the inevitability of some cultural loading anytime you put together tests.
What you strive for is a test that is more and more rather than less and less fair. But when all efforts have been expended, obviously there are going to be things in the background of a child from a given social or economic class that will put that child in a more privileged position with respect to questions of this kind than a child born in impoverished or culturally desolate circumstances or culturally diminished.
So Binay is on to all this. Well, the tests are developed, they're administered to large numbers of children. The better the tests get, the determination is made that some of these children are showing deficiencies, not because they lack some basic intellectual ability, but because in fact they have been culturally deprived or brought up in cultures that really did not prepare them for what they're having.
They're facing in the Parisian schools. And so Binay and Simon are doing a serviceable job on this. Now in America, not long after the results of all this were turned in and published at Stanford University, Professor Terman decided that these tests could be translated and rendered useful in the American context.
A side note on this, I should say that the Stanford version of Binay's test, which is the Stanford Binay, produced tremendous revenues in the United States. And as best we can tell, Binay's permission was never asked for on this. Binay was not consulted on this.
So as a matter of fact that Alfred Binay did not die rich, we didn't have quite the scrupulous copyright arrangements circa 1910, 11 and 12 that we have now. In any case, the Stanford version, Terman's version of the test was put together and became very, very popular in America from the very outset.
There's an interesting sort of historical cultural point that I should want to make in this context. Very early on, some states, the state of New Jersey I believe was the first state, actually made these tests mandatory. And the reason for making them mandatory was to spare children the burden of ageless prejudices in education in America.
The prejudice is often faced by the children of immigrant families. The idea being that a, quote, objective, close, quote, test of intelligence would bypass the sort of prejudices that teachers have toward children who look a certain way or dress a certain way or have certain last names and the like.
So the enthusiasm for these tests, the vigor with which the application of these tests was advocated, sometimes to the point of making them statutorily required, was grounded in a desire for fairness.
Now, if we jump ahead to the late 1970s in a California federal case referred to as Larry P., just the last initial, versus Riles, here we have a case. I shan't have an opportunity to spend a lot of time on this.
But here's a case where the tests used by the California Board of Education with the K-12 population are producing large numbers of black and so-called Hispanic children in the Los Angeles school system being classified as, quote, educable but mentally retarded EMR, which of course is a quite distasteful designation to say no more on the subject.
But note this. The EMR designation is reserved for those who fall far below what is expected of children in their age group that is serious deficiencies in basic linguistic and mathematical abilities.
This became a subject of litigation. The grounds being that the tests were having discriminatory consequences and that in fact they were putting black and Hispanic children at a decided disadvantage by having them consigned to special groups that would bar them from the educational opportunities that other children were getting.
In Larry P. versus Riles, the federal judge ordered that these tests no longer be administered and that the California education authorities come up with a test that not have just these discriminatory consequences.
I don't want to take sides in the legal issue here. What I do want to note is how different it was between circa 1920 when if you were a child in New Jersey you had to be tested this way and this as a way of securing fairness and justice.
Whereas if you are a child in Los Angeles now in the 1990s you won't be getting tests of this kind because of their discriminatory consequences.
Whatever it is that gives the children in these Los Angeles schools such low grades is not going to go away because you outlaw the application of the tests.
Whatever your theory is about why these children are scoring so poorly, they are scoring poorly. One of the functions of the tests is to determine whether children in different school systems are learning what children are supposed to learn.
You don't have to say that those who fail the tests are educable but mentally retarded. You can say that they are academically not achieving.
But to throw the tests away is something akin to discovering that there is a fever running around and it seems to be selectively hitting certain children and rather than have this pattern of discrimination continue you are going to outlaw the use of thermometers.
I don't think the rationale here was apolitical and I don't think the motivations were apolitical.
It was pointed out by those giving expert testimony for the plaintiffs in this case that the testing movement in the United States was launched by persons whose own publications clearly established them as having terribly bigoted and racist attitudes.
And that part of the historical record is true and is clear and indeed it could be that low scores in such populations give aid and comfort to prejudiced people.
Nonetheless we have problems, extraordinary problems in our secondary school system. These problems are particularly acute in areas where poverty is the rule and where a high premium is not placed on educational achievement.
These problems have to be solved. The victims are now 8 or 9 and 10 and 12 years old and these will be lifelong victims if the right kind of intervention does not take place.
And it will not take place if we destroy the very instruments that are so adequate to picking out just these deficiencies. The labels can be abandoned.
Now suppose you take a 6 year old and the 6 year old gives you a score that matches up just about perfectly with the average score achieved by 6 year olds.
In that case you'd be prepared to say that this child's performance is the average performance for the group at that age level.
It was the distinguished psychologist Willem Stern, the German psychologist Stern, who actually suggested a convenient calculation for expressing such performances.
Stern's suggestion, which was followed and has been followed thereafter, is this. You take the test score as evidence of a child's mental age so that if you pass all of the items that are passed by 6 year olds,
your mental age is 6. You divide that by the child's chronological age and you multiply that ratio by 100.
And that says Stern gives you something useful that you can call the intelligence quotient, the IQ.
So suppose you're passing all the items that are to be passed by the 6 year old group and you're 5.
Well now you have 6 over 5 times 100 and your IQ is 120.
Let's say that you're passing all the items that would be passed by 4 year olds and you're 5 years old.
Well that's 4 over 5 times 100 and your IQ would be 80.
So we now had this convenient metric, this IQ score, this intelligence quotient.
And then the task was one of devising tests that would match up with a certain theory.
And I want to say a few words about the theory.
The theory is that intelligence is like any other phenotype or measurable characteristic of an organism, including a human organism.
That intelligence is like height or weight or hair color or eye color.
And thus it should distribute itself normally.
That is the distribution of intelligence in the human population should be like the distribution of height in the human population.
Very few people 9 feet tall, very few adults 1 foot tall.
Most people having an average height and the distribution of height being a bell shaped or normal distribution.
Now I submit to you that's a theory.
It's a theory worth examining.
But from the fact that IQ scores are normally distributed, you don't want to see this as confirming the theory.
Rather when IQ tests are constructed and administered, they are refined and refined and refined until when given to a large representative sample,
they generate a normal distribution.
That is you take the theory to be true and then work up tests that the theory requires.
So we do not have proof that intelligence is normally distributed,
but we have developed tests that will yield normal distributions of IQ scores when given to a large representative sample.
Is IQ normally distributed?
Well, I don't know.
I think that there's probably a qualitative difference between Newton, for example,
and people who are very, very clever at physics.
Newton perhaps is off scale.
It's entirely possible that Shakespeare is off scale.
It's entirely possible that intelligence is sort of packaged at a given point
and environmental influences move us around that point,
but that when it comes to genius, you're looking at something qualitatively distinct.
That's a subject for another time.
Now, there are two aspects of intelligence that I think require,
two aspects of psychological tests that require further comment.
One has to do with the reliability of psychological tests,
and the other has to do with the validity of psychological tests,
and I want to take a moment on both of those.
The reliability of an IQ test or any test is the tendency of the test
to produce the same results on repeated application.
We can talk about the reliability of a thermometer.
If somebody is running a fever and we take that person's temperature
and take it 10 or 15 minutes later,
if there really is no reason to expect that the temperature will change,
then we expect a thermometer to turn in the same temperature on repeated administrations.
If we had a thermometer which in a normal population read 98.6,
then 126.5, then 42.4, we'd throw the thing away.
We'd say it lacks reliability.
Similarly, intelligence is regarded by theorists in the field,
by those who construct the tests.
Intelligence is regarded as a fairly stable characteristic of the individual.
Once we've reached a certain level of maturity and brain function and the like,
this, if it is a natural tendency, then like our very height,
it should remain constant over long stretches of time.
And so an IQ test is accepted as reliable when administered
over long periods of time repeatedly, it turns in the same results.
If it doesn't turn in the same results,
if the coefficient of reliability falls below a certain level,
that test would be regarded as not adequate as an intelligence test
because intelligence is regarded as stable.
Is it? I don't know. It depends on how you define it.
If it isn't stable, by the way, if it isn't stable
and you've developed a test that makes it stable, then the test is failing.
So there are two views on this.
Now, the validity of a test of any measurement instrument
is a measure of the extent to which it measures what it sets out to measure.
You may have a wonderfully reliable thermometer,
but it's not a valid measure of weight, is it?
You certainly wouldn't determine someone's weight by taking their temperature.
You'd use a scale which will not tell you a person's temperature,
but will tell you a person's weight.
So we ask, is an IQ test valid?
And the answer to that is a test is valid
when it measures what it purports to measure
and it measures what it purports to measure
when it predicts the sort of things that go with measurements of that kind.
All right? This then forces us to ask the question,
if someone is highly intelligent, what is it they should be achieving?
If someone is not very intelligent, what is it they should fail to achieve?
So the way one goes about validating IQ tests
is to determine whether the IQ tests predict
what you would expect an intelligence test to predict.
Well, what would you expect it to predict?
One thing we're pretty sure an IQ test should predict is academic performance.
That is, persons who on an IQ test score very, very high
should do very well academically.
Persons who have very, very low IQ scores
should have great, great difficulties academically.
Well, what are the facts? Well, the facts are these.
IQ scores do predict such things as grade point average,
class rank, SAT scores, college board scores,
college grade point average, and the like.
Now again, I would want those within the range of this lecture
not to trivialize those findings,
but also not to go up in a balloon over them.
In validating an IQ test, you put together a test
in such a way that it does predict these outcomes,
you would not use a test that didn't.
So indeed, there's a kind of built-in guarantee
that the correlations will be there or the tests wouldn't be used.
And indeed, most IQ tests use materials that are so like
what one finds in high school and college courses,
R.E.s, SATs and the like that the tests are,
the tests and the academic setting very often are sampling
quite comparable abilities or understandings or knowledges.
In fact, they might be sampling very much the same knowledge base.
Well, do IQ tests predict what we'd really want to predict
if I can serve up a perhaps biased question here?
I would like to know when Billy or Jane are four years old
whether we're dealing with Shakespeare and Newton
so that we can pour a lot of resources in
and want to make sure that Billy and Jane
don't fall through the cracks just in case there's a Newton
or a Shakespeare here.
Well, it turns out this is a long story
that can't be told accurately, briefly,
but it turns out that although IQ measures do predict
what might be called achievements at the high end,
they do not predict true exceptionality all that well.
They're much better at predicting grade point average
than they are predicting eminence in a field.
In fact, some studies indicate that if IQ measures
exceed some criterion level like about 115 or 118,
and if a certain educational criterion is satisfied
such as earned a bachelor's degree,
then neither IQ nor academic performance
will predict eminence.
That is, true exceptionality seems to arise out of things
not tapped by IQ tests,
not sampled by the sorts of questions that IQ tests feature.
Are IQ tests culturally loaded?
Well, they can be culturally loaded in more ways than one.
They can be culturally loaded in the obvious sense
that one of the early versions of the Stanford Binet
asked children to estimate the distance
between New York and Paris.
Well, of course, there are some children
that have gone between New York and Paris
15 times before they're five years old.
There are other children who may not have heard of Paris
and certainly have not seen New York.
Now, I say this is an obvious cultural loading on a test,
and I should think by this time in the history of IQ
and intelligence testing,
most of the real blundering kinds of cultural loading
have been removed.
But look, cultural loading includes much.
It includes very attitudes about being tested,
the importance of a test,
how much one is motivated to achieve in a setting like that,
what one thinks about oneself as one is being tested.
There are studies that indicate that the IQ
used by minority children, by black children, for example,
are higher when the person administering the test is black
than when the person administering the test is white.
Now, I say I don't want to exaggerate the importance
of these findings, but for goodness sake,
if the outcome depends on a factor of that kind,
then clearly the notion of cultural loading
is a much subtler notion than
don't ask farm children about city things,
ask city children about what one puts in a silo.
Now, it goes far beyond that.
It has to do with parental expectations.
It has to do with parental levels of education themselves.
It has to do with things children are told about
what their value is as persons
depending on how they do in situations like this.
The earliest studies were conducted by champions
of the IQ as a permanent characteristic
biologically and hereditarily set.
Much of the literature that was in place
right through the 1930s and even early 1940s
was so manifestly hereditarian in tone,
and I must say so manifestly racist in its conclusions
as to cast clouds of dubiety over the entire movement itself
to the point where many self-respecting decent people
thought that reliance on such tests
was to be complicitous with a project
that really required condemnation.
Race and racial comparisons and ethnic comparisons
were the order of the day.
Official publications of the American Psychological Association
hasn't happened for years,
but would actually list ethnic groups by average IQ
so that what you really wanted to be was...
I forget what some of these things were.
I think you were supposed to wish
that you had been born a Russian Jew
because that would get you very, very high on the list,
and I suspect that what you wouldn't want to be
would be Mediterranean, you know,
the people of the Renaissance and so forth.
So I say these comparisons always odious
are now happily I can report entirely rare,
and in fact they used more for illustrative purposes
than they are for informing purposes.
Nonetheless, we still have a controversial literature
and indeed a current literature
that makes racial comparisons on the level of intelligence
and indeed even sets out to explain the socio-economic condition
of certain races in American life
versus other races in American life
as more or less foreordained
by a genetically established level of intelligence.
This will become a topic of one of my concluding lectures
in which I will discuss the bell curve
and its various implications and foibles.
Let me just say that we do not want to throw out the baby
with the dirty bath water.
Psychological assessment can have very, very important
social consequences of great value to the individual.
We do have to have some reliable technique
for gauging the progress children are making through schools,
for determining whether school districts
and the funding given to school districts
are fulfilling what are the realistic expectations
of the community and the family.
Psychological testing conducted not as a way of verifying
a theory, a fatalistic theory about genetic determinism,
but as a useful tool for measuring the progress
that we are making in trying to improve ourselves,
should be improved, held on to, used selectively,
and which is to say, non-rhetorically,
and indeed, non-theoretically.
