My favorite era of history is the Middle Ages, and one of the interesting things about that time
period is that it's an era of history in which people generally didn't apologize for human nature
nearly as much as they do in our society. Things would happen in the Middle Ages,
and they just were what they were. A barbarian invasion was a barbarian invasion. A church
would openly burn heretics, or the nobility was openly trying to oppress the poor. The thing
is that all of that still happens today, often at much worse scales, but we invent some modern
cover in order to differentiate it from the past. The barbarian invaders are the Taliban.
Burning heretics becomes cancel culture, and oppressing the poor is ubiquitous.
Modernity does all the same stuff as the rest of history. Again, with much, much more deaths,
but we pretend what we're doing is in some new category of behavior which makes it okay.
In China, they've started calling the new tenements, like that which the working classes
huddled in 150 years ago, micro-apartments. An example of this that I'd like to pause at is that
America, and I think much of the world in general, is in the midst of a religious war between four
different factions. We don't notice this since we imagine this kind of thing doesn't happen anymore,
but whoever wins in this current conflict will determine the course of history in almost every
single way you could possibly imagine.
Well, these are the four religions that are fighting over the West. There are other
religions and beliefs that permeate other civilizations, and one way to see that is through
looking at their art. This can be hard since they operate with very different mediums from us,
but with today's sponsor, Surfshark, you can access a variety of content from around the world.
Surfshark is a VPN with over 3,000 servers in 100 countries, allowing you to really explore
what goes on around the world, whether you're home wanting to access other content libraries
or visiting somewhere and wanting to catch up with home. Surfshark has a lot more as well.
They provide security to all your devices to keep your personal information safe from big
corporations and cyber criminals. As a content creator, I know how important internet security
is, which is why I use Surfshark to keep my data safe. They also have antivirus scans,
encrypt your searches, and send alerts when they spot your data somewhere unsafe,
providing as much security and opportunity as possible. So if you're looking to keep your
data safe or at least explore the world online, Surfshark is right for you when, for my viewers,
they're offering 4 months free for anyone who uses the code WHATDEAL, and even after you pay,
they have a 30-day money back guarantee. So click the link in the description, try Surfshark today,
and explore what the world has to offer.
What our current era of history reminds me of is that there was an era of history
basically no one thinks about, which occurred after the fall of the Mesopotamian or Egyptian
civilizations and then before the rise of Islam. Ever since I was in middle school,
I wondered what was going on in the Middle East under Persian, Greek, or Roman colonization.
The short answer is that even though the region were colonies, you can see profound cultural and
especially religious revolutions that were occurring under the surface. On top of this,
the foundations of what later became Islamic culture, especially in the Fertile Crescent,
and through architecture, was developing in the first centuries after the birth of Christ.
The Middle East in the Hellenistic period saw the flowering of a series of religions that became
Judaism, Gnosticism, Hermeticism, the Cult of Isis, Stoicism, Christianity, Sibyl,
Mithraism, Manichaeism, Mazdicism, or Islam. There was something in the water at that time,
which created a bunch of religions. These were all popular cults or religions which spread across
the whole world, including to the Roman Empire. The Hellenistic period, or when the Greeks controlled
the Middle East, was a period of widespread secularism. And people often forget that there was
secularism or atheism in the ancient world, but there was a significant amount. And since that
didn't fulfill people's spiritual needs, they turned to these Eastern mystery cults. The irony
is that I'm pretty sure the people of that time period, except those people who ran those religions,
didn't realize that a Darwinistic battle for survival was occurring between these different
mystery religions, which would change the course of history. What ended up happening eventually is
that Christianity crushed all the other religions, but in a process of doing so, taking what was
best from the rest of them. The parallel to our current era is that both of these were during
ages of nihilism and secularism, where the societies in general didn't believe in anything.
There were waning and waxing political issues, while the seeds were being planted for the
next age of faith. There were large empires which allowed rapid trade and increases in
communication and commerce, but said empires fell into decadence while their sheer size
made people feel like they were useless and completely powerless. And I think a similar
process is going on now due to all these parallels in the spiritual and social institutions of our
society are really not up to snuff with what our needs are, thus what we will see over the
next few centuries, in that I don't think this process is going to be completed anytime soon,
is the competition between these different worldviews for whichever one will achieve total
dominance in the next age. I think we're only going to see how important the events going on now
were hundreds of years in the future looking back with hindsight. Some of you might have
seen my video on the religious wars of the 20th century, in which I posit that it's better to
see the ideological conflicts of the 20th century as the bloodiest religious wars in history fought
between Marxism, fascism, and liberalism. Our current age is a finishing act to those wars,
in which those three ideologies are still fighting each other today. That being said,
and the world doesn't have any pretensions to being simple, in that killing the other,
these three ideologies will transform into something completely incomprehensible to what
they were before. I briefly covered in that video in which liberalism or Marxism have morphed
being the exact opposites of what they originally started as, with liberalism today standing for
government bureaucracy and social engineering, which is the exact opposite of its libertarian roots.
Meanwhile, Marxism has become a corporate elite ideology supported by the wealthy in opposition
to its revolutionary working class roots. I am of the opinion that classical liberalism is basically
dead. The only people who push for it are people who are actually Christians, where classical
liberalism is just their economic and social system. The reason this process is occurring is
the social foundations under which the 20th century we're operating are completely alien
to those of today. All three of those humanist ideologies operate under the principle that through
greater wealth, technology, and social engineering that humanity will reach a utopia where heaven
is like earth. That being said, with the Second World War, three events have occurred which have
completely discredited this theory. The first being that the Western world has attained an absurd
level of wealth, safety, peace, health, fairness, or comfort, and it made us miserable to the point
of suicide. I know most of us don't live in that anymore, but it didn't make us happy when we had it.
One of my friends likes to say that God teaches you lessons in two ways, either by taking everything
you have away from you and making you rebuild yourself or giving you everything you could
ever want and seeing it destroy you. The second point is that global civilization is in rapid
decline. We can cope all we want, but nothing can stop the world's population from collapsing by
at least half by the end of this century. The world today is beset by degeneracy and
bizarre social issues, including most notably the West trying to commit suicide. All of that
means that the 20th century's idea of permanent growth and progress will end up just coming across
as completely insane. Thirdly, over the course of the 21st century, there has been a significant
amount of research into human nature, in many cases driven off advances in neurology or using
the internet to mine data. The idea that human nature is perfectible, that under which modernity
and the technological project is founded, is completely unbelievable now. Everyone in the
sciences now agrees that human nature is fundamentally flawed and animalistic. Even all the socialists
in the sciences at this point agree that half of human nature is genetic. This is indirect
opposition even to what people believed 10 years ago, that all humans are equal blank
slates who are motivated by social engineering. It reminds me of Bertrand Russell's history
of Western philosophy, in which he talks about how the rise of the great depersonal,
Hellenistic empires at the expense of the old city-states created mass alienation.
With all the suffering and powerlessness, the world didn't seem like a rational place to
analyze or explain. Instead, it was a hard place to accept and live through. A similar shift occurred
across Eurasia before the Axial Age, when Lao Tzu, Confucius, Buddha, and Socrates lived at the
same time around 500 BC. Even in just the last 10 years in my short life, people are losing the
ability to think rationally. Whenever I listen to someone speak, I parcel it in my mind, are they
making an argument or are they virtue signaling to their faction? The ratio has massively gone to
the latter with very little original thinking happening today. As this happens, people will
move from worldviews based off reason to those based on existing, from how to rationally explain
the world to how to deal with it. To be clear, before we go into explaining these four different
religions, that if you ask someone if they belong to one of these, they'll probably say no. That
being said in the Bible, they talk about how we all put up different idols in our soul of things
that we venerate above all else. For some people, that's money. For others, God itself. For others,
their families are fame. If you talk to people for long enough and do a little bit of probing,
you'll find out what's sacred to them. That thing which they truly unironically believe in,
which they believe pushes the world forward and gives their life meaning. That's their religion.
You find with absolutely every person that there has to be something there in their soul and that
it unironically completely controls their life. Ironically, for one of these religions, their
religion has devolved into the active battle for nothing, in which their belief in nothing is held
far more fanatically than any of the other religions' belief in whatever they believe in.
The human mind is funny like that. It needs to achieve certain aims, with faith being one of
them, and so if you obstruct it from doing so, it will turn the rejection of faith into a form of
faith. A large part of the population are fusions of multiple of these religions, in the manner that
in China it's not uncommon for someone to be Taoist, Buddhist, and Confucian at the same time.
As you guys listen to this video, keep that in mind and I think this principle will be even more
true for the audience of this channel. I'm not going to say which of these I belong to, but it
is a fusion and I'm curious to see for the audience what they guess I am. Finally, for each of these,
I will be giving a rough estimate of how much of America's population they make up. To be clear,
I am making these numbers up since these are religious categories I've invented. That being
said, I did put a decent amount of analysis into figuring this out and I have a sneaking suspicion
that if you develop the test to measure this, that the results would be generally accurate for
three out of four of these religions and I'd be really wrong on the fourth. That's what I generally
found for my ability to guess statistical patterns like this. I will start explaining these now from
how popular they are or from smallest to largest. Number one, Darwinists at 10% of the population.
This is a philosophy which in my opinion should be vastly larger. That since Darwinism at this
point is an almost universally agreed upon principle that we use in science. I'm always shocked how
little people use Darwinism as a lens of human analysis. That being said, there's an obvious
reason why this is the case in that Darwinism effectively became a heretical religion due to a
certain Austrian painter and for the last 80 years anyone who propounded a worldview,
even adjacent to it, was mass persecuted by the entire world. If you look back upon the time
since Charles Darwin and see how little our worldview has incorporated Darwinism, it would
come across as completely insane. Our entire society is a direct rejection of Darwinism.
Even if you say something as completely innocuous or obvious, like that Europe conquered the world
since some part of its society was superior to the rest of the planet, you could have your entire
life ruined. Our current social sciences or theory of the world literally doesn't have any
philosophic structure for superiority or competence. If you succeed it since you must be oppressive,
not since you're better in any way. That being said, we all know that's ridiculous. We all know
that some people are better at some things than others. And the thing is that I think this is
all intentional, in that the left realized that Darwinism created an intractable ideological issue
which would destroy their entire ideology. Thus the left made Darwinism completely taboo to discuss
on any single level, causing the academy to even the slightest hinting of it since I think they
realize in a subconscious level that they didn't have an answer to it. The Darwinists are the
evil group our society is allied against, thus being the social outsiders. This is both the
greatest strength and the greatest weakness of the Darwinists. Partly it keeps them from growing
or attaining elite power, except until some point in the future. But also at the same point,
since the ruling class is failing so hard as society is collapsing, the Darwinist's hands
are completely clean of the previous social failures. Darwinism hasn't been tested enough
recently for it to be obvious to the next generation of young people what its failings are.
Thus it can appear fresh or new. Darwinism is currently in a place of flexibility in which
it hasn't coalesced into being a complete new ideology. The biggest reason people enter the
Darwinistic worldview is since for as long as anyone can remember, the regime has used the Nazis
as the bogeyman to avoid and unify society against. The problem implicit in that is that as the regime
has treated its own subjects worse and worse, it removes any incentive for thinking, why not be a
Nazi. Darwinism is the smallest of these philosophies now and the least developed, but I expect it to
make incredible surges in the near future, perhaps becoming the dominant philosophy. I say this partly
for the reason I mentioned before that as the regime grows weaker, the Darwinists stand again
massively. Secondly, the advances in genetic science over the 21st century have proven things that
the regime's right to rule is completely false. Anyone in the sciences today of any political
stripe agrees that biological race is real, that genetics amount to at least half of personality
going down to things like political affiliation, how fast you drive, or what music you listen to.
We've completely proven that social class, ethnicity, and sex have genetic components.
Every year we find that genetics is more and more important. The regime is holding an ideological
line which is just insane. Here are a bunch of books written by leftists or socialists that
talk about all these points. Since the regime shuts down reasonable discussion of these topics,
that means that when people take the red pill and start questioning the regime, the Darwinists take
them in. The third reason is that with the new discoveries in genetic engineering, which have
the potential to create god-like abilities, including changing the fabric of life itself,
is that the temptation to use said technology will probably become overwhelming in the only way
that you could explain it in a comprehensible world view is through the lens of Darwinism and
improving genetics. Darwinism is based upon the idea that the world is a violent and brutal place
of continuous warfare and competition, that our blood determines who we are, and that human
nature is ingrained, not malleable. I think the most advanced Darwinistic thinker today is Kurt
Doolittle, who has pushed the philosophic principles of Darwinism to their logical conclusion.
Bronze Age pervert is another advanced Darwinist thinker who has taken more so from the Nietzschean
classical bent on this topic. The new rite is currently stuck between Darwinists and Christians
fighting each other, often covertly under the surface, and it's completely unclear which of
them the movement will eventually go after. Something a lot of you might not realize is that the
red pill is the biggest gateway to Darwinism. Entire generations of young men realized what
they were told about women while they grew up was a complete lie, mostly from their own personal
experiences. Then they started learning about female nature, which inevitably leads to studies
in genetics or human nature in general. Of the four religions, Darwinism appeals to young men
or the fighters of society the best. Without a religion balancing it out, Darwinism naturally
worships vitality. Vitality is a sort of vague principle that glory or great action is the meaning
of life. Nietzsche is the real prophet of the Darwinist worldview. The problem here is that most
people's lives are fundamentally boring and non-glorious. Society is mostly NPCs who, if they
don't get a place in that society, will defect from the system. Darwinism is a direct reaction to
the life-heating, envious, and egalitarian nature of our society, which young men are
understandably rebelling against. One of the biggest issues the Darwinists run into is the
inability to develop mindfulness or the conflation of brutality and practicality. For an example
of this from the Second World War, the Nazis in Japanese whenever they faced a challenge just
doubled down on aggression, which makes sense from their worldview which glorifies vitality.
That being said, this was retarded since they ended up declaring war on a coalition of the most
powerful countries in the world with 20 times their population at the exact same time. At the same
time, a lot of Darwinism is just a rationalization for killing people. This ends up in weird places
where lots of Darwinists will say, we need to kill those ethnic minorities or invade this country
for our people to survive. The problem is that's not actually true, and being aggressive all the
time is a terrible strategy. A nimble, strategic thinker realizes that there are times for flattery,
selling out cowardice, cooperation, alongside courage, aggression, or dominance. If you look at
successful empires over history, they always find carrots and sticks to induce cooperation with
the conquered. Great empires do as much of their governing through indirect diplomacy as through
violence. Darwinists don't do this. If the Japanese or Germans found ways to cooperate with the
conquered, which is not unimaginable since at the start of World War II, most of Eastern Europe
preferred the Nazis to Stalin, or the Chinese have cooperated with foreign conquerors for thousands
of years. This is also true on an international scale where everyone else teamed up against
fascism since it was so overtly aggressive that people realized they couldn't trust it.
If the Darwinists lose this time, it will be for the very same reason. That being said, we
live in what's probably the least wise age of history. People only see the outward trappings
of ideas not what they actually mean. This is how they left a suicidal nihilistic death cult
when they were able to take over all of society because we only saw their front of being kind
and caring, not the reality of what they were even publicly literally saying. I've seen the
Darwinists do a good job of putting up a new front of not being Nazis. As a figure on the right,
I know a lot of these people and normies don't believe me when I say that there are legit
Nazis on the right, but there are. The irony is that this is 100% the left's fault for pushing
people to this. I see a lot of people on the right who have a worldview which is literally 95%
similar to Nazism, but since they gave it a new name, people don't notice. I think that this
movement will see the rise of a new leader in the next few years. I don't think anyone understands
how big a sentiment there is here and it just needs said leader. I frankly don't think any of the
figures so far have this capability and that people like Nick Fuentes or Bronze Age Pervert
have designed their brands to be memes, not serious people. That being said, it only takes
one Hitler, but once he shows up, everything changes. It's not an uncommon sentiment on the
right to believe that we should construct a racial caste system based off race and IQ. Even if it's
not that big a platform, expect it to grow exponentially every single year. Before leftists
get all self-righteous, keep in mind your people have unironically turned society into a racial
caste system and your moderates haven't called them out. The left has no clue at the demon they
made, similarly to how the Nazis formed as a reaction to the insanity of Weimar leftists.
The Darwinists will make tough and brave fighters too. The greatest issue the Darwinists face is
nihilism. A principle I've developed is that if you believe in God or the soul, you're not a nihilist
and if you don't, you are. This is since the soul disposes a sense of inherent meaning independent
from the material. The Darwinists generally larp as Christians, but they actually are the
least Christian of any of these factions, in that literally if you tell them about Christ's teachings
and compare their philosophy to it, they will mock them while they pretend to be Christians as a
coat, much like the Nazis. The Darwinists are obsessed with aesthetics in a reaction to the
ugly monotony of our culture. That being said, they use glory as a way to get around a meaningful
universe. I prefer that to most other ways people cope with the death of God, but it does inevitably
result in pushing unhuman cruelties and authoritarianism. That being said, if you push them on if they
believe any values, you won't really get an answer. Everything in their worldview is a rationalization
for pushing their self-interest, which is something a lot of they themselves would agree with. The
thing that Darwinists really need is a soul and God. Without that, they spiral and with it,
they can hold themselves to moral standards. If you don't believe in the soul or divine,
killing other people to bring about utopia is the rationally correct end point to reach. Ironically,
the Darwinists with religion is literally what the entirety of pre-modern history looks like.
Hey everybody, for a brief pause, you guys should check out my second channel, History 102,
where Eric Torenberg and I explain various events in history, and we have 16 episodes so far where
we go through the Middle Ages, the fall of Rome, the world wars, and explaining history in easy
one-hour segments. Number two, machine worship at 15% of the population. You know when fantasy
novels, there are small orders of mages or secret societies which have massive outsized political
or social power, but are numerically incredibly small. That's what tech is today. Tech today has
an absurd amount of power over the world and society, while at the same time being centered
around a handful of social groups driven off particular cultural norms or incentives which
are completely alien to the general population. Techno-optimism used to be a widespread and
normal sentiment among the population. Look back at the 1950s, where they had all of this
science fiction about the incredible technological advances that would occur in the future and how
it would make their lives so much easier. This sentiment is largely completely dead among the
general public today. If you ask anyone about what technologies they expect, they'll immediately drop
a list of dystopian black mirror stuff. When tech discovers something new, the populace assume it
exists to exploit them. At the same time, that doesn't stop the populace from using whatever
technologies Silicon Valley produces, seeing how rapidly people have accepted AI and started
integrating it into their daily lives really shocks me. I told myself I would never use AI,
and now I do so all the time. Your average person is a better relationship with their
technology than the people in their daily lives. Gen Z spends seven hours a day on average on just
their phones. At the same time, this change has bred remarkable resentment among the general
populace. People hate the new digital world. It's incredibly lonely, sterile, and depressing.
The screens are basically as addictive as heroin. Digitization has automated the middle class out
of existence, creating the largest dating crisis in history and allows the near permanent monitoring
of the population. I have a lot of friends in technology and it's so strange to talk to them
in that they are constantly talking about how powerful the tech industry is and also
what new things they're about to discover. Meanwhile, I have to frequently tell them,
you guys are aware the general public is always about a week from burning you all on the stake.
That being said, I'm making the claim here that tech has become a new religion,
not that it's just a powerful social force. The reason I believe this is that if you talk to
people in technology, they have a remarkable faith in the idea that technology will bring about the
rapture. That sounds insane to tell normal people, but there is a very powerful,
kind of secret cult in tech which unironically believes that we are in the verge of a complete
breakthrough in world history, which has no parallel ever. This idea animates almost all
of the great men in technology in one form or another, whether Mark Zuckerberg, Sam Altman,
or Elon Musk. It's called the Singularity or that artificial intelligence will hit a rate of
exponential growth in which it breaks human history, ushering in a completely new era.
Look this up, it's a very popular theory which has had many books written about it.
Almost all important figures in this field have written about it and there are loads of serious
books which treat the Singularity as a real coming event which will certainly change the
course of the future in ways that we can't understand. As a historian, I chuckle at this
since by studying history, I've come to realize that there are certain archetypes in human behavior
which you see repeated again and again in different garbs. These are edged into the
human condition and certain eras of history rationalize them with whatever logic their
society uses, one being the rapture or a point where we will reach a spiritual breakthrough
in which those who follow said religion are saved while the world completely changes.
For the techies, their Singularity is the rapture. These are people who treat religion as silly,
but they have so easily slipped into their own version. A constant theme we'll find with all
of these religions except the final is they lack a tremendous amount of self-awareness and so end
up acting out principles of human nature which are far more primitive than the sheen they put on.
Ironically, they have no idea they're doing it. Artificial intelligence may have tremendous
effects upon the world. In fact, it almost certainly will, but to expect it to completely alter
every element of humanity is just insane. Look at the most inventions in world history,
whether the industrial revolution, nuclear bombs, agriculture, or metalworking. What happens in each
case is that there are a couple major variables which change, but the messy nature of the world
in human competition remains. What messianic ideologies say is that the era of suffering
in human competition is just going to stop, but that's never going to happen. You'll also see
this across technology where it appears as if Mark Zuckerberg believes himself to be a god who is
creating a new world through virtual reality. Elon is creating neural link to fight against
the potential issues with AI destroying humanity. Alternately, you see it with some of the most
insane people in crypto. Sim Altman wants to have machines replace humanity and that's not an
uncommon sentiment in a lot of these tech people of creating a more perfect creation than humanity
through the machine who will move past us in evolution. You've all know a Harari has talked
a lot about this. In each case, they believe their technologies are going to usher in a utopia
right around the corner. The utopia thesis has been tested for a very long time over history,
and every single time it fails, in fact, the utopians make things vastly worse in almost every
case. The thing that scares you at the tech industry is it fills with people who view context,
barriers, human nature in natural ecosystems with contempt. They want to rip everything up.
They don't hold themselves to any standard. This leads to a worldview capable of profound evil
since the great totalitarians of the past share every single one of those traits with them.
They hold human nature in no kind of sacredness. That being said, tech is a double-sided coin,
which in addition to this has incredible promise to change the world in a very positive way.
One of those is that the internet will probably allow the defeat of the current wave
of authoritarianism or totalitarianism flowing across the world, and it allows easy non-government
communication and cooperation. This is the populist world that has been created by the internet.
We used to be completely dependent upon TV stations, which were curated by elites in the
government. My friend biology has turned me around on a lot of points in this topic. He splits the
world into grays, reds, and blues, which is a split I like enough that I'll probably make a video
about it at some point, which are conservatives, leftists, and technologists. The advantage I see
in tech is decentralization, and it has the smartest and most creative people of any of these
religions by a significant margin. Tech is also the most innovative and creative, and then it has
the greatest ability to just invent something totally new, which changes the game. Tech has
potential to pop up anywhere in the world as we've seen in El Salvador. Due to how decentralized
it is, it's not unimaginable to see random third world countries become new centers for tech if
they try hard enough, or if they're pushed out of the first world. Tech is divided between
decentralized and centralized tech. Decentralized tech is largely a tool of authoritarian governments
and has lost a lot of creativity. China, or even the World Economic Forum, are great examples of
that, in that the WEF is a fusion between machine worship and leftism. We're currently in a race
between tech as a force for freedom or servitude. I really do worry that AI being a tool of state
surveillance as a great example. The biggest weakness in tech is its complete disconnection
from reality and human nature. When I talk to people in tech, it always shocks me to see how
split off they are from the public sentiment, often to an incredibly embarrassing degree.
Their arrogance makes them hated and increases the chances they just get slaughtered by the
general populace. The reason capitalism was so rare in history, only really flowering in western
Europe, is that it's too easy for government to just ally with the mob to steal money from the
capitalist. This has happened dozens of times in history. Also, the god that tech pushes is
fundamentally false. Firstly, I very rarely see people in tech push for things that the general
populace wants. Almost everything big tech creates is to push their power. Secondly, the tech ideas
they have just won't make the world a utopia. It will probably make things a lot worse. The
singularity will never happen and if it does, it will probably be pushing some cynical agenda.
Their idea is that you can just engineer your way out of human nature, which is wrong. Also,
tech has become rapidly a lot less creative, where they put up this facade of creativity,
and they're still probably the most creative of any of these religions. But their amount of
creativity has collapsed precipitously in the last decade, as has their ability to think independently.
Where San Francisco is now one of the least free-thinking places in America, tech will do its
best if it stays in a small scale based off actually inventing stuff. The raw creative
ability of this group is remarkable if tapped. That being said, they again need to have a soul
or an idea that they serve some broader human agenda rather than rationalize an in-co-it drive
for power. Tech is one of the few places that actually makes new stuff in our society which is
largely boring and uncreative and sterile. If we lose tech, we're probably slated for another dark age.
Number three, Marxists at a Quarter of the Population. This story is so unbelievably bizarre
that I think our descendants will struggle to believe that it was ever real. Communism was the
ideology which killed the most people in human history. By a truly vast margin, it was tried in
every single continent, climate, and civilization. It killed more people than every other religion
and ideology and history combined. Then after that, they changed their name and were able to
quietly take over the institutions of the entirety of western civilization. The West didn't even
really put up a fight, sacrificing its economy, culture, romance, religion, foreign policy,
or literally anything else you could possibly imagine without even realizing it was happening.
This degree of idiocy should not be physically possible. However, that didn't stop it from
happening. I'll explain later why I think it occurred. That being said, we live in a society
which is run by Marxists. Every single institution that exists has been co-opted by Marxists. This
is the case for Hollywood, TV, the media, the government bureaucracy, corporations, the upper
brass of the military, the police, schools, academia, philosophy, religion, and literally
anything else. They have turned the entire hiring process into racial discrimination against the
majority population. Every single facet of our social code has been melded under Marxist
philosophic assumptions. You know a cultural form has been really important when its assumptions
are so baked into a culture that people don't even think about them. For example, our idea of the
underdog being good stems from Marxism. The idea that all people are equal, diversity is good,
the sex is being interchangeable, or that the government should take care of the populace,
all stem from Marxism. Communists will see that me saying this, but the US has a hybrid socialist
economy, since the US government makes half of the US's as a country's total economy. The Marxists
did this largely through verbal games. The communists maintain the exact same worldview as they had
before, in which the oppressed need to launch a revolution to bring about utopia. That being said,
they changed out the working classes for women, sexual, and ethnic minorities. This was since
the white working class was wealthy enough that they actually became satisfied with their material
conditions. Meanwhile, the groups above keep on asking for more, no matter what they get.
Our society is foolish enough that we didn't even notice. The Marxist kept changing definitions
so that people never realized what was happening. We were indoctrinated through leftist dominated
media and schools not to notice. The Marxists socialized the populace to be NPCs who wouldn't
see what was occurring right before their own eyes. The left is completely evil. I used to feel
bad saying that, but after watching the actions of the last few years, I've seen the lefts completely
trash every single moral standard they could have held themselves to. They've become the party of
the rich, the powerful, they shut down dissent, they're trying to commit social suicide. I have a
game of trying to find a single moral degeneracy that the mainstream left hasn't defended.
It's impossible. Mainstream leftist media have written positively of Kim,
pedophilia, mass cast, a racial caste system and have written against thinking for yourself
or having children. The reason I think all of this happened personally is that we're living
through mouse utopia. Mouse utopia was an experiment in the 60s which I made a video about
where they gave the mice perfect conditions to breed and then after their numbers going up massively,
the mouse social structure completely fell apart. Male mice became effeminate, female mice aggressive,
the mice stopped having children, became autistic, mouse society completely collapsed as bands of
thugs destroyed the mice who continued to breed. Even if you don't believe in that experiment,
historically periods of wealth or decadence allow societies to stop behaving in productive ways
and instead be degenerate. What's happened here is the left one since they were able to
create an easy rationalization for complete degeneracy and social collapse to be morally okay.
Imagine what kind of ideology those mice would make up to justify mouse utopia. Wouldn't it
end up looking a lot like wokeness? Wokeness is making a turn now from kind of positive ideology
about empowering oppressed groups to legit death cult bent on social suicide. You can see this and
that the left is pushing more and more so for stuff like not having children, de-industrialization
to stop climate change, suicide, mass immigration to destroy developed countries, the end of heterosexuality
or other things which are exactly what a mental group would do to rationalize. The left has become
completely possessed by what is effectively the worship of mother nature. As you can see with
their obsession with the planet or environmentalism or the noble savage, in the esoteric tradition the
negatives of mother nature are chaos, irrationality, and an incoate desire to destroy for its own sake.
To make the world more simple, thus allowing future creativity, the left's main goal is suicide. You
can see that now the western left picks different issues to be suicidal about. In the US they pick
African slavery. In the settler colonial countries which didn't have slavery like Canada or Australia,
they pick indigenous issues. In the countries the Europeans are native to they pick climate change
or colonialism. In each case they pick whatever rationalization works for suicide. This is the
great weakness of the left that they are completely insane and literally want to lose. The left is
killing itself. The left doesn't do anything anymore. They don't develop new ideas, have kids,
make culture or art, have new philosophies, make companies. The great worry is that the left brings
down their entire civilization with them as they fall. The left's great strength is they have all
of the organs of society and have a fanatical base of supporters who will die for them. This battle
in my opinion will rupture into legitimate wars in the western world over the next few years between
the right and the left. Number four, Christians at half of the population. Now for the religion which
is by far the largest. Although it may not appear like this, Christians are still demographically
dominant in America, forming between two-thirds and three-quarters of the population. I put the
real number at 50% and I think lots of people who say they're Christian in their hearts really have
another ideology which is actually more important for their thought process. Think of woke churches
for example or people on the dissident right who are really Darwinists but mask it in Christianity.
That being said, over 90% of Americans still believe in God and similar to slightly lower
numbers pray or are spiritual. This is different from Europe which is largely turned completely
agnostic. Funnily enough, the average American agnostic is more religious in belief in God or
prayer than the average European religious person. What this means is that there is a
very significant amount of people who are adjacent to Christianity who could be scooped up by a new
Reformation if it were to occur. Christianity is in a strong if very precarious position.
It's by far the oldest and best tested of these religions, the only one that you can seriously
call a religion. It's also the most balanced and intellectually developed. The other ideologies,
largely since they lack belief in a soul, lack self-awareness which creates huge intractable
flaws which eat them alive. For Darwinism it's their absurd aggression, for communism it's that
their world through doesn't make sense they're trying to kill themselves and for machine worship
is that their technologies can't deliver what they promise. That being said, Christianity has
propelled multiple civilizations for thousands of years sustainably. With all that being said,
Christianity is a large empire built on weak foundations. It's been declining around the
world for centuries and even more so in the last few decades. Just since the year 2000 until the
present, almost all countries in West Europe went from overwhelmingly Christian to something around
only a quarter of their population. In America it went from 90% to two thirds. The church is
currently bleeding followers. If things don't change, American Christianity could be dead by
the end of our lives. Another interesting trend is that over history, even with majority Christian
populations, small agnostic elites have taken over said societies and then secularized them.
This happened with Soviet Russia, Jacobin France, Fascist Italy, or Nazi Germany. That is what
wokeism is attempting now and what the other two religions might try. The problem that this runs
into is that Christians today are too complacent. Christianity has experienced a profound brain
drain over the last few centuries. In the medieval or early modern periods, the greatest minds whether
St. Augustine, Isaac Newton, Thomas Aquinas, or Descartes served the church. Recently, those people
have gone into business, politics, or science. This has resulted in the church constantly being
outmaneuvered by other institutions. This is why Christians haven't been able to adapt to the
new scientific world. Christian theology is stuck in the pre-industrial world, which makes it
unrelatable to the general public. The greatest issue Christianity faces is that a large part
of the population literally finds it impossible to believe in. The intellectual view of the world
modernity has openly doesn't believe in any non-material things like God or spirits. Most
people take this completely for granted. Until that variable changes, the world's religions will
continue to decline. With all this said, changing the public's view on this, making them believe
in a spiritual ideal dimension, would be one of the most important intellectual breakthroughs in
history. I personally, and I know I'm biased on this topic due to my research in this area,
think there will be an intellectual breakthrough towards belief in the spirit world that will
take place this century. That being said, I think even if the evidence was irrefutable,
most people would reject it for a very long time. Getting it to become a new consensus would take
centuries. The fundamental foundations of most people's worldview are so mechanistic on a really
deep level. Christianity will keep losing in a mechanistic worldview against the other three.
The people who tend to be left in Christianity after all of this are the soft-hearted and those
who love tradition. These kinds aren't the sort of people who usher in great advances or fight
other ideologies. This has been self-reinforcing as the church becomes more of a white bread place
for nice guys. The church runs into issues in which, since it tells its followers to follow
their moral code, even when it results in them losing, Christians get constantly outmaneuvered.
Christians today are completely incapable of realpolitik, cynicism, and power politics.
You often see Christians come across as overly sincere and cringe when they try to get involved
in these fields, or they come across as completely out of touch with reality. Christians often end
up projecting their own attitudes upon their enemies, thus making their enemies' cynicism
and power-hungryness completely unrecognizable. Christianity today is pretty cucked with the
church being feminized. The amount of young men attending church has halved since the start of
the 21st century, since it's just not masculine enough. That being said, there has been a push to
make Christianity more masculine as we've seen with the Jesus lifting culture, guns and God
culture, or figures like Jordan Peterson. Christianity, ironically, is the opposite issues
of all the groups above in that they err by being too cynical without a concept of the soul to give
them internal direction. For Christians, it's that they're too motivated by an internal sense
of righteousness. If you look at the worst Christian fundamentalist states over history,
whether Puritan, New England, Franco, Spain, or Savonarola's dictatorship in Florence,
you find that it's pretty tame compared to fascism or communism, in which the Christians
maintained independence for the family, the society, very rarely had drafts, and there's not as much
totalitarian interference in every single facet of life. Thus, in summary, if Christianity doesn't
do anything, it will continue to decline into irrelevance. That being said, I think of all of
these, Christianity has the highest potential for winning, largely since Christianity has proven
itself to be incredibly strong, or as people say, Lindy over its history, preferably by having some
kind of internal revolution to make it more adaptable to the modern world. Christianity has
proven itself time and time again at being incredibly inventive and malleable. This would be
the most in-character for Christianity to do of any world religion. Another important detail is that
with the population crash which is occurring, the religious are forming a vastly disproportionate
amount of those who are procreating and continuing the next generation. For educated people, this is
even more extreme, in which literally the only educated people who are having children are the
religious. This means that our society will basically have to become religious over the
next 50 years. The real question is what religion will they end up following?
Eros of harshness like ours tend to push religion since people need meaning in a difficult world
that makes no sense. Of these four, Christianity is the best track record of giving people mental
models which actually help them live with their lives. All of the other three effectively outsource
behavior to the state or elites. It's their job to build the utopia so you can be happy,
not that you have to change your life to live a happy life as an individual. With all that said,
I'm still putting the highest bet on Christianity, but I don't want Christians to get complacent.
Keep in mind your religion is still collapsing at record historic rates in your home countries.
Most people can't bring themselves to believe in traditional religions even if they wanted to.
If the natural order suggests we will become religious over the next few centuries,
it's totally possible that completely new variations emerge, maybe descended from the
other three ideologies. The world is a crazy place and is never going to be what you think.
In my opinion, the most likely victor is in fact some combination of these ideologies.
Darwinism and Christianity is an easy shot. We've already seen machine worship and Marxism
combine in the ruling ideology of our society. Except for Marxism and Christianity, which can't
combine due to both having belief structures which openly exclude the other, I find the combination
of Darwinism and Marxism hard to believe given once you believe in Darwinism, leftism makes no
sense. That being said, the left has proven they don't care about logical inconsistencies in their
worldview. I mean my short answer for who will win this religious war is probably no one. Anyone
who fills this void will have to adapt into something new. By the process of winning,
these ideologies would evolve into something completely different. Imagine a world where
Christianity really became a new state religion where spiritual technology or exorcism are back.
That's what a Christian victory as a total new worldview would have to look like. That's completely
unrecognizable to Presbyterian churches today. Just imagine if you showed up and told Marx about
what his ideology evolved into today being this corporate enabling for losers very wealthy ruling
class. Keep in mind we are players in this game. The result is still up to us. Are you ready to play?
