These lectures are part of the Great Courses.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university-level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website at TheGreatCourses.com and imagine how much you could learn if you
spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lectures are university professors carefully selected by The Great Courses and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are part of The Great Courses series.
These lectures are titled The First Amendment and You, What Everyone Should Know.
The lecture is John E. Finn, Professor of Government at Wesleyan University, where he
has taught for more than 25 years.
Professor Finn earned a BA in Political Science from Nassan College, where he graduated first
in his class, a JD from Georgetown University, where he served as an editor of the Georgetown
Law Journal, and an MA and a PhD in Political Science from Princeton University.
He also holds a degree in Culinary Arts from the French Culinary Institute.
His research focuses on constitutional theory, comparative constitutional law, the First
Amendment, and cuisine and popular culture, and internationally recognized expert on
constitutional law and political violence.
Professor Finn's public lectures include testimony before the House Judiciary Committee, as well
as lectures in Bolivia, Canada, Chile, England, France, Italy, and Spain.
In addition, he has lectured at numerous universities and colleges, including Northeastern University,
the University of Connecticut School of Law, the University of Pennsylvania, Princeton University,
and the University of Texas at Austin School of Law.
Professor Finn is the recipient of several Distinguished Teaching Awards at Wesleyan
University, including the Benzwanger Prize for Excellence in Teaching, the Caleb T. Winchester
Award for Teaching Excellence, and the Carole A. Baker Eighty-One Memorial Prize for Excellence
in Teaching and Research.
Professor Finn is the recipient of several Distinguished Teaching Awards at Wesleyan
University, including the Benzwanger Prize for Excellence in Teaching, the Caleb T. Winchester
award for teaching excellence, and the Carol A. Baker 81 Memorial Prize for Excellence in Teaching and Research.
Published widely in the fields of constitutional theory and interpretation,
Professor Finn is the author of the highly regarded,
Constitutions in Crisis, Political Violence and the Rule of Law,
and the co-author of American Constitutional Law, Essays, Cases and Comparative Notes.
His most recent publication in the field of constitutional law
is an article in the Columbia Journal of Transnational Law entitled
Sunset Clauses and Democratic Deliberation,
assessing the significance of sunset provisions in anti-terrorism legislation.
The course guidebook that comes with these lectures includes lecture guides and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course,
you may find it useful to review these materials before or after each lecture.
Music
Lecture 1
A Citizen's Guide to the First Amendment
Applause
Imagine you are ten years old and in the fifth grade.
As your country marches off to war in a far-off country called somewhere else-a-stan,
your little town full of pride, patriotism and perhaps more than a little fear,
elects to show its support by requiring every child in every public school
to salute the flag and to say the Pledge of Allegiance.
You knew this was coming.
Your parents, members of a religious organization that others in your community
do not know much about or do not understand,
have told you that you cannot say the Pledge or salute the flag
because your religious faith prohibits it.
You love your parents, you love your country and you love your God.
Do the freedoms guaranteed by the First Amendment protect you when the school,
complaining that your refusal to salute the flag disrupts the classroom,
suspends or expels you?
Or consider another possibility.
You recently lost your job for reasons you do not fully understand
when the company you worked for was sold to another company
and then liquidated or shuttered.
Unemployed, scared and angry,
you and several hundred other citizens plan to protest by occupying a public park
where you will put up tents and hold rallies to protest economic and political injustices.
Does the First Amendment protect your right to protest in a public park?
Does it matter that you and your allies have occupied the town green for several months
or that your presence might keep other citizens from using the park
or impose a significant economic burden on the community?
Or maybe you were a grief-stricken parent whose oldest son,
only 12, was killed in a car accident.
Your youngest son wants to honor the memory of his older brother by getting a tattoo,
notwithstanding a state law that prohibits the tattooing of minors,
even with parental consent.
Is a tattoo speech?
Does it matter that it is a child who wants the tattoo and not an adult?
Each of my examples is a real case.
Each involves real people with real problems
and each raises difficult and complicated questions about the meaning and the scope
of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Moreover, as you may have noticed, all three of my hypothetical cases,
none of which is truly hypothetical, concern only the speech clauses of the First Amendment.
But there is a rich legal history around the other First Amendment clauses as well.
In particular, there are issues relating to the two religion clauses,
one that prohibits the establishment of religion,
a second guarantees the free exercise of religion,
which are every bit as complex and relevant as the issues surrounding free speech.
Consider, for example, the following scenario and all of the questions it seems to raise.
For as long as you or anyone else can remember,
your town has celebrated the Christmas holidays by reenacting a live nativity scene
in front of the town hall.
Planning for this celebration is an elaborate, consuming affair.
There are costumes to make, lines to learn, songs to sing, treats to bake.
This is a decades-long tradition.
Does the presence of a nativity scene on public property
offend the establishment clause of the First Amendment?
Does it matter if the display occurs on public property or in a churchyard?
Does it matter if the town spends public monies to support the celebration?
What does establishment mean exactly?
Or look at it from a different angle.
If the establishment clause does prohibit such displays,
does that not intrude upon the religious freedom of those who wish to celebrate the religious holiday?
Does the free exercise of religion clause protect public or communal affirmations of faith?
If it does, does it also require us to honor public celebrations or rituals
that we might find unfamiliar, uncomfortable, or even distressing?
In this course, we're going to look at these and a host of similar questions
that the courts have grappled with in an ongoing effort to apply the First Amendment
in an ever-changing cultural context.
The effort has proved to be formidable,
especially when you consider that the entire text of the First Amendment runs to only 45 words.
Here it is in full.
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion
or prohibiting the free exercise thereof,
or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press
or the right of the people peaceably to assemble
and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
From that text, we can identify five basic freedoms that the First Amendment protects.
Freedom of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of the press,
the right to assembly, and the right to petition the government for a redress of grievances.
The First Amendment also protects, we shall see, an implied right of association.
So the amendment is succinct, and the freedoms it protects are actually pretty easy to identify.
And yet these sparse words, seemingly so straightforward,
in fact raise profoundly difficult questions of interpretation and meaning.
They have generated an amazingly complex, if not bewildering, jumble of rules,
doctrines, and cases.
One of my favorite, we'll see it later, is called the Two Plastic Reindeer Rule,
and it relates directly to the example that we just used about a nativity scene.
Here is the rule put simply.
You can in fact put up a nativity scene on public property
provided your nativity scene is accompanied by two plastic reindeer
and other symbols of the season that are not inherently religious.
There are literally hundreds of Supreme Court cases on the First Amendment,
and the vast majority of those have been decided since the 1970s.
In fact, First Amendment case law is so complex
that most law schools and many colleges offer semester-long courses on the First Amendment,
or even just on parts of it.
It is unusual to find courses just on the press and media,
or just on speech, or just on religion.
As one scholar has noted, the First Amendment has given us, and I quote,
a body of law complicated enough to inspire comparisons with the internal revenue code.
Moreover, the rules constantly change and evolve,
in part because the world changes.
New forms of speech constantly appear, and new questions constantly arise.
Is the Internet a public forum?
Can you defame someone in an email?
Is Twitter speech?
But while these are in some ways new and novel questions,
it's important to recognize that earlier generations faced similar questions.
Imagine the difficulties occasioned by new inventions like the telegraph, radio, and television.
Society has always been changing,
so we shouldn't be surprised to find that throughout American history,
interpretations of the First Amendment have evolved, clashed,
and sometimes flatly contradicted one another.
For this reason, it is important not only to know which freedoms the First Amendment protects,
but also to understand the first principles and fundamentals that lay behind it.
In this course, I will try to cut through the jungle of First Amendment jurisprudence,
and to provide a practical guide to understanding both the protections
and the limits of basic freedoms in the United States.
My hope is that we can learn what the First Amendment means,
not simply in a strictly legal sense, but instead from a larger perspective.
We need to know what sorts of things the First Amendment seeks to protect,
and why it seeks to protect them.
These are not just abstract questions.
They are questions that make up and infuse everyday life
that involve your family, your neighbors, and your fellow citizens.
But before we address these questions, head on.
I want to take the rest of this lecture to accomplish three things.
First, I'd like to take up, and possibly discard,
some of the common misperceptions some of us have about the significance
and meaning of the First Amendment.
Second, I'll take a stab at answering a basic but complicated question.
Why do we even have a First Amendment?
And finally, I want to tell you how this course is organized
and why I've chosen to organize it this way.
You'll see that I have gathered the materials around a simple proposition.
Whether the First Amendment protects you depends in large measure upon
what you want to say, where you want to say it, and who says it.
So what about those common misperceptions people have?
If we cannot agree about what the First Amendment means,
or even why it matters, we can surely agree on at least this one thing.
Everyone thinks they know what the First Amendment means,
and everyone thinks they are an expert on it,
especially when it comes to knowing whether someone has violated our right to speak or to believe.
Most of us are especially sensitive to the dangers of being silenced.
That said, most of us are also aware that there must be limits to our freedoms,
that we do not have the freedom to say whatever we want, wherever we want, whenever we want.
I'm sure you've heard the all-too-common aphorism,
you can't yell fire in a crowded theater.
It really is remarkable just how far the First Amendment seems to have penetrated.
Some might say infected, popular culture.
On the other hand, popular ignorance about what the First Amendment actually says,
and what it really means, seems about as common and as annoying as the common cold.
You may have heard, for example, of a recent study that found that almost one quarter of Americans
can correctly name all five members of the Homer Simpson family,
while only one in 1,000 Americans can correctly list all five freedoms protected by the First Amendment.
As is so often true in life, the intensity of our attachment to the First Amendment
seems matched only by how little we actually know about it.
Worse, I say infected popular culture,
because much of what we know or think we know about the First Amendment
is to use a technical term we academics are so fond of wrong.
Did I say wrong?
I meant wrong as in incomplete or misleading.
Consider the fire example I just alluded to.
Can you yell fire in a crowded theater?
If there really is a fire, then of course you can and should yell fire.
But what if you're an actor reciting a line in a script?
Or what if you're simply but honestly mistaken and there is no fire at all?
Worse, what if you know there is no fire but say there is anyway?
And does it matter if the audience believes you?
So as it turns out, of course you can yell fire in a crowded theater.
Sometimes. It all depends.
Now you might think that that's a fairly trivial example.
So let's consider some of the more serious misconceptions many citizens have
concerning the First Amendment and in no particular order of importance.
One misperception is that freedom of speech and religion are the most important freedoms we have as citizens.
We know this because after all they are in the First Amendment.
But in fact, a few moments' reflection will make clear some of the difficulties with this approach.
The First Amendment is first only because of historical happenstance.
The original Bill of Rights sent to the states for ratification actually had 12 proposed amendments.
And two of those actually preceded the First Amendment.
Now one of those proposed amendments wasn't ratified until much later and the other was never ratified at all.
But what if they had been ratified?
What if the First Amendment were actually the Third Amendment?
Would it still be first in importance or would it now be third in importance?
Moreover, should we prioritize amendments that come first in time or last in time?
In many cases of statutory interpretation, the so-called last in time rule governs.
A restatement of the famous legal maxim here in Latin, lex posterior deregat priori.
In other words, a later law prevails over an earlier one.
Is there a good reason for a different rule in interpreting the Constitution?
This is not just an academic question.
Many important questions concerning the First Amendment concern the relative priority of speech and religion
when they conflict with other constitutional commitments and provisions.
And this leads to another common misperception.
Many of us mistakenly think our commitment to freedom of speech is more important
than our commitment to other constitutional values and liberties.
But in fact, the relationship of the First Amendment to other constitutional liberties and principles
is not always easy to discern.
As we shall see at various points throughout this course,
sometimes First Amendment freedoms collide with other constitutional rights and liberties,
such as the right to equal protection under the law, or the right to property, or the right to a fair trial.
Is freedom of speech more important than the right to property?
That is a question we shall play with in Lecture 7, but for now, consider this hypothetical question.
Should we have a right to pass out flyers in a large commercial shopping mall?
What if such malls are one of the few places where citizens congregate,
or where we can easily reach or communicate with lots of other citizens?
Are shopping malls the functional equivalent of downtowns?
Does it matter if the flyers advocate a political position that the owners of the mall might disagree with?
What if the flyers are critical of the mall or of a store in it?
Does it matter if the flyers are graphic and may offend other shoppers?
Even a passing glance at this example shows us that complications arise when we evaluate competing rights.
It is not always true that freedom of speech outweighs other constitutional values, or even that it should.
And the conflicts are not simply between the First Amendment and other parts of the Bill of Rights.
In some cases, parts of the First Amendment actually seem to be in tension with other parts of the First Amendment itself.
Consider a classic example.
The military's use of public monies to pay for military chaplains might well violate the Establishment Clause,
because it provides some sort of aid or benefit to the religion in question.
But as Justice Potter Stewart observed in 1963, and I quote him,
a lonely soldier stationed at some faraway outpost could surely complain that a government which did not provide in the opportunity for pastoral guidance
was affirmatively prohibiting him the free exercise of his religion.
In this case, what the Establishment Clause forbids might be required under the Free Exercise Clause.
A related misperception concerns the importance of the First Amendment to the founders themselves.
Some of us mistakenly believe that the founders were committed to robust protections for speech and religion,
or that they prized these freedoms so much that they meant for them to be protected no matter what.
But in fact, we don't have a lot of unambiguous evidence about what the founders understood speech and religion to mean,
or about just how far they thought these freedoms ran when in tension with other liberties or communal interests.
Most scholars would agree that the founders were opposed to prior censorship or to prior restraint of the press,
but we are far less certain about whether the founders also thought that the First Amendment would prevent lawsuits against the press
for injuries suffered after the fact of publication.
Some scholars hold to the view that the founders embraced a fairly narrow understanding of freedom of speech,
where others believe that the founders meant the First Amendment to encompass a much broader understanding of freedom of speech.
It is worth remembering, too, that some of the most far-reaching and egregious limitations on freedom of speech trace back to the very early years of the Republic.
The Alien and Sedition Acts, for example, made it a crime to publish false, scandalous, and malicious writing against the government or certain officials.
The acts were signed into law by President John Adams in 1798 with an expiration date of March 3rd, 1801,
coincidentally one day before Adams' presidential term was to end.
The Alien and Sedition Acts were the source of much controversy.
Opponents claim that the laws authorized the government to prosecute speech simply because it criticized the sitting government.
Not even representatives in Congress were spared.
In one well-known case, for example, a congressman from Vermont was indicted and tried under the Act, which he had claimed unsuccessfully was unconstitutional.
Indeed, in 1802 the House of Representatives Judiciary Committee declared the Acts unconstitutional,
an opinion shared by President Jefferson, but never actually tested in the Supreme Court.
For some of the founders, at least, freedom of speech did not give one the right to speak without fear of punishment.
Another misperception is that freedom of speech applies to the workplace and to our interactions with other citizens.
Many mistakenly think that any suppression of speech, including suppression by private citizens, must violate the First Amendment.
But in fact, the First Amendment applies only to suppressions of speech and religion by government officials,
and not by private parties such as corporations or by other citizens.
As much as I might like to, I cannot violate your First Amendment right to speak,
no matter how offensive, or dangerous, or harmful, or even annoying I think your speech is, because I, sadly, am not a government official.
As a private citizen, I am perfectly free to organize a boycott of a particularly obnoxious radio or television program.
I'm sure you won't have any difficulty thinking of one or two that you find especially bothersome.
And in fact, even if I wage a thoroughly successful campaign that shuts you up and gets you off the air,
my doing so is not a violation of your First Amendment rights.
Indeed, my campaign to get you off the air is itself protected speech.
Or it may be, provided I have not violated some other rule that governs when I can speak or what I can say.
All of which is not to say that I won't complain loudly about my speech rights if you organize a boycott of this course.
It may not literally be true that such a boycott violates the First Amendment,
but the First Amendment, in addition to having legal meaning and significance, also has symbolic and cultural significance.
The charge that someone has violated our rights to speak or to practice our religion has weight and meaning in our world.
It testifies to the power and the enduring significance of the First Amendment more generally.
Even so, it is a common misperception to think that the First Amendment protects me from private attempts to suppress my speech.
It does not.
Another misunderstanding concerns the right to freedom of the press.
Some of us think it gives the press and media special rights or privileges not afforded to citizens in general.
But in fact, the First Amendment gives the press and journalists no special rights,
although occasionally one finds a judge or a Supreme Court justice or two who thinks otherwise.
In the case of First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, decided in 1978,
the court ruled that the press clause is largely indistinguishable from the speech clause.
In part because it imagined that giving the clause any real weight would pose insurmountable problems of interpretation and definition.
Consider, for example, this problem once suggested by Chief Justice Warren Berger.
Who is the press?
How do we distinguish, if at all, between reporters, citizen journalists and bloggers?
In the case of Lovell v. Griffin, decided in 1938,
the court decided that the press clause protects the publication of leaflets, literature, circulars and pamphlets.
Many of us now assume that the term press covers most if not all forms of publication, including blogs and tweets,
but the law is still developing.
Does the press clause of the First Amendment give reporters a privilege not to give up their sources or informants to the police?
In Brandsburg v. Hayes, decided in 1972,
the court ruled that the First Amendment did not give a journalist the right to refuse a subpoena from a grand jury,
in part because an individual citizen would not be able to make such a claim under the First Amendment.
The press clause has, however, given us some of the most important freedom of speech cases decided by the United States Supreme Court.
As we shall see, many of these cases involve potential liability on the part of newspapers and publishers for publishing certain kinds of information.
In the important case of New York Times v. Sullivan, for example, a case will take up in later lectures,
the court considered the important question of whether and when newspapers may be sued for printing false information about public officials.
And in the Pentagon Papers case, decided in 1971,
the Supreme Court considered whether the Washington Post and New York Times had a First Amendment right to publish information about the Vietnam War
that the government alleged was a threat to national security.
The press clause also raises another fundamental issue.
Since most of us do not and are unlikely to run a press, on the other hand, we can Twitter and blog, can we not,
does the First Amendment guarantee us access to the media?
As we shall see, the answer depends in part on what we want to say, when we want to say it, and where, or in what kind of medium, we want to say it.
And that takes us to my second topic.
Why do we have a First Amendment?
You may be surprised to learn that there are a number of answers to this question.
Some judges, scholars, and historians argue that the First Amendment is necessary because freedom of speech is indispensable to democratic self-government.
This instrumental defense of speech rests on two claims, really.
First, freedom of speech is necessary because it affords citizens the space and the means necessary to freely deliberate about our political life together.
We cannot govern ourselves or make informed choices about politics and public policy unless we can deliberate with each other about those choices.
Freedom of speech is necessary because it is how citizens communicate not only with each other, but also with our representatives.
Indeed, freedom of speech, press, petition, and assembly are preconditions to freedom itself.
A silent democracy, we might say, is literally a contradiction in terms.
A second defense of the First Amendment stresses instead its importance to our development as human creatures capable of reason, self-reflection, and engagement with others.
On this understanding, art growth and development as human beings requires the freedom to speak our minds, to learn, and to reject or embrace ideas and knowledge as we determine for ourselves.
Those ideas might pertain to politics, art, or to economics, and must surely extend, as the First Amendment makes clear, to matters of faith.
The First Amendment, some of us say, is necessary for human beings to flourish as moral and sentient creatures, or to realize the uniquely human capacity for self-definition.
To violate or to deny others the right to speak or to practice their religion is not only to deny our right to govern ourselves, it is to deny others their very humanity.
There are a number of other arguments concerning the purpose of the First Amendment, some of them quite significant and influential,
but before we consider them, I want to point out that the first two, far from contradicting each other, are in fact complementary.
But they also point to, or perhaps highlight, different ways of understanding who we are.
The first, let's call it the argument from self-government, points to our role and identity as citizens.
The second, let's call it the argument from self-development, points to our role and identity as persons.
As we shall see, these distinctions may come to play an important role in our decisions about what sorts of speech and expression to protect and when to protect it.
For example, the self-government rationale for protecting speech leads obviously to expansive protections for political speech, but not necessarily to protections for other kinds of speech and expression.
Justifications for freedom of expression in matters of art, or music, culture and taste must be found in the second rationale, or the rationale of flourishing.
There are some other understandings and justifications of speech that have also been important in the development of the First Amendment.
These include, for instance, the marketplace of ideas approach.
As articulated in 1919 by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, this approach holds, and I quote,
that the best test of truth is the power of thought to get itself accepted in the competition of the marketplace.
A more complete version was proposed earlier by John Stuart Mill in his 1859 treatise On Liberty.
Mill wrote, and I quote,
If the opinion is right, humanity is deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth.
If wrong, they lose what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth produced by its collision with error.
In other words, the conflict of opinion is valuable in its own right because it helps us all to understand and appreciate what truth means.
Another argument that seeks to answer the question, why do we have a First Amendment, is the so-called safety valve theory.
This theory claims that freedom of speech, press, assembly and petition enables those in power to learn about and to respond to grievances
before citizens resort to more direct and perhaps more violent mechanisms of dissent.
Finally, one might look to the so-called checking theory to understand the purpose of the First Amendment.
The central premise of the checking theory, according to Vincent Blasey,
quote, is that the abuse of official power is an especially serious evil, more serious than the abuse of private power,
even by institutions such as large corporations which can affect the lives of millions of people.
Governments on this theory have a unique power and especially dangerous kind of power to do harm,
and the checking function of the First Amendment emphasizes the role of freedom of speech in preventing the abuse of that power.
These are not just theories or abstract philosophical pursuits.
As we shall see in every lecture, why we value the five core freedoms of the First Amendment has an important bearing on whether and when we protect those freedoms.
So, for example, we shall learn in lecture two that so-called political speech is high value speech,
often singled out for special or extraordinary protection by the Supreme Court.
This makes obvious sense if the reason why we value speech is connected with the self-government rationale,
but less so if we value freedom of speech chiefly for other reasons.
And in lecture nine, we'll learn that the Court often distinguishes between a right to intimate and to expressive association,
a distinction that trades directly on the different rationales we advance for valuing the First Amendment in the first place.
Before we end this lecture, I also promised to provide an overview of the course.
Our twelve lectures emphasize three fundamental questions.
What does the First Amendment protect? Who does the First Amendment protect?
And when and where does the First Amendment protect our freedoms?
When we look at the first question, we may find that the answers are somewhat surprising.
As it turns out, the First Amendment protects less than one might think.
It does not include some things that are clearly speech or expression, such as racial insults or pornography.
Are there other kinds of expression that ought not to be shielded by the First Amendment?
Should the First Amendment protect speech that some of us might find offensive or insulting?
And as it turns out, the First Amendment also protects more than one might think, too.
It includes some things that might not seem all that obvious, such as burning a flag or telling a lie.
And it turns out, too, that there are a lot of things that we just don't know the answer to.
Is a tattoo speech? Does the First Amendment protect the tattoo I mentioned at the beginning of this lecture?
What if I tattoo a likeness of Chief Justice John Marshall on my cheek?
Does it matter if the tattoo is a picture, a symbol, or a word?
Does it matter where the tattoo is located?
Is a body piercing speech?
Well, does piercing communicate a message to others?
Does it have to? Why?
As we shall see, a court is likely to ask all of these questions in trying to come to a decision about whether a tattoo or a piercing is speech or expression,
and it is folly for anyone to say that the question is easy or the answer certain.
All of these questions relate to our first general inquiry.
What does the First Amendment protect?
The second general inquiry we'll be addressing in a number of lectures is this.
Who does the First Amendment protect?
As we shall see, sometimes what is protected under the First Amendment or outside its embrace depends on who the speaker is.
So, for example, is the speaker a student at a public high school?
A student at a private school?
A public employee?
An employee for a large private corporation?
Different rules apply in each of these cases.
Consider this case, undoubtedly my favorite case.
It's called Miles v. City Council of Augusta, decided by a U.S. Court of Appeals in 1983.
In this case, the court upheld the constitutionality of a city regulation that required certain businesses to get a license as applied against Carl and Elaine Miles.
The Miles claimed that the license requirement violated the First Amendment.
Why?
To answer that question, we need to know what their business was.
Carl and Elaine Miles were the owners of Blackie the Talking Cat.
In the words of the district court,
According to Mr. Miles, Blackie was talking when he was six months old, but I could not prove it then.
It was where I could understand him, but you can't understand him.
It took me all together a year and a half before I had him talking real plain like where you could understand him.
The court continued.
Ineluctably, Blackie's talents were taken to the marketplace and the rest is history.
Blackie catapulted into public prominence when he spoke for a fee on radio and television shows such as That's Incredible.
The appellants capitalized on Blackie's linguistic skills through agreements with agents in South Carolina, North Carolina, and Georgia.
Indeed, the public's affection for Blackie was the catalyst for his success, and Blackie loved his fans.
As the district court judge observed in his published opinion,
Blackie even purred, I love you, to whom he encountered Blackie one day on the street.
In the end, the court ruled against Blackie, saying in a footnote, and I quote again,
This court will not hear a claim that Blackie's right to free speech has been infringed.
First, although Blackie arguably possesses a very unusual ability, he cannot be considered a person and is therefore not protected by the Bill of Rights.
The court continued.
Second, even if Blackie had such a right, we see no need for the appellants to assert his right on his behalf.
Blackie can clearly speak for himself.
Now, Blackie's case actually raises an interesting question.
What if the speaker is not actually a person?
I mean a person like you and me flesh and blood, but is instead an abstraction like a corporation, or a political party, or an employee union.
You probably already know that questions about corporate speech have been very much on the court's mind of late,
as suggested by cases like Citizens United versus FEC decided in 2010, but the question is not entirely new or limited to campaign contributions.
What if the speaker is unknown or wishes to remain anonymous?
Does the First Amendment require a speaker to identify her or himself?
Should the First Amendment protect anonymous speech?
Why?
So, we'll be looking at what the First Amendment protects, and who the First Amendment protects.
And then finally, throughout the course, we'll wrestle with the third, very important question.
When and where does the First Amendment protect freedom of speech and religion?
Does the First Amendment protect speech on a residential street after the witching hour, whenever that is?
In the fascinating case of Frisbee versus Schultz, decided in 1988,
the court upheld an ordinance in the town of Brookfield, Wisconsin, that prevented protest outside of a residential home.
The case involved anti-abortion protesters who picketed outside the home of a doctor who performed abortions.
In a 6-3 decision, the court ruled that the First Amendment right to freedom of assembly and protest was not violated
because the government, quote, had a legitimate reason to protect the home of its residents.
Consider another example.
Does the First Amendment permit you to call the Vice President a war criminal at a campaign rally?
Or one we asked earlier, does it allow you to speak on private property?
Now, as we take up these three thematic inquiries, I want to focus our discussion from a citizen's perspective.
What does that mean?
From my vantage point, it means two things.
First, and here I'm going to preach, it is every citizen's civic responsibility to be literate about the Constitution.
To know not only what it says and means, but also to know why it means what it does.
To know where it is clear, where it is vague, and where it asks us to make up our own minds.
Second, taking a citizen's perspective means that we should try to develop a practical guide to the First Amendment.
What's protected? What's not? Why?
The why matters because the answers to what's in and what's out will always change.
The law we will see is not static. It constantly changes and evolves.
As a consequence, the only reliable guide to what the First Amendment means is a clear understanding of the basic principles it enshrines.
Finally, a citizen's perspective on the First Amendment means, I think, that we want an autobiographical approach to the study of the First Amendment.
By autobiographical, I mean only this. To study the First Amendment is to study who we are, who we want to be, and what we believe.
And because who we are is not only a question of how we see ourselves, but also of how others see us and are influenced by us,
I hope occasionally to show how the freedoms protected by the First Amendment are similar to and different from those that are protected in other constitutional democracies.
So to conclude, in this course we want to think about what the First Amendment means and why it matters.
To do that, we'll need to consider an astonishingly complex and complicated body of case law and scholarly opinion.
But most importantly, we'll need always to keep our focus on first principles, on questions about what the First Amendment means, about why we value it, and about what sorts of problems it poses.
When we're done, I think, we will have learned quite a bit about the First Amendment. That's enough in itself.
But I believe passionately that to study the First Amendment is to learn the meaning of America, and that's what this course is ultimately about, learning the meaning of America.
