Lecture 2 The First Amendment and Political Speech
The First Amendment protects not speech, but instead only freedom of speech.
It does not say what the difference is, if any, and it does not indicate, perhaps because
it is too plain for words if you'll forgive my bad pun, what speech is or how it should
be defined.
Nor does it seem to suggest that certain kinds of speech are more or less important than
others.
In purely textual terms, there is nothing in the First Amendment that indicates that
some sorts of speech are more valuable than others.
As we shall see in this lecture, however, the Supreme Court has long assumed that some
categories of speech are more valuable and hence deserve more protection under the First
Amendment than others.
A corollary, which we will explore in later lectures, must be that some other kinds of
speech get less protection, or even none at all.
The idea that different kinds of speech merit different degrees of protection is sometimes
called the categorical approach to the First Amendment.
Simply put, different categories of speech get different levels of protection.
It may not be easy to see or to find this kind of categorical approach in the actual
language of the First Amendment itself, but it is not difficult to see why the idea has
had a lot of appeal to so many judges and scholars.
Consider the following question.
Is speech about the Constitution different, by which we mean entitled to more protection
under the First Amendment, than gossip about some celebrity du jour sexual misadventures?
Well, surely the Constitution matters more than celebrity gossip, no matter how delicious
or salacious that gossip is.
And it is very, very difficult to imagine how speech about the Constitution itself might
not be protected by the First Amendment, though far from impossible, too, as we shall see
a little later on in this lecture.
But of course it's no good just to announce that speech about the Constitution matters
more under the First Amendment than speech about celebrities, especially since the distinction
itself isn't actually in the language of the text of the First Amendment.
The significant question must be why we should make such a distinction.
Political speech is high value speech because, as we saw in lecture one, such speech is necessary
for democratic self-governance.
A functioning democracy requires the public exchange of information about candidates,
public policies, and the general welfare.
It requires, in other words, some measure of deliberation concerning public affairs.
This deliberative function cannot occur in the absence of information and its exchange,
but even more importantly, it cannot function if citizens and representatives do not have
the opportunity to engage with each other.
Imagine a democratic community where citizens cannot speak about politics, or justice, or
the general welfare.
As I mentioned in the first lecture, a silent democracy almost seems a contradiction in terms.
We should not be surprised, therefore, to learn that the Supreme Court traditionally
puts a very high value on protecting political speech.
Protecting political speech is simply a requirement or a manifestation of our commitment to democracy
itself.
On this logic, and again to return to a basic theme of this course, what we protect, in
this case political speech, is largely a function of why we protect it.
And so if we conclude, or if some future court concludes in some future case, that speech
about the Constitution matters more than celebrity gossip, will any of us be terribly surprised
by that decision?
That doesn't mean that it's necessarily the correct decision, or an easy one to apply
in the real world.
In fact, once we determine that political speech deserves greater protection by the
First Amendment, we encounter three significant problems.
And I'd like to spend the rest of this lecture examining these three problems, because I'm
convinced that grappling with them will give us all a deeper appreciation for the reasons
why we protect freedom of speech, and the reasons why sometimes we think that freedom
has limits.
First, how do we know if speech is political or non-political in character?
My hypothetical case involving speech about the Constitution itself is ridiculously easy.
Indeed, that's why I chose it.
Surely speech about the Constitution is political speech, presumptively entitled to a high degree
of protection.
And it should not be difficult in many other cases to determine whether the speech or expression
in question is political or not.
Protests about a war in a far-off country called somewhere else-a-stan involve political questions
of the most fundamental sort, as do protests about taxes, health care, abortion, and guns.
Surely refusing to salute the flag, or to pledge allegiance, surely wearing a black
armband to protest the war in Vietnam-surely all of these count as political in nature.
But if you think about it, there's a difficulty looming here.
Is there any speech that is not political?
If a candidate for political office calls a press conference to brag about his teenage
daughter's batting average in softball, is that political?
One might argue, I suppose, that his daughter's proficiency at softball is not a matter of
public concern, hardly worthy of the First Amendment.
But maybe some of us think a candidate's personal life is in fact relevant to his or her suitability
for public life.
And maybe the more cynical of us think that the candidate is using his family for symbolic
political purposes, and that fact alone makes the speech political in character.
Does our sense change if he calls the press conference to address charges published in
your newspaper that his teenage daughter cheats at softball?
What sorts of speech, if any, cannot be said to be political in one way or another?
Would it help to try to break this question down into different parts?
Can we say, for instance, that some subjects or objects of speech are political and others
are not?
So maybe speech about the Constitution, or about campaigns for public office, or about
public policy, are political, but speech about celebrities, or art, or music, or dogs and
cats, or even recipes are not political?
I'm not real confident that this approach will work, but then I've published scholarly
articles in which I argue that recipes are deeply political, indeed that a certain kind
of recipe is even fascist.
And don't get me started on the topic of presidential dogs.
No, it won't take much to persuade me that pretty much everything is political in one
way or another.
Maybe we could say instead that what makes speech political, or not, isn't the object
or the subject matter of the expression in question, but rather the intent of the speaker.
Does this approach seem likely to work?
Again, a moment's thought suggests some obvious difficulties with this approach.
What if I post to my blog a heartfelt, personal account of the difficulty I have had finding
enough money to pay for my mother's chemotherapy?
Don't worry, it's just a hypothetical problem.
I'm not trolling for money.
I'm not trying to make any public statement about healthcare.
I'm just venting about a personal matter.
But obviously others might see in my blog something of relevance to the issue of healthcare.
Is my blog not political speech because I intended it to be something else?
Would others think it might have political relevance?
Or consider another possibility?
Can a speaker make speech about anything at all?
A form of political speech just because they think it is?
Wouldn't that allow a speaker to make any kind of speech, no matter the topic, no matter
how significant or trivial, political and thus presumptively entitled to a high degree
of protection under the First Amendment?
Let's say I publish my next scholarly piece on the housing habits of the Eastern Box Turtle.
Are the housing habits of box turtles political speech?
Does it matter if I argue that we should pass a federal statute to protect the habitats
of box turtles?
In other words, does a speaker determine what kind of speech we have?
Or should the audience have some say in the matter?
Let's assume, however, that we can come to some sort of agreement that political speech,
however we define it, let's say we know it when we see it to anticipate a definition
we'll explore in a later lecture, is entitled to the highest degree of protection under
the First Amendment.
Let's just work around the definitional problem.
Even so, a second difficulty presents itself.
A decision to protect political speech or to afford it a high degree of value does not
actually tell us why it should get more protection than other types of speech.
Let's say we accept the argument that the First Amendment should protect political speech
because it is necessary in order for self-government to function.
That doesn't tell us whether that is the only purpose to the First Amendment, or even
that this purpose is more important than other purposes we might assign to the First
Amendment.
So again, what we protect is related in large measure to why we have the First Amendment
in the first place.
If one of the reasons we cherish the First Amendment is because it is necessary for human
beings to grow or to flourish, then we ought equally to protect speech that allows or encourages
that to happen, including music, art, literature, and photography, whether or not the expression
in question is political.
In other words, a defense of the First Amendment centered on the argument from self-flourishing
may yield protection for different kinds of speech than the argument from self-governance.
If it does, then on what grounds can we claim that political speech deserves more protection
than these other kinds of speech?
Doesn't that argument rest on an unspoken premise that the self-governance aspects of
the First Amendment are more important than its self-flourishing aspects?
How do we know that to be true?
So we've identified two problems already.
First, how do we identify what qualifies as political speech?
And second, on what basis do we place a higher value on political speech?
Even if we can find ways to resolve these two problems, we will still have to address
a third problem.
The decision to call political speech high value speech does not actually tell us very
much about how much protection it should get or when, if ever, it may be overcome by other
values or interests.
Just how far does protection for political speech extend?
This is a very important question.
It's also a fairly broad one.
So let's try to narrow our scope.
Let's focus on two specific issues that bear directly on this question.
First, let's examine whether political speech that is defamatory should be protected.
And second, let's see how far political speech that is treasonous should be protected.
To our first issue then, should our commitment to freedom of political speech protect speech
that defames or includes lies?
The leading case here is New York Times v. Sullivan, decided by the court in 1964.
The case springs from the Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s and the 1960s.
On February 17, 1960, two Fulton County Sheriff's deputies arrested Martin Luther King at his
church office in Atlanta, Georgia.
A grand jury had issued a warrant for King's arrest for signing fraudulent tax returns for
the years 1956 and 1958.
In response to the charges against King, a felony that could have resulted in a five-year
prison sentence, a committee formed in New York City to raise money to defend him.
The committee placed a full-page advertisement in the New York Times.
The ad, which appeared on March 29, 1960, was titled, Heed Their Rising Voices.
The advertisement claimed that King's arrest was politically motivated, and here I'm going
to quote, part of an effort to destroy the one man who more than any other symbolizes
the new spirit now sweeping the South.
The appeal was signed by 84 supporters, including Jackie Robinson and Eleanor Roosevelt.
As it turns out, the advertisement did include a number of inaccuracies.
For instance, the advertisement stated that Alabama police had arrested King seven times,
when in fact, King had only been arrested four times.
In addition, the Montgomery Public Safety Commissioner, L.B. Sullivan, argued that
he had been personally defamed by inaccurate criticism of the police, although he was not
named individually in the advertisement.
Sullivan demanded that the New York Times publish a formal retraction, in part because
such a demand was required by Alabama law as a precursor to a lawsuit for damages in
a liable action regarding a public official's public conduct.
The New York Times refused to publish the retraction, and eventually, Sullivan won a verdict of $500,000
against the Times in an Alabama state court.
The New York Times appealed to the United States Supreme Court, where it eventually won.
The court concluded unanimously that the First Amendment imposes limitations on state liable
law in general, and in particular on the ability of a public official to sue for criticisms
relating to their official or public conduct.
The case is perhaps best known for establishing the so-called Actual Malice Test in defamation
cases.
Actual Malice requires that a plaintiff, or to be more precise, that a public official
who is a plaintiff in a defamation case, must prove that the publisher of the statement
knew that the statement was false, or alternatively that the publisher acted with reckless disregard
for the truth.
This is a very, very high burden of proof.
It makes defamation suits exceptionally difficult for plaintiffs to win.
And that, of course, is the whole point of the Actual Malice Test.
As Justice Brennan wrote for the majority, and here I quote,
We consider this case against the background of a profound national commitment to the principle
that debate on public issues should be uninhibited, robust, and wide open, and that it may well
include vehement, caustic, and sometimes unpleasantly sharp attacks on government and public officials.
The present advertisement, as an expression of grievance and protest on one of the major
public issues of our time, would seem clearly to qualify for the constitutional protection.
Much of the court's opinion reads like a sermon preaching the gospel of freedom of speech.
Justice Brennan writes at great length about how freedom of speech, or what he calls the
right of free public discussion, was for the founders, again I quote, a fundamental principle
of the American form of government.
The court argued that a rule compelling the critic of official conduct to guarantee the
truth of all of his factual assertions, and to do so on paying of liable judgments virtually
unlimited in dollar amount would lead to a kind of self-censorship.
A rule that permitted a defense based only on the truth of the statement, with the burden
of proving that truth on the defendant, would deter not only false speech, but would actually
deter would-be critics of official conduct from voicing their criticism altogether.
In other words, even if the factual elements of their criticism were believed to be true,
or even if they were in fact true, would-be critics might choose to keep silent, either
because of doubt about whether the facts could be proved in court, or because of a fear of
the expense of having to do so.
As a result, even legitimate criticism of public officials would be dampened.
Now, the court did acknowledge that the actual malice test might lead to caustic, and perhaps
even abusive instances of speech against public officials.
But it responded by quoting James Madison, who said, some degree of abuse is inseparable
from the proper use of everything, and in no instance is this more true than in that
of the press.
In a concurring opinion, Justices Black and Douglas complained that even the actual malice
test put too heavy a burden on speech.
Justices Black instead argued for an absolute, unconditional constitutional right to criticize
public officials and to discuss public affairs with impunity.
One of the consequences of the New York Times vs. Sullivan rule is that a wide variety of
speech that might otherwise be the stuff of lawsuits is now protected by the First Amendment.
Our commitment to freedom of speech, or to freedom of speech about things that are political,
or which relate to the public duties of public officials, runs so deep that we value such
speech even if it is mistaken or just wrong.
The actual malice rule for defamatory speech developed in Sullivan has since evolved in
interesting ways.
One line of cases concerns the question of who precisely counts as a public official.
Are public school teachers or principals public officials?
Lower courts have reached conflicting results.
In a second line of cases, the court has expanded the actual malice test to include public figures
and not just public officials.
Two cases are especially important here.
The first, Kurdish publishing company vs. Butts, involved Wally Butts, who was a former
athletic director at the University of Georgia.
The second case, Associated Press vs. Walker, involved Edwin Walker, who was a general in
command of the federal troops during the school desegregation crisis at Little Rock in the
1950s.
Both Butts and Walker were private citizens at the time of their lawsuits.
And yet five members of the court extended the Sullivan rule to the alleged defamation
of both men in so far as they could be considered public figures.
The obvious question is, why?
Three reasons seem to explain this decision.
First, the court has suggested that public figures, in contrast to private persons, are
likely to have access to the media to rebut falsehoods.
Second, most public figures have voluntarily put themselves in the public eye.
And third, the public is likely to have a greater interest in such persons.
According to the court, a public figure is someone who has achieved such pervasive fame
or notoriety that he becomes a public figure for all purposes and in all contexts.
Of course, it is not always easy to tell whether someone is a public figure, and lower courts
have often struggled with this issue.
In another opinion, Gertz versus Welch decided in 1974 the court offered some guidance, but
also complicated the issue even further by creating yet another category of plaintiff,
the so-called limited purpose public figure, or someone who was a public figure with respect
to a certain controversy.
The Gertz court also noted that sometimes an individual, and I quote, injects himself
or is drawn into a particular public controversy and thereby becomes a public figure for a
limited range of issues.
I wonder, do these include the participants on television reality shows?
In any event, the actual malice standard would have to be applied in any case alleging defamation
of these limited purpose public figures.
What about persons who are drawn into the public site involuntarily?
Such persons might include accused criminals, or the victims of crimes, accident victims,
or even persons who perform heroic or humanitarian acts of public interest.
In one very well-known case, Time versus Firestone, decided in 1976, the court was
asked to consider whether the parties involved in a very, very messy divorce case in the
state of Florida were public figures or limited public figures.
The divorce attracted a great deal of local and national publicity, and was eventually
reported with some small inaccuracies in Time magazine.
You noted, for example, the trial judge's comments that he had heard testimony that
would make Dr. Freud's hair curl.
The Supreme Court concluded that the plaintiffs were not public figures because they had not,
quote, thrust themselves to the forefront of particular controversies in order to influence
the resolution of the issues involved.
Nor was there, according to the court, any public controversy at all, although the matter
was certainly of public interest.
As a result, Time had to pay libel damages to the plaintiffs.
What about individuals who might once have been limited public figures, but whose notoriety
or public interest resides well in the past?
There are not a lot of decisions on this question, but most of the lower courts that
have considered it have concluded that the passage of time does not affect one's status
as a limited public figure.
As an example, take the case of Citus vs. FR Publishing Corporation.
The case concerned William James Citus, a child prodigy at Mathematics and Languages.
As IQ was estimated to be between 250 and 300, he enrolled in Harvard at age 11, and
as an adult he was said to be conversant in over 40 languages and dialects.
The Second Circuit Court of Appeals held that a child prodigy, Citus, who was once a public
figure, remained a public figure years later, even though, quote, he had since cloaked
himself in obscurity.
Why was he a public figure?
Because his later life was relevant to the question of whether or not he had fulfilled
his early promise.
I'm not sure why that question is itself of any significant public interest, but the
case does seem to suggest that once you are in the public eye, you remain there, no matter
how much you strive later on for privacy or obscurity.
In some, the rules governing deformation seem complicated and confusing.
From a citizen's perspective, what do we really need to know?
The most important thing is to determine the status of the plaintiff under the Sullivan
line of cases.
Simply put, if the plaintiff is a public official, a public figure, or a limited purpose public
figure, or even perhaps once was, then the plaintiff must establish that the defendant
acted with actual malice.
If the plaintiff is a private person in contrast, presumably you or me, then the plaintiff must
usually only show that the defendant acted negligently.
In all cases, showing that the statement is truthful is a defense.
One final remark on Sullivan and its progeny.
The logic of the court's protection for speech about public officials, and to a lesser extent
about public figures, is grounded squarely in a conception of freedom of speech that
prizes speech for its centrality to democratic self-governance.
By now, this defense of speech should sound familiar, but this rationale need not necessarily
lead to the result in Sullivan.
It seems like it would be fairly easy to argue that First Amendment protections for defamatory
speech actually undermine the project of democracy by driving people out of public
life altogether.
Consider two possible examples of negative effects that flow from the Sullivan rule.
First, as I just suggested, the Sullivan rule might drive good people out of politics by
exposing them, and perhaps their families, to great indignities and even the falsehoods.
Second and related, the Sullivan rule might be said to make public discourse and debate
course and uncivilized, or at least careless.
Campaigns as a consequence become more personal, more salacious, less interested in issues.
And recall, if we value speech for other reasons, if, for instance, we cherish speech not for
its political value, but rather on the self-development rationale we explored in Lecture 1, then we
might conclude that the Sullivan rule is troublesome because it does not go far enough
to recognize the harm to individual dignity and reputation that defamatory speech can
cause.
So let's take stock.
Earlier in the lecture, we raised an important question.
Just how far does protection for political speech extend?
And thus far, we've addressed that question by considering whether the First Amendment
should protect political speech that may be false or defamatory.
Now let's consider another difficult problem.
Should the First Amendment protect political speech that is treasonous or that threatens
the security of the state?
The Supreme Court has considered this issue on several occasions.
But before we consider those rulings, let's approach this through another hypothetical
case.
Imagine that your efforts to persuade your fellow citizens and the government that a
war in somewhere else's stand is a very, very bad idea have fallen on deaf ears.
We are at war with somewhere else's stand and have been now for several years.
Worse, the war has not gone as hoped.
Our enemies are clever, devious, and in it for the long haul.
We have had to resort to a draft, and every eligible male between the ages of 18 and 26
has been required to register for that draft.
Your opposition to the war continues.
As part of your effort, you distribute leaflets on a city street and maintain a website where
you make arguments that the draft is unconstitutional, a violation not only of a citizen's rights
to liberty, but also of the Thirteenth Amendment.
Is your speech protected?
Surely, the speech in question is political.
To return to an earlier point, how can speech about questions of constitutionality, or war,
much less both, not be political?
Such speech, we know, is presumptively entitled to a very high degree of protection under
the First Amendment.
On the other hand, it is possible that your speech might undermine the war effort and
our national security.
Could that be reason enough to shut it down?
My hypothetical case closely tracks a real case decided by the Supreme Court in 1919
called Schenck vs. United States.
In Schenck, the court upheld the conviction of a young man who had distributed flyers
nearly identical to the one I described, ruling that speech may be prescribed when it constitutes
a clear and present danger.
In the century since Schenck, a clear and present danger test has sometimes been interpreted
more strictly and sometimes more loosely.
In its current form, as described by the court in Brandenburg vs. Ohio, a case cited in 1969,
the test prohibits the suppression of speech, quote, except where such advocacy is directed
to inciting or producing imminent lawless action, and is likely to incite or produce
such action.
So to return to our hypothetical case, we must ask, are your leaflets an incitement
to imminent lawless action?
Does your website incite such action?
Terms like advocacy, incitement, and likely to incite are sufficiently vague to require
interpretation, and judges may vary in how much emphasis they give to one part of the
test or to another.
These issues are highly relevant.
Indeed, they are at the heart of current conflicts surrounding parts of the USA Patriot Act and
the war on terrorism.
Consider another hypothetical case.
Your efforts to oppose the war by encouraging resistance to the draft have not been successful.
And in the meantime, your opposition to the war and your sense of despair have increased.
You are now of the opinion that the government of the United States cannot be persuaded to
change course, and what is necessary is not protest, but revolution.
Your website, called Patriotic Americans for a New America, announces the establishment
of a new political party of the same name.
Its program is simple and straightforward.
It calls for a new American revolution.
One that requires the dismantlement of the current political system and its replacement
with something more efficient, more humane, something better.
Your mechanism for achieving this result?
You encourage citizens to vote for your new political party.
Once in office, your party will set out systematically to dismantle democracy.
Is this political speech, or is it treason?
What if it is both?
May the state, consistent with the First Amendment, make illegal speech that counsels the overthrow
of the state itself?
Or to be more specific, may the state keep your new party off the ballot?
The court decided a series of important cases concerning the Communist Party of the United
States between and after the two world wars.
Among these cases was Keishian v. Board of Regents, decided in 1967, where the Supreme
Court held that a state cannot prohibit state employees from being members of the Communist
Party.
But I want to focus for a moment on another case, decided in 1974, called Communist Party
of Indiana v. Whitcomb.
Indiana had passed a law that said no political party could have its candidates' names printed
on election ballots until the party filed an affidavit stating that it did not advocate
the overthrow of local, state, or national government by force or violence.
Now, the Indiana statute is not directly comparable to my hypothetical.
The Indiana law involved the prescription of political parties that would not force
where force or violence, whereas the patriotic Americans for a new America party appears
committed to revolutionary change through democratic, nonviolent procedures.
But there are similarities, especially since in the Indiana case, the state had argued that
its loyalty oath requirement should be upheld in part because, and I quote, it is fraudulent
for a group seeking by violent revolution to overthrow our democratic form of government
to disguise itself as a political party and to use the very forms of democracy it seeks
to subvert in order to gain support and carry on its nefarious ends.
The court struck down the Indiana law, saying once again that the operative distinction
must be between advocacy, which is protected, and incitement of imminent unlawful action,
which is not.
The Indiana law, which prohibited both, thus infringed on a core First Amendment value.
One final example to think about.
Should the First Amendment protect a post on the internet by an American citizen that
features or promotes pro-jihadist materials, let's say these materials are translations
of documents and propaganda for certain terrorist organizations.
The USA Patriot Act explicitly prohibits providing material support to groups designated
as terrorists.
And in Holder vs. Humanitarian Law Project, decided by the Supreme Court in 2010, the
court was asked to decide whether providing nonviolent aid to terrorist groups constitutes
material support for terrorism.
The court held that a prohibition of certain types of support was constitutional.
Specifically, the court upheld the prohibition on providing training, expert advice or assistance,
service, and personnel.
The court further concluded that even political speech, otherwise protected, can be criminalized
if it occurs at the direction of a terrorist organization.
It would not matter if the speech itself was violent or not.
The only question would be whether the speech was posted at the direction of a terrorist
group.
On the other hand, independent advocacy of the speech or the message would seem to be
protected.
So based on these standards, posting translations of terrorist propaganda online would seem
to be protected by the First Amendment, provided that the action wasn't done at the direction
of a terrorist organization.
In US vs. Mahana, 29-year-old Tarik Mahana, a United States citizen and a graduate from
the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, was recently sentenced to
a 17-and-a-half-year prison sentence followed by seven years of supervised release on federal
criminal charges of conspiracy to provide material support to terrorists and providing
or attempting to provide material support to terrorists.
Prosecutors in the case described Mahana as a terrorist sympathizer who had once sought
unsuccessfully training in terrorist camps in Pakistan and Yemen.
Failing that, prosecutors charged, Mahana committed himself to battling the West by
other means, such as spreading al-Qaeda's ideology to the masses by translating extremist
documents and posting terrorist propaganda on the internet in the hopes of converting
more to the cause.
Following the decision in Holder, one can be convicted of materially supporting terrorism
merely for translating a document or putting an extremist video online, depending on your
intentions, whether or not the speech is violent.
Thus, in Mahana's case, the question was whether Mahana's actions were done at the
direction of a terrorist group or whether his actions constituted independent advocacy.
The lower court concluded that they were not independent advocacy and hence not protected.
So should the First Amendment protect political speech that advocates the establishment of
political regimes or governments that themselves would not protect or value freedom of speech?
Consider this quote by Justice Holmes, writing in the 1925 case of Gitlow vs. New York.
If in the long run, the beliefs expressed in proletarian dictatorship are destined
to be accepted by the dominant forces of the community, the only meaning of free speech
is that they should be given their chance and have their way.
Do you agree?
In this lecture, then, we have learned that the First Amendment offers more protection
for some kinds of speech than others, and in particular that it values political speech,
especially highly.
We have learned also, however, that freedom of speech, even of high value speech, like
political speech, is not absolute.
There are times when the state may prohibit speech in service of some other important
goal, such as the reputation of others or in cases of national security.
And last point, I have said several times in this lecture that political speech is
high value speech, typically entitled to a very high degree of protection.
As we shall see in future lectures, the court often says that such restrictions must pass
what is called the strict scrutiny test.
Strict scrutiny means that the court will ask if the state's interest in regulating
or prohibiting the speech in question advances, quote, a compelling state interest.
In addition, the law must be narrowly tailored to achieve that goal or interest.
And finally, the law must be the least restrictive means for achieving that interest.
That is, there cannot be a less restrictive way to effectively achieve the compelling governmental
interest involved.
We will want to keep this test, the strict scrutiny test, in mind as we go forward.
