Lecture 3. The First Amendment and Symbolic Speech.
The First Amendment protects a wide range of speech and expression that is neither written
nor spoken. We typically call this expressive conduct or symbolic speech. But when is conduct
expressive? And what is symbolic speech? Is it subject to the same rules that govern
pure speech? Today we are going to address these and similar questions, which as we shall
see are sometimes difficult even for the Supreme Court to answer. Perhaps the easiest way to
start our exploration is with one of the classic symbolic speech cases, a case called U.S.
versus O'Brien, decided by the Supreme Court in 1968. In this case, the Court set forth
a set of rules to determine how much protection the First Amendment affords to symbolic speech.
Collectively, these rules constitute the O'Brien test, which is still good law. The rules the
Court set forth to determine how much protection the First Amendment affords to symbolic speech
in O'Brien are still applicable. So it is important to know what those rules are and
what they mean. But that is not really why I want to start with the O'Brien test. I
want to start with O'Brien because it reinforces one of the primary themes of this course.
Whether your speech is protected under the First Amendment sometimes depends, as we
saw in Lecture 2, on the content of your expression. You will recall in particular that political
speech is said to be high value speech, protected normally by the strict scrutiny test. The
strict scrutiny test means simply that the Court requires a state to show that its interest
in restricting the speech in question is compelling and is narrowly tailored to advance
that interest without intruding on more speech than is necessary. But as we will see in this
lecture, how much protection your speech warrants, even political speech, also depends on the
form your speech takes. O'Brien illustrates the point perfectly.
In 1948, the United States instituted a peacetime draft requiring all males to register upon
reaching the age of 18. The Selective Service Law included a requirement that you had to
keep your draft card on you at all times. In 1965, Congress amended the Act to prohibit
the destruction of draft cards, a response to public burnings of the draft cards as a
popular protest of the Vietnam War. On the morning of March 31, 1966, David
Paul O'Brien and three other young men burned their draft cards on the steps of the South
Boston Courthouse. After the four men were attacked by some of the crowd, an FBI agent
moved O'Brien inside the courthouse and advised him of his rights. O'Brien proudly confessed
to burning the card and produced the charred remains of the card as proof of the act.
He argued that he had burned his draft card to persuade others to oppose the war. Certainly
O'Brien's burning of the draft card attracted public attention. All three of the major news
networks at the time gave the incident extensive coverage.
O'Brien was subsequently convicted of violating the Selective Service Act, which prohibited
the destruction or mutilation of a draft card. O'Brien contended that the law prohibiting
draft card burning was a violation of his First Amendment rights. The Supreme Court
ruled otherwise. The O'Brien test has four components. If a law is to survive a First
Amendment challenge, the court ruled, the following conditions must be met. First, the
law must be within the constitutional power of the government to enact. Second, the law
must further an important or substantial government interest. Third, that interest must be unrelated
to the suppression of speech. It must, in other words, be content neutral. And fourth,
the law must prohibit no more speech than is essential to further that interest.
Now, the first point to make about the O'Brien test is that it does not offer as much protection
for symbolic speech as the strict scrutiny test offers for high value or political peer
speech. Typically, limits on political speech require the state to articulate a compelling
state interest, and any restriction on speech must also be narrowly tailored to effectuate
that interest. But under the O'Brien test, a statute must instead quote further an important
or substantial government interest. The difference between compelling and important or substantial
might seem only semantic, but most scholars and judges think that the O'Brien test is
in fact less demanding than strict scrutiny. Before we consider what, if anything justifies
a different rule for symbolic political speech than for peer political speech, let's just
make sure that the comparison is appropriate. Surely burning a draft card is a way of protesting
the Vietnam War, if it is expression or speech, is speech that concerns politics. And as such,
as we saw in lecture two, it should be entitled to a fairly high level of protection. But
is burning a draft card really speech? At first glance, it seems like a simple enough
question. Symbols are often a way of communicating a message to others, and conduct often expresses
ideas. When O'Brien burned his draft card, we know he intended to send a message. He
meant to communicate his opposition to the draft, and perhaps to the war. And it seems
pretty likely that his audience knew what the message was. Moreover, it may have been
an especially effective form of communicating the message. The heavy media coverage O'Brien's
conduct attracted suggests that symbols often evoke a kind of emotional appeal, or have
a powerful emotional impact that words alone sometimes lack.
As Justice Robert Jackson wrote for the court in a case called West Virginia vs. Barnett,
decided also in a time of war, 1943, symbols are, and I quote, a shortcut from mind to
mind. But if O'Brien's case seems easy, consider some obvious problems. Should we conclude
that any action intended by the actor to communicate a message should be treated as speech? Won't
we run the risk that individuals will simply invent speech claims after they have been
arrested? Other problems seem obvious too.
What if no audience understands or comprehends that a message is intended? What if the audience
is simply too dense to understand the message? Or what if the speaker has no intent to communicate
but an audience nevertheless perceives meaning in the act? Do we protect speech because someone
intends to communicate? Or because the message has meaning, whether or not the meaning is
intentional? Our answers to these questions may well depend upon the particular facts
and contexts of specific cases. O'Brien, for example, burned his draft card in public.
Would our certainty that his conduct was speech waiver if he had burned it in a bar with
a few friends? Although the court in O'Brien concluded that burning a draft card can be
symbolic speech, the court also concluded, and I quote, that we cannot accept the view
that an apparently limitless variety of conduct can be labeled speech whenever the person
engaging in the conduct intends thereby to express an idea. But why not?
One answer is that if the opposite were true, how long would it be before burglars, also
students of the French philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon began to claim that their thefts
were a symbolic form of protest against the inequalities and evils of capitalism? I can
hear myself now. No officer, I wasn't stealing that flat screen. I was protesting economic
inequality in a time of economic turmoil. Not only would this be speech, it might well
be political speech. And consider some other examples. Would wearing a t-shirt with the
United States flag on it be symbolic speech? What about a sit-in at a lunch counter? Is
new dancing symbolic speech? Assassinations no doubt communicate a message as well. Alternatively,
we might choose to start from another perspective. The First Amendment, we might say, mentions
freedom of speech, not freedom of expressive conduct, not freedom of symbolic speech. It
would not seem to be very difficult at all to read the language of the First Amendment
to protect only verbal or written communications. Some judges and scholars have therefore concluded
that the First Amendment's speech provisions should not extend at all to conduct, no matter
that the conduct in question, say burning a flag or a cross or wearing an armband to
school, may have an expressive component. This is the position held by Judge Robert
Bork, for example. Others hold a diametrically opposite opinion, arguing that it makes no
sense at all to try to distinguish between conduct and speech. In the words of Professor
Lewis Hankin, and I quote, a constitutional distinction between speech and conduct is
specious. Speech is conduct and actions speak. The Court's general approach has been to
reject both absolutes. So not all conduct that expresses an idea is symbolic speech that
qualifies for protection under the First Amendment, but some conduct does. That means, of course,
that we need a definition of symbolic speech, or some kind of analytical tool that allows
us to distinguish between unprotected conduct and protected symbolic speech.
The rules the Court has developed closely track the sort of questions I posed above.
In analyzing symbolic speech cases, the Court asks first whether the speaker intended to
convey a particular message, and second whether it is likely that the message was understood
by those who viewed it. The so-called Spence Test, for example, derives from the Court's
opinion in Spence v. Washington. In this case, decided in 1974 a college student in Seattle
hung a United States flag outside his apartment window. He had attached to the flag a peace
symbol to protest the government's action in Cambodia and the fatal events at Kent
State University. His purpose was to associate the American flag with peace instead of war
and violence. Spence was arrested for violating a state statute that made, quote, improper
use of the flag a crime.
The Court held that Spence's conviction was a violation of the First Amendment. The Court
concluded, and I quote, the nature of the appellant's activity, combined with the factual
context and environment in which it was undertaken, lead to the conclusion that he engaged in
a form of protected expression. The Court continued by stating that, and again I quote, an intent
to convey a particularized message, and in the surrounding circumstances the likelihood
was great that the message would be understood by those who viewed it. We are confronted
then with a case of prosecution for the expression of an idea through activity. In his dissent,
Justice William Rehnquist did not challenge the majority's conclusion that Spence's activity
was a kind of communication. But he did deny that this conclusion meant that the state's
prosecution of Spence was unconstitutional. In Rehnquist's opinion, and I quote, a state
may legislate to protect the important state interests, even though an incidental limitation
on free speech results.
Justice Rehnquist also pointed out one of the obvious problems with this symbolic speech
doctrine, and again I quote from his opinion. Virtually any law enacted by a state, when
viewed with sufficient ingenuity, could be thought to interfere with some citizen's preferred
means of expression. But no one would argue, I presume, that a state could not prevent
the painting of public buildings simply because a particular class of protesters believed
their message would best be conveyed through that medium.
So Spence tells us that activity or conduct may sometimes be protected as expressive under
the First Amendment, provided the speaker intends to convey a message, and in the surrounding
circumstances the likelihood is great that the message will be understood by others.
But Justice Rehnquist's dissent in Spence also teaches us that the state may have an
important interest in regulating the conduct that is said to be expressive, and that the
state's interest in regulating the conduct may be independent of the message itself.
It is then the added element of action, or conduct, that tells us why the O'Brien test
for when the state may limit symbolic speech is different than the test for regulating speech
more generally. It is the element of conduct that triggers the state's authority, and
so long as the state's interest is not directed to disapproving the message, the state may
act even if there is an incidental effect upon speech.
But in the case of Spence v. Washington, the court finally ruled that the O'Brien test
was inapplicable. Why? Because in this case the government's interest was directly related
to shutting down the expressive element of the activity.
In O'Brien, by contrast, the court accepted the government's claim that the statute that
prohibited the burning of the draft cards was not an effort to shutter speech. Indeed,
the law did not restrict speech on its face, but instead only addressed conduct that was
not necessarily expressive, and the law applied without regard to whether the draft card was
destroyed in private or before an audience.
Moreover, and if you'll permit me to say so perhaps more troubling, it did not matter
to the court if Congress had in fact passed the law with the intention of stifling protest
as long as it could be justified on another basis.
As Chief Justice Earl Warren put it, and I quote, this court will not strike down an
otherwise constitutional statute on the basis of an alleged illicit legislative motive.
I mentioned earlier that David O'Brien's protest was occasioned by the war in Vietnam.
In fact, a good many of the court's most important symbolic speech cases involve speech or expression
offered in protest to America's involvement in Vietnam, or at least involve protests that
are fundamentally political in nature. Certainly the Spence case falls into that category,
and then a little bit will consider an entire category of symbolic speech cases that involve
the United States flag.
Another important case involving the Vietnam War is Tinker v. Des Moines, which the court
decided in 1969.
Tinker is important for a lot of reasons. For example, it is a leading case on the rights
of public school students, but it is also a very interesting case on the subject of symbolic
speech.
Tinker began when 15-year-old John F. Tinker, along with his younger sister Mary Beth Tinker
and their friend Christopher Eckhart, decided to wear black armbands to their school to
protest the Vietnam War and to support the Christmas truce called for by Senator Robert
F. Kennedy.
The action was in violation of a Des Moines school district policy banning the wearing
of armbands to school. Consequently, all three students were suspended from school.
Interestingly, the Tinker court did not seem very much interested or very much inclined
to open the question of whether the students' armbands were speech or not, and if so, what
kind of speech it might be.
Instead, the court simply announced that the symbolic act of wearing the armbands, and
I quote, was closely akin to peer speech and as such was entitled to protection under
the First Amendment.
Perhaps because the speech was, quote, closely akin to peer speech, whatever that means,
the court did not proceed to apply the O'Brien test that it had devised for symbolic speech
just the year before, nor did it seem to apply the strict scrutiny test that would ordinarily
govern the category of political speech. Indeed, the court never mentioned the fact
that the armbands were political speech at all.
Instead, the court seemed to fashion a new test altogether.
It held that for school officials to justify censoring speech, they, and here I quote,
must be able to show that their action was caused by something more than a mere desire
to avoid the discomfort and unpleasantness that always accompany an unpopular viewpoint.
The court further determined that schools may only prohibit expressive conduct that would,
quote, materially and substantially interfere with the requirements of appropriate discipline
in the operation of the school.
Perhaps the court was disinclined to apply O'Brien because it did not really see Tinker
as a symbolic speech case. After all, the court referred to the speech as something akin
to peer speech.
Or maybe it simply assumed that O'Brien did not apply because school administrators had
banned the armbands, not out of a fear that the armbands would materially disrupt school
operations, but instead on the basis of, quote, an urgent wish to avoid the controversy
which might result from the expression.
If this is so, the court may have concluded that the O'Brien test should not apply since
the third prong of the test specifically requires that the state's interest in regulating the
expression must be unrelated to the substance or the viewpoint of the speech in question.
Whatever the reason, I think Tinker raises very, very interesting questions about how
we define symbolic speech and how much protection we offer it.
Before we leave Tinker, there are a number of other points that are worth exploring.
Assuming the conduct in question is expressive or communicative in nature, is there ever
any good reason to afford such expression less protection than peer speech?
The court's answer appears to center on the state's independent interest in regulating
the conduct or the action involved, but why should the resulting restriction on speech
not be assessed against the strict scrutiny test?
If the court did not seem much concerned in Tinker with the question of whether wearing
an armband was speech, that was precisely the question in another fascinating case.
In the case of Clark v. Community for Creative Nonviolence, decided by the court in 1984,
the court was asked to consider whether sleeping in a national park should be protected under
the First Amendment.
Clark raised a question about the constitutionality of a national park service regulation that
prohibited overnight camping in Lafayette Park, which is across the street from the White
House.
The Community for Creative Nonviolence was an organization that advocated for the plight
of the homeless in our nation's capital.
In 1981, they offered a Thanksgiving dinner for the homeless in Lafayette Park.
The event also featured protest signs and tents set up as a village.
The group proclaimed, Welcome to Reganville, population growing daily, Reaganomics at work.
The protesters planned to sleep in the tents overnight to make their point.
The Community for Creative Nonviolence had a permit for events in connection with the
permitted demonstrations, but the permit did not include the overnight camping.
The protest organizers were informed in advance by the national park service that they would
be arrested if they stayed overnight.
I want to stress that most of the activities conducted by the CCNV had been expressly authorized
by permit.
The only activity not authorized was sleeping overnight in the tents.
The Community for Creative Nonviolence argued that sleeping in the tents constituted a form
of speech and expression.
And although the court did not consider this question at great length, it seems likely
that the sort of speech involved, if there was speech, was political in character.
So let's look at this question for ourselves.
Is sleeping in a tent in a park symbolic speech?
Let's start by applying the Spence test that we saw earlier.
Spence requires that the speaker intend to convey a particularized message and a likelihood
that the message will be understood by others.
No matter how peculiar it may seem in the abstract, sleeping is speech?
In this case, it doesn't seem like it would be so difficult to make the argument that
sleeping in the tents is both intended to make a statement and likely to be understood
by others.
That's because in symbolic speech cases, the question is rarely, if ever, is a given
action speech in the abstract.
The question is always one of context.
The court voted 7-2 to uphold the decision of the National Park Service to prohibit
overnight camping.
In his opinion for the majority, Justice Byron White addressed the symbolic speech claim
by simply assuming that overnight sleeping in connection with the demonstration is expressive
conduct protected to some extent by the First Amendment.
Following the O'Brien test, the court had little difficulty, however, in concluding
that the regulation was content-neutral and advanced an important and substantial interest
in maintaining the integrity of the park as a recreational facility for public use.
In a concurring opinion, Chief Justice Berger rejected the speech claim altogether, saying
and I quote, the actions here claimed as speech entitled to the protections of the First Amendment
simply are not speech.
Rather, they constitute conduct.
On the other hand, Justice Marshall, writing in dissent, complained that the court had
not done enough to recognize the seriousness of the speech claim.
I want to quote Justice Marshall's opinion at a little length.
It is true, he said, that we all go to sleep as part of our daily regimen and that for the
most part, sleep represents a physical necessity and not a vehicle for expression.
But these characteristics need not prevent an activity that is normally devoid of an
expressive purpose from being used as a novel mode of communication.
Sitting or standing in a library is a commonplace activity necessary to facilitate ends, usually
having nothing to do with making a statement.
Moreover, sitting or standing is not conduct that an observer would normally construe as
expressive conduct.
However, for Negroes to stand or sit in a whites-only library in Louisiana in 1965 was
powerfully expressive.
In that particular context, those acts became monuments of protest against segregation.
I mention Justice Marshall's dissent because I think for some of us, the problem discussed
in Clark sounds familiar.
Tent cities, which some of us will certainly associate with the Occupy Wall Street movement,
in fact have a long history as a part of protest movements in the United States.
For example, after World War I, thousands of veterans and their families marched to
Washington, D.C. and set up a tent city to demand cash payment of certificates given
to them for their service.
They were later evicted by the U.S. Army at President Hoover's direction.
Another tent protest in 1933 was diffused with promises from Mrs. Roosevelt.
Consider more recent examples.
The Poor People's Campaign in the 1960s also set up tent cities in Washington, D.C.
And in 1977, a tent city was set up at Kent State University to protest the construction
of a gym on the site of the 1970 massacre.
So there are numerous historical antecedents to the tent cities that have recently been
erected in public parks across the nation by the Occupy Wall Street movement.
But they remain a subject of intense public debate.
For example, of all of the tent cities set up by the Occupy Wall Street movement, perhaps
there was one near you.
Probably the best known and most contentious was the one established in Zuccotti Park in
New York City.
Mayor Bloomberg reacted to the continued occupation of Zuccotti Park by saying, and I quote,
The Constitution doesn't protect tents.
It protects speech and assembly.
As you may recall, eventually the mayor ordered the police to disperse the protesters.
In part arguing, and again I quote, that we can't have a place where only one point
of view is allowed.
There are places where I think it's appropriate to express yourself, and there are places
that are appropriate to set up tent city.
They don't necessarily have to be one and the same.
Is Mayor Bloomberg correct that the Constitution does not protect tents?
Almost certainly he is not, at least in this one sense.
Occupying public parks and camping out in them may well qualify as symbolic speech.
But in another sense, the mayor likely is correct.
Under the O'Brien test, the state may shut down or limit such protests, especially if
the state's interest in doing so is unrelated to the suppression of the message.
As we'll see in Lecture 7, the O'Brien test has a closely related legal doctrine known
as the time, place and manner restrictions.
The time, place and manner restrictions doctrine holds that speech may be limited by reasonable
time, place and manner restrictions, and it is quite possible that a court would uphold
the city's restrictions on that basis as well.
For many Americans, the tent cities associated with the Occupied Movement are emotional and
controversial.
That is often true of First Amendment issues.
It is certainly true of our next illustration of the symbolic speech doctrine, and it is
perhaps the most familiar example.
Is burning an American flag protected by the First Amendment?
The 1989 case of Texas versus Johnson concerned the constitutionality of a Texas statute that
criminalized desecration of the flag.
The case began during the 1984 Republican Presidential Convention in Dallas, Texas,
which nominated President Reagan to run for a second term on the Republican Party ticket.
Protesters outside the convention gathered to announce their dissatisfaction with President
Reagan's administration.
During one such protest, Gregory Lee Joey Johnson, a member of the Revolutionary Committee
Youth Brigade, doused a stolen American flag with kerosene and lit it.
As the flag burned, several protesters chanted, America the red, white and blue, we spit on
you.
Johnson was arrested and charged with violating the Texas law that prohibited the desecration
of a venerated object.
The statute included in its definition of desecration any mistreatment of an object
and I quote, in any way that the actor knows will seriously offend one or more persons
likely to observe or discover his action.
It is important to note that the Texas statute did not address the problem of how to dispose
of a flag after its useful life has ended.
Instead, the whole point of the statute was to protect the flag as a symbol of national
unity and to prevent breaches of the peace that might result from its desecration.
Writing for a sharply divided five to four court, Justice William Brennan began his opinion
with the Spence test.
I don't think you'll be surprised to hear that the court concluded that Johnson had
indeed intended to communicate a message.
Indeed the state of Texas conceded this point and the court similarly had little difficulty
concluding that the message was likely to be understood by those who saw it.
Having concluded that the flag burning constituted symbolic speech, the court then turned to
the application of the O'Brien test.
In the court's view, the crucial first question under O'Brien is whether the state's interest
in outlawing flag burning is unrelated to the suppression of expression itself.
Texas had offered two interests in support of the statute.
One was to prevent a breach of the peace.
A second was to prevent the offense to onlookers that might result from interfering with or
disrupting the flag's status as a symbol of national unity.
In the facts, the court concluded that only the second interest was involved in the decision
to charge Johnson.
The difficulty with the second interest, Justice Brennan concluded, is that it is directly
related to the suppression of a message that might give offense to viewers.
Hence, according to the state of Texas, if one physically treats the flag in a way that
casts doubt that national unity actually exists, the message conveyed is a harmful one.
And therefore may be prohibited.
But in the majority's view, and I quote, if there is a bedrock principle underlying the
First Amendment, it is that the government may not prohibit the expression of an idea
simply because society finds the idea itself offensive or disagreeable.
Moreover, the court noted that under some of its other precedents, Johnson could not
be prosecuted simply for uttering words critical of the flag.
Texas had argued in response that in this case, it sought only to prevent the physical
destruction of the flag, of course not foreclosed by these other decisions.
The majority was not persuaded.
As Justice Brennan concluded, and again I quote him, Texas's focus on the precise nature
of Johnson's expression misses the point of our prior decisions.
Their enduring lesson that the government may not prohibit expression simply because
it disagrees with its message is not dependent on the particular mode in which one chooses
to express an idea.
In a sharply worded dissent, Justice Rehnquist advanced two arguments in support of the statute.
First, he argued that the uniqueness of the flag justifies of governmental prohibition
against flag burning.
The American flag, he wrote, and I quote him, has come to be the visible symbol embodying
our nation.
It does not represent the views of any particular political party, and it does not represent
any particular political philosophy.
The flag is not simply another idea or point of view competing for recognition in the marketplace
of ideas.
Second, Justice Rehnquist argued that flag burning warranted no protection under the
First Amendment because, in his words, it is no essential part of any exposition of ideas,
but rather, and again I quote, the equivalent of an inarticulate grunt or roar that it seems
fair to say, it is no essential part of any exposition of ideas, but rather, and again
I quote, the equivalent of an inarticulate grunt or roar that it seems fair to say is
most likely to be indulged in not to express any particular idea, but to antagonize others.
Now, Justice Rehnquist gives us some real food for thought here, but if you will permit
me, I think both of his arguments in the end are unpersuasive.
The First argues essentially that the flag is so precious, so special, that it is uniquely
off limits to certain kinds of protest.
It's an interesting idea.
The First Amendment permits us to talk, to criticize, and even to reject any and every
idea save one and one alone.
The majority I think correctly noted in response that it was hard on this logic to figure out
why we could not similarly immunize other treasured symbols of the nation from harsh criticism.
Justice Rehnquist's second argument also seems to me flawed.
Burning a flag is far more than just an inarticulate grunt.
Indeed, its power to hurt and to offend is directly related to the power of its underlying
message.
Just don't have that kind of power.
On the other hand, this last point might suggest that if there is an argument for protecting
the flag, perhaps it is this.
Burning a flag is in fact a kind of speech or expression, and likely the expression of
an idea that is irreducibly and undeniably political in character, presumably entitled
to the highest degree of protection.
But not every instance of political speech is automatically entitled to a safe harbor
under the First Amendment.
Even political speech is subject to certain limits, or may be overcome by a compelling
state interest.
The question then becomes, is potential harm to others ever a sufficient reason to limit
speech?
In some ways we have already considered this question.
In lecture 2, for instance, we explored whether harm to one's reputation and dignity ought
to allow defamation suits in cases of actual malice.
And we'll take up the question again in later lectures when we consider other sorts of speech
that may cause harm to others.
One other point on the Texas case.
I do not think we will make much progress here by pretending that no harm follows from
burning the flag, or by minimizing the degree of offense it causes to some of us.
Instead, we must acknowledge that words sometimes do have the capacity to harm.
Once we recognize harm, we can then wrestle with the question of what sorts of harm should
be sufficient to limit speech.
That's an ongoing question.
Sometimes it is easy to forget that the meaning of the First Amendment is always a work in
progress.
An ongoing conversation among all of the branches of government and citizens alike.
This is certainly true with regard to flag burning.
The court's decision in Texas vs. Johnson was remarkably controversial.
Partly to respond to the court's decision, and partly in response to calls for a constitutional
amendment to protect the flag, Congress passed the Flag Protection Act of 1989, which prohibited
the knowing mutilation, defacement, burning, or trampling of the flag.
Unlike the Texas statute, this new statutory effort was directed, its supporters argued,
simply to preserving the physical integrity of the flag as an object.
In United States vs. Eichmann, decided in 1990, Justice Brennan again concluded for
a five to four court that the new statute was also a violation of the First Amendment.
In the court's view, the need to protect the physical integrity of the flag arises only
because of its importance as a symbol of the nation.
Consequently, the new statute also was premised upon the suppression of a message that challenged
or contradicted that symbolic importance.
What do you think?
Would it ever be possible to protect the flag, or any other national icon, without interfering
with freedom of expression?
For instance, would a constitutional amendment that protected the flag as an important if
not unique symbol of the nation offend the values of the First Amendment?
It is certainly not unusual to see references to flags, national anthems, and other symbols
of national identity set forth in national constitutions.
The most do not immunize the flag from desecration or mutilation.
Several such amendments have been proposed in the United States in recent years.
One typical formulation reads, and I quote,
The Congress shall have the power to prohibit the physical desecration of the flag of the
United States.
I hope it is obvious that there would be significant problems of constitutional interpretation raised
by this amendment.
What does physical desecration mean, for example?
But I want to raise a larger point.
Would a flag amendment violate the First Amendment?
Some of you may find my way of putting this question peculiar, so just to be as clear
as possible, I am indeed asking if an amendment to the Constitution can be unconstitutional
because it offends another amendment.
An unconstitutional constitutional amendment?
Such is the stuff I dream about at night.
And the idea, in general, is not quite as peculiar or as strange as it might at first
seem.
The American Supreme Court, at least to my knowledge, has never suggested that such a
thing is possible.
But constitutional courts in Germany, India, and Israel have.
In some, questions concerning whether and when the First Amendment protects symbolic
speech and expressive conduct ask us to consider what speech is and what it means.
They also ask us to think about when a state may have good cause to regulate symbolic speech.
There are no easy answers to these questions.
