So far, we have learned that some things that are not obviously speech, such as money or
sleeping in a park, may nevertheless be protected by the First Amendment, chiefly because they
do have some kind of expressive content.
In this lecture, however, we will see that some things that plainly are speech or expression,
such as obscenity and pornography, are nonetheless entitled to little or no protection under the
First Amendment.
As the court has sometimes said, some sorts of speech fall entirely outside the orbit
of the First Amendment.
As a reminder, we sometimes call this the categorical approach to the First Amendment.
Different categories of expression merit different levels of protection, and indeed
some categories are excluded altogether.
I'm sure you can anticipate some of the obvious difficulties in determining that some sorts
of speech don't merit protection under the First Amendment.
First, we must consider why some forms of expression are said not to deserve such protection.
Why are some kinds of speech especially vulnerable to prohibition?
To answer this question, we must first understand the rationale for excluding some forms of
speech and expression from the protections guaranteed by the First Amendment.
Courts sometimes justify these exceptions because the expression involved may cause
substantial harm to the public, or because it doesn't seem to make a substantial contribution
to the marketplace of ideas.
Both rationales are commonly advanced as reasons for excluding obscenity from First Amendment
protections.
Second, if we say that some forms of expression don't deserve First Amendment protection,
we run into the obvious and by now familiar problem of definition.
We'll see that terms like pornography, obscenity, and offensive are difficult to define with
the degree of precision necessary to satisfy the Constitution.
But to put it another way, the problem is not that we can't define these terms.
The problem is that there are too many definitions and no obvious way to determine which one
should apply or why.
And finally, here's a third problem we encounter if we hold that obscenity or any other form
of expression does not merit First Amendment protection.
Who should have the authority to determine that speech is so harmful that it should be
censored or that it contributes nothing of significance to the marketplace of ideas?
In other words, censorship means investing someone with the awesome power to censor or
to determine when, where, and even whether the First Amendment kicks in.
If men were angels to paraphrase Madison, we'd have no need to fear that power or to suspect
that it might be used unwisely.
But as we all know, most of us are not to be trusted.
Today we're going to look at how the Court has grappled with all three of these problems.
But before we do, I want to clear up a common misperception about the First Amendment and
obscenity.
It is not entirely true that the First Amendment offers no protection at all for obscenity or
pornography, even though I just suggested otherwise.
Here is why.
In the case of Stanley v. Georgia, decided in 1969, the Court struck down a Georgia
statute that made it a crime to possess obscene materials.
The police, searching Robert E. Lai Stanley's home for evidence of another crime, had discovered
three reels of pornographic film.
The Court set aside Stanley's conviction for private possession of obscene materials,
stating that the First Amendment protects the right to receive information and ideas
in the Court's words, regardless of their social worth.
Stanley had argued that the possession statute infringed directly on this right.
As the Court noted, Stanley is, and I quote the Court here, asserting the right to read
or observe what he pleases, the right to satisfy his intellectual and emotional needs in the
privacy of his own home, he is asserting the right to be free from state inquiry into the
contents of his library.
The Court added that a prosecution for mere possession of printed or filmed matter in
the privacy of a person's home also implicated a fundamental right to be free, except in
very limited circumstances from unwanted governmental intrusions into one's privacy.
Thus, as Justice Thurgood Marshall wrote, and I quote,
If the First Amendment means anything, it means that a state has no business telling
a man, sitting in his own house, what books he may read or what films he may watch.
What reason did the state of Georgia proffer for the statute?
Georgia had argued that it possessed the authority to criminalize even the private possession
of obscene materials because it had, as the Court described it, a right to protect the
individual's mind from the effects of obscenity.
The Court responded to this claim with a bit of puzzlement, saying, and I quote,
We are not certain that this argument amounts to anything more than the assertion that the
state has the right to control the moral content of a person's thoughts.
To some, this may be a noble purpose, but it is wholly inconsistent with the philosophy
of the First Amendment.
So Stanley does seem to support a First Amendment right of private individuals to read and view
obscene materials, at least in the privacy of their own homes.
But does Stanley support the proposition that obscene materials are protected by the First
Amendment?
Not at all.
In a subsequent case, Paris Adult Theater 1 vs. Slayton decided in 1973 the Court distinguished
the commercial exhibition of obscene movies in a theater from the private possession of
them in a residence.
The Paris Court concluded that nothing in Stanley or any other case intimated that there
is any fundamental right of privacy to watch obscene movies in a place of public accommodation.
Once a place of public accommodation becomes involved, the Court observed.
The state has interest, and I quote, in the quality of life and the total community environment
as well as possibly the public safety itself, and these become relevant matters upon which
the state can act.
Moreover, in a case called the United States vs. 12 200-foot Reels, also decided in 1973,
the Court upheld an individual's conviction for importing obscene materials, even though
the materials were for personal use.
So it is not entirely true that obscenity is unprotected by the First Amendment.
Stanley suggests that there may be some very limited circumstances, such as in the privacy
of your own home, where the state may not interfere.
But that does not mean that the state cannot make it illegal for you to obtain pornography
from somewhere else and to prosecute you before you make it home.
And even that might not fully describe the extent of the First Amendment's protections.
As we'll see later on, the state can make even the private possession of some particular
forms of pornography, such as child pornography, illegal.
But the main point I want to make right now is just this.
The Stanley case does show that we can't just make the blanket statement that obscenity
is not protected by the First Amendment.
Instead, a more accurate description of the courts' obscenity jurisprudence is that obscenity
in pornography, once we have identified what they are, are entitled to little or no protection
under the First Amendment, except in some limited circumstances.
This is not a recent or a new development in American jurisprudence.
Any student of American history knows that great works of fiction, such as Henry Miller's
Tropic of Cancer or D.H. Lawrence's Lady Chatterley's Lover, have been challenged
as obscene in American courts.
Other works tried for obscenity include James Joyce's Ulysses and Allen Ginsberg's Howell
and other poems.
Many of the early obscenity cases utilized a test proposed in a well-known English case
decided in 1868, and one can still find occasional references to it in American courts.
The case was Regina vs. Hickland.
Hickland involved an English statute that authorized authorities to order the destruction
of books judged to be obscene.
The case concerned Henry Scott, who had resold copies of an anti-Catholic pamphlet entitled
The Confessional Unmasked, showing the depravity of the Romish priesthood, the iniquity of
the confessional, and the questions put to females in confession.
When the pamphlets were ordered destroyed as obscene, Scott appealed, claiming that
his innocent intention was simply to expose problems within the Catholic Church.
The Hickland Court held that all material, quote, tending to deprave and corrupt those
whose minds are open to such immoral influences, is obscene regardless of its artistic or literary
merit, nor was Scott's innocent intention relevant.
It is important to note the practical effect of the Hickland Test.
It permits censorship, based on the effects of the material on the most easily offended
members of the community, and that censorship may occur no matter how important the material
may be as a work of art or literature.
A few isolated passages in a work, and their possible effect on children and others impressionable
or of tender years, might be enough to justify a prohibition.
The Hickland Test was well received in the United States in the late 19th century due
in parts to the efforts of Anthony Comstock.
Comstock's lobbying efforts against obscenity in pornography culminated in the Federal Comstock
Act of 1873, which made it illegal to send any, and I quote, obscene, lewd, and or lascivious
materials through the mail, including contraceptive devices and information about contraception.
The act also banned the distribution of information on abortion for educational purposes and information.
Many states followed with similar statutes.
The Supreme Court's contemporary obscenity jurisprudence, however, begins in 1957 with
the important case of Roth v. United States.
Hickland plays a prominent part in the Roth decision.
The court's majority opinion, written by Justice Brennan, replaced the Hickland Test
with something new.
Justice Brennan began by noting that most of the colonies had restrictions upon a great
variety of speech, oftentimes including libelous, profane, and obscene speech.
At the time of the adoption of the First Amendment, he noted, obscenity law was not
as fully developed as libel law, but there is evidence to show that obscenity, too, was
outside the protection intended by the founders for speech and press.
Nevertheless, the court recognized that the purpose of the First Amendment, quote, is
to assure unfettered interchange of ideas for the bringing about of political and social
changes desired by the people.
And given this purpose, the court went on to conclude, quote, all ideas having even
the slightest redeeming social importance, even ideas hateful to the prevailing climate
of opinion, have the full protection of First Amendment guarantees, unless excludable because
they encroach upon the limited area of more important interests.
But obscenity is a general category, is not, the court concluded, within the area of constitutionally
protected speech or press.
Why not?
The court concluded, and I quote, implicit in the history of the First Amendment is the
rejection of obscenity as utterly without redeeming social importance.
This rejection is mirrored in the universal judgment that obscenity should be restrained,
reflected in the international agreement of over 50 nations, in the obscenity laws of
all the 48 states, and in the 20 obscenity laws enacted by the Congress from 1842 to 1956.
You can probably see where the court's opinion goes next.
If all ideas having even the slightest redeeming social importance are protected, then it remains
only for the majority of the court to determine if the speech in question has any such importance,
or more broadly, to determine if the speech is in fact obscene.
There is no reason at all why the court could not have used the Hicklin definition to do
this, but instead the court devised a new and improved definition.
The Roth test holds that expression is obscene if, quote, when applied to the average person,
applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as
a whole appeals to the purient interest.
Note the differences.
The Roth test is in fact more protective of speech than Hicklin in at least two ways.
First, Hicklin authorized the censorship of materials based just on an isolated passage
in a work, whereas Roth requires an assessment of the dominant theme of the work taken as
a whole.
Second, as we noted earlier, Hicklin makes the most squeamish or easily offended among
us the final barometer of what is obscene.
Under Roth, we replace that judgment with the judgment of an average person applying
not his or her own standards, but rather the contemporary standards of the community.
Moreover, the Roth test requires that the work as a whole must appeal to the purient
interest.
This raises an obvious question.
What is a purient interest in sex?
An interest in sex or sexuality is not by itself necessarily purient.
As Justice Brennan wrote, sex and obscenity are not synonymous.
The portrayal of sex in art, literature, and scientific works is not itself's sufficient
reason to deny the material the constitutional protection of freedom of speech and press.
Sex, a great and mysterious motive force in human life, has indisputably been a subject
of absorbing interest to mankind through the ages.
It is one of the vital problems of human interest and public concern.
What distinguishes a purient interest in human sexuality from an interest in sex as a vital
problem of human interest and public concern?
In a footnote, the court quoted a dictionary definition of purient as, quote, material
having a tendency to excite lustful thoughts.
Purient means also an itching, longing, uneasy with desire or longing, of persons having
itching, morbid, or lascivious longings of desire, curiosity, or propensity, lewd.
In a strongly worded dissent, Justice's Douglas and Black argued that the majority had aired
by fashioning a standard that was insufficiently attentive to the First Amendment.
Justice Douglas wrote, and I quote, when we sustain these convictions, we make the legality
of a publication turn on the purity of thought which a book or tract instills in the mind
of the reader.
I do not think we can approve that standard and be faithful to the command of the First
Amendment.
Such a standard, Justice's Douglas and Black concluded, permitted a censor to quash a vast
domain of expression simply because such expression provokes certain thoughts, not for overt acts
or for antisocial conduct.
In contrast, some other critics of the Roth decision think that the test it developed,
which seemingly permitted a state to prohibit so-called hard core pornography but little
else, was too dismissive of the state's legitimate interests in the negative effects of obscene
materials.
More generally, I think it is reasonably clear that the Roth test, whatever else it may or
may not have accomplished, did very little to clear up the definitional confusion involved
in deciding what materials are obscene and which must be protected.
The confusion is best captured in a decision called Jacob Bellis vs. Ohio, decided in 1964.
Jacob Bellis, a manager of a movie theater, had been convicted of possessing and exhibiting
an allegedly obscene film because his theater had run a French film called Les Amants, The
Lovers, Forgive My French.
A majority of the court reversed the conviction, but in doing so it revealed that the court's
ongoing struggles to decide what obscenity means and what it might be prohibited.
Indeed the court could not find a majority voice.
Justice Brennan wrote for himself and Justice Goldberg, and Justice's Goldberg, Black and
Stewart all wrote concurring opinions.
Justice's Warren and Harlan dissented.
The case is best known for Justice Stewart's opinion, where he wrote about the court's
continuing difficulty in defining obscenity.
Justice Stewart concluded that under Roth, the states are entitled to prohibit only what
he called hardcore pornography.
But it is possible to read the court's opinion in Roth vs. United States, he wrote, in a
variety of ways.
In saying this, I imply no criticism of the court, which in those cases was faced with
the task of trying to define what may be indefinable.
How does one define the indefinable?
Justice Stewart's reply is justifiably famous.
I quote, I shall not today attempt further to define the kinds of material I understand
to be embraced within that shorthand description, and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly
doing so.
But I know it when I see it.
So under Justice Stewart's formulation, obscene speech is not protected by the First Amendment.
But what qualifies as obscene?
He can't say in advance, but he knows it when he sees it.
We probably don't need to spend very much time talking about the problems with this
definition, but I can't help being a little snarky.
Just how much obscene material does one have to see before one can confidently say that
I know it when I see it?
I'm not just being snarky, there's a real problem here.
It can't possibly be the case, Kenneth, that the First Amendment protects only what Justice
Stewart thinks it protects, based on his own personal and subjective experience.
And yet for many years after Roth, it looks like determinations of what materials were
obscene and not protected, and which were not, often did seem to be based on the personal
opinions of a majority of nine Supreme Court justices.
A short aside here.
According to some accounts, for many years the court would have what it called movie
day, when the law clerks and the justices sat down to eat popcorn and to see the porn
films for the cases awaiting decisions.
Some justices, such as Hugo Black, refused to attend movie day, saying, quote, if I want
to go see that movie, I should pay my money.
According to the Brethren, a book written about the inner workings of the court, the
law clerks that drafted the justice's opinion, created shorthand for how the justices decided
if material was obscene.
Ironically, for reasons of decency, I can't repeat them all here.
But I've always loved Justice Stewart's definition, you've already seen it, and which some of
us call the Casablanca Test.
The definition is, I know it when I see it.
In Casablanca, as a navy lieutenant in World War II and watch officer for his ship, Stewart
had seen his men bring back locally produced pornography.
He knew the difference between that hardest of hardcore and much of what came to the court.
In any event, Justice Stewart was not the only member of the court to express some exasperation
following Roth.
Even the author of the Roth opinion, Justice Brennan, concluded that the effort to come
up with a workable definition of obscenity had failed.
In the 1973 Paris Adult Theater decision I mentioned earlier, Brennan wrote, and I think
we need to quote him at some length,
I am forced to conclude that the concept of obscenity cannot be defined with sufficient
specificity and clarity to provide fair notice to persons who create and distribute sexually
oriented materials to prevent substantial erosion of protected speech as a byproduct
of the attempt to suppress unprotected speech and to avoid very costly institutional harms.
In English, that means that Justice Brennan had concluded that it would not be possible
to craft a constitutionally defensible definition of obscenity.
Nevertheless, in the same year, 1973, a majority of the court decided to try its hand at a
definition yet again.
In Miller v. California, the state had arrested a mail order distributor of sexually explicit
materials, Marvin Miller, and charged him with the sale and distribution of obscene
materials.
The court again confirmed that obscenity is not protected by the First Amendment.
And the court seemed disinclined to rethink this basic assumption, concentrating instead
on the lingering and long-standing problem of definition.
Over the objection of Justice Brennan, now in dissent, a new majority, led by Chief Justice
Berger, formulated a new test to replace the Roth Test.
The Miller Test has three parts.
First, the court asks whether the average person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the work taken as a whole appeals to the purient interest.
Second, the court asks whether the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct or excretory functions specifically defined by applicable state law.
And third, the court asks whether the work taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value.
Some elements of the Miller Test should sound familiar.
The first prong, for example, again uses the Purancy Standard of Roth, and the third prong
recalls part of the Roth Test as well, but the second prong is distinctive.
Where the court is requiring the state to define in its criminal laws the specific sorts
of acts it seeks to prohibit.
The purpose of this part of the Miller Test is clear.
It is intended to overcome persistent criticisms that the test for obscenity is ambiguous
or vague.
With perhaps one exception, the Miller Test proposed in 1973 is still the governing analytical
framework in obscenity cases.
The one exception concerns child pornography.
In the case of Ferber vs. New York, decided in 1982, the court ruled that child pornography
or sexual materials that involve children as models or actors causes such significant
harm to the children and to society that a state may ban the materials altogether in
an effort to destroy the market for them.
Indeed, in Osborne vs. Ohio, a case decided in 1990, the court upheld a prohibition on
the private possession of child pornography, thus creating an exception to the Stanley
case we discussed earlier.
In cases that involve child pornography, the state need not show that the material appeals
to the Purian interest of the average person, and the material need not be assessed for
its overall literary, artistic, scientific or political value.
Interestingly, in a 2002 case, Ashcroft vs. Free Speech Coalition, the court struck a
congressional statute that banned virtual child pornography.
In other words, pornography in which adult actors portray children or where computer-drafted
images are generated that look like children.
Writing for the court, Justice Kennedy stressed that the ban upheld in Ferber was based on
how the materials were made and not on the basis of what was communicated.
When it comes to the involvement of actual children, however, child pornography represents
a clear exception to the Miller test.
In most other cases, Miller requires that for materials to be judged obscene, the jury
must apply the community standards to see if the work appeals to the Purian interest
and must also assess whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
Part of the reason for the community standards part of the first prong was precisely to get
the court out of the business of deciding what is and is not obscene on a case-by-case basis.
Another reason rests on the great social and cultural diversity of the United States.
Thus the court concluded, and I quote,
It is not realistic nor constitutionally sound to read the First Amendment as requiring that
the people of Maine or Mississippi accept public depiction of conduct found tolerable
in Las Vegas or New York City.
But who or what exactly is the relevant community?
In federal obscenity cases the community appears to be the area from which jurors are selected.
In state prosecutions the community may be defined by a state statute or by decisions
by state courts or by the community from which the jurors are selected.
But the community standards test, even if it is sensitive to cultural and geographic
differences, might also be criticized for exactly that reason.
Some critics charge that under this standard the meaning of the First Amendment varies
from place to place, something that is obscene in one jurisdiction may not be in another.
Is that a problem?
Is it a rule we would want to apply to other categories of expression, such as political
speech or commercial speech?
If not, why is it appropriate in obscenity cases?
And consider another question, is a local community standards test increasingly obsolete?
After all, pornography is easily accessible through the internet, or so I hear.
Is the internet, or cyberspace, itself a community?
Can communities located in real physical space impose their own local standards on producers
and consumers physically removed from their location?
It will be interesting to see how these issues play out in the Supreme Court in years to
come.
There have already been a few cases in lower courts that address the applicability of the
community standards rule in an age of global internet connectivity.
For example, in the United States versus Thomas, an appeals court rejected the argument that
the relevant community standards were not those of Memphis, Tennessee, where the defendants
had been prosecuted, but rather that a new definition of community was needed altogether,
one that was based on cyberspatial rather than geographical connections among people.
More recently, in Nicky versus Gonzalez, the plaintiff challenged the constitutionality
of the obscenity provisions under the Communications Decency Act of 1996.
She claimed that the provision was unconstitutional as applied to the internet because expression
deemed lawful in some communities and unlawful in others might be restricted due to the open
access of the internet.
The district court concluded that there was insufficient evidence to show that there was
substantial variation in community standards as applied in the Miller test.
There are also ongoing problems with the third prong of the test, which requires the jury
to determine if the work in question, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value.
The court has said that this test is an objective test, or one that should be assessed from the
perspective of a reasonable person.
Among other things, this means that the community standards test required in prong one does
not necessarily apply to the question of value in prong three.
A moment's reflection raises several questions about the third prong of Miller.
Does it make any sense at all to talk about an objective assessment of a work's literary,
artistic, political, or scientific value?
And why must the value of a work fall into one of these categories?
What if a potentially obscene work has significant religious value?
We'll take up a case along these lines in a later lecture on religious freedom.
Come to think of it, why should the work have to have any objective value at all?
Is there a test for truth in the First Amendment?
What the value of a work determined by its popularity in the marketplace of ideas?
Whatever these difficulties, it should be obvious that the Miller test has not actually
succeeded in bringing clarity or predictability to the court's obscenity jurisprudence.
Moreover, I think we can safely conclude that sexually explicit expression is widely and
easily available in the United States, Miller notwithstanding, and that efforts to regulate
it and prohibit it are not likely to wane anytime soon.
In fact, in the decades since Miller, efforts to prohibit sexually explicit expression have
taken two new forms.
One approach seeks to regulate sexually explicit expression as a zoning or land use problem.
Thus, in the case of Young v. American Mini-Theaters Incorporated, decided in 1976, the court considered
the constitutionality of a Detroit zoning ordinance that prohibited adult bookstores
and movie theaters within a thousand feet of any two other regulated uses of property
such as liquor stores or pool halls.
Writing for the court, Justice Stevens upheld the ordinance notwithstanding any negative
effect it might have upon speech, because although the government cannot entirely ban
speech, even erotic or sexually explicit speech that has some value, these materials
nevertheless have less value under the First Amendment.
In an especially interesting passage, Justice Stevens wrote that protecting adult bookstores
is rather unlike protecting political speech of the kind that inspired Voltaire's immortal
comment that he might disagree with the speaker's comment, but defend to the death his right
to make it.
Continuing Stevens wrote, and I quote,
Few of us would march our sons and daughters off to war to preserve the citizen's right
to see specified sexual activities exhibited in the theaters of our choice.
To some observers, Justice Stevens' opinion in Mini-Theaters suggests a new category of
very low value speech, or speech that is indecent but not necessarily obscene.
But Justice Stevens' opinion did not carner a critical fifth vote.
Instead, the fifth vote to uphold the regulation was provided for by Justice Powell in a concurring
opinion.
He specifically rejected the plurality suggestion that non-obscene erotic materials may be treated
as conceptually different from other kinds of protected speech.
Instead, in his words, I view the case as presenting an example of an innovative land
use regulation, implicating First Amendment concerns only incidentally and to a limited
extent.
In City of Renton vs. Playtime Theatres Incorporated, decided in 1986, the court took up the constitutionality
of a municipal ordinance that prohibited adult movie theaters within a thousand feet of any
church, school, residence, or park.
Again, the court upheld the ordinance, finding that advanced, significant and substantial
city interests in preventing crime, protecting retail sales, maintaining property values,
and generally protecting the quality of urban life.
These secondary effects of adult-oriented businesses thus satisfied the substantial
burden test the court often uses in assessing the constitutionality of state regulations
that are found to be content-neutral.
In addition, the court noted that the statute left open alternative avenues of communication.
Finally, in the important case of Barnes vs. Glenn Theater, decided in 1991, the court
upheld a prohibition on totally nude dancing as a part of a general ban on public nudity.
In addition to the zoning approach to regulative scene expression, a second approach attempts
to classify pornography as a kind of civil rights violation.
The leading case here is a 1985 decision by a federal court of appeals in Chicago.
In American booksellers vs. Hudnut, the court considered the constitutionality of an ordinance
passed by the city of Indianapolis.
The ordinance defined pornography, and I quote, as the graphic sexually explicit subordination
of women, whether in pictures or words, including depictions that portray women as sexual objects
who enjoy degradation, pain, humiliation, rape, or physical brutality.
The statute went on to prohibit the coercion of persons into pornographic acts, trafficking
in pornography, and forcing pornography on a person.
In addition, victims of conduct directly traceable to pornography could file suit against the
disseminators of such pornography.
The Indianapolis statute was based on a proposal crafted by Andrea Dworkin and Catherine McKinnon.
Dworkin and McKinnon argued that pornography systematically victimized women, and as such
should be treated as a civil rights problem.
As Dworkin wrote in a well-known law review article, and I quote, pornography, unlike
obscenity, is a discrete, identifiable system of sexual exploitation that hurts women as
a class by creating inequality and abuse.
According for the appellate court, Judge Frank Easterbrook declared the ordinance unconstitutional.
The logic of the judge's opinion is very interesting.
Judge Easterbrook began by accepting the premise behind the prohibition.
He agreed, in other words, that pornography may send messages about women and may cause
harm in doing so.
But in Judge Easterbrook's words, this simply demonstrates the power of pornography as speech.
All of these unhappy effects depend on mental intermediation.
Pornography affects how people see the world, their fellows, and social relations.
On this view, there can be little doubt that pornography is speech or expression.
The state's efforts to silence this expression is thus a kind of discrimination against speech
based on the content or viewpoint of the speech in question.
Speech that subordinates women, Judge Easterbrook concluded, is prohibited, while speech that
does not is permitted no matter how sexually explicit it might be.
Judge Easterbrook described this as a kind of thought control.
The Supreme Court affirmed the appellate court's decision without opinion, so we should assume,
for now at least, that Judge Easterbrook's decision represents the current state of the
law.
Essentially, Judge Easterbrook is asserting that misogynistic pornography should be entitled
to First Amendment protection because it expresses an idea.
Would this assertion cause us to rethink the categorical exclusion of obscenity from First
Amendment protection altogether?
And if obscenity does qualify for some degree of protection, what tests should the state
have to satisfy in order to justify regulating or prohibiting such speech?
For another point of view, consider the decision by the Supreme Court of Canada in Regina
versus Butler, decided in 1992.
In Butler, the Canadian court was asked to decide if an anti-pornography statute that
banned degrading or dehumanizing materials and that placed women in positions of subordination,
servile submission, or humiliation violated Section 2 of the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms.
Section 2 of the Charter guarantees freedom of expression.
The Canadian court concluded that in general, laws against obscenity do contravene Section
2 of the Charter.
But the court also found that the materials in question fell outside the protection of
the Charter because they involved the undue exploitation of sex and the degradation of
human sexuality.
In its opinion, the court wrote that the anti-pornography measure could be justified as a reasonable
limit on expression prescribed by law.
Because the objective of the law was not moral approbation, but the avoidance of harmed society,
the threat to equality resulting from exposure to certain types of violence and degrading
material, the state was authorized to prevent it.
One effect of Butler, ironically, was the later use of the statute to prosecute pornography
that was said to promote sex-positive equality.
When Little Sister's Book and Art Emporium vs. Canada decided in the year 2000, the court
applied the Butler analysis to homosexual pornography and thus upheld its application
to gay and lesbian-related literature.
The Canadian decision charts an interesting course.
In some ways, it seems to accept the first proposition advanced by Judge Easterbrook in
the Hudnut case that some kinds of pornography are, in fact, expressive and should count
as speech.
But in another respect, in its willingness to permit restrictions on speech because
that speech can harm others, the Canadian decision comes closer to the general rule in
the United States, which is that obscene materials are entitled to very little protection.
And it is true, as we have learned in this lecture, that pornography and obscenity are
generally not protected by the First Amendment.
This is because a majority of justices have had little difficulty concluding that sexually
explicit materials, or materials that lack serious artistic, political, scientific, or
literary merit, do not significantly advance the exalted purposes of the First Amendment.
But there remains disagreement over how to define obscenity in a way that does not chill
speech more generally.
That problem is also one we'll take up in our next lecture concerning offensive speech.
