Lecture 6 – The First Amendment and Hate Speech
Imagine a loud and boisterous parade of skinheads.
Neo-Nazis decked out in combat boots and t-shirts, sporting swastikas,
and razor cuts through a predominantly Jewish area of your community.
Or consider the plan of a well-known anti-Arab political leader
to conduct a march through an Arab neighborhood.
The first scenario recalls the famous Nazi march in Skokie, Illinois,
where a federal district court concluded that, I quote,
speech may not be punished merely because it offends.
The second corresponds to a well-known case in Israel,
where the Israeli Supreme Court took the opposite view.
Upholding a ban on a proposed march because, and I quote,
a near certainty that the feelings of a religious or ethnic minority
be really and harshly hurt is enough to justify limiting that speech.
Are these spectacles a kind of speech that should be protected by the First Amendment?
Or are they a kind of assault and a front to the dignity of others
and perhaps the occasion for a violent response?
Do we have a First Amendment right to say hateful things
that may hurt others or words that might provoke violence?
Is there a difference between speech that is hateful
and speech that is simply offensive or which offends common norms of civility?
As we've already seen, the court has sometimes protected speech
that many of us might find uncivil, offensive, or even hateful.
Recall, for example, Texas versus Johnson,
the flag-burning case we addressed in lecture two.
In that case the court asserted, and I quote,
if there is a bedrock principle underlying the First Amendment,
it is that government may not prohibit the expression of an idea
simply because society finds the idea itself offensive or disagreeable.
But Texas versus Johnson hardly settles the matter.
Many argue that so-called fighting words or hate speech should be banned,
not because they are disagreeable,
but because they harm others or undermine our commitment
to other equally important constitutional norms and values.
Those values may include the promotion of civility in public discourse,
respect for others, including racial and other minorities,
and a commitment to human equality.
We already have learned that our commitment to freedom of expression
does not always outweigh our commitment to other basic constitutional norms and values.
We routinely tolerate restrictions on speech,
sometimes because we think the expression in question
does little or nothing to contribute to the marketplace of ideas
or to the essential aims of self-government,
and sometimes because we place a higher value on other claims,
such as preventing threats to democracy itself or harm to the community.
These are difficult issues.
We can't simply dismiss them based on nursery rhymes
about the differences between words and sticks and stones.
Words can be strong stuff.
Indeed, the power of words to change the world is partly why we protect them,
and sometimes even why we forbid them.
Recall our discussion in lecture two, for example,
of the difference between advocacy and incitement.
It seems almost a contradiction in terms
to suggest that we should protect any and all words
because, in the end, they are just words.
So our inquiry into the First Amendment and fighting words
and other forms of offensive expression
raises fundamental, if not intractable, questions.
On what grounds, if any,
should we conclude that freedom of speech outweighs our commitment to equality
or to the dignity or emotional well-being of others
or to civility?
On the other hand,
if we can silence speech because it offends
or when it hurts,
will anything be left of freedom of speech?
As I indicated in earlier lectures,
the idea that entire categories of speech
might fall outside the First Amendment,
or the related idea
that some categories of speech deserve more or less protection
is often called the categorical approach to the First Amendment.
By most accounts,
the categorical approach to the First Amendment
made its first appearance
in a case called Cieplinski vs. New Hampshire
decided in 1942.
By the way, Cieplinski is my favorite case of all time.
The case began when on a Saturday afternoon,
Walter Cieplinski,
a Jehovah's Witness,
managed to offend passersby
and a crowd of people
in the small city of Rochester, New Hampshire.
Cieplinski's speech included references to organized religion as a racket.
Fearing an agitated crowd,
a policeman escorted Cieplinski to the police station
where Cieplinski confronted a town official he had met earlier in the day,
including him a god-damned racketeer
and a damned fascist.
Some accounts of the case
suggest that Cieplinski was as much a victim as a provocateur,
arguing that members of the crowd and the local police
may have mocked him for the witness's well-known refusal to salute the flag,
a stance that itself gave rise
to two very important free speech cases.
Minersville vs. Gobitis decided in 1939
where a majority of the court
upheld the suspension of Jehovah's students for refusing to salute the flag
and West Virginia vs. Barnett
decided in 1943
where the court overruled Gobitis.
Whatever the facts,
Cieplinski was charged and convicted
under a New Hampshire statute
that made it illegal for anyone to address
quote, any offensive, derisive,
or annoying word to anyone
who is lawfully in any street or public place
or to call him by an offensive or derisive name.
If the New Hampshire statute seems breathtakingly broad,
it's illegal to address an annoying word to another person.
Really?
The court nonetheless had no difficulty upholding it.
In a unanimous opinion by Justice Frank Murphy,
the court began with the observation, quote,
that it is well understood
that the right of free speech
is not absolute at all times
and under all circumstances.
Justice Murphy next insisted
in a long passage that I must quote
that there are certain well-defined
and narrowly limited classes of speech
the prevention and punishment of which
have never been thought to raise any constitutional problem.
These include the lewd and obscene,
the profane, the libelous,
and the insulting or fighting words.
Those which, by their very utterance,
inflict injury or tend to incite
an immediate breach of the peace.
It has been well observed, Justice Murphy continued,
that such utterances are no essential part
of any exposition of ideas
and are of such slight social value
as a step to truth
that any benefit that may be derived from them
is clearly outweighed by the social interest
in order and morality.
Here we have both a description
and a justification for the categorical approach
to speech questions.
The description is straightforward.
There are certain well-defined
and narrowly limited classes of speech
including the lewd, the obscene,
the profane, the libelous, and fighting words
that the state may regulate
with little constitutional problem.
The rationale is equally straightforward.
The state may punish these categories of expression
because they are not an essential part
of any exposition of ideas
and are of slight social value.
In response to the obvious,
if not alarming, expansiveness of the statute,
the court noted that the New Hampshire Supreme Court
had limited it to the prohibition of fighting words
or to speech by which its very utterance
tends to provoke others to violence
or to cause a breach of the peace.
Moreover, the statute only applied
to speech in a public place.
So as the Supreme Court defined the term,
fighting words refers to those words
which by their very utterance inflict injury
or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace.
Now to some of you, these may not seem
like significant limitations.
After all, some of us are more easily offended
or provoked than others
and it is not always easy to tell
what will set someone else off.
A rule that prohibits all words
that in fact may cause a breach of peace
seems to hold speech hostage to those of us,
like myself, who are easily offended.
To guard against this,
the New Hampshire Supreme Court wrote
and the Supreme Court of the United States agreed
that fighting words may be limited
only when, quote,
men of common intelligence
would understand that the words are likely
to cause an average addressee to fight.
The English language has a number of words and expressions
which by general consent are fighting words
when said without a disarming smile.
So an inquiry into the words alone
will not tell us if they are fighting words.
We must also know in what context they were spoken,
as an aside.
I wondered just how much power
a disarming smile has to take the sting out of words.
Every day when I get home,
my little dog rushes to greet me with inexpressible joy
and as he jumps on my lap and licks my face,
I say the most outrageous things to him,
like, what an ugly little puppy you are.
No wonder I had to adopt you.
The things I say to that dog,
no human being should say to anyone,
but they're not fighting words,
in part because my dog knows that I am only kidding him
and he can tell because I have a disarming smile
and I make a friendly gesture.
So we must also know the context
in which fighting words have been spoken.
In the court's formulation,
fighting words must be spoken face to face,
directed to an individual
and not robbed of their sting
by a disarming smile or a friendly gesture,
all of which may still leave you
with one unanswered question.
Is calling someone a god-damned racketeer
and a damned fascist
really a provocation to violence
or likely to cause a breach of peace?
I'm inclined to think not,
but maybe the words had more bite in the early 1940s.
In the court's judgment,
quote, argument is unnecessary to demonstrate
that the Appalachian's damned racketeer
and damned fascist
are epithets likely to provoke
the average person to retaliation
and thereby cause a breach of the peace.
In any case,
Jeplinski has continuing significance
in First Amendment jurisprudence,
in part just because it is one of the first cases
to embrace the categorical approach
to the First Amendment
and in part also
because it provides some of the scaffolding
for efforts to prohibit hate speech,
which will take up in just a few moments.
But before we move on,
I want to return to the statute involved in Jeplinski.
Remember that the statute made it illegal
for anyone to address, quote,
any offensive, derisive, or annoying word
to anyone who is lawfully in any street
or public place
and call him by an offensive or derisive name.
Contrast that language
with the following language
taken from legislation recently proposed
in the state of Arizona
and again I quote,
it is unlawful for any person
with intent to terrify, intimidate,
threaten, harass, annoy, or offend
to use any electronic or digital device
and use any obscene, lewd, or profane language
or suggest any lewd or lascivious act
or threaten to inflict physical harm
to the person or property of any other person.
It is also unlawful to otherwise disturb
by repeated anonymous telephone calls
or electronic or digital communications
the peace, quiet, or right of privacy
of any person at the place
where the telephone calls or communications were received.
If the Arizona statute
makes it illegal to use the internet
to terrify, intimidate, threaten, harass,
annoy, or offend someone,
would it satisfy the terms of Chiplinsky?
It almost seems unimaginable
an internet purged of offensive and annoying language.
It's difficult for me to see how such a statute
could pass the Chiplinsky test.
Do the Chiplinsky rules make any sense at all
if applied to the internet?
Would they kill the internet?
We saw in our last lecture
that the categorical approach to the First Amendment
proffered in Chiplinsky
has served as a part of the rationale
for excluding obscenity and pornography
from First Amendment protection.
Should such exclusions extend to words
that although not obscene
may be offensive or crude?
The court addressed this question
in the well-known case
of Cohen v. California
decided in 1971.
19-year-old Paul Robert Cohen
was arrested in a hallway
just outside a Los Angeles courtroom
for wearing a jacket
bearing an expletive
in this case, the F-word.
Cohen's jacket bore the phrase
F the Draft.
A lower court noted that women and children
were in the area where Cohen was arrested.
Cohen was charged with violating a California law
that prohibited maliciously
and willfully disturbing the peace or quiet
of any neighborhood or person
by offensive conduct
sentenced to 30 days in jail.
The California court that appell
Cohen's conviction
determined that the term offensive conduct
meant, and I quote,
behavior which has a tendency to provoke others
to acts of violence
or to in turn disturb the peace.
Although the decision may not seem
all that important,
it serves for us two significant purposes.
First, just as Harlan's opinion for the court
is itself a very useful primer
on some basic First Amendment doctrines
and it will be good for us to take a look at it
as a review.
Second, and just as important,
Cohen establishes the general principle
that unlike fighting words,
offensive speech is generally protected
by the Constitution.
But first, an unimportant point.
Just as Harlan never actually uses
the F word in his opinion
and his clerks later reported
that he found the word deeply offensive.
So I wonder,
when he wrote this very first sentence
in the opinion, I quote,
this case may seem at first blush
too inconsequential to find its way
into our books.
If the use of the phrase first blush
is an intentional play on words,
nothing in the Constitution prevents a justice
from trying his hand at a joke once in a while.
Just as Harlan starts his opinion
by noting that Cohen's conviction
was solely for the offensiveness
of the words on his jacket
and not for any conduct
associated with the jacket.
As Harlan states and I quote,
the only conduct which the state sought to punish
is the fact of communication.
Thus we deal here with a conviction
resting solely upon speech.
Just as Harlan also concludes
that the question presented concerns
pure speech, not symbolic speech,
and so the O'Brien test we encountered
in lecture three does not apply.
Moreover, just as Harlan notes,
the state cannot punish Cohen
based simply on the content
of the message his jacket displayed,
at least not without showing
that he intended to incite others
to illegal conduct.
As a consequence,
just as Harlan concludes,
Cohen's conviction rests and I quote,
squarely upon his exercise
of the freedom of speech
protected from arbitrary governmental interference
by the Constitution.
Cohen's conviction, in other words,
can only be justified
if it is a valid regulation
of the time, place, or manner
in which the message was displayed,
not on the basis of the message itself.
Harlan continues by saying,
and again I quote,
this does not end the inquiry, of course,
for the First and Fourteenth Amendments
have never been thought
to give absolute protection
to every individual
to speak whenever or wherever he pleases
or to use any form of address
in any circumstances that he chooses.
Having made this concession, however,
Harlan significantly goes on to say,
and again I quote,
in this vein too,
we think it is important to note
that several issues typically associated
with such problems
are not presented here.
Okay, so what sorts of issues
are not present in Cohen
according to the court?
First, the conviction cannot be sustained
on the basis of a claim
that the statute has as its object
the protection of the decorum
and the dignity of the courthouse,
chiefly because the statute itself
included no such limitation.
Secondly, the conviction
could not be appelled on the claim
that Cohen's speech fell into one
of the categories of speech
that the court had previously held
were outside the First Amendment.
The expression was not, for example, obscene
because it was not erotic in any way.
As Justice Harlan put it,
it cannot plausibly be maintained
that this vulgar allusion
to the selective service system
would conjure up such psychic stimulation.
But I'm sure if you think about Cohen's speech,
you'll agree that obscenity isn't really the issue.
Isn't the obvious question instead
whether the speech amounts to fighting words
like those used in Chieplinski?
It's not too difficult to foresee
some individuals taking great offense
at Cohen's speech, is it?
The court rejected this analysis as well.
Remember, under Chieplinski,
provocative speech does not amount to fighting words
unless it is, quote,
directed to the person of the hearer.
That was not the case here,
for as the court observed,
no individual, actually, or likely to be present
could reasonably have regarded the words
on a pellet's jacket as a direct personal insult.
Finally, the court addressed at length
an issue we have yet to consider in this course.
Were Cohen's words thrust upon
an unwilling or captive audience?
And if so, is that reason enough
to prohibit the speech?
The lower court, you'll remember,
made a point of noting that women and children
were in the vicinity.
Just as Harlan noted that in some circumstances,
speech might in fact be thrust upon
an unwilling or captive audience,
and that in limited circumstances
the privacy interests of those persons
might trump a speech claim.
But that was not the case here,
because, and I quote,
those in the Los Angeles courthouse
could effectively avoid further bombardment
of their sensibilities simply by averting their eyes.
The court added that one's privacy interest
when walking down the halls of a courthouse
is, quote, nothing like the interest in being free
from unwanted expression in the confines
of one's own home.
Having run through and rejected
a laundry list of possible reasons
why California might limit Cohen's speech,
the court concluded in a dramatic passage,
and I quote,
the constitutional right of free expression
is powerful medicine in a society
as diverse and populous as ours.
It is designed and intended
to remove governmental restraints
from the arena of public discussion,
putting the decision as to what views
shall be voiced largely into the hands of each of us.
In the hope that use of such freedom
will ultimately produce a more capable citizenry
and more perfect polity,
and in the belief that no other approach
would comport with the premise of individual dignity
and choice upon which our political system rests.
But what of the claim that Cohen's speech
hardly rises to the elevated sort of discourse
that will produce a more capable citizenry
and produce a more perfect polity,
or that it comports with the values
of human dignity and self-government?
Harlan's response is instructive.
That is a cost of our commitment to freedom of speech.
Again, his words are far better than any I could use.
To many, he wrote,
the immediate consequence of this freedom
may often appear to be only verbal tumult,
discord, and even offensive utterance.
These are, however, within established limits,
in truth necessary side effects
of the broader enduring values
which the process of open debate permits us to achieve.
That the air may at times seem filled with verbal cacophony
is, in this sense, not a sign of weakness,
but of strength.
We cannot lose sight of the fact
that in what otherwise might seem a trifling
and annoying instance of individual distasteful abuse
of a privilege, these fundamental societal values
are truly implicated.
That is why wholly neutral futilities
come under the protection of free speech
as fully as do Keats poems or Dunn's sermons.
And why, so long as the means are peaceful,
the communication need not meet standards of acceptability.
Contrast the majority's impassioned defensive speech
with Justice Blackman's dissent,
joined by Chief Justice Berger and Justice Black,
and in part by Justice White.
I quote,
Cohen's absurd and immature antique
was mainly conduct and little speech.
Further, if the words were speech,
they were fighting words,
and thus subject to limitation on that basis.
I'd like to return for a moment
to the very first point of analysis in the court's opinion,
a point the court did not actually develop at any length.
Does the state have a legitimate interest
in preserving civility and decorum
in certain places or locations?
Is the court simply too dismissive of the claim
that public spaces and public discourse
are shared spaces and that indignities in them
devalue us all as social creatures
and debase the dignity of civic life?
And if so, are there times when that interest
should be substantial enough to outweigh a speech claim?
Does it matter that Cohen's speech was political speech?
On the other hand,
should the most squeamish among us set the standard
for what sorts of expression are tolerable in the public square?
You may remember from our last lecture
that we addressed this very problem
in considering the court's use of the Hicklin test
in obscenity cases.
Our expansive protections for speech like Cohen's means, of course,
that there are times when we might find ourselves exposed to speech
that is not only offensive and deeply so,
but perhaps also outrageous.
Consider, for example, the court's 2011 decision
in the case of Snyder v. Phelps.
In many ways, the facts of this case seem outrageous.
On March 10, 2006,
the Westboro Baptist Church, led by pastor Fred Phelps,
picketed the funeral of U.S. Marine Lance Corporal
Matthew A. Snyder, who was killed in an accident in Iraq.
Although Snyder was not gay,
the Westboro Church had picketed hundreds of other funerals
to protest what they considered the increasing acceptance of homosexuality,
both in the military and in American society as a whole.
Picketers displayed placards, such as,
America is doomed, you're going to hell,
God hates you, and semper fi fags,
and thank God for dead soldiers.
The church even denounced Snyder's parents for raising him as a Catholic,
stating on their website that they, quote,
taught Matthew to defy his creator and raised him for the devil.
Matthew's father, Albert Snyder, sued Phelps,
the Westboro Baptist Church,
and two of Phelps' daughters for defamation,
intrusion upon seclusion,
publicity given to private life,
and intentional infliction of emotional distress.
As Snyder testified at trial, and I quote,
they turned this funeral into a media circus,
and they wanted to hurt my family.
They wanted their message to be heard,
and they didn't care who they stepped over.
My son should have been buried with dignity,
not with a bunch of clowns outside.
But writing for an eight to one court,
Chief Justice John Roberts wrote,
we cannot react to Snyder's pain by punishing the speaker.
As a nation, we have chosen a different course
to protect even hurtful speech on public issues
to ensure that we do not stifle public debate.
But was the expression in this case really related to a matter of public concern?
The court observed, and I quote,
while these messages may fall short of refined social or political commentary,
the issues they highlight,
the political and moral conduct of the United States and its citizens,
the fate of our nation,
homosexuality in the military,
and scandals involving the Catholic clergy
are matters of public import.
Thus, in the court's view, quoting,
what Westboro said in the whole context of how and where it chose to say it
is entitled to special protection under the First Amendment,
and that protection cannot be overcome
by a jury finding that the picketing was outrageous.
Only Justice Alito dissented,
arguing that at least some of the group's speech directly attacked,
indeed brutalized the Snyder family,
and therefore did not relate to a matter of public concern.
In Alito's view, quoting,
our profound national commitment to the free and open debate
is not a license for the vicious verbal assault that occurred in this case.
It's worth stopping here for a moment to spend some time with Justice Alito's dissent.
Justice Alito's references to brutalization and verbal assault intrigue me.
I wonder if the Justices' comments indicate that he might be receptive to a claim
that certain kinds of hate speech also brutalize or assault the persons to whom they are directed.
We will want to revisit this question when we take up the court's hate speech cases
in just a few moments.
It seems Chiplinski tells us that fighting words fall entirely outside the orbit of the First Amendment.
Cohen and Snyder, on the other hand, tell us that offensive words,
if they are not fighting words or obscene, are generally protected.
Probably that summary is too blunt to be of any real use to any of us.
Many scholars think that Chiplinski is largely obsolete,
and at least by some estimations, the court has rarely, if ever,
upheld a conviction under the fighting words doctrine since Chiplinski itself was decided.
On the other hand, what about the seemingly recent development of hate speech laws?
Are hate speech laws just a refined version of the old fighting words doctrine?
Or should we think of them instead as another kind of offensive speech?
There is no single definition of hate speech.
But one common approach is to define it as speech that disparages a person or a group
on the basis of some characteristics such as race, color, ethnicity, gender, disability, sexual orientation,
nationality, religion, or some other characteristic.
Under this approach, many forms of racist or sexist speech might qualify as hateful
and might, on that basis alone, be proscribed.
Although in many ways hate speech laws seem of recent vintage,
there are cases involving similar prohibitions from the 1950s.
The most significant of these is a case called Boharney v. Illinois, decided in 1952.
In this case, a sharply divided court upheld an Illinois criminal libel statute
that proscribed publications that portrayed the, and I quote here,
the depravity, criminality, unchastity, or lack of virtue of a class of citizens
of any race, color, creed, or religion that exposes them to contempt, derision, or obliquy,
or which might produce a riot or breach of the peace.
Although the decision has never been overruled, it's not clear to most of us that Boharney remains good law,
especially in light of the court's more recent cases involving racist speech.
The most important case on the subject is RAV v. City of St. Paul, decided in 1992.
RAV, by the way, are the initials of the adolescent petitioner in this case.
The case arose from what might be described as a classic hate crime.
In the pre-dawn hours of June 21st, 1990, several teenagers allegedly made a cross
by taping together broken chair legs.
They then allegedly burned the cross inside the fenced yard of an African-American family.
They were charged under a city ordinance that provided, and I quote,
whoever places on public or private property a symbol, object, appellation, characterization, or graffiti,
including but not limited to a burning cross or Nazi swastika,
which one knows or has reasonable grounds to know arouses anger, alarm, or resentment in others
on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, or gender,
its disorderly conduct and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Relying in part on Chaplinsky, Minnesota state courts had construed the modifying phrase,
arouses anger, alarm, or resentment in others, to limit the ordinance to conduct that amounts to fighting words,
or to conduct that itself inflicts injury or tends to incite immediate violence.
The majority of the United States Supreme Court, in an opinion by Justice Scalia,
struck the statute as a violation of the First Amendment.
Although the opinion is complicated, we can summarize it in this way.
The ordinance was unconstitutional because it was not content neutral.
Rather than prescribing any and all forms of fighting words, Justice Scalia noted,
the ordinance prohibited only those fighting words that aroused anger or alarm on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, or gender.
Left untouched, the court observed, were fighting words based on political affiliation, union membership, or sexual orientation.
In this way, Justice Scalia concluded, the law was under-inclusive, and that under-inclusiveness amounts to a content-based regulation of speech.
As we have seen in earlier lectures, content-based regulations are subject to a very rigorous level of judicial scrutiny.
Thus, in Justice Scalia's words, one could hold up a sign saying, for example, that all anti-Catholic bigots are misbegotten,
but not that all Papists are, for that would insult and provoke violence on the basis of religion.
St. Paul has no such authority to license one side of a debate to fight freestyle while requiring the other to follow Marquis of Queensbury rules.
For a different approach, consider the concurring opinion written by Justice White and joined by three other Justices.
Justice White began from a proposition he traced directly to Cieplinski, that fighting words are entirely outside the First Amendment.
As a consequence, Justice Scalia's reference to content-based regulations and the consequent necessity for strict scrutiny was irrelevant.
Moreover, these Justices thought that the Ordinance might well have satisfied strict scrutiny if properly applied,
while again reiterating that it would not be necessary under the fighting words doctrine even to use that standard.
Why then did Justice White also vote to strike the statute?
In his view, the Ordinance did not actually satisfy the conditions said in Cieplinski.
The hate speech proscribed by the Ordinance was speech that aroused anger, alarm, or resentment in others.
That's not enough.
As Justice White wrote, the mere fact that expressive activity causes hurt feeling, offense, or resentment does not render the expression unprotected.
Now, as I suggested before, I wonder how Justice Alito might have voted in RAV.
Would he find that a cross-burning is, to use the words he used in Snyder, a vicious verbal assault?
Or is there something different about this case?
Sometimes Justices move in unexpected ways.
Scholars disagree about how much room is left after RAV for states to prescribe hate speech.
Some scholars think that a general prohibition of all forms of hate speech, perhaps limited to the form of fighting words, might survive the court's opinion in RAV.
But I think no one knows for sure.
All we can say is that so far, laws that seek to limit hate speech have a very high burden to pass.
One interesting side note.
A year after RAV, the Supreme Court unanimously upheld, in a case called Wisconsin vs. Mitchell, a statute that imposed stiffer sentences for racially motivated assaults than for other types of assaults.
According to the court, the statute did not violate the First Amendment because it was aimed at conduct, not speech.
And in another case, Virginia vs. Black decided in 2003, the court upheld a state statute that made cross-burning with the intent to intimidate illegal.
The majority, in an opinion by Justice O'Connor, argued that cross-burning has a history, and I quote, as a particularly virulent form of intimidation.
Consequently, a state could prohibit that form of expression as a signal of impending violence.
Justice Thomas dissented, arguing that cross-burning is conduct, not expression, and therefore its suppression does not raise serious First Amendment issues.
The result in RAV is not unique, but it might be described as unusual, at least in comparison to other constitutional democracy.
Generally speaking, international human rights laws tend to lead to a different result.
For example, under the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights, the European Court has upheld laws prohibiting racist speech.
For an alternative analysis, we might contrast RAV with the decision by the Canadian Supreme Court.
In Regina vs. Kegstra, decided in 1990, the Canadian court sustained a criminal statute on hate speech.
Kegstra, a public high school teacher, was charged with willfully promoting hatred against an identifiable group by making repeated anti-Semitic statements to his students.
The court found that the criminal prohibition in question did violate Section 2 of the Charter, guaranteeing freedom of speech,
but it determined also that the law could be justified because racist speech causes significant harm to members of the maligned group and to society as a whole.
Such consequences, the Canadian court wrote, bear heavily in a nation that prides itself on tolerance and the fostering of human dignity through, among other things,
respect for the many racial, religious and cultural groups in our society.
In addition, such speech, the court concluded, tended to undermine Canada's commitment to equality.
One especially interesting aspect of the Canadian court's opinion in Kegstra is its response to the familiar argument that the remedy for speech we dislike is more speech,
or the related assumption that with more speech, truth will eventually triumph over falsehood.
The court quoted approvingly from a report by a committee charged with examining hate propaganda, noting that, and I quote,
the individual is often swayed and even swept away by hysterical, emotional appeals, and we act irresponsibly if we ignore the ways in which emotion can drive reason from the field.
The emotive power of speech, the Canadian court seems to say, can overcome reason, and we cannot always assume that the remedy for distasteful or untrue speech will be more speech.
If that is true, then what is the remedy?
The Canadian court appears more willing than the Supreme Court of the United States to accept the idea that sometimes the remedy for offensive speech should be limits on what we can say.
As we end this lecture, we should again return to first principles.
Our commitment to freedom of speech, if it is serious, must surely require us to tolerate a wide range and variety of expression that many will find annoying, impolitic, or offensive.
But does it also require us to suffer the indignities and perhaps the very real harm that offensive or hateful speech can sometimes cause?
In asking such questions, we must consider not only how deep our commitment to speech runs, but also the meaning and vitality of our other constitutional commitments, including those of human dignity and equality.
