Lecture 7 Does it matter where you speak?
We have seen in our previous lectures that the First Amendment does not offer blanket
protection for any and all kinds of speech.
In this lecture, we will see that what we can say is sometimes a function of when and
where we want to speak.
In particular, we will consider whether, and to what extent, citizens can speak in different
kinds of places, such as sidewalks, city streets, and public parks, or in public schools, or
on private property, such as in shopping malls.
Let's start with a familiar example.
The President has announced that we are going to war in somewhere else-a-stand.
You and your compatriots oppose this foolish course, and hope to persuade others of its
folly through peaceful, nonviolent protest.
Here is my question.
Is your expression, let's say it consists of signs, slogans, and songs, protected by
the First Amendment?
Let's say the slogan is something truly inventive and catchy, like, hell no, we won't go.
Where is somewhere else-a-stand?
We don't even know.
Is this kind of speech protected?
The answer?
It depends.
But on what?
One consideration, as we saw in lecture two, might be the character of the expression.
Here we have, most likely, overtly political speech, or what we sometimes call high-value
speech.
And we know that political speech is generally entitled to a very high degree of protection
under the First Amendment.
A second consideration, however, asks us to determine whether the speech in question is
peer speech or symbolic speech.
You know that if it is symbolic speech, it is entitled to somewhat less protection under
the O'Brien test.
The example I have given you mixes elements both of symbolic speech and peer speech, and
I think it is likely that the court will treat it as peer speech.
As we shall see in this lecture, however, much of the answer depends not only on what
you say, and how you say it, but also where you say it.
The very same signs, slogans, and songs will likely be protected in a city park, but not
in an airport, or the Mall of America, and certainly not in my front yard.
Why a park, but not a shopping mall?
The answer is that one is a public forum, and one is private property.
The rules for public forums are different than those for private property, which leads us
to ask, what is a public forum?
As described by the Supreme Court in the case of Hague v. CIO, decided in 1939, the public
forum actually has a deceptively simple definition.
A public forum is a place or property, owned by the public and maintained by the state.
That has by long standing tradition, and I'm quoting the court now, been used for purposes
of assembly, communicating thoughts between citizens, and discussing public questions.
Such use of the streets and public places has, from ancient times, been a part of the privileges,
communities, rights, and liberties of citizens.
From this decision, we can derive what legal scholars call the public forum doctrine.
Essentially, the public forum doctrine provides that the rights of a state to limit expressive
activity are more closely scrutinized in places that traditionally, or which by government
designation, are dedicated to assembly and debate.
In particular, the state may not restrict speech based on its content or its viewpoint,
unless it can show that its regulation is necessary to serve a compelling state interest,
and is narrowly tailored to achieve that interest.
It might be worthwhile to note just how recent the public forum doctrine is.
In a well-known earlier case, Massachusetts v. Davis, decided in 1895, Oliver Wendell
Holmes, then on the Massachusetts Supreme Court, had no difficulty at all in concluding
that the public did not necessarily have speech rights in the Boston Common of all places.
He concluded instead, and I quote him, for the legislature to forbid public speaking
in a public park is no more an infringement of the rights of a member of the public than
for the owner of a private house to forbid it in his house.
To see how far we've come, where Holmes could see no difference between speech in a public
park and speech on private property, that very distinction is one of the keys to understanding
the public forum doctrine.
What is the rationale behind the public forum doctrine?
Most scholars point to two rationales that might support the doctrine.
First, we might argue that access to public spaces is essential to foster the kinds of
public discussions and debates that the First Amendment demands.
Allowing the government to shut down such spaces would work against the First Amendment
in its most basic form.
If public deliberation is to be a practical reality, citizens must have both the spaces
and the places opportunities to engage other citizens in debate and conversation.
Public forums are thus preconditions for the free exchange of ideas.
Thus, some scholars stress the importance of such spaces to the deliberative exchange
that makes democratic self-government possible.
Some sociologists refer to these as third places, as places where citizens can meet
to promote civil society and civic engagement generally.
A second rationale for the public forum doctrine holds that permitting the state to shut down
speech might also undercut other important constitutional principles such as our commitment
to equality.
So for example, it seems unlikely that any government will seek to silence citizens completely
in public parks or on sidewalks or in other public forums.
And while some speech is certain to be tolerated by authorities, stop for a minute.
Does anyone think that the government will rush to shut down speech in favor of the war
in somewhere else's stand?
It also seems likely, given what we know from the historical record, that governments will
want to suppress other kinds of speech.
The public forum doctrine provides that governments cannot discriminate between permitted and
prohibited speech on the basis of its content or its viewpoint.
All viewpoints must be permitted in the public forum.
This expansive rule helps to guard against the very real possibility that governments
will violate our commitment to equality by permitting speech it tolerates and prohibiting
speech it dislikes.
As the court wrote in a case called Police Department of Chicago vs. Mosley in 1972,
and I quote,
Above all else, the First Amendment means that government has no power to restrict expression
because of its message, its ideas, its subject matter, or its content.
Under the Equal Protection Clause, not to mention the First Amendment itself, government
may not select which issues are worth discussing or debating in public facilities.
So now that we understand the basic principles of the public forum doctrine, let's identify
some examples of public forums.
What sorts of spaces and places qualify as public forums?
Certainly traditional public forums include city parks.
They appear also to include streets and sidewalks, except in those rare instances where the walkway
may serve a more limited purpose or clientele.
In the case of United States vs. Cochinda, for example, decided in 1990, a sharply divided
court struggled in classifying a sidewalk that connected a United States post office
to a nearby parking lot.
On the other hand, in United States vs. Grace, a case from 1983, the court ruled that the
sidewalks outside the Supreme Court itself were a public forum, and it's a good thing
it did as well.
In addition to public forums, the court recognizes what it calls limited public forums as well
as non-public forums.
The court set forth the distinction between these different kinds of forums in the leading
case of Perry Education Association vs. Perry Local Educators Association in 1983.
Now, according to the opinion in Perry, a limited public forum is a property the government
has deliberately opened for public communication, but which it might also choose to close altogether
to public communication.
One important difference between the traditional public forum and a limited public forum is
that the government need not open or maintain a limited public forum at all.
It may close them to speech altogether if it so chooses.
An example of a limited public forum might be a meeting room or a conference center at
a public university.
What would be some other examples of limited public forums?
In Heffron vs. International Society for Krishna Consciousness 1981, the court concluded
that state fairgrounds are a limited public forum.
The court upheld as content-neutral and narrowly tailored a state law that limited the sale
or distribution of Krishna materials to certain fixed locations on state fairgrounds.
Here are two other examples of a limited public forum.
In Edwards vs. South Carolina, decided in 1963, the court overturned a conviction of
civil rights activists who had protested on the grounds of the South Carolina State House.
Those grounds the court held were a limited public forum.
But in Grain Ed vs. Rockford, a case from 1972, the court upheld the constitutionality
of a local ordinance that prohibited loud demonstrations close to schools while classes
were in session.
So to summarize, we must distinguish between public forums and limited public forums.
The decision in Perry also requires us to ask, what are non-public forums?
A non-public forum is defined as public property, which is not by tradition or designation
a forum for public communication.
A non-public forum would appear to include, for example, jails.
In Adderley vs. Florida, decided in 1966, students gathered at a local jail to protest
the arrests of other students who had protested racial segregation in movie theaters.
Although the protests were peaceful, Justice Black upheld the convictions, writing in language
reminiscent of the quote we heard earlier from Justice Holmes that in here I quote Justice
Black, the state, no less than a private owner of property, has power to preserve the property
under its control for the use to which it is lawfully dedicated.
Justice Douglas rejected the comparison flatly, observing instead that jails are quote an
obvious center for protest.
In Iceconn vs. Lee, decided in 1992, the court ruled that walkways in a public airport also
do not qualify as a public forum.
If Justice Rehnquist, writing for the court's majority, concluded that air terminals did
not qualify as public forums, because they are not property and here I want to quote
him that since time out of mind, or as a matter of long-standing practice, have been used
for public expressive purposes.
In Descent, Justice Kennedy pointed to an obvious problem.
Whatever the history of its usage, he noted, airports functionally are one of only a few
spaces or areas where members of the public can actually communicate directly with large
numbers of other citizens.
If the majority's approach seems largely historical in nature, the Descent's approach
seems more functional.
I wonder which one the First Amendment prefers.
So, airports are classified as a non-public forum.
Other non-public forums would include military bases, as well as advertising space on public
buses, residential mailboxes, and utility poles, and there are Supreme Court cases that
address each of those examples.
It is important to note that non-public forums are still public property.
They are not private property.
Different rules apply to speech on private property, as I shall make clear in a few moments.
Now, this might all seem needlessly complicated to you.
Why should citizens care about the distinction between traditional public forums, limited
public forums, and non-public forums?
It's all so confusing.
The public forum doctrine indicates that the extent to which the First Amendment permits
the government to restrict speech on its own property depends on the character of the forum
that the government has created.
Thus, to put it simply, the First Amendment permits greater restrictions on speech in
areas less amenable to free expression, such as military bases or public airport terminals,
than it does in traditional forums such as streets, sidewalks, and public parks.
So the rules for speech depend upon the kind of forum we are in.
The distinction between these kinds of forums that the court advanced in Perry is still
the governing analytical framework, and understanding this framework is a key to understanding your
First Amendment rights generally.
Different rules governing speech apply in all three forums.
Let's review the rules now.
In a traditional public forum, like a park or a sidewalk, the government's authority
to prohibit or regulate speech is very limited.
Regulations that address or concern the content of speech must satisfy the strict scrutiny
test, and you'll recall from our earlier lectures that strict scrutiny means such regulations
must advance what we call a compelling state interest.
Hence, in a traditional public forum, the state may not restrict speech based on its
content unless it can show that the regulation is necessary to serve a compelling state interest
and is narrowly tailored to achieve that interest.
This means that content and viewpoint restrictions, or regulations that burden some viewpoints
or favor others, are generally unconstitutional in traditional public forums.
A government, for example, may not prohibit speeches in big city park that oppose the
coming war in somewhere else's stand while permitting speeches that support it.
But assuming the state's interest in silencing speech is content-neutral, it may subject
speech in the public forum to reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions.
In the case of war versus rock against racism decided in 1989, for example, the court upheld
a New York City regulation that required musicians to use amplifiers and sound technicians provided
by the city, finding that reasonable time, place, and manner restrictions do pass constitutional
muster, so long as they are one, content-neutral, two, narrowly tailored to serve a significant
governmental interest, and three, leave open ample alternative channels for the communication
of the information.
What are some other examples of time, place, and manner restrictions?
In the fascinating case of Hill versus Colorado decided in the year 2000, the court considered
the constitutionality of a Colorado law that prohibited anyone within 100 feet of a healthcare
facility from knowingly approaching within 8 feet of another person without that person's
consent to pass out leaflets or to display signs or to engage, and I quote from the statute,
in oral protest, education, or counseling.
The law, as you might guess, was passed in response to the activities of abortion protesters
at abortion clinics.
Writing for the court, Justice Stevens upheld the law and found that it placed reasonable
time, place, and manner restrictions that advanced the state's interests in protecting
the health and welfare of its citizens by unimpeded access to healthcare services and
facilities.
In dissent, however, justices Thomas and Scalia argued that the law, far from being viewpoint
neutral, was in fact directed against anti-abortion protesters.
I quote here, this Colorado law is no more targeted at used car salesmen, animal rights
activists, fundraisers, environmentalists, and missionaries than French vagrancy law
was targeted at the rich.
We know what the Colorado legislators were taking aim at.
So far, we have been considering the rules that govern speech in a traditional public
forum.
Remember, a limited public forum exists only where there is clear evidence of intent by
the government to create such a forum.
The court looks to the policy and practice of the government to determine whether it
intended to designate a non-traditional forum as open to assembly and debate.
If, by virtue of long-standing practice, the place in question is one where citizens frequently
express themselves, then that long-standing practice is evidence that the government intended
the forum to be public.
The court also considers the nature of the property to ascertain whether it is compatible
with expressive activity.
Some locations, such as prisons or military bases, may require a degree of security that
is simply incompatible with public debate.
In addition, the government need not hold open such forums indefinitely.
But while the limited public forum is open, the same restrictions governing traditional
public forums apply.
Specifically, in a limited public forum, a state may impose reasonable, content-neutral
time, place, and manner restrictions so long as the restrictions are necessary and narrowly
tailored to serve a compelling state interest and are not designed to silence particular
viewpoints.
Now, let's turn to non-public forums.
Here, the state has expansive authority to prohibit or regulate speech.
Simply put, the court grants states much greater latitude in regulating non-public forums.
Even content-based restrictions might be permissible, provided only that they do not discriminate
between different viewpoints and are reasonable in light of the property's usage.
In addition to applying time, place, and manner regulations, the state may reserve the forum
for its intended purposes as long as the regulation on speech is reasonable and is not an effort
to suppress expression merely because public officials oppose the speaker's view.
In practice, these are not difficult or demanding requirements, and the court has routinely
upheld the authority of state officials to regulate non-public forums.
I mentioned in our first lecture that the rules concerning the First Amendment sometimes
approach the complexity of tax law.
The rules concerning public and limited and non-public forums may seem like a good example of this.
From a citizen's perspective, however, I think there are two key points we need to remember.
First, what you can say and when government may prohibit you from saying it depends quite a bit
on the nature of the forum where you want to speak.
And second, because of this, it becomes important to know how to characterize the forum where you desire to speak.
In some cases are obvious, others are more difficult.
Let's try to apply the rules to some common everyday examples and situations.
What about speech at public transportation facilities, such as bus or air terminals?
What we already saw in ICON versus Lee decided in 1992 that the court ruled that walkways
in a public airport do not qualify as a public forum.
And as we noted, Chief Justice Rehnquist, writing for the majority, concluded that air terminals did not qualify as public forums
because they are not property that since time out of mind or as a matter of long-standing practice
have been used for public expressive purposes.
There are some questions to think about here.
How long a time is time out of mind?
Indeed, how old is the concept of the airport itself?
And if time is the critical element, then will we have to revisit this issue at some point in the distant future?
We've also seen that in his dissent, Justice Kennedy pointed out that whatever the history of its usage,
airports functionally are one of only a few places where individuals can actually communicate directly with large numbers of other citizens.
Justice Kennedy proposed a different test.
If the physical characteristics of the property and the actual public access and uses which have been permitted by the government
indicate that expressive activity would be appropriate and compatible with those uses, then the property is a public forum.
Here are some questions to think about Kennedy's test.
Following Justice Kennedy's first point, where do people in fact congregate with one another?
What if those places are shopping malls, or coffee houses, or restaurants?
Do they become public forums just because they are places where lots of folks tend to congregate?
As I said, if the majority's approach seems largely historical in nature, the dissent's approach seems more functional.
Which approach is better?
What does better even mean, speaking constitutionally?
Here is a related question to consider.
Is the internet a public forum?
So far, the court has not provided a direct answer to this question.
But in United States vs. American Library Association Incorporated, a case from 2003, a Ford Justice plurality found, and I quote,
that internet access in public libraries is neither a traditional nor a designated public forum.
The plurality therefore did not apply strict scrutiny in upholding the Children's Internet Protection Act.
That act provides that public libraries cannot receive federal funds for providing internet access unless they install obscenity blocking software.
According to the court, internet access in public libraries is not a traditional public forum because, and I quote,
we have rejected the view that traditional public forum status extends beyond its historic confines.
Moreover, the court held that internet access at public libraries is not a designated public forum because, and I quote again,
a public library does not acquire internet terminals in order to create a public forum for web publishers to express themselves.
Any more than it collects books in order to provide a public forum for the authors of books to speak.
It provides internet access not to encourage a diversity of views from private speakers, but for the same reasons it offers other library resources
to facilitate research, learning, and recreational pursuits by furnishing materials of requisite and appropriate quality.
If internet access in libraries is not a traditional public forum, should the internet itself be considered a public forum?
Once more, the Supreme Court has not explicitly held that the internet is, as a whole, a public forum.
But in the case of Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, decided in 1997, the court struck down the Communications Decency Act's
prohibition of indecent material on the internet.
In that ruling, the court noted that the internet, and I quote, constitutes a vast platform from which to address and hear
from a worldwide audience of millions of readers, viewers, researchers, and buyers.
Any person or organization with a computer connected to the internet can publish information.
In other words, the internet allows us to communicate with others, to hear what others have to say, and to speak to others.
That does not tell us, however, that the internet is itself a public forum.
So now that we've worked through a variety of issues relating to public, limited public, and non-public forums,
let's return to our hypothetical protest against the winds of war in somewhere else's stand.
Is your protest protected? Yes? Maybe? No.
Do you plan to speak in a public forum, like a public park or a town green? Yes, your speech is likely protected.
Do you plan to protest in a limited public forum, like a municipally owned theater or a meeting room in a public school?
Maybe. Do you plan instead to speak in a non-public forum, such as a military base? Your speech is probably not protected.
Now, let's take up a different question.
How far is speech protected when citizens, including students, speak in public schools?
Well, first, I hope it is clear that public schools are not traditional public forums.
But as you know from our discussion in lecture three, the Supreme Court ruled in the well-known case of Tinker v. Des Moines,
that's the armband case from 1969, that students do not shed their constitutional rights to freedom of expression at the schoolhouse gate as the court so nobly wrote.
True enough, but the court has since made clear that schoolhouses are not like public parks,
and here I quote from a case called Bethel,
the constitutional rights of students are not automatically co-extensive with the rights of adults in other settings.
The question of speech in schools is a recurrent one in the Supreme Court.
In the wonderful 2007 case of Morse v. Frederick, better known perhaps as the bong hits for Jesus case,
the court considered the constitutionality of a student who was suspended from school.
In this case, the high school student had displayed a banner reading bong hits for Jesus across the street from his public school during the 2002 Olympic torch relay.
Chief Justice John Roberts upheld the constitutionality of the suspension,
concluding that school officials could reasonably have determined that the speech in question promoted illegal drug use.
Unlike Tinker, which the court left intact, this case, according to the Chief Justice, did not involve speech of the sort the First Amendment was designed to protect.
The Chief Justice also rejected the claim that the speech in question should be treated under traditional First Amendment rules governing speech,
instead of under the narrower rules that govern student speech.
The student had claimed that because he was off campus, his speech should be examined under the public forum doctrine.
Here is the court's response, and I quote,
Under these circumstances, we agree with the superintendent that Frederick cannot stand in the midst of his fellow students during school hours at a school-sanctioned activity and claim he is not at school.
In a concurring opinion, Justice Thomas went even further, arguing explicitly that Tinker should be overruled.
I quote from Justice Thomas' opinion.
In my view, the history of public education suggests that the First Amendment, as originally understood, does not protect student speech in schools.
In his dissent, Justice Stevens, joined by Justice Souter and Justice Ginsburg, argued, and I quote,
The court does serious violence to the First Amendment in upholding, indeed lauding, a school's decision to punish Frederick for expressing a view with which it disagreed.
Stevens criticized the majority decision as one that, quote, trivializes the two cardinal principles upon which Tinker rests,
because it upholds a punishment meted out on the basis of a listener's disagreement with her understanding, or more likely misunderstanding, of the speaker's viewpoint.
Moreover, Justice Stevens noted, carving out pro-drug speech for uniquely harsh treatment finds no support in our case law and is inimical to the values protected by the First Amendment.
In short, much uncertainty characterizes the current state of speech rights in public schools, with some justices insisting that Tinker should be overruled,
while others complicate it by importing rules like content neutrality and viewpoint neutrality to supplements Tinker's analytical framework.
The First Amendment rules that govern speech at colleges and universities are equally complex.
In Widmar v. Vincent, a 1981 case, the court found that student-center meeting rooms are a limited public forum, and so could not be restricted to allow students to meet for academic, social, or political purposes, but not for religious purposes.
Although most of us are probably inclined to think of public forums and limited public forums as references to physical spaces, the fascinating case of Rosenberger v. University of Virginia, decided in 1995, teaches us differently.
In Rosenberger, the court found that Virginia had created a limited public forum when it established a fund that would cover the cost of publications by eligible student groups.
Once having created such a forum, which of course it was under no obligation to do, Virginia could not refuse funding to a student organization simply because of the overtly religious nature of its publication.
So far, we've been considering speech on public property. But what about speech rights on private property?
You may recall that in our first lecture, I identified a number of common misperceptions some citizens seem to have about the First Amendment.
One such misperception is that our freedom to speak shields us from anyone and everyone who might seek to silence us.
In fact, as I said then, the protections of the First Amendment guard us only against suppressions of speech by governments and governmental officials.
In the case of Frisbee v. Schultz, decided in 1988, the Supreme Court considered the constitutionality of a town law that prohibited picketing by citizens before or about any residence.
The law was occasioned by anti-abortion picketers who targeted the private residence of a doctor who performed abortions.
The court, speaking through Justice O'Connor, concluded and I quote,
A public street does not lose its status as a traditional public forum simply because it runs through a residential neighborhood.
Even so, the court upheld the law because it said it was narrowly tailored to serve a significant governmental interest,
in this case, protecting captive homeowners and because the law left open alternative channels of communication.
Perhaps more relevant to most citizens, assuming most of us are not often the target of picketers outside our homes,
are a series of important cases where the court is considered whether private property itself might be a kind of public forum.
Once again, one of the common misperceptions we identified in Lecture 1 is relevant to this point.
Recall that by virtue of the state action doctrine, the First Amendment does not apply to private parties or to non-state actors.
Following this principle, it would appear that the owner of private property has no obligation to permit others to speak on his or her property.
Or to put it another way, the First Amendment does not give me the right to speak on your property.
For the most part, the court has followed this train of logic.
In one case, however, the court did seem to carve out an exception.
In Marsh vs. Alabama, a case from 1946, the court considered a case where an entire town was private property, or a so-called company town.
In this case, the company prohibited Jehovah's Witnesses from soliciting on the town's streets.
Just as Black overturned a trespass conviction, noting in that quote,
the more an owner, for his advantage, opens up his property for use by the public in general,
the more do his rights become circumscribed by the constitutional rights of those who use it.
Of course, most of us don't live in company towns.
So we might regard the case as interesting, but relatively unique, certainly not of much practical significance.
But if we have no company towns, do we have something similar?
Might we argue that we ought to have speech rights in large commercial shopping centers, or malls,
chiefly because such areas, although owned privately, are essentially functional analogues to public squares,
or to traditional downtown commercial areas?
In other words, are privately owned shopping malls public forums?
The court struggled with this question for a short while.
In Amalgamated Food Employees Union versus Logan Valley Plaza Incorporated, decided in 1968,
the court ruled that an open-air private shopping center must permit picketers onto the property.
Writing for the court, just as Third Good Marshall concluded, and I quote,
the shopping center here is clearly the functional equivalent to the business district involved in Marsh.
Interestingly, this provoked a dissenting opinion from Justice Black, who had written the majority opinion in Marsh.
Justice Black insisted, and I quote,
only when that property has taken on all of the attributes of a town should the First Amendment protections apply.
I wonder how Justice Black found that rule in the First Amendment,
or is it somehow derived instead from the state action requirement?
The court appeared to modify Logan Valley considerably just four years later in the case of Lloyd Corporation versus Tanner.
The court this time upheld the authority of the mall's owner to exclude picketers from the mall.
Two important differences seemed to persuade the court to reach a different result.
Here, the mall was completely enclosed, and the picketers involved in Logan were protesting labor practices at a store in the mall.
In Lloyd, however, the protest, directed against the Vietnam War, had no obvious or direct connection to the mall or to any of its businesses.
A plane of cases effectively came to an end in 1976 in the case of Hudgens versus National Labor Relations Board.
Here, the court simply overruled Logan, and in doing so reaffirmed the general principle that every citizen should know.
We do not have a First Amendment right to speak on someone else's private property.
If the rule is simple, however, the court's rationale was a little more complicated.
Justice Stewart's majority opinion argued that the distinction between Logan and Lloyd concerning whether the speech concerned or was related to the site of the protest
required the court to make exactly the same kind of content-based distinctions that the government is typically prohibited from doing under the First Amendment.
Reluctant to make such a distinction at all, the court returned to the rule that holds that there is no First Amendment right to speak on another's property, period.
Justice Marshall dissented, arguing, and I quote,
The roadways, parking lots, and walkways of the modern shopping center may be as essential for effective speech as the streets and sidewalks in the municipal or company-owned town.
Marshall's dissent suggests a fundamental question.
Should speech rights trump property rights?
Or, if you prefer, should property rights trump speech rights?
Does it matter that so many of the places where citizens seem to gather, shopping malls, coffee shops, restaurants, are private?
Should it matter if the speech in question is related to the business or is disruptive?
The shopping mall cases also give us a chance to learn something new about the First Amendment and state constitutional law.
The United States Constitution may not give us the right to speak in privately owned shopping malls, but the Constitution of your own state might do so.
So, in a fascinating case called Pruneyard vs. Robbins from 1980, the Supreme Court ruled that several local high school students who wished to solicit signatures for a petition against the United Nations General Assembly Resolution had the right to do so under the California State Constitution.
The owners of the mall had argued that such a right violated their property rights, a position that has been rejected by several other state Supreme Courts, including that of New York, but also adopted by a few, including Massachusetts and New Jersey.
Do these questions mask another conflict?
If I have the right to speak on someone else's private property, does my speech not violate their right not to speak or to disagree?
What if, as the owner of the property in question, I want not to associate or to appear to be associated with those points of view?
We'll take up the right to association in a separate lecture, but to summarize what we've learned in this lecture.
The First Amendment can mean different things, or to be more precise, offers different degrees of protection for speech, depending upon the location or nature of the forum where you want to speak.
It offers no protection at all for speech on another person's private property, somewhat more protection in a limited public forum, and the highest degree of protection in a traditional public forum.
Thank you.
