Lecture 9, Freedom of Association
Writing in 1835, Alexis de Tocqueville observed that freedom of association has become a necessary guarantee against the tyranny of the majority.
Indeed, Tocqueville wrote at some length in Democracy in America about the importance of associational freedom.
The right of association, he notes, seems almost as inalienable by nature as individual liberty.
At the same time, Tocqueville was shrewd enough to see that freedom of association also has some potential dangers.
As he put it, if there are some peoples among whom the liberty to unite together is only beneficial and fruitful in prosperity,
there are also others who, by their excesses, distort it and turn an element of life into a cause of destruction.
If Tocqueville's shrewd observations on the crucial importance and potential danger of freedom of association to the maintenance of democratic life are accurate,
then it becomes all the more curious why the First Amendment says so little about it and why the Court's treatment of it is of such recent vintage.
The First Amendment identifies the rights to assemble and to petition the government, but it does not specifically protect the right to association.
In a series of cases beginning in the 1950s, however, the Supreme Court held that the First Amendment does protect freedom of association.
In the first of these, Sweezy v. New Hampshire, decided in 1957, the Court remarked, and I quote,
Our form of government is built on the premise that every citizen shall have the right to engage in political expression and association.
This right was enshrined in the First Amendment of the Bill of Rights.
An attentive reading of the Court's words in Sweezy might suggest that freedom of association extends chiefly, if not exclusively, to freedom of political association.
Such a reading would comport with the idea that all First Amendment freedoms are predicated upon the self-governance rationale that we explored in our first lecture.
And as we shall see in this lecture, the Court has, in fact, sometimes seemed to suggest that the First Amendment protects only political forms of association.
But more often, the Court has charted a different, more expansive course.
Protecting associations that have as their purpose aims as diverse and as varied as Americans themselves.
Hence, in the case of NAACP v. Alabama, which we'll take up later in this lecture, the Court assumed, without argument, and I quote,
It is immaterial whether the beliefs sought to be advanced by association pertain to political, economic, religious, or cultural matters.
This more capacious understanding of freedom of association may be based on a different account of the First Amendment's purpose, such as the argument from human flourishing, which we also discussed in lecture one.
But this larger understanding of freedom of association may also result from a different understanding of where the right to association resides in the Constitution.
Although one obvious inference is that association has its home in the First Amendment, the Court has also found some support for the right in the Liberty Clause of the 14th Amendment and in a general right to privacy.
These different understandings of the origins and purposes of freedom of association will become important as we examine the Court's work.
As we go forward, for example, we'll find that the Court sometimes distinguishes between what it calls freedom of expressive association,
or an associational liberty that has as its core an element of political expression, and freedom of intimate association,
or the right to choose to enter into certain intimate human relationships, such as marriage, consensual sexual relationships, families,
and private associations formed for particular cultural, social, or religious purposes.
I have to wonder, are there forms of association that do not fit within this neat model?
Are there forms of association, in other words, that are neither political nor intimate, at least as the Court uses those terms?
And if there are, are they entitled to protection under the First Amendment?
Let's start by looking at a case that might provide an answer to that question.
In City of Dallas vs. Stanglin, decided in 1989, the Court considered the constitutionality of a city ordinance that restricted entrance to teenage dance halls.
According to the ordinance, only teenagers between the ages of 14 and 18 could be admitted into the dance hall.
The purpose of the ordinance was to shield teenagers from, and I quote, the potentially detrimental influences of older teenagers and adults.
The Court had no difficulty upholding the ordinance against the claim that it violated the associational rights either of adults who were excluded from the dance hall, or of minors who were admitted.
According to the Court, no right of intimate association was implicated, in part because on any given night, as many as 1,000 teenagers might be footloose.
A crowd so large and impersonal, the Court suggested, could hardly be considered intimate association.
Nor, in the Court's view, do the opportunities of adults and minors to dance with one another, which might be described as associational in common parlance, involve the sort of expressive freedom that the First Amendment protects.
The teenagers who congregate are not members of any organized association, and most, the Court noted, are strangers to one another, if not for long.
The dance hall admits all who pay the admission fee, and there is no suggestion that the patrons take positions on public questions.
So there was in this case no intimate association and no expressive association.
But is there a generalized right of social association that includes chance encounters and dance halls that should be protected in this case?
Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Rehnquist concluded that no such right exists.
And in a concurring opinion, Justice Stevens, joined by Justice Blackman, wrote and I quote,
In my opinion, the opportunity to make friends and enjoy the company of other people in a dance hall or elsewhere is an aspect of liberty protected by the 14th Amendment.
For that reason, I believe the critical issue in this case involves substantive due process rather than the First Amendment right of association.
When I read the case then, all nine justices concluded that a large crowd of teenagers gathered for the purpose of dancing and socializing has no significant First Amendment value.
Where have I heard about this before?
Perhaps you have already discerned my response to the ruling in my passing reference to the important work of noted First Amendment scholar, Kevin Bacon.
Speaking just for myself, I prefer Sinatra's classic album, The Dance Hall Years.
One of the questions Stanglin raises, therefore, is precisely the one the court decided without much discussion.
How do we define association in First Amendment terms?
Is every kind of associational activity encompassed by such a freedom?
One way to answer this question would be to start from the assumption that, yes, everything is potentially encompassed by the freedom, but to then indicate precisely when and where the state may regulate or limit associational freedom.
Alternatively, we could mimic the court's approach to speech questions and try to identify different categories of associational activity.
Some such categories, perhaps associations geared towards illegal activities, for example, might be excluded from the First Amendment altogether,
and others, perhaps associations, say, of individuals gathered together for a concert at Chase Stadium in August 1965,
or for the promotion of generous pensions for underappreciated college faculty, get a little protection, much as commercial speech does,
and still other forms of association, such as political parties, should get the full force of First Amendment immunity.
There might well be other questions of definition too, similar to those we confront in cases involving symbolic speech.
Many, if not most forms of association, are acts in one way or another.
Does every association communicate a message?
Should we employ something like the Spence Test?
Does the act of association require an intention to communicate a message?
Does it require an audience that comprehends that a message is intended?
What would be the result in Stanglin if the court had decided that dancing, much like sleeping in a park, is symbolic speech?
One final point about Stanglin.
Having found no significant First Amendment rights implicated, the court proceeded to ask only if the ordinance satisfied the Rational Basis Test
instead of applying the higher standard of strict scrutiny.
This too gave the court no difficulty.
Chief Justice Rehnquist noted that the city could properly conclude that limiting dance hall contacts between juveniles and adults
would make less likely illicit or undesirable juvenile involvement with alcohol, illegal drugs, and promiscuous sex.
Leaving Stanglin, let's return to the Tocqueville quote I began with.
Tocqueville warned also that there is sometimes reason to limit, as well as to protect, freedom of association
because some citizens will, by their excesses, distort it and turn an element of life into a cause of destruction.
It should not be difficult to see why Tocqueville thought freedom of association might occasionally have a destructive component to it.
Just how far is peaceful association removed from an angry mob?
What about associations formed for self-evidently illiberal or discriminatory purposes, such as the KKK,
or associations that restrict membership on the basis of race or gender,
or associations that advocate revolution, such as the Communist Party?
So here, as with the other aspects of the First Amendment we have explored, we must ask,
when and why may the state limit our freedom to associate?
The court has dealt with each of these questions as shall we.
Because the court's first cases involve freedom of expressive association, we begin there.
Earlier I mentioned the case of NAACP versus Alabama in passing.
Decided in 1958, this case addressed the constitutionality of a state law that required the NAACP to disclose its list of members.
Alabama's insistence that the NAACP hand over this and other organizational records occurred during a series of legal procedures
began when the state sought to prevent the NAACP from conducting business in the state.
In Alabama's view, the NAACP was, and I quote,
causing irreparable injury to the property and civil rights of the residents and citizens of the state of Alabama,
for which criminal prosecution and civil actions at law afford no adequate relief.
What sorts of injury did the state have in mind? The Montgomery Bus Boycott, for example.
The NAACP's refusal to turn over its records ultimately resulted in a contempt citation from the Alabama Supreme Court.
Eventually, after a complicated series of legal ploys lasting five years,
the Supreme Court of the United States agreed to hear the case on the merits.
Now, it's important to note that the court had heard a similar case in the 1920s.
In New York, ex-Rail Bryant versus Zimmerman, decided in 1928,
the court upheld a New York state law that required the KKK to disclose a list of members in the state.
The court reasoned that the state had a rational basis,
which was controlling the Klan's illegal activities for the disclosure provision.
In the Alabama case, however, a unanimous court took a different path.
The NAACP argued that the disclosure demands would irreparably damage its organization and impede its right to association.
In assessing that argument, the court first determined, and I quote,
effective advocacy of both public and private points of view, particularly controversial ones,
is undeniably enhanced by group association.
Associational freedom is thus a necessary implication of freedom of speech and assembly,
as well as of the Liberty Clause of the 14th Amendment.
But how, if at all, did Alabama's demand for the NAACP's membership list impinge on this right?
Strictly speaking, such a requirement does not prevent the NAACP or any of its members from associating with one another.
The court correctly noted that this perspective was too simplistic.
The court concluded instead that there is, quote,
a vital relationship between freedom to associate and privacy in one's associations.
Indeed, the court observed that the relationship between association and privacy is especially important
when the association or group involved tends to espouse unpopular or dissenting beliefs.
This was not just an abstract fear.
In the court's own words,
the order to turn over the membership list must be regarded as entailing the likelihood of a substantial restraint
upon the exercise by petitioners' members of their right to freedom of association.
Petitioner has made an uncontroverted showing that on past occasions,
revelation of the identity of its rank and file members has exposed these members to economic reprisal,
loss of employment, threat of physical coercion, and other manifestations of public hostility.
Having concluded that the NAACP did have a significant associational freedom claim,
the court then turned to an examination of the state's interest in overcoming that freedom.
The court described Alabama's interest as concern with whether the NAACP was conducting business in violation
of an Alabama statute that required foreign corporations to register in the state.
This interest, the court concluded, was insufficient.
The opinion does not use the sorts of language we now know so well.
No talk of strict scrutiny or rationality.
But any fair reading of the case would have to conclude, I think,
that the court did not adopt the deferential posture that the rationality test seems to require.
And this seems to make sense as far as it goes.
First Amendment freedoms we have seen generally warrant strict scrutiny,
especially if the speech or expression in question is political or concerns public affairs.
Surely the expressive activities undertaken by the NAACP fall into that category.
But some of you may have spotted a couple of difficulties, too.
Is it clear, for example, that freedom of association in general is pure speech
or akin to pure speech as opposed to symbolic speech?
If it is the latter, then presumably the O'Brien test governs.
And following Lecture 7, does it matter where the associational speech or activities occur?
Similarly, does it matter if the associational claim is about freedom of expressive association
or about some other kind of expression?
And recall that the court has often suggested that political speech is high value speech,
often entitled to a higher degree of protection than other forms of speech.
Should we rank order associational freedoms in the same way?
For example, should the court distinguish between expressive associations that are political
and those that are expressive but organized around non-political purposes?
And second, should the court generally rank order freedom of expressive association
more highly than freedom of intimate association?
For the most part, these remain unanswered questions.
I hope you can see that answering them requires us to revisit fundamental questions,
not only questions of definition, but also questions that concern why we have a First Amendment
and what we want it to achieve.
Before we leave NAACP versus Alabama, I'd like you to think about a related issue
that might implicate privacy interests, but perhaps in a very different sort of way.
Some of you may remember that a few years ago, Californians passed an initiative
that was known popularly as Proposition 8.
Proposition 8, you'll recall, added a new provision to the California State Constitution.
It states, and I quote, that only marriage between a man and a woman is valid or recognized in California.
The amendment thus overturned a decision by the California Supreme Court,
finding that same-sex couples have a state constitutional right to marry.
After the amendment was ratified, the California State Attorney General's Office
posted the names of donors who had contributed more than $100 in support of the amendment,
as well as the names of those who had donated in opposition to the proposal.
Similar information is available for all other ballot measures in the state of California.
In short time, the names of supporters of the amendment were easily and widely available on the internet.
There is even one website, 8maps.com, which shows the names and occupations of San Francisco residents
who donated to the campaign overlaid on a Google map that indicates where they live.
Some of the proposition's supporters complained that they had been targets of reprisal and harassment,
including boycotts of their businesses and even, on occasion, death threats.
Some of the groups that supported Proposition 8 subsequently filed suit in the United States District Court,
asking that the information be withdrawn and kept private.
In addition, they asked the District Court to require California officials
to destroy all government reports on the financial backers of any ballot measure immediately following an election.
How would you decide this case?
Is it clear to begin with that there is a freedom of association claim involved in this dispute?
Is contributing money to a campaign a kind of association?
We already know that spending money in an election is a kind of speech claim.
Is it not also a way of associating oneself with others of a similar mindset or position?
If there is an association claim, is it similar to the claim made in the NAACP case
that making such information available to the public will impede the exercise of that right?
Is that why we have secret ballots?
Or are there differences between the two cases?
And finally, if there is a credible claim to associational freedom in keeping the names of donors anonymous,
then what state interest might be sufficient, if any, to overcome that liberty?
In his opinion, District Court Judge Morrison England noted, and I quote,
that small, persecuted groups whose very existence depended on some manner of anonymity
should be exempted from having to disclose their donors.
But in this case, he concluded, the seven million voters who supported Proposition 8
were neither small nor persecuted.
Nor were they dependent upon anonymity in the same way that the NAACP had been
in the early period of the civil rights movement.
Judge England's approach is certainly interesting.
Does it make sense to you?
So far, we've been mainly concerned with associational claims that are expressive and political.
Let's turn now to an important series of cases that concern freedom of association
and organizations that are not explicitly political in purpose.
Most of these cases involve private organizations that impose limitations on membership.
Not anyone who wants to join one of these organizations may do so.
The refusal to admit members into an organization or a community we should recognize
is itself an exercise of freedom of association.
The Court has long recognized that the freedom to associate
necessarily includes the freedom to refuse to associate,
and the principle has found expression in a number of situations,
some of which may not seem so obvious.
Take, for instance, the Court's much-celebrated decision in Brown v. Board of Education,
which ruled that racial segregation of public schools is a violation of the Equal Protection Clause
of the 14th Amendment.
Some academic criticisms of this decision argue that the Court was insufficiently attentive
to the associational rights of whites or the constitutional rights of whites
to what might be called non-association.
As the well-known constitutional law scholar Herbert Weschler observed, and I quote him,
if freedom of association is denied by segregation,
integration forces an association upon those for whom it is unpleasant or repugnant.
The NAACP Legal Defense Fund pointed to one obvious objection to this formulation,
noting that African-Americans had hardly chosen not to associate with whites.
A better response, I think, would force us again back to first principles.
Why should our commitment to associational freedoms, or in this case the freedom not to associate,
why should that commitment trump our commitment to other constitutional principles, such as equality?
The issue should remind us of Tocqueville's warning about how freedom of association
has a destructive element that no society can safely ignore.
Freedom of association may be used to promote illiberal ends, as well as noble ones.
The Court considered a version of this problem in the case of Runyon v. McCrary, decided in 1976.
The plaintiffs were two African-American young men who had been denied admission
into a private school because of their race.
The ruling is fairly straightforward.
The Court held that federal law prohibits private schools from discriminating on the basis of race.
Brown, you remember, had applied only to public schools.
Responding to the school's defense that forced racial integration violated its right of association,
the Court offered the following opinion, and I quote,
It may be assumed that parents have a right to send their children to schools
that promote the beliefs that racial segregation is desirable
and that children have a right to attend such schools.
But the Court continued,
It does not follow that the practice of excluding racial minorities from such schools
is also protected by the same principle.
The Constitution places no value on discrimination,
and although discrimination on the basis of race may be a form of associational freedom,
it has never been protected by the First Amendment.
Finally, the Court observed that discontinuing the discriminatory practices at issue
would not necessarily inhibit the teaching of any particular idea or dogma in these schools.
In some ways, the Court's ruling in Runyon may be narrower than it seems.
Indeed, the Court specifically noted that the case did not present any question
of the right of a private social organization to limit its membership on racial or any other grounds.
I quote from the Court,
They do not present any question of the right of a private school to limit its student body to boys,
to girls, or to adherence of a particular religious faith.
Instead, the only issue in Runyon was the constitutionality of racial segregation in private schools.
I wonder, though, how far the logic in Runyon runs.
Why would we craft a different rule for discriminatory practices based on gender or religion?
Eight years after Runyon, in a case known as Roberts v. J.C.'s,
the Court did address the question of whether a private organization's membership rules are entitled to constitutional protection
as an exercise of freedom of association, even where the membership rules are discriminatory.
The case involved two chapters of the J.C.'s in the state of Minnesota.
The J.C.'s are a civic organization.
Full membership in the organization was open only to men between the ages of 18 and 35.
An associate membership, with no right to vote, to hold office,
or to participate in certain sorts of activities, was available to older men and to women.
In 1974, two chapters of the J.C.'s in Minnesota, in compliance with a state non-discrimination law,
began to admit women as full members.
Both chapters were subsequently sanctioned by the national organization of the J.C.'s.
A series of lawsuits and countersuits quickly followed.
When the case finally reached the Supreme Court,
a majority of the Court held that the J.C.'s freedom of association may be overcome by a countervailing, compelling state interest.
In other words, the Court ruled that freedom of association cases must be subject to the strict scrutiny test.
As a reminder, that test requires a compelling state interest unrelated to the suppression of ideas
that cannot be achieved through means significantly less restrictive of the associational freedoms in question.
In his opinion for the Court, just as Brennan concluded that the state's interest in overcoming discrimination against women was, in fact, compelling.
Brennan's opinion is especially interesting because it involves a distinction between freedom of expressive association and freedom of intimate association.
The difference between these two claims is critical for understanding the result in the case.
According to Justice Brennan, freedom of expressive association refers to a right to associate, and I quote,
for the purpose of engaging in those activities protected by the First Amendment,
speech, assembly, petition for redress of grievances, and the exercise of religion.
Freedom of intimate association, in contrast, encompasses, and again I quote the Justice,
choices to enter into and to maintain certain intimate human relationships.
These choices must be protected against the intrusion of the state because the role of such relationships in safeguarding individual freedom is central to our constitutional scheme.
Intimate associations include obvious candidates like marriage and family relationships,
but they can sometimes extend to certain sorts of professional and business relationships.
In every case, according to the Court, what distinguishes an intimate association is a quote,
relative smallness, a high degree of selectivity and decisions to begin and maintain the affiliation,
and seclusion from others in critical aspects of the relationship.
The JC's the Court decided did not satisfy these criteria.
Membership in the organization was not generally exclusive, saved chiefly for its rules regarding women,
and the Court was not persuaded that admitting women would affect the organization or its speech in any significant way.
Please note, however, that in the JC's case, the Court concluded there was no plausible claim of intimate association.
Would that have led to a different result?
Is there a good constitutional reason to rank freedom of intimate association more highly than expressive association?
One possible way to approach this question is at least suggested by Justice Brennan's opinion in the JC's case.
We might say, for example, that the intrusion of the state cuts deeper in cases of intimate association
and has a greater, more substantial impact on the right itself.
But in some ways, isn't this line of argument a little peculiar?
If we start from the premise that the First Amendment and its attendant freedoms have as their central purpose the protection of political freedoms,
then isn't there something a little backwards in holding that intimate associations are more protected than expressive associations?
At least one justice has hinted at just this.
In the fascinating case of Moore v. City of East Cleveland, decided by the Court in 1977,
the Court considered the constitutionality of a municipal ordinance that limited occupancy of a dwelling unit to members of a single family.
Furthermore, the ordinance defined family in such a way that Moore's household, Moore lived with her son and two grandchildren who were first cousins,
did not qualify.
In a very interesting opinion, a plurality of the Court struck the statute as a violation of a liberty interest surrounding the sanctity of the family.
For our purposes, however, the descending opinion by Justice Stewart is most instructive.
Justice Stewart argued that Moore's claim could not be so supported as an associational liberty because, and I quote,
to suggest that the biological fact of common ancestry necessarily gives related persons constitutional rights of association superior to those of unrelated persons
is to misunderstand the nature of the associational freedoms that the constitution has been understood to protect.
Obviously, not every association is for First Amendment purposes or serves to promote the ideological freedom that the First Amendment was designed to protect.
The association in this case is not for any purpose relating to the promotion of speech, assembly, the press, or religion.
Stewart's objection in the Moore case raises precisely the question I asked a moment ago.
Why should we attach a higher value to intimate association than to expressive ones or at least to political ones?
And how does either claim rate against the state's interest in overcoming discrimination, which directly implicates our commitment to another constitutional value, that of equality?
In the years since Roberts v. J.C.'s, the court has heard a series of follow-up cases in which the justices have extended the Roberts decision to cover non-discrimination on the basis of gender.
In cases involving other sorts of discrimination, however, the court has been less insistent.
The most important and perhaps the most controversial of these other cases is Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, decided in 2000.
The case began when James Dale, a former scoutmaster, filed a suit claiming that his dismissal by the Scouts on the basis of his sexual orientation violated the New Jersey Public Accommodations Law,
which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
The court, dividing 5-4, ruled in favor of the Boy Scouts.
In his opinion for the majority, Chief Justice Rehnquist began by noting that in Roberts, the court had accepted the claim that the First Amendment recognizes, and I quote,
a corresponding right to associate with others in pursuit of a wide variety of political, social, economic, educational, religious, and cultural ends.
This right is crucial in preventing the majority from imposing its views on groups that would rather express other, perhaps unpopular, ideas.
Continuing, the Chief Justice observed, if freedom of association plainly presupposes a freedom not to associate.
The forced inclusion of an unwanted person in a group infringes the group's freedom of expressive association if the presence of that person affects in a significant way the group's ability to advocate public or private viewpoints.
The court then asked if the Boy Scouts were engaged in expressive association.
After reviewing the Scouts' oath and the Scouts' law, you know the one, a scout is trustworthy, obedient, loyal, cheerful, and so on, I used to know the whole thing.
The court accepted the position offered by the Boy Scouts that it found homosexuality inconsistent with the values embodied by the Scouts.
In addition, the majority concluded that forcing the Scouts to readmit Dale, quote, would significantly affect its expression.
The only remaining question was whether the state's interest in overcoming discrimination was sufficient to justify the burden on expression.
The court concluded that it was not. Distinguishing the JC's case in part on the ground that there, unlike here, the court had specifically found that the non-discrimination principle would not significantly affect the organization's expression.
In dissent, Justice Stevens, joined by Justices Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer, concluded that a review of the Boy Scouts' statements and documents revealed nothing at all about homosexuality.
Consequently, Justice Stevens could not conclude that requiring the organization to include Dale burdened the Scouts' freedom of expressive association in any significant way at all.
Moreover, he noted, the court had held squarely in Roberts and other cases that state non-discrimination laws should trump discriminatory membership rules.
Should our analysis of the constitutional conflict between freedom of association and equality change if the state, rather than seeking to alter the membership rules of an organization, seeks instead to deny an organization certain kinds of public benefits, such as funding?
In a case called Christian Legal Society vs. Martinez, decided in 2010, the court upheld a decision by a public law school, the Hastings College of Law of the University of California, to deny funding and the use of some law school facilities to the Christian Legal Society.
The society refused to accept as members students, quote, who engaged in unrepentant homosexual conduct.
Writing for a five to four majority, Justice Ginsburg upheld the funding denial as a reasonable viewpoint neutral condition on access to a limited public forum.
The court decided, in other words, that its limited public forum decisions were the appropriate framework for assessing the free speech and expressive association claims.
Those decisions recognized that a governmental entity, in regulating property in its charge, may in fact impose restrictions on speech as long as those restrictions are viewpoint neutral and are reasonable in light of the purposes of the public forum.
You'll recall that we discussed this in lecture seven.
The Christian Legal Society had argued instead that the court should assess the expressive association claim by applying the Robert's Dale line of cases.
The court rejected this argument for several reasons, including its observation that the Christian Legal Society may continue to exclude any person for any reason so long as it forgoes the benefits of official recognition.
The court's expressive association decisions, in contrast, involved regulations that compelled the group to include unwanted members with no choice to opt out.
In dissent, Justice Alito, joined by justices Roberts, Scalia and Thomas, wrote, and I quote,
Today's decision rests on a very different principle, no freedom for expression that offends prevailing standards of political correctness in our country's institutions of higher learning.
In Justice Alito's view, Hastings' refusal to register the Christian Legal Society could be explained only on the basis of viewpoint discrimination.
The conflict in these cases illustrates once again the tension between our commitments to associational freedom and equality.
Is this not precisely the sort of conflict foreseen by Tocqueville when he warned that freedom of association, unnecessary safeguard against tyranny, must also be subject to certain limitations?
Does our commitment to freedom of association, like our commitment to freedom of speech, mean that we must sometimes tolerate associations we do not like?
