Lecture 10, The Establishment Clause
Why does the Constitution make special mention of religion?
As you probably know, the First Amendment references religion twice, once in the Establishment
Clause and again in the Free Exercise Clause.
Here, as much as anywhere in this course, it is critically important to understand first
principles.
This is in part because the religion clauses have been the source of much controversy among
the justices, leading, as we shall see, to an incredibly complex, if not convoluted series
of rules and tests for deciding religion cases.
Indeed, many scholars no longer include the religion clauses in their survey courses
on the First Amendment, preferring instead to give them their own treatment in separate
courses.
Worse, the rules change or are amended with astonishing frequency.
Hence it will do us little good to memorize them.
Better we should understand the sorts of problems and issues that give rise to them in the first
place.
This means too that we should begin our treatment of the religion clauses with a firm, historical
understanding of the circumstances of their adoption, as well as a clear understanding
of the purposes the clauses are meant to advance.
It turns out, as does pretty much everything concerning the First Amendment, that this
is not as easy to do as it might seem.
Why did the founders include a separate guarantee for freedom of religion in the First Amendment?
Thomas Jefferson wrote that the clauses were, and I quote, a fair and novel experiment.
They were novel in the sense that they broke from the long-standing European tradition
of strong state support for one denomination of religious faith over another.
Indeed upon its adoption, the First Amendment provoked widespread commentary in Europe.
Again, quoting Jefferson, writing from Paris,
Our act for freedom of religion is extremely applauded.
But the religion clauses of the First Amendment were novel in another sense as well.
It is a common misperception that the American colonies were founded on guarantees of religious
freedom or religious equality.
In fact, many states had established religions before the First Amendment was passed, and
in some of them, the demands for religious conformity were suffocating, if not extreme.
Consider, for example, the case of the Boston Martyrs, four Quakers who were executed by
public hanging for their religious beliefs in the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1659, 1660,
and 1661.
In addition to having established religions, most colonies also required a profession of
belief to hold public office.
It is against this backdrop that we must consider the drafting and the ratification of the First
Amendment.
But it is likely a mistake to think that there was a single common understanding of the meaning
or purpose of the First Amendment, even at the time of the founding.
Instead, we can identify several broad concerns that lay behind the religion clauses.
First, there is the concern for individual self-determination.
As we've seen in other lectures, this concern undergirds freedom of expression generally.
And it applies with equal, if not greater, force to matters of faith.
Constitutionalism's concern for individual liberty and the autonomy of self apply with
special force to matters that relate to the innermost convictions of the human person.
Second, we can see that freedom of religion serves an important social and political purpose.
Religious liberty is an end in itself, but it is also a means of protecting constitutional
democracy from social and political unrest.
And third, one might argue broadly, as George Washington certainly did, that religious liberty
is an essential cornerstone for morality, civic virtue, and sound democratic government.
These three concerns are reflected in three different arguments in favor of religious
freedom and all three found expression at the founding.
One argument, often attributed to Thomas Jefferson, stresses the potentially disruptive
effects of religious fervor in the public square and in the business of government.
Jefferson's approach is best known through his remark that a wall of separation should
exist between the state and religion, chiefly to protect the public square from the disruptions
of religious conflict.
A second argument, sometimes attributed to James Madison, starts from the premise that
religious freedom is best secured through religious pluralism or what he called a multiplicity
of sects.
Jefferson's Memorial in Remonstrance Against Religious Assessment, written in 1785 to oppose
a state-sponsored church in Virginia, makes clear his support for religious pluralism
so that, and I'm quoting Madison, all men should enjoy the fullest toleration in the
exercise of religion according to the dictates of conscience, unpunished and unrestrained
by the magistrate, unless under the color of religion any man disturb the peace, the
happiness or safety of society.
A third argument, often associated with the colonial theologian Roger Williams, sees
in guarantees of religious freedom an essential protection for religion from the possible
corrupting influence of the state.
On this view, the relationship between religion and the state threatens the purity of religion
as much as it threatens to disrupt the public square.
In addition, some of the founders saw issues of religious freedom through the lens of federalism.
Many states were concerned that the new and powerful federal Congress might usurp their
religious freedom and prerogatives.
One of the major aims of the establishment clause in this view was to leave the states
free to decide in their own legislatures and courts in order to ensure that the state
was to leave the states free to decide in their own legislatures and courts whether and
to what extent they should establish religion in their own polities.
As we shall see, these different historical interpretations of the purpose of the First
Amendment continue to influence how courts and citizens understand the religion clauses.
The actual text of the First Amendment reads,
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof.
The amendment thus includes two distinct provisions for religious freedom, the establishment clause
and the free exercise clause.
Although I will treat the two clauses as distinct and in different lectures, there are some
common problems that I'd like to address now.
The first problem is obvious, but no less difficult because of it.
How do we define religion?
Should the court simply defer to an individual's judgment about what a religion is and whether
his or her beliefs qualify as such?
Isn't this an obvious invitation for abuse?
In one well-known case, the United States versus Ballard decided in 1944 the court
considered just this question in a mail fraud case involving the members of the I am religion.
Founded by Guy Ballard, alias Saint-Germain, Jesus, George Washington and Godfrey Ray King,
the religion claimed its members were divine messengers blessed with the power to heal a
wide variety of physical ailments.
According to some estimates, the I am religion had about 2 million adherents in the 1930s.
In an opinion by Justice Douglas, the court stated that in the trial of Ballard's widow
and son, apparently Ballard died of natural causes, an ailment that the messengers could
not heal, the jury was prohibited from considering the truth or verity of Ballard's religious
beliefs.
In the words of Justice Douglas, if one could be sent to jail because a jury in a hostile
environment found his teaching false, little indeed would be left of religious freedom.
Similarly, in the case of Fowler versus Rhode Island, decided in 1953, the court again insisted
and I quote, it is no business of courts to say that what is a religious practice or activity
for one group is not religion under the protection of the First Amendment.
Instead, in such cases the court asks whether there is evidence that the belief, no matter
its content, is sincerely held.
There are obvious problems with this approach, fraud among them.
Consider the case of the United States versus Sung Young Moon, decided by a federal appellate
court in 1984.
In this case, the Reverend Sung Young Moon claimed that he is the very embodiment of
religion, and consequently that all of his personal expenses were also expenditures for
his church.
The appellate court rejected this claim and upheld Moon's convictions for tax fraud
and conspiracy.
Which raises an obvious question.
Is anything a religious belief so long as someone holds it sincerely?
What if I believe wholeheartedly and with absolute unwavering conviction in the almighty
Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster?
If you haven't heard of it, just Google it.
Or in the Church of the Jedi, as do apparently several million people, mostly in Australia.
What if I believe in the Church of the Great Hunger, which requires its believers to eat
only food prepared by angelic Michelin star chefs?
I just made this last one up, but it's making me hungry.
Perhaps instead the court should reserve judgment for itself.
Will it be possible to do that without invariably trampling on the beliefs of some minority groups?
At times the court has seen prepared to judge for itself whether a set of beliefs is in fact
religious.
In Davis v. Beeson, one of the court's first freedom of religion cases, decided in 1890,
the court seemed implicitly to insist upon a definition of religion that was restricted
to Christianity.
In upholding a law that forbade polygamy, Justice Field appeared to suggest that Mormonism
itself was not a religion, but instead a cult.
He wrote, and I quote from the opinion,
The term religion has referenced to one's views of his relations to his creator,
and to the obligations they impose of reverence for his being and character,
and of obedience to his will.
It is often confounded with the cultists or form of worship of a particular sect,
but is distinguishable from the latter.
If one thinks that cases from the 1890s are perhaps too remote to be of any real guide,
consider the decision of the Supreme Court in Wisconsin v. Yoder, decided in 1972.
Yoder is my favorite case.
At issue in this case was a state law that required children in the state of Wisconsin
to attend public schools until age 16.
The law conflicted with the practices of certain old order Amish groups,
whose children often withdrew from school prior to age 16.
In assessing the constitutionality of the Wisconsin law,
the court thought it necessary to inquire into the details of the Amish faith.
In his opinion for the majority, Chief Justice Berger observed, and I quote,
A way of life, however virtuous and admirable,
may not be interposed as a barrier to reasonable state regulation of education
if it is based on purely secular considerations.
To have the protection of the religion clauses, the claims must be rooted in religious belief.
Thus, if the Amish asserted their claims because of their subjective evaluation
and rejection of the contemporary secular values accepted by the majority,
much as Thoreau rejected the social values of his time and isolated himself at Walden Pond,
their claims would not rest on a religious basis.
Now, if I may say so, I have never found the Yoder definition of religion
to be especially useful or illuminating.
In some ways, I think it reduces to something very close to saying
that in order for a belief system to qualify as a religion under the First Amendment,
it must be religious.
Maybe you will see it differently.
But I don't mean to be overly critical either.
I'm not sure it is possible to come up with a definition of religion
that doesn't risk including some things that probably ought not to be there
and of excluding things that should be there.
So the problem of defining religion is one that the court has long struggled with.
A second issue, not so much a problem,
is that most of our freedom of religion jurisprudence is of remarkably recent vintage.
Indeed, the complicated jurisprudence of the religion clauses really begins
in the second half of the 20th century.
Why is this?
I wish we had more time to explore this topic.
But the quick answer is that a doctrine called incorporation
did not really develop until after the Second World War.
Now, incorporation refers to the process by which the Supreme Court
made the individual provisions of the Bill of Rights applicable to the states
through the due process clause of the 14th Amendment.
So prior to World War II, the Bill of Rights functioned in large measure
as a set of limits on the federal government, but not on state governments.
As a consequence, there was little occasion or opportunity for the court
to consider violations of the religion clauses
until after the religion clauses of the First Amendment were incorporated
or made applicable to state and local governments in the 1940s.
Again, it's important to remember that eight of the 13 colonies did have established religions.
This fact suggests to Justice Thomas that the establishment clause
should not have been incorporated against the states at all.
As he wrote in his concurring opinion in the case of Elk Grove Unified School District
versus Newdow in 2004, and I quote him,
I would acknowledge that the establishment clause is a federalism provision,
which for this reason resists incorporation.
You may remember when I began this lecture that I said that some justices
do see the establishment clause through the lens of federalism,
and this would be an example of that lens.
This does not mean that there were no cases at all
concerning freedom of religion in the 19th century.
As we saw in our brief treatment of Davis versus Beeson,
the Mormon migration to the West sparked a series of cases
involving the Mormon Church, and in particular concerning the practice of polygamy.
As we go forward in these two lectures,
we'll see that some of the Mormon cases still influence the court's decision-making.
So, now that we have some historical and theoretical context
for the religion clauses of the First Amendment,
let's spend the rest of this lecture taking a closer look
at the way the court has interpreted the establishment clause over the past six decades.
The establishment clause provides that, and I quote,
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion.
I'm sure you can see some of the obvious difficulties straight away.
What does establish mean?
Does the First Amendment require the separation of church and state?
Or, perhaps recognizing, as Justice Douglas once remarked,
that we are a religious people,
does it permit the state to recognize and sometimes to accommodate religious belief?
In recent years, the court has struggled to find a consistent or strong voice
on the meaning and the application of the establishment clause
in a religiously diverse country.
The court's first establishment clause cases both illustrate and mask this conflict.
In Everson v. Board of Education, decided in 1947,
the court considered the constitutionality of a state program
that used public funds to provide transportation of students to parochial schools.
In the end, the court upheld the constitutionality of this aid
and in doing so inaugurated a long line of cases
that concern the constitutionality of using public resources
to promote attendance at religious schools.
In Everson, the court insisted upon a high wall of separation,
insisting, and I quote, that the wall must be kept high and impregnable.
But for all of its insistence, it is important to remember that in the end,
the court did in fact allow the wall to be scaled,
for it upheld the constitutionality of some state aid to religious schools.
Noting the apparent contradiction, Justice Jackson, writing in dissent, noted, and I quote,
the case which irresistibly comes to mind as the most fitting precedent is that of Julia,
who according to Byron's reports, whispering, I never will consent, consented.
Of course, in a literal sense, this sort of aid does not establish the religions in question.
But if our reading is less literal, is it not the case that such aid does tend to favor religion
by using public monies and resources to facilitate attendance at parochial schools?
So the obvious first question we must ask in establishment cases concerns the meaning of establish.
And it should not be difficult to appreciate just how messy this question can become.
Consider a few scenarios.
Following the decision in school aid in Everson,
would it be an unconstitutional establishment of religion for a state to create a voucher system
in which certain low income families received vouchers from the state
that they could use to send their children to elementary schools of their choice, public or private?
In Zellman vs. Simmons Harris, decided in 2002, the court upheld just such a voucher program in the state of Ohio,
concluding, and I quote, that the Ohio program is neutral in all respects towards religion.
It is part of a general and multifaceted undertaking by the state of Ohio
to provide educational opportunities to the children of a failed school district.
It confers educational assistance directly to a broad class of individuals defined without reference to religion.
Do you agree with the court's decision?
Would your assessment change if you knew that well over 90% of the families that received vouchers
sent their children to religious schools?
What about a state program that provides free books for secular subjects taught at private schools?
The court upheld this as constitutional in Board of Education vs. Allen.
What about a state program that provides subsidies for books and tests, but not for field trips at religious schools?
In a variety of cases, the court has upheld that sort of aid as constitutional as well.
What about a state program that provides subsidies for teachers' salaries at private schools?
The court declared that program unconstitutional in a case we'll take up later called Lemon vs. Kurtzman.
What about a timed release for religious instruction?
In McCollum vs. Board of Education, the court ruled that that would be unconstitutional if done inside a public school,
but that it is perfectly constitutional, the court ruled, in Zorak vs. Clausen if done outside the school.
You'll have noticed, I'm sure, that all of these scenarios involve the Establishment Clause and Education.
Why?
To answer that question, I'd turn to Justice Wiley Blunt Rutledge, who once observed, and I quote,
Two great drives are constantly in motion to abridge the complete division of religion and civil authority.
One is to introduce religious education and observances into the public schools.
The other, to obtain public funds for the aid and support of various private religious schools.
I've singled out Justice Rutledge's observation for a couple of reasons.
First, his identification of the two great drives suggests a very useful way of organizing our discussion.
We can see, for example, that all of the scenarios I discussed above concerned the second of these drives,
the drive to obtain public funding for religious instruction.
In a moment, we'll consider some of the cases that the court has decided on the first drive Rutledge mentioned,
the effort to introduce religious observances into public schools.
The other reason I quoted Justice Rutledge, however, concerns his assertion that the Establishment Clause requires,
and again I quote him, the complete division of religion and civil authority.
Is this the correct understanding of the Establishment Clause?
Some judges think so.
Such a position is sometimes called the wall of separation understanding of the Establishment Clause.
The reference is to Jefferson's letter to the Danbury Baptists in 1802, where he wrote,
I contemplate with sovereign reverence that act of the whole American people,
which declared that their legislature should make no law respecting an Establishment of religion,
or prohibiting the free exercise thereof, thus building a wall of separation between church and state.
The Supreme Court referenced Jefferson's wall of separation phrase in its 1947 Everson decision,
where it seemed to equate the phrase with a very strict, if not complete division between the state and religion.
At least in theory.
Because, as we've seen, for all of the talk about the wall of separation,
the majority in Everson nonetheless approved the use of public money to aid parochial school students.
For many years following Everson, the court's understanding of the Establishment Clause was dominated by this strict separationist approach,
or an approach where the wall of separation requires a state to remain wholly neutral to religion in general,
and without preference to religion over irreligion.
In the last 25 years or so, however, some members of the court have embraced a different understanding of the Establishment Clause,
one that is often called the Accommodationist Perspective to the Establishment Clause.
The Accommodationist Perspective starts from the premise that the wall of separation approach to the Establishment Clause
is a wrong understanding of history and should be abandoned.
In Chief Justice Rehnquist's view, of you shared by Justices O'Connor and Scalia, and perhaps others,
governmental accommodations of religious displays of faith do not always violate the Establishment Clause.
Presumably, a wide variety of public acknowledgments of religious faith and practice
that would be unconstitutional under the strict separation approach would survive the Accommodationist Perspective.
You probably won't be surprised to learn that these different approaches to the Establishment Clause
have led the Justices to adopt different doctrinal rules and tests to determine when the state has violated the First Amendment.
In part because the court's use of these rules frequently changes and is at best inconsistent and confused,
I don't think there is much to be gained in a course like this by focusing on the detailed development and application of those tests.
But there is one test that we really do need to know about, largely because it remains the focal point of division on the court.
This test, it is called the Lemon Test, was established in a case called Lemon vs. Kurtzmann, decided in 1971.
To pass the Lemon Test, a government law or policy must meet three criteria.
First, the policy or law must have a valid secular purpose.
Second, its primary effect must be neither to advance nor to inhibit religion.
And third, it must not lead to excessive governmental entanglement with religion.
Many if not most of the cases that utilize the Lemon Test focus upon the second and third prongs.
But occasionally one comes across a statute or policy that violates the first prong.
In the case of Church of the Lukumi Babalu I vs. City of Hialeah, decided in 1993,
the court had no difficulty striking a statute adopted by the City of Hialeah, Florida, that purported to regulate animal sacrifices.
The law was enacted soon after the City Council of Hialeah learned that the church, which practiced Santaria,
was planning on opening a church in the city.
Santaria is a religion practiced in the Americas by the descendants of Africans.
Some of its rituals involve animal sacrifice.
Writing for the court, Justice Kennedy seemed almost surprised by Hialeah's action.
He wrote,
Three justices concurred in the opinion, but no one filed a dissent.
I mentioned earlier that many of the court's establishment cases concern, in Justice Rutledge's words,
the drive to introduce religious education and observances into the public schools.
Among these cases, the court's school prayer decisions stand out as some of the most important and controversial it has ever decided.
In Engel vs. Vitale, decided in 1962, the court determined that the establishment clause, and I quote,
must at least mean that it is no part of the business of government to compose official prayers for any group of the American people to recite as a part of a religious program carried on by the government.
In Engel, this meant that a practice of reading a short, non-denominational prayer composed by the state itself at the beginning of the school day in New York schools was unconstitutional.
Let me make just two quick points about Engel.
First, why does it matter that the state compose the prayer?
Is the problem that no matter how ecumenical the prayer purports to be, some citizens will likely feel excluded?
Second, the court was not persuaded that permitting students to opt out of saying the prayer was enough to save the practice.
Why not?
A year after Engel, the court applied the same reasoning in a case called School District of Abington vs. Shemp.
This time, a Pennsylvania practice of Bible reading during classroom time was found to be unconstitutional.
This is a good place for us to pause and to think about what religious freedom means.
And one way to do that is to think about what religious freedom might mean in other countries.
Almost all constitutional democracies protect religious freedom.
But what that means or requires can vary considerably.
So consider two other school prayer decisions, one from Germany, the other from Canada.
In the German school prayer case, decided in 1979, Germany's High Court concluded that there was no constitutional impediment to voluntary prayers in public schools,
so long as dissenting students were guaranteed the right not to participate.
One reason for permitting that prayer, the court noted, was its understanding of religious freedom as including the right to express one's belief in a larger community.
In contrast, the Canadian Supreme Court, in a case called Zeilerburg vs. Sudbury Board of Education, decided in 1988,
found that a statute authorizing religious instruction in state schools did violate the Charter of Rights.
Notwithstanding a release option, because, and I quote the court,
the exemption imposes a penalty on students from religious minorities who utilize it by stigmatizing them as non-conformists.
The German court, considering the very same objection, concluded that though the problem was real, and here I quote the German court,
one cannot assume that abstaining from school prayer will generally, or even a substantial number of cases, force a dissenting student into an unbearable position as an outsider.
Engel and Schemp, of course, proved to be profoundly, fantastically controversial.
Neither has been overruled, but that doesn't mean that school prayer in the United States is a completely settled issue.
Consider the following question.
Should it be unconstitutional for a public high school to invite a member of the local clergy to give a short prayer at the opening of graduation ceremonies?
In Lee v. Weissman, decided in 1992, the court found this practice unconstitutional, in part because, in the majority's view, students were essentially coerced into attendance.
In Justice Kennedy's words, and I quote him,
The design of the Constitution is that preservation and transmission of religious beliefs and worship is a responsibility and a choice committed to the private sphere.
The Lee case gave rise to a bewildering array of concurring and dissenting opinions.
Some of the disagreement stemmed from differences of opinion about whether the court should use the lemon test or some other analytical framework to assess the school's policy.
But some of it also seems to have been the result of a more fundamental disagreement about the meaning and purpose of the establishment clause itself.
Justice Kennedy's opinion, for instance, seems closely aligned with the strict separation approach.
Justice Scalia, by contrast, embraced the accommodationist perspective.
In his impassioned dissent, Scalia wrote, and I quote him,
The history and tradition of our nation are replete with public ceremonies featuring prayers of thanksgiving and petition.
The founders of our republic knew the fearsome potential of sectarian religious belief to generate civil dissension and civil strife.
They also knew that nothing, absolutely nothing, is so inclined to foster among religious believers of various faith a toleration,
no an affection for one another, than voluntarily joining in prayer together to the God whom they all worship and seek.
Let's also consider two other examples.
First, what should we make of laws that call for a moment of silence at the start of the school day?
In Wallace v. Jaffrey, decided in 1985, the court considered whether Alabama's moment of silence law violated the establishment clause.
Writing for the court and employing the lemon test, Justice Stevens concluded for the majority that it did.
Of particular significance in the court's view was the uncontradicted evidence that the state's purpose in introducing the law was simply to restore prayer in public schools.
This was a plain violation of the first prong of the lemon test, which requires a statute to have a valid secular purpose.
Does this suggest that a moment of silence law, if enacted to advance purely secular purposes, such as encouraging kids to calm down and focus before beginning their studies, might satisfy the demands of the establishment clause?
In an important and influential dissent in the same case, Chief Justice Rehnquist urged the court to reject the strict separationist approach to the establishment clause in favor of the accommodationist perspective.
There is, he wrote, simply no historical foundation for the proposition that the framers intended to build the wall of separation that was constitutionalized in Everson.
On this view, the establishment clause does not require government neutrality between religion and irreligion, nor does it, as Justice Rehnquist wrote, prohibit the federal government from providing non-discriminatory aid to religion.
What about prayers at high school football games?
In Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe, decided in 2000, the court took up a challenge by Mormon and Catholic students at a Santa Fe public high school to a long-standing school policy of having a student lead a prayer over the public address system before varsity football games.
After the policy was challenged, the school district changed it to provide for two student elections. The first would determine whether invocations should be delivered before the games, and the second would select a spokesperson to deliver them.
Writing for a 6-3 majority, Justice Stevens concluded, and I quote,
The policy is invalid on its face because it establishes an improper majoritarian election on religion and unquestionably has the purpose and creates the perception of encouraging the delivery of prayer at a series of important school events.
In dissent, Justice Rehnquist complained loudly about the court's holding. I quote,
But even more disturbing than its holding is the tone of the court's opinion. It bristles with hostility to all things religious in public life.
Neither the holding nor the tone of the opinion is faithful to the meaning of the establishment clause when it is recalled that George Washington himself, at the request of the very Congress which passed the Bill of Rights,
proclaimed a day of public thanksgiving and prayer to be observed by acknowledging with grateful hearts the many and signal favors of Almighty God.
I hope it is obvious that the constitutionality of prayer in schools is still a live and contentious cultural issue, and that disagreements about it often turn on fundamentally different understandings about the meaning and purpose of the establishment clause.
It should be obvious, too, that the establishment clause also pops up in cases that have little to do with public schools.
Over the years, the court has considered establishment clause issues and controversies concerning tax exemption laws for religious institutions,
blue laws that restrict commercial activity on Sundays, zoning laws that prohibit liquor sales near churches and schools,
policies relating to prayer and state legislative sessions, and a wide variety of other cases.
Time limits us to consideration of just one of these other controversial issues, but it is among the most fiercely debated.
The CRESH, or Nativity Scene Cases. Cases involving states sponsored or supported nativity scenes during the Christmas holidays vividly illustrate the two different approaches to the establishment clause we've discussed.
Not surprisingly, a strict separationist understanding of the establishment clause, which insists upon a high wall of separation between church and state, envisions a public square nearly or entirely free of religious symbolism.
The accommodationist perspective, on the other hand, is not averse to public accommodations of religion, but insists that such accommodations must not themselves discriminate against particular religions.
What then should we make of a nativity scene in a public park?
In Lynch v. Donnelly, decided in 1984, the Supreme Court upheld the display of a CRESH in an annual Christmas display in Pawtucket, Rhode Island, because, in the court's view, the CRESH was just a part of a larger display in a larger presentation that included both religious and secular motifs.
Thus the court noted, and I quote,
This is an interesting rule. A purely religious display would seem to be in violation of the First Amendment under this approach. Indeed, as the court itself noted, and I quote,
Focus exclusively on the religious component of any activity would inevitably lead to its invalidation under the establishment clause.
In a subsequent case, Allegheny County v. American Civil Liberties Union decided in 1989, the court ruled that a display of a CRESH with a banner bearing a religious slogan on the grand staircase of the county courthouse sponsored by the Catholic Church did violate the establishment clause.
Using the lemon test, the court concluded that the primary purpose was to advance religion.
In the same case, however, the court upheld the display of a menorah placed next to a Christmas tree and other holiday decorations, this time because the purpose of this display was said to be secular.
Some wags refer to the results in Lynch and Allegheny as the two plastic reindeer rule. Apparently, two plastic reindeer offset the predominantly religious message of these displays, and in so doing, they escaped the strictures of the establishment clause.
The distinction between displays with a secular or non-secular purpose also figures prominently in two very recent establishment clause cases, both decided in 2005.
In McCreary County v. ACLU, a closely divided court concluded that the practice of posting gold-framed copies of the Ten Commandments in state courthouses violated the establishment clause because the posting advanced substantially religious objectives.
On the other hand, and on the very same day, the court ruled five to four in a case called Van Orden v. Perry that a display of the Ten Commandments in the form of a six-foot high and three-foot wide monument was permissible under the establishment clause.
Writing for the court, Chief Justice Rehnquist concluded that the Ten Commandments have historical as well as religious significance.
The monument's presence in a statuary garden, among 21 historical markers commemorating the people, ideals, and events that compose Texan identity, led the court to conclude that its historical significance was sufficient to overcome a claim that it was included just for its religious message.
By now, you may well be confused about what the establishment clause permits or forbids and why. I think, in conclusion, I can offer up a pretty simple rule that should help you. The rule is, it all depends.
Or, as Justice Breyer, explained in voting with the majority in both Van Orden and McCleary, and I quote,
No single mechanical formula can accurately draw the constitutional line in every case.
If the relationship between government and religion is one of separation but not of mutual hostility and suspicion, one will inevitably find difficult borderline cases.
And in such cases, I see no test-related substitute for the exercise of legal judgment.
In our next lecture, we consider the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment.
We'll see that the Free Exercise Clause, like the establishment clause, raises issues of extraordinary complexity and importance.
