Lecture 11, The Free Exercise Clause.
In September 1963, a woman named Mrs. Jones, age 25 and the mother of a seven month old
child, was admitted by her husband into the emergency room at Georgetown College Hospital
in Washington, D.C., a Catholic institution. She had a ruptured ulcer and had lost nearly
half her body's blood. Concerned doctors informed her and her husband that she would die without
a transfusion. Jones and her husband refused, saying the transfusion would violate her faith
as a Jehovah's Witness. Jehovah's Witnesses follow the command in Genesis chapter 9 which
says, But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat. Witnesses
believe that blood transfusions violate this command and thus are an offense to God, resulting
in the person being shunned. Should the Free Exercise Clause protect her
decision? Do you need to know more about Mrs. Jones? Do you need to know, for example,
if they understand fully the ramifications of their decision, that she will die without
a transfusion and leave behind her child? Do you need to know if she is willing to die
for her faith? Do you need to know if her understanding of Church doctrine is correct
or is shared by other members of the faith? I know it's an unforgivably theatrical trick,
but I will wait until the end of this lecture to tell you what happened to Mrs. Jones. I
have a good reason for doing so. I want us to think about whether anything we learn in
this lecture helps us, you, to decide her case. In the meantime, I have lots of other
cases I'd like us to think about. Cases that bear directly on the practical and often
controversial implications of those important words from the First Amendment, Congress shall
make no law prohibiting the Free Exercise of Religion.
First, let's consider the case of John Wayne Pumpkin Brown Jr. For many years, Pumpkin was
a Pentecostal pastor at the old Rock House Holiness Church in the small village of Macedonia,
Alabama. Like many members of his Pentecostal faith, Pumpkin Brown read Mark 16, verses 17,
18, literally. The scripture provides, and these signs shall follow them that believe,
In my name shall they cast out devils. They shall speak with new tongues. They shall take
up serpents. And if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. They shall lay hands
on the sick, and they shall recover. As a minister and itinerant evangelist, Pumpkin
routinely handled serpents. At every service, he would reach into a wooden box on the altar
and calmly pull out a snake, say a copperhead, or a three-foot-long yellow timber rattler.
As he pulled the snake out of its slumber, Pumpkin would say, and I quote,
They say it won't bite. If it won't bite, there ain't no sense in being scared.
I've seen that big copperhead in their bite, but I know one thing, that the Lord told me
it was all right. The Lord said it would be all right.
Now, Pumpkin knew well he might die. A copperhead got his wife, the mother of his five children,
at a revival in Kentucky. Indeed, Pumpkin once figured he'd been bitten 22 times
and lived to tell the tale by virtue of the Lord's grace and mercy.
One day, however, a yellow timber rattler set one of its long fangs deep into Pumpkin's left
middle finger. Pumpkin showed no signs of fear, crying only, God don't ever fail, and he never will.
Sadly, those were Pumpkin's very last words. He faltered as he walked away from the altar,
requiring the assistance of the Reverend Billy Summerford. Ten minutes later, Pumpkin Brown was dead.
My question about this case is not the one you're probably thinking about.
I don't want to ask, at least right now, if the Free Exercise Clause should protect his right to
engage in snake handling if he thinks the Bible tells him to do it. The story is more complicated
than that. Two of Pumpkin's children were adults, and they continued in the faith.
But Pumpkin also had three other young children, all under the age of ten.
Knowing the children might be exposed to snakes, and having suffered already the trauma of losing
both parents to the practice, the state of Alabama sought to remove the children from
Pumpkin's parents, who also handle snakes. Is that an infringement of their faith?
Does it infringe upon the children's faith? And these are just a couple of the questions
that cases like this one raise. The Free Exercise Clause guarantees freedom of belief.
But does it include the freedom to believe anything, everything, or nothing at all?
Does it include the freedom to act on my beliefs, even at the cost of harm to others or to myself?
When and why can the state regulate or prohibit the practice of religion?
Can it outlaw the use of certain substances, say snakes, in a church?
And here is another question. Does religious freedom mean that I can opt out of secular laws
that burden my faith? That question has been addressed frequently by the courts.
For example, in Frank v. Alaska, decided in 1979, the Alaska Supreme Court held that the state
could not enforce its hunting laws against Athabaskan Indians who were religiously motivated
to hunt moose out of season. But as we'll see, not every conflict between religious motivations
and secular laws has led to a similar outcome.
Sometimes it seems to me that there are more free exercise cases than anyone can possibly imagine.
Just think of the kinds of controversies we can foresee.
Is a mandate in a health care law that requires religious organizations to provide
insurance for abortions or contraception, a violation of that organization's free exercise
rights? Is a prison required to respect the dietary demands of prisoners who must follow
certain religious rules, such as kosher or halal? Can a state prosecute a minister for
using marijuana as part of a religious ceremony? Can a state prosecute a church that shows
sexually explicit materials to children as a part of its sex education program in Sunday school?
All of these are real cases, but you're probably thinking that I made them up,
especially the last one. Not so. The case of Unitarian Church West versus McConnell
was decided by a United States District Court in 1972.
A Unitarian Church in Wisconsin had asked the court to enjoin a district attorney from prosecuting
the church under a state of sanity law. As part of its Sunday school program, the church intended
to teach a course called About Your Sexuality, a course that had been developed under the direction
of the parent body of the Unitarian Church. The course included still pictures of heterosexual
and homosexual acts. Participation in the course was limited to children in the congregation who
had the consent of at least one parent who in turn had attended a parent orientation session.
The district attorney sent a letter to the reverend of the church, in which he indicated that the
church might be in violation of state obscenity statutes and might also be at risk of prosecution
unless the church met first with his office to discuss the ground rules.
Should the Free Exercise Clause protect the church in this case?
The district court said yes, the church should be protected and could proceed with its Sunday
school course without interference from the district attorney. Do you agree with the court?
To help you reach a considered opinion, let's take a closer look at the meaning of the free
exercise clause. What precisely do the words free exercise mean?
One of the court's first free exercise cases addressed this very question and in many ways
that discussion continues to influence the court's understanding of the free exercise clause.
In Reynolds v. United States, decided in 1879, the Supreme Court was asked to consider the
constitutionality of the Moral Anti-Bigamy Act, which was passed in 1862 in an effort to prohibit
the spread of bigamy and polygamy in the Utah Territory. George Reynolds, a Mormon, was arrested
for having two wives. Remember that in our last lecture, we examined another case involving the
Mormons, Davis v. Beeson, which was decided 11 years after Reynolds in 1890. And as we saw in that
case, the court was not generally very sympathetic to claims by the church that its free exercise
right was infringed by laws that prohibited polygamy. Indeed, in writing for the Beeson court,
Justice Field said of polygamy, and I quote,
Few crimes are more pernicious to the best interests of society and receive more general
or more deserved punishment. But Field also cited Reynolds for the following proposition,
which I want to quote precisely. Congress was deprived of all legislative power over mere
opinion, but was left free to reach actions which were in violation of social duties
or subversive of good order. Whatever we may think of the court's apparent hostility to the
Mormon faith, Reynolds is often said to have established two basic principles that continue
to hold great sway over judicial interpretations of the free exercise clause. The first of these
principles is called the belief conduct distinction. Under this principle, we say that an individual
has an absolute freedom to believe whatever he or she wants to believe. Indeed, some scholars
suggest that the free exercise clause has at least one clear and undisputed meaning. The state may
not punish a person for holding or rejecting any particular religious belief, period, ever.
On the other hand, the belief conduct distinction also holds that while one's freedom to believe
may be absolute, the state must have some authority to regulate action or conduct.
I may believe that my God wants me to invade, conquer, and convert the great state of Connecticut
to the Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster. Google it. But few of us would doubt that I can
be arrested and prosecuted if I actually try to do it. And surely the state's authority in such cases
is independent of the truth or falsity or even of the sincerity of my belief.
So the belief conduct distinction tells us that the state cannot touch what we believe,
but may sometimes regulate or prohibit religiously motivated actions.
The belief conduct distinction may seem appealing, but it does have a few problems.
First, I want to highlight a problem that few of us ever really think about.
Is it obvious that the free exercise clause should give us the liberty to believe anything,
everything, or nothing at all? Is there no belief that the state can act against
just on the basis of what is believed? What if I believe? I take no action. I simply believe
that God has made some humans less equal, inferior to others.
You probably know that there are some churches, sometimes called Christian identity churches,
in the United States, which profess to believe just that.
Or what if I believe as a matter of religious faith? I take no action. I simply believe
that an adult may have sex with a child.
Consider the case of Michael Trevesser, spiritual leader of the Lord Our Righteousness Church in New
Mexico. One member of the church informed authorities that Trevesser had told his congregation, and I
quote, that God told him that he was supposed to sleep with seven virgins, including the member's
own daughters. Trevesser was later arrested by authorities on three counts of criminal sexual
contact with a minor, and three counts of contributing to the delinquency of a minor.
Now, if Trevesser in fact molested these children, there can be little doubt that his actions are
not protected by the free exercise clause, no matter what he believes. But what if Trevesser
never acts on this belief? Should we leave him alone, free to believe whatever he believes?
Second, a more common complaint. Is it really so easy to separate belief from action?
What if my belief requires me to act on it? Think again of my Trevesser example.
What if Trevesser believes that he really must sleep with seven virgins,
some of them juveniles, as a profession of his faith? Is it possible to regulate or
proscribe his actions without compromising his beliefs? Or, in other words, how valuable
is freedom of belief without a corresponding freedom to act on the basis of that belief?
A third problem with the belief action distinction may be the most significant one of all.
It is one thing to say that the state may sometimes regulate religious actions under the free exercise
clause. The difficult question is when? Which actions warrant immunity under the free exercise
clause? Which can be regulated? And why? And unfortunately, the belief conduct distinction
itself tells us nothing at all about the circumstances under which various communal
interests are sufficiently strong to outweigh the countervailing interest in religious liberty.
This takes us to the second principle that Reynolds and Beeson are sometimes said to have
established, the so-called secular regulation rule. The secular regulation rule holds that
secular state regulations, or regulations that have as their primary aim a secular purpose,
do not ordinarily violate the free exercise clause, even though they may have an effect upon
or even substantially touch religious actions. Laws that purposefully burden free exercise
are a different matter altogether, but secular laws need make no accommodation for their heavy
burden on religious freedom. To put it another way, the secular regulation rule typically
weighs the balance between free exercise and the community in favor of the community.
Just so we are clear, the belief conduct distinction does not require that we adopt
the secular regulation rule, and the court has not always followed it.
In a very significant case decided in 1963, called Sherbert versus Werner, the court ruled
that if a secular regulation, and I quote, substantially burdens a religious practice,
then it must be justified by a compelling state interest. I'm sure that's a phrase you'll
recognize from earlier in this course. The Sherbert rule, in other words, requires strict scrutiny.
In Sherbert, the use of strict scrutiny led the court to declare unconstitutional
a state law that denied Adele Sherbert, a Seventh Day Adventist, unemployment compensation
because she refused to work on Saturdays. One quick but important aside, in so far as the
court in Sherbert seemed to carve out an exception for Seventh Day Adventists, should we worry that
the court, in an effort to give wide meaning to the free exercise clause, in fact violated
the establishment clause. Here is Justice Brennan's response writing for the court.
Plainly, we are not fostering the establishment of the Seventh Day Adventist religion in South
Carolina, for the extension of unemployment benefits to saboteurians in common with Sunday
worshipers, reflects nothing more than the governmental obligation of neutrality in the
face of religious differences, and does not represent the involvement of religious with
secular institutions, which it is the object of the establishment clause to forestall.
Would Justice Brennan's explanation work equally well in another case we've already considered?
I'm thinking of the court's opinion in Wisconsin versus Yoder, decided in 1972.
As a reminder, Yoder involved a state law that required children in the state of Wisconsin
to attend public schools until age 16. The court concluded that because the law burdened the
religious faith of the Amish, it must be supported by a compelling state interest, which the court
could not find on the facts. So the court made an exception for the Amish.
Should we see this as an accommodation of their free exercise of religion,
or as an unconstitutional establishment of their religion?
Does the Yoder opinion tend to establish religion over irreligion?
After all, the irreligious, remember the court's reference to Thoreau at Walden,
would not have the opportunity to claim an exemption under this framework.
And isn't there a similar problem at work in Sherbert itself?
What if my objection to working on Saturdays is not grounded in religious faith, but has some other
basis? Although the court could not find a compelling state interest in Sherbert,
it has in some other cases, and these cases tell us something about the relationship between
the free exercise of religion and the kinds of compelling state interests that may sometimes
overcome it. Take the case of Bob Jones University versus United States, for example,
which was decided in 1983. In this case, the Internal Revenue Service had issued a ruling
denying tax exemption status to a private university because the university discriminated on the basis
of race. Founded in 1927 by the well-known evangelist Reverend Robert Reynolds Jones,
Bob Jones University claimed that its racial policies, in particular a policy that prohibited
interracial dating and interracial marriage, were grounded in its understanding of the Bible
and thus protected by the free exercise clause. Speaking for the court, Chief Justice Berger
wrote that a state has, and I quote, a fundamental overriding interest in eradicating racial
discrimination in education. To return to a point we considered earlier, the interest in
overcoming racial discrimination is compelling, and so overcomes the practice of racial discrimination.
But would it be enough if instead of acting on a discriminatory policy,
Bob Jones University simply stated its belief that interracial marriages offend their faith?
Parenthetically, the university repealed its policies on interracial relationships in 2000.
The university's website includes an apology for the university's failing quote to accurately
represent the Lord and to fulfill the commandment to love others as ourselves.
In some places, the court's decision in the Bob Jones case was profoundly controversial.
According to one study, the court was flooded with angry letters decrying the decision's effect
on religious freedom. Would the anger have dissipated if the court had made clearer the
distinction between freedom of belief and freedom of action?
Would it matter if the court had said unequivocally that Bob Jones University is perfectly free to
believe what it wants about the Bible and interracial relationships, but it may not adopt and enforce a
policy that prohibits them? In any event, we've seen that in the 1960s with the Sherbert case,
in the 1970s with the Yoder case, and in the 1980s with the Bob Jones case,
a similar test was applied. This test, although it did not always immunize faith from state
regulation, nonetheless had as its chief aim carving out a wide space for free exercise.
An approach that some scholars liken to the accommodationist perspective,
the court sometimes seems to favor an establishment clause cases.
We might even call this a kind of free exercise accommodationism,
in so far as the purpose is to accommodate claims of faith when they are significantly
burdened by secular laws. But no matter how we characterize the Sherbert rule,
it no longer governs how the court treats most free exercise claims.
Although there were occasional signs of dissatisfaction within the court a few years earlier,
the sea change in how the court treats free exercise cases dates from the year 1990.
The case that ushered in the change is known as Employment Division versus Smith,
or sometimes as the Peyote case. The case involved two members of the Native American Church,
Alfred Smith and Galen Black. Smith and Black were fired from their jobs as counselors at a
private drug rehabilitation clinic because they had ingested Peyote, a crime under Oregon law,
as part of a religious ceremony. Both men were denied unemployment benefits because the reason
for their dismissal was deemed to be work-related misconduct. Smith and Black appealed, claiming
that the denial of unemployment benefits impermissibly burdened their free exercise rights.
On these facts, Sherbert certainly seems like the appropriate place to start.
Sherbert, too, involved the denial of unemployment benefits, and in both cases,
the action or behavior that triggered the denial was grounded in a religion claim.
Moreover, in both cases, the law at issue was secular, not designed to burden religion in
particular. Of course, there is also a fairly obvious difference between the two cases.
The course of action dictated by Adele Sherbert's religious faith, not working on Saturdays,
was completely legal. In Alfred Smith's case, however, the course of action dictated by his
religious faith, the consumption of Peyote, was illegal. How, if at all, is this distinction
between making an accommodation under the free exercise clause for legal conduct,
but not for illegal conduct, relevant? If it is relevant, I think, it is because the distinction
speaks possibly to the strength of the state's interest in overcoming the claim of religious
liberty. Perhaps we could argue, staying fully within the analytical framework required by
Sherbert versus Werner, that the state has a compelling interest in preventing the ingestion
of Peyote. Remember, as we saw earlier in this lecture, the Sherbert test does not mean that
the state can never limit or proscribe conduct that is religiously motivated. And indeed,
this is the approach Justice O'Connor took in Smith, but she did not write for a majority of the court.
Instead, the court, speaking through Justice Scalia, discarded the Sherbert test altogether,
saying, and I quote from Justice Scalia's opinion,
the compelling government interest requirement seems benign because it is familiar from other fields.
But using it as the standard that must be met before the government may accord different treatment
on the basis of race, or before the government may regulate the content of speech, is not remotely
comparable to using it for the purpose asserted here. What it produces in those other fields,
equality of treatment, and an unrestricted flow of contending speech, are constitutional norms.
What it would produce here, a private right to ignore generally applicable laws, is a constitutional anomaly.
Neutral laws of general applicability, Justice Scalia argued, laws that do not single out religion,
or intentionally burden religion, need not accommodate exemptions grounded in claims of faith.
We have consistently held, Justice Scalia wrote, that the right of free exercise does not relieve an
individual of the obligation to comply with a valid and neutral law of general applicability.
To hold otherwise, he argued would be, quote, to make the professed doctrines of religious belief
superior to the law of the land, and in effect, to permit every citizen to become a law unto himself.
So the new rule, the Smith rule, holds that a secular law that burdens free exercise
will be judged by the simple rationality test, not by strict scrutiny.
The new rule looks much like the rule that governed before Sherbert, in Reynolds,
and indeed the court cited Reynolds with approval.
I said earlier that Sherbert no longer controls most free exercise claims, having been replaced by Smith.
But I should add two qualifications.
First, there may be an exception to the Smith rule, created by the court itself.
And second, deep rooted dissatisfaction with Smith has led some legislators to try to change it without the court's help.
One exception to the Smith rule, was suggested by Justice Scalia himself.
Strict scrutiny might still be appropriate, he explained, in so-called hybrid cases.
Hybrid cases are cases where the free exercise claim is accompanied by other claims to constitutional protections.
In these cases, cases where there is, apparently, a violation not only of the free exercise clause,
but also of some other significant constitutional interest, strict scrutiny might still apply.
Thus, for example, the result in Yoder might be the same even under the new Smith rule.
The free exercise claim in Yoder did not stand alone,
but was instead paired with a parental liberty claim to control a child's education,
which is itself a fundamental right under the due process clause of the 14th amendment,
and thus entitled on its own to strict scrutiny.
If I may say so, I find this exception to the Smith rule both confusing and confused.
Here is why continuing with the Yoder example.
It is, in fact, true that a parental liberty to control a child's education is a fundamental constitutional liberty,
and as such, it gets strict scrutiny.
That is true whether or not the parental liberty claim is made in concert with a free exercise claim.
Adding free exercise to the mix changes nothing at all about the analysis in such a case.
Consequently, if we read Smith to say that free exercise claims get strict scrutiny
when made in conjunction with another constitutional claim that already gets strict scrutiny,
how is that an exception to the general rule on free exercise?
It's not. Instead, it makes the free exercise claim irrelevant or redundant.
On the other hand, not all constitutional liberties are entitled to strict scrutiny.
In most cases, for example, the right to property is not judged by the strict scrutiny test,
but is instead measured against the lowly rational basis test.
These liberty interests are sometimes called non-fundamental rights.
For a fuller discussion, I can recommend a good course on civil liberties in the Bill of Rights
also produced by the Great Courses Company.
Continuing with the hybrid exception suggested by Justice Scalia,
does he mean to argue that a free exercise claim itself not entitled to strict scrutiny,
but made in conjunction with another constitutional liberty that likewise does not get strict scrutiny,
now does get strict scrutiny? Neither claim is strong enough on its own,
but together they are special. Sort of like the amazing Wonder Twins,
Zan and Jaina in the Super Friends Justice League.
Alone, they're pretty ordinary. Together, special strict scrutiny power.
On this logic, Smith and Black were badly served by making their claim on the basis of the free
exercise clause alone. Perhaps they should have argued also
that the denial violated some other constitutional liberty. Like what?
I said also that dissatisfaction with the court's decision in Smith has led some legislators to
try to change it. Before we examine those efforts, we should take a look at one of the more interesting
parts of the majority opinion in Smith. Near the end of the opinion, Justice Scalia remarked and I
quote, it may fairly be said that leaving accommodation to the political process will
place at a relative disadvantage those religious practices that are not widely engaged in.
But that unavoidable consequence of democratic government must be preferred to a system in
which each conscience is a law unto itself, or in which judges weigh the social importance of all
laws against the centrality of all religious beliefs. I think all that Justice Scalia means here
is that minority religions may in fact find themselves at a disadvantage in the political
process, but that result is better than allowing judges to determine which religions should be
entitled to an exemption from the law. One response to Justice Scalia's call for deference to
legislative judgments is to wonder if it can really be squared with the underlying logic
and purpose of the free exercise clause itself. At the very least, the Smith rule seems considerably
less protective of religious liberty than the Sherbert test it replaced.
Another response is precisely the one Justice Scalia noted. If we really want a free exercise
clause that looks more like Sherbert than Smith, let's make that choice through the legislative
process. And maybe we have. After the Smith decision, the Oregon legislature amended the law to give
religious users of peyote an exemption to criminal prohibition. Congress has since taken similar
action. Even more significantly, in 1993, just a few years after the peyote case, Congress passed
the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. Supported by a wide variety of religious organizations
and attracting nearly unanimous support in Congress, the act's overriding purpose was to
replace the Smith test with the old Sherbert rule. Indeed, in section three of the Act, Congress wrote,
and I quote, governments should not substantially burden religious exercise without compelling
justification. And in section five, Congress further added that the compelling interest test
is a workable test for striking sensible balances between religious liberty and competing prior
governmental interests. The Religious Freedom Restoration Act is a pretty straightforward
repudiation of the court's current approach to free exercise claims. But it is not the last word.
In the case of City of Bernie versus Flores, decided in 1997, the Supreme Court declared the
Religious Freedom Restoration Act itself unconstitutional, at least as applied to the states
under the 14th Amendment. In brief, the court ruled that Congress had exceeded its powers under the
14th Amendment and had instead infringed upon the authority of the judiciary to determine what the
Constitution means. As applied to the states then, the free exercise clause is measured against the
Smith rational basis test, unless the claim walks with another constitutional liberty as we discussed
earlier. It is worth noting, however, that several states have passed their own versions of the
Religious Freedom Restoration Act, and in those states, the Sherbert rule or something similar
applies. Our discussion of the peyote case reminds me that my favorite freedom of religion case is
from Canada and goes by the impossibly humorous name of Jack and Charlie versus the Queen.
In this case, the Canadian Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of a ban on hunting as
applied to two Coast Salish Indians. Jack and Charlie were charged with hunting deer out of season
contrary to the British Columbia Wildlife Act. The deer had been killed for use in a religious
ceremony involving the burning of raw deer meat. The court ruled that their conviction did not
violate their freedom of religion. Now honestly, can you say the result is surprising? Jack and
Charlie versus the Queen. My money's on the Queen. As we conclude this lecture, let's return to
Mrs. Jones and the Georgetown College case we started with. Does Mrs. Jones' right to religious
freedom include the right to refuse life-saving treatment if that treatment violates a command
of her faith? Faced with her refusal and her husband's refusal, attorneys for the hospital
petitioned a federal district court in Washington D.C. for an emergency order that would authorize
the hospital to administer the transfusion over the Jones' objection. The district court refused
to issue such an order, whereupon Georgetown filed an emergency appeal with the circuit court in the
city. The appeal went to Judge J. Skelly Wright, who proceeded to the hospital where he spoke with
doctors and with Mr. Jones, quoting the judge, Mr. Jones advised me that on religious grounds,
he would not approve a blood transfusion for his wife. He said, however, that if the court ordered
the transfusion, the responsibility was not his. I advised Mr. Jones to obtain counsel immediately.
He thereupon went to the telephone and returned in 10 or 15 minutes to advise that he had taken
the matter up with his church and that he had decided that he did not want counsel.
Then Judge Wright tried to speak with Mrs. Jones. Again, I quote the judge at length.
Her appearance confirmed the urgency which had been represented to me.
I tried to communicate with her, advising her again as to what the doctors had said.
The only audible reply I could hear was, against my will. It was obvious that the woman was not
in a mental condition to make a decision. I was reluctant to press her because of the seriousness
of her condition and because I felt that to suggest repeatedly the imminence of death without blood
might place a strain on her religious convictions. I asked her whether she would oppose the blood
transfusion if the court allowed it. She indicated, as best I could make out, that it would not then
be her responsibility. In his opinion, Judge Skelly Wright discussed the various principles
and factors that weighed on his decision. Among them, the fact that Mrs. Jones was a mother,
did not wish to die as evidenced by her decision to go to the hospital in the first place,
the state's general interest in preventing suicide, and the possibility of liability for
the hospital if Mrs. Jones died in their care. Balanced against these was the weighty claim
of religious freedom. How should a court decide this case?
What happens if we apply the Sherbert test?
What happens if instead we apply the Smith test?
Maybe there is no test that tells us what to do in such cases. Maybe in such cases,
the Constitution can do no more than tell us what sort of conflict we face, not how to resolve it.
Here is what Judge Skelly Wright decided in his own words.
The final and compelling reason for granting the emergency writ was that a life hung in the balance.
There was no time for research and reflection. Death could have mooted the cause in a matter of
minutes if action were not taken to preserve the status quo. To refuse to act, only to find
later that the law required action was a risk I was unwilling to accept, I determined to act on the
side of life. Is it obvious that life is a better choice than being shunned or alienated from one's
God? Who should make that choice? A court or the individual?
