Paleontology. It's really widespread in the media these days. It's in books, movies.
You try switching on the TV, flipping around the channels and not finding some beautifully
produced CGI representation of dinosaurs striding across some exotic, beautiful landscape.
But it's really just about dinosaurs? Well, I don't think so. Don't get me wrong. I love
dinosaurs. I think they're beautiful, magnificent creatures and we'll examine some of them in
this course. But I think paleontology is about so much more. Paleontology is about opening
doors to the deep past, ancient earths which have been long since hidden, also perhaps
providing lessons for the present, but perhaps also, importantly, windows to the future as
well. I think the reason I was attracted to paleontology and geology is because of all
the sciences. I think it is the most narrative of the sciences. It's very often looking at
the history, the story of our planet, and the story of our planet is written large in
rocks. If you've walked past a road cut or walked past cliff faces by the side of the
ocean, you've probably often seen strata, layers of rock, laid one on top of another.
They really are like the pages in a book. Each of those rock strata contains information
about ancient earths long since vanished. Through this course, I'd like to provide you
with some of the basic tools that will also allow you to go and read that story for yourself,
perhaps in your local area. My interest in rocks and fossils goes way
back to my childhood. This is a picture of me in Tenby, South Wales in 1972. You can
see I had an awful lot more hair back then. You can also see that I was dabbling with
an early career in architecture, but my attention was always switching to the rocks behind me.
In those rocks, you can find glimpses of another world, and that really fascinated me as a
child. For example, while on holiday in Derbyshire,
and sometimes in the English Lake District, while eating sandwiches, which incidentally
we call butties where I come from, for lunch on a windy limestone hill, I'd find certain
things in the rocks, certain things like these things. What is this? I had no idea.
It really didn't resemble anything that I could see in the world around me, not even
in books that talked about the current ecosystem and other parts of the world. It was foreign.
And then also, what about this? I was told that this was actually a coral, a tropical
coral. I must admit, with my fingers turning blue after all this was a summer holiday in
Britain on the top of a hill in Derbyshire, I found that a little strange. How do you get
a tropical coral in very non-tropical Derbyshire? This course is going to evaluate some of the
high points in evolution of the Earth system, and also describe hopefully how we can get
tropical corals on a windy Derbyshire hillside. But as a bit of a segue now, I'd like to
consider some of my fellow colleagues. By that I mean scientists. And if you think about
the view of scientists, say, in the 1930s, I think it was very different to the way that
scientists are viewed today. Back in the 30s and 40s, scientists were often hailed as being
the people who were going to save the planet. They were going to end disease and hunger.
They were going to rocket us to the stars. Today, I think the view of a scientist is
very different. They're often regarded as narrow-minded, too focused to the exclusion
of everything else, a bit like Mary Shelley's Dr. Frankenstein. Today, though, I think science
is an awful lot more about climbing out of ivory towers, widening our perspective. And
a really useful way of widening our perspective when we're considering the science of the
earth is a manner of looking at science that's called earth system science. It considers
the interconnectedness of all aspects of earth. And that's a theme that we're going to draw
through this series in a new history of life. But what is earth system science? Well, basically
it considers that you can divide the earth into a number of spheres or systems. And
the system is anything in our minds that we can set apart and study. Systems are also
arranged in hierarchies. Let me just show you one system here. This is a system. It's
a leaf. It's a system that is composed of cells, the plant cells. The plant cells themselves,
each individual cell is a system. It's composed of lots of integrated parts. But if we come
back from the leaf, we see that the leaf isn't isolated. It's actually attached to a stem
to the rest of the plant. Now, if this was a tree, that leaf could be attached to a branch.
The branch could be attached, of course, to the larger tree. The tree is part of a forest.
The forest is part of a wider ecosystem. So what we're looking at is understanding things
in a greater context. It will also provide context for fossils. Fossils, not unlike this
one here. You see, what I want to understand about this fossil is not just what it looks
like, its shape and form. I want to understand what this creature did when it was alive.
How did it eat? How did it move? How did it interact with members of its other species?
Was it eating things or was it avoiding being it? You see, this is much more than a long
Latin name and an age. I need to read this in the context of the Earth system that it
inhabited originally. This course will consider the Earth and its life in the context of an
evolving system. So in this lecture, I'd like to consider what are the Earth systems and
how are they classified, what degrees and orders of complexity the systems demonstrate, and
how are systems related to each other? How do they interact? So what are Earth systems
and how are they classified? Well, here's a very broad overview of four of Earth's really
major systems. We have the lithosphere, or sometimes called the geosphere. That's all
the rocky material that we're walking about on. We then have the hydrosphere. That's all
the water on the planet, whether in lakes, rivers, oceans, whether it's in groundwater.
Some people also split off a category of the hydrosphere called the cryosphere to account
for all the frozen water on the planet. Then, of course, there's the atmosphere, that thin
layer of gases that surrounds the surface of our planet. And, of course, the biosphere,
all the life that coats the surface. But we'll also discover not only coats the surface, but
penetrates quite a way into the geosphere, as well as up into the atmosphere, too. Well,
how do these systems interact? And for that, I'd like to give you a little bit of a demonstration.
This is a no-expense-aspired demonstration, and I have created for you here what we call
an open system, obviously, a glass of water. Now, an open system is an open system because
it's open to other elements around it. I could add water into this system. I could take water
out of it. Not only that, though, I can actually see that energy, heat, for example, can pass
into the water. And, of course, heat can radiate out from this system into the wider system
that is this room. All major earth systems are open systems. For example, the ocean is
a major open system. It receives both matter and energy from other systems. For example,
the atmosphere. Rain can fall into the ocean, and water can effectively be evaporated away
to form clouds in the atmosphere. And, of course, oceans can heat up and get cold as
well. They can exchange energy. But what about closed systems? I'm going to create a closed
system right now. Again, this is highly technical. Not that highly technical, to be honest with
you. I just put a lid on the glass of water. This is a closed system. I can no longer add
water into this glass system, and I can't take it out. But there's still a free passage
of energy. This water can still get hot, and it can still get cold. The earth can probably
be considered to be a closed system. It's not a perfect closed system. There is some
leakage of matter out of the atmosphere. But in terms of exchange, it's mostly energy,
sunlight coming into the earth, and, of course, the heat radiating heat and losing that heat
to space. The next system we're going to do, the concept we're going to deal with, though,
is the hierarchy of systems, and see what orders of complexity they demonstrate. And
for that, I'd like to, if I humbly may offer it myself, as an example of a complex system.
If you were to, say, for example, take me and strain me through a fine wire mesh, not
something that I would really particularly like you to do, but if you would do that,
you might eventually come up with a very smallest unit, whether it's me, perhaps a molecule.
Actually, a molecule is still a system. It's a system of atoms. But anyway, starting with
a molecule, you can see that a molecule, if you were to reconstruct me, would be part of
larger molecules, macromolecules, for example, DNA. DNA itself is a component part of small
machines, if you were, of cells that we call organelles. For example, a mitochondria, which
is one of the powerhouses of the cells. A mitochondria is one of one of those micro-machines
within a cell system. A cell system forms tissue systems composed of many cells. Tissues,
makeup organs, organs themselves, for example, the stomach, are part of a wider system, the
digestive system. And the digestive system is one of just many systems in the body, including
the reproductive system and the nervous system, which all go together to combine to form the
highest level of this system, which in that case is me, an organism.
System hierarchy is interesting in that it mirrors the evolution of systems from simple,
those molecules, to a complex, a complex organism. For example, if you think of that analogy that
we've just gone through, those simple molecules probably represent the state of the earth
really early on in its history. Once the earth had cooled, you probably had pools of water
just full of organic molecules, like you can see in this hot spring here. Eventually, though,
those molecules would get together to form macromolecules, and ultimately the first cells.
We think around about four billion years ago. And then ultimately, association of cells
to form the first simple algae, as we can see in this fossil. We'll meet this later.
Finally, we get complex organisms. We see that about 600 million years ago. We're also
going to trace the evolution of this system complexity through this course.
So far, though, we've just described systems. How about how those systems interact, because
that's where the magic happens. And when we're talking about interactions in earth systems
science, we generally regard those interactions as being controlled by what we call feedback
loops. So how are systems related to each other, and how do they interact? Well, feedback
is a very important concept in system theory. Feedback drives systems into or out of stability.
There's generally negative and positive feedback. I'd like to give you an example now of a negative
feedback system, and it's one that you're probably all very well familiar with. It's
a central heating system. Temperature in a central heating system is detected by a
thermostat. That sends a signal to a heater, switching on, which will give you heating
or switching off, giving cooling, depending on where you set the thermostat. The input
temperature causes change in the temperature in the home in the opposite direction to the
external stimulus. So if it's getting warm outside, it would cause cooling inside and
vice versa. This causes stable temperatures within your house. We call that homeostasis.
Incidentally, this doesn't account for the dad effect. That's the manner in which all
dads can somehow telepathically tell when someone has been messing with the thermostat.
But how about a real example? Well, let's take something that's very much in the news,
carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide allows, as does the rest of the atmosphere, solar radiation,
shortwave radiation to penetrate to the surface. There, it heats up the surface of the planet,
and the planet then radiates longwave radiation back into space. Now, some of that longwave
radiation, though, is absorbed by carbon dioxide molecules. And as such, the carbon dioxide
acts a bit like a blanket. It keeps the planet warm. Now, greenhouse effects, which is basically
what we're describing here, get a very bad press in a way, because they're not always
such a bad thing. In fact, we need the greenhouse effect to keep our planet warm. In fact, it's
been keeping our planet warm for billions of years. But how is this carbon dioxide regulated?
Obviously, we have input of carbon dioxide from volcanoes, from weathering of rocks, the decay
of organic material. We can't just have this carbon dioxide continually added. If it did,
we'd have a runaway greenhouse effect. We'd have so much carbon dioxide in the atmosphere,
and so much heating that the planet would just become probably too hot for life to exist. So,
there must be some way in which this carbon dioxide is being regulated to prevent the planet
from reaching those dangerous temperatures. There's actually many ways in which this regulation
occurs. And I haven't got time here to go into many of them. So, here's just one. Strip down.
Consider an increase in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. The greenhouse effect kicks into
effect even more, and we see an increase in temperature. Because of that, we see an increase
in warm, wet conditions. The oceans will evaporate more, producing clouds, moving out into the
continents, and it will rain. We'll see a lot of erosion of rocks. Now, when you erode rocks,
you chemically erode them as well, and you flush a lot of minerals and nutrients into the oceans.
That's great for the micro plankton that live in those oceans, and they bloom. They proliferate
incredibly, and you can see that happening in this image. This is NASA's SeaWiF sensor on the
GeoI's orbit V2 satellite, and what it's imaging here is just off the coast of Newfoundland. Can
you see that kind of turquoise colour? That turquoise colour is actually produced by life. It's
produced by these things. These are coccolithophores. These are tiny microscopic algae, single-celled
creatures, photosynthesised, but secrete this shell around themselves. It's very small. You
could fit this actually through the eye of a needle. But what's significant about these creatures
is that they use carbon dioxide to make the calcium carbonate in their shells, and they get
that carbon dioxide by extracting it from the ocean. This allows more carbon dioxide to be
dissolved into the ocean from the atmosphere. Effectively, these little creatures, blooming
as they do, draws down at excess CO2 from the atmosphere. But what about the other feedback
effects? We've had negative feedback, and we see how that kind of stabilises conditions in systems.
How about positive feedback? Well, positive feedback obviously has the opposite effect. It
tends to drive systems into states of instability. And if you want a really good example of that,
consider our nearest neighbour. Consider the beautiful planet of Venus. Venus is a similar
size to our planet. It's a similar distance to the Sun. And in the 1950s, the view of Venus
was those clouds, which incidentally reflect lots of sunlight, which is why you see it
so brightly in the night sky covered a tropical, steamy world full of lush forests. However,
when we actually sent probes there, we found that the real Venus was very different.
Surface temperatures are hot enough to melt lead, and atmospheric pressures there are so
intense that they could crush a car. So given that Venus is apparently on the surface so similar
to our planet, what went wrong? Well, that would be complicated. There are probably lots of factors.
But consider one possible model. Venus, like Earth, and actually possibly Mars as well,
may have had early on in its history, liquid water oceans. But our Sun has actually been
getting brighter through time. Initially, it wasn't quite as bright. It's been getting warmer and
warmer. And as the Sun got brighter and the surface of the planet started to get warmer,
the oceans on Venus started to evaporate into the atmosphere. Now, water vapor actually,
like carbon dioxide, is a pretty good greenhouse gas. It acts like a blanket.
So what we think happens on Venus is that we quickly go into a positive feedback situation.
The atmosphere warms, so we have more evaporation of the oceans and more warming until eventually
the entire oceans of Venus are up in the atmosphere. Temperature is now running away,
getting so hot that some of the surface rocks on the planet start to sublimate, turn to gas,
adding carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, and therefore more of a greenhouse effect develops,
the planet getting warmer, releasing more CO2, producing the very inhospitable planet that we
see today. Could this occur on Earth? Is this a lesson for Earth? Well, probably not. Earth has
many systems by homeostasis maintained. Life is present on Earth and isn't on Venus. Also,
Earth has significant plate tectonics, which are very important in these homeostatic processes.
Positive feedback loops, though, do operate on our planet, and they're very significant when
we're studying extinction events, driving the Earth's system, in this case the biosphere, with
it into instability. They're extremely important in the Permium mass extinction event at 251 million
years ago, and we'll deal with that in some detail later in this course. But how about an example from
today? Okay, well, we do know our planet is warming, whatever the cause might be, and as our planet
warms, the cryosphere, that part of the hydrosphere that is ice, starts to shrink. Now, ice has what
we call a high albedo. It's white. It reflects a lot of solar radiation, a bit like my forehead.
That reflected solar radiation gets out into space, of course, and keeps our planet cool.
So, the less ice we have, the less reflection, and therefore the more heat absorbed. But it's
more than that, because once the ice is removed, it exposes dark surfaces, land and oceans, which
actually look very dark from space. Now, those of you who have perhaps gone out on a very hot,
sunny day wearing black clothing will know how effectively dark surfaces absorb heat. So, we
have a positive feedback loop operating here. We have the ice melting, revealing more dark surfaces,
which absorbs more heat, which causes the planet to warm, which causes more ice to melt,
which reveals more dark surfaces, and so on, and so on, and so on. Positive feedback.
On average, though, over the past 600 million years or so, our planet's been fairly well regulated.
There have been no complete evaporation events. The oceans haven't disappeared into the atmosphere,
nor has ice rumbled down from the pole to meet at the equator. We think that it's feedback
mechanisms that have maintained this homeostasis. In a way, the Earth could almost be regarded,
some claim, as being self-regulating. This is an idea that was popularized by one James Lovelock.
Now, he viewed the Earth as being a very large, self-regulating organism. He called this hypothesis
the Gaia Hypothesis. Gaia is a Greek goddess that personified the Earth. He says that the
Earth system homeostatic state is really just the result of lots of complex feedback mechanisms
operating together. This received an awful lot of criticism. People said that it kind of implied
some sort of intelligence within operation here. So he created a thought experiment to kind of
demonstrate how Gaia could self-regulate just using simple feedback. It works a bit like this.
Imagine a planet. A planet like ours, though. But because this is a model, we're going to
simplify this planet so we can test things. This planet, therefore, doesn't have a very varied
biosphere like ours. It has a simple one. It has two daisies, dark daisies and light daisies.
Now, the light daisies reflect heat, like the ice that we described. It has a high albedo.
The dark daisies, of course, absorb heat. This daisy world orbits the sunlight powers,
and just like our sun, initially, it wasn't as bright. In fact, like our sun, it was 30%
less luminous. And at those times, early on in its history, the daisies can only inhabit
equatorial regions. That's because, obviously, those areas receive maximum sunlight and will be
the warmest. After the first generation, dark daisies will have the selective advantage. They're
dark, they can absorb more heat. So, the planet starts to heat up, and the dark daisies, as a
result, spread, absorbing more heat, which allows for the spread of more daisies. You see, we're
into a positive feedback loop here. The result at the end of this first stage is that the planet
will be warmer than expected if life hadn't been present. Time moves on, the sun gets brighter,
and the temperature increases. Now, it becomes too hot for dark daisies at the equator,
and the white daisies have the selective advantage because they can reflect the sunlight back
and keep those equatorial regions cooler. This is a negative feedback loop that's been initiated.
Planet temperatures are starting to be regulated. We're moving into a homeostatic state.
The sun eventually reaches a mature state, and some sort of equilibrium is reached.
In this particular model, we'd only have dark daisies at the poles, where it was cold enough
for them to exist. Eventually, though, the daisy sun swells into a red giant. That's going to happen
to our sun, too, but it's about five billion years ahead of us, so you still have to do your taxes.
The temperature increase on the surface of the planet then would mean that the
planet is just far too hot for daisies to regulate. The planet and the biosphere dies,
but let's look again at this graphically because I think it can help us.
Let's run a couple of simulations. First of all, in our first simulation, let's just have one type
of daisy. You can see that the top graph here is the number of daisies, the population of daisies
we get over time. Mirroring that is the bottom graph, which is showing increased solar luminosity,
and, of course, the associated increase in the planet's surface temperatures.
As the sun gets warmer, surface temperatures increase, no surprise there. At a certain temperature,
conditions are just right for the daisies to germinate, and they produce a population spike
over a certain range of temperatures and then die when it becomes too hot.
Note that the population explosion of daisies has no appreciable effect on the surface
temperatures of the planet. In simulation two, let's just add one extra level of complexity,
different colored daisies, light daisies and dark daisies. Now, keep an eye on the dash line in
the bottom graph. That is the surface temperature response from the previous simulation. So, first
of all, solar luminosity increases. See how much faster the temperature increases than in the previous
simulation due to the associated expansion of the dark daisy population that are absorbing more
heat, making the planet warmer than you would expect. Then the breaks are placed on the positive
feedback by the proliferation, ultimately, of the white daisies at the equator. We're now
entering into our negative feedback system. Equilibrium is eventually reached. Surface
temperatures remain constant, even though the sun is getting warmer. Moderated by feedback loops,
unconsciously created by the daisies. Eventually, graphically, you can see the sun gets too hot
for the daisies to regulate the temperature and the biosphere dies. So, regulation of an
equitable planet by feedback loops. It's a very simple model, but it does show how the interaction
of the biosphere may help regulate conditions of the Earth's system for life. Now, Love-Locken
is a hypothesis of received and awful lot of criticism by some notable scientists. And indeed,
at many times, the Earth's system's biosphere has caused wild shifts in the Earth's system
in a very non-guyan manner, and we'll meet a number of those later. Before that, though,
I'd like to give you some background in the first five lectures so that we've got some
basic understanding and tools that we can use in this interpretation. In this lecture, we're going
to be looking at the Earth as a complex system. Following that, we need to understand the concept
of deep geological time, which allows for all the change that we're going to describe to happen.
Also, we're going to look at using fossils as clocks, and also as evidence of past ecosystems,
past life. And also, we're going to see how we can pull it all together. That's the grand
unifying theory of the Earth that we call plate tectonics. Whether you buy into Love-Lock's idea
of a self-regulating Earth system is really not what is the point here. What is important
is an appreciation that the Earth is composed of many systems. We've just met four broad ones,
hydrosphere, atmosphere, geosphere, and biosphere. Changes in one or components of those
will have knock-on effects in all the others, domino effects almost. To understand how Earth
systems have evolved over time, though, we need an appreciation of an incredibly important concept
in the geosciences, one which is relatively recent, in fact. It's the concept of deep geological time,
which allows some incredible things to happen in the history of the planet.
And we'll examine those in the next...
