Hello again. Last time we dealt with Earth system science. We looked at how the Earth
can be viewed as a whole series of integrated systems. In this course, though, we want to
consider the evolution of those systems over deep geological time. And so it's in this lecture
that I want to introduce you to that concept, the vast amount of time over which wonderful
things in Earth's history have occurred. What I want to demonstrate to you is how we can tell
the story of the rocks in sections like this in the Grand Canyon. There's an entire history,
a vast history recorded in the Grand Canyon, and all those layers of rock. And I hope through
this lecture I can give you some of the tools to actually understand and read that story in the
rocks. So what I'd like to address in this lecture is, first of all, how did the concept of deep time
develop and how can we really read those stories in the rocks? Secondly, I'd like to address the
question of how do we provide dates on the geological timescale? Where do we get those numbers from?
And also just how old is the Earth? So to the first of those questions, how did the concept of
deep time develop and how can we read the story in the rocks? This is Archbishop James Usher. He
was the Archbishop of Armar. Now I know he looks like he's eating a plate there, but it's just a
rough he's wearing around the neck. It was the fashion at the time. And Archbishop James Usher,
like me, was interested in the age of the Earth. So he turned to the only reliable resource that
he had that he believed in, and that was the Holy Bible. And in order to determine the age of the
Earth, he added up all the dates that were mentioned in the Bible to provide a timeline. In doing that,
he came up with a day for the first day of creation to be October the 22nd, 4004 BC,
making the Earth just a little over 6,000 years old. That's fine until you realize that if you
were to go against these ideas after Archbishop Usher's proclamations, any ideas of an old Earth
was blasphemy. Academics could lose their jobs. Consider that until the late 18th century, blasphemy
was an offense that really could receive the death penalty in England. So it was really serious
business. By the mid 18th century, though, many scientists, including the young scientists of
geology, started to get unhappy with this idea of only 6,000 years. 6,000 years didn't really seem
long enough for all the things to happen that they were recording happening in the rocks that
they were looking at. An example of an alternative age determination of the Earth came from this
figure here. This is George Louis de Bouffan. He, like many modern scholars today, believed that
the Earth had a very early history, which was molten. The Earth has a large, hot molten mass
hanging in space, so George Louis de Bouffan had a very simple idea in terms of an experiment.
Why don't we create a model of that situation? He did this by heating up iron spheres that were
meant to model the Earth, place them in a furnace and heated them until they were red hot, took them
out of the furnace, and then just timed how long it took for them to cool so you could actually
touch them. This then he scaled up to account for the size of the Earth and came up with an age
for the Earth in terms of the time it had taken to cool to the present temperature as being about
75,000 years old. Now we know that that is woefully inadequate in terms of the age of the Earth that
we accept today, but at least we're looking at a appreciation that the Earth was a lot older than
6,000 years old, and people were approaching that question in more of a scientific manner.
Before we go on with this though, I feel I really need to make a note about cultural bias. Very often
I'm going to be talking about the Western tradition, but we should note that many other natural
philosophers, for example in the 11th century Persian philosopher Avicenna and in China,
Shen Kuo, were very happy with the idea of an ancient Earth. To them, an ancient Earth wasn't
a problem, but for the Western tradition that 6,000 years old age for an Earth was definitely going
to be a stumbling block. This man would kind of turn that around. This is James Hutton. He was a
Dower Scott trained in law and medicine. He turned his hand to farming as well, but he also made an
awful lot of money by extracting Alonium chloride from soot. Very useful thing that it did make
him an awful lot of money because Hutton had a burning passion that was to tromp around the
hills and glens of Scotland looking at the rocks. His findings in geology were going to really
revolutionise the discipline. Hutton was part of the Enlightening movement of the 18th century.
It was a period when there was lots of questioning of ideas, of customs, even morals. It sees in
the Western tradition the kind of the birth of the modern ideas regarding logical reasoning.
Edinburgh would be the new hotbed of this reason movement, and by 1750 in reflection of that
probably Scotland had 75% literacy. For those days that was absolutely incredible. Hutton would
rub shoulders with other important figures including mathematician John Playfair, philosopher David
Hume and economist Adam Smith. It must have been a really incredible time living in Edinburgh at
that time with all this new science and new ways of thinking going on. Hutton though was building
on the geological principles of an earlier scientist. This is Danish anatomist and geologist
Nicholas Steno and it's from Steno that we get something very important, an understanding of
the principles of the science of stratigraphy. Stratigraphy is the science of how rock layers
are laid down and how they're arranged, one above the other or in various other combinations.
Stratigraphy is the basis though of our understanding of geological time, and I'd like to give you a
brief overview of some of the principles that Steno brought and later what Hutton would develop upon.
So first of all consider this. Steno's first principle of stratigraphy, the principle of
superposition. It states that a section as you can see in this image wasn't created as it is,
it didn't just appear. It's a section that reflects process such that those layers have developed
one on top of another over time. Basically it means that the layers, the rock layers that you
can see at the bottom of this section are going to be the oldest rock layers and the layers at the
top are going to be the youngest layers. It might seem somewhat obvious but back then that was kind
of a new paradigm. Here's another principle of stratigraphy that Steno would give us. It's called
the principle of original horizontality. You've probably seen rock layers like this, rock layers
that aren't horizontal, rock layers that are tilted or sometimes even folded into complex shapes.
Steno said that if you see rocks like this and these rocks are sedimentary rocks, rocks that
were originally sediments laid down in oceans or lakes or perhaps lava flows laid down one on top
of another, they wouldn't have been deposited at an angle. They would have been deposited flat
and have only subsequently, after being turned into rock, have been tilted. Again, it implies a
history to this particular section. It wasn't created as you see it. It's gone through a process.
As I said, this might seem obvious. When I go over these principles with my students in Vancouver,
you're trying to get a kind of a well-duh kind of look. But consider, this is 1669. In 1669,
Galileo had only been dead for 30 years. Remember, Galileo had faced the inquisition for his defense
of the Copernican solar system. Steno was a committed Christian, but his principles really
would be the foundation of the challenge to Usher's ideas of a young earth of 6,000 years old.
Just look at this picture. The Grand Canyon. It's a product of processes that we now know
operate over long periods of time. One rock laid down on top of another,
recording lots of earth history. But back in the late 17th century, a view like that was absolute
heresy. Hutton brings another concept, though, to these basic principles. And that principle
is the principle of cross-cutting relationships. And I'd like to show you how that works in this
next image. I've gone back to the Grand Canyon. It's kind of a holy place, I guess, for geologists.
You can see the Colorado River here in the foreground. But what I'm particularly interested
in are the rocks. You can see you've got kind of reddish-colored rocks, which are horizontal in
nature. But running diagonally across them is a more darker surface, more darker rocks, which
cross-cut those horizontal strata. That darker area, the diagonal structure, is called an igneous
dike. And originally, it was hot magma that forced its way through those sedimentary rocks.
It then later cooled to form the rock that we see today. And from that image now, we can make a
rather simple but very profound deduction. The fact that the igneous dike must be younger than
the sediments that it cross-cuts. Again, it might seem very obvious, but it's a powerful tool when
we're trying to unravel the story and the history of events in Earth. This is one of the sections
that was very important to Hutton. This is one of his light bulb moment sections. It's Sikar Point
in Scotland. And I'd just like you to describe this section to you. This is another one of those
really holy places for geologists. It's located at the bottom of a very rather scary, steep, grassy
slope. Given that it's Scotland, generally you have rain coming at you in this particular
orientation. But when you do get down to the section, it's really well worth the visit.
There are vertical strata, strata that have been turned up on their end. When you examine these
rocks and you turn to the sediments and the fossils that you contain, you can tell that they
were deposited in a deep ocean. And they were deposited in a period that we call the Silorian
about 425 million years ago. Then there's a red line that I've drawn on there. And that represents
an erosion surface. So at some point, those vertical rocks have been eroded down to that
erosion surface. And on the top of them, other rocks have been deposited. You can see there
is a slight angle here. When you examine those slightly reddish rocks above that red line,
you can tell that they were actually deposited in a completely different environment. Not a
deep ocean this time, but in a desert in a period called the Devonian about 345 million years ago.
That red line, therefore, represents a hiatus, a period of non-deposition. And we call it an
unconformity. Now that we have an understanding of basic stratigraphy, including the cross-cutting
relationships that Hutton bought to the fore, we can now really start to read the history in geological
sections. And let's do that here with Sikar Point. Sikar Point here, you can see the final image,
Sikar Point as it is today. But let's break that down and tell the story in a series of
cartoons of how we get to that particular image. First of all, we must have had sediments deposited
horizontally, remember, giving Steno's principles of original horizontality
in some ocean during the Silorian. After they'd been turned into rock, they probably been buried
and folded and tilted, and then raised up again, such that they could be eroded to that erosion
surface that we talked about. Following that, that erosion surface has been covered over by
desert rocks, those rocks of the Devonian. And then the whole section has been tilted again.
So we've read just from basic principles, just by simple logic and looking at the
relationships stratigraphically, an entire history of this section. And by just using those basic
tools, anyone can really go out and read some of the story in the rocks. But how could these changes
occur? To Hutton, it was amazing to think that in one area in Scotland, there at Sikar Point,
you had evidence of both that part of Scotland being represented by a deep ocean and also
an incredibly hot arid desert. How can we explain those? Well, Hutton surmised that we could probably
explain it in at least some part by observing and understanding processes that operate today.
The erosion of rocks and the deposition of sediments. Hutton didn't know about the grand
unifying theory of geology, plate tectonics that we'll get to later, or how mountains were built.
But he did know that natural processes, such as we can see in this image here of a canyon being
worn away by a simple stream, can wear down entire mountain chains. But there's one important
factor that you need in order to do that, tying an awful lot of it.
According to Hutton, giving his understanding of this, the earth really couldn't be 6,000 years
old. In order to see all the changes that he was reading in the rocks, the earth had to be ancient.
And in 1788, he published a famous paper in which he wrote this. The result, therefore,
of our present inquiry, is that we find no vestige of a beginning and no prospect of an end.
To him, the processes that had been going on in the earth really were distant and vast.
This is what we call now the concept of uniformitarianism or gradualism. It received an
awful lot of criticism by some of Hutton's peers. Some said it was just poor logic,
others said it was just pure atheism. The idea of an ancient earth, though,
really wouldn't go away. It would be popularized by many people, including this man here,
another very famous scientist. This is Charles Lyall. He was definitely a uniformitarianist
and really wanted to find an area some way where he could really demonstrate this slow gradual time,
a change over vast periods of time. And luckily for Lyall, he looked out. He found it in a very
nice place in 1826, hiking Mount Etna in Sicily. It's always a good idea if you're going to do
geological fieldwork to find somewhere where they have good cheese and wine. And Lyall certainly
has a good one here. But as walking up Mount Etna and looking around, he saw something that
interested him, parasitic cones. Now, parasitic cones are smaller volcanoes that are developed on
the back of a larger volcano. And you notice that there was only one that had erupted in
recent recorded human records. That's Monter Rossi. He used this as an estimate for the frequency
of cone development. And given the number of cones he could see, he estimated that it must have taken
about 12,000 years for all those cones to form. Therefore, the first conclusion, Etna, must be
at least itself older than 12,000 years, double the age allotted for the age of the earth by
Archbishop James Usher. There are more revelations to come, though. This is the Valley del Bovi.
It cuts into the side of Etna. And as Lyall stared across to the other side of the valley,
he noticed that he could see the dissected remains of lots of older cones, not just a few of them,
hundreds of them. And these older cones had been covered by lava that had come from the active cone
in Etna. Lyall used a little bit of logic now. If a few cones appeared over about 12,000 years,
but then hundreds of other cones had appeared earlier and then had been covered by Etna,
these cones must be older than Etna. Etna is now 90 miles wide and about 10,000 feet high.
And taking the rate of volcanic cone formation as a yardstick, Etna, therefore, must be millions,
not thousands of years old. That was quite the revelation. But the where more to come.
This time, it would be from a rock, though, because there's a particularly fossil rich
rock in that area in the Valdanotto, called the Valdanotto limestone. It's a fossiliferous limestone.
Basically, it's a calcium carbonate rock that contains lots of fossils within it. And when
Lyall looked at the rock, he noticed that the species you as identifying in it weren't really
all that different from species that you could find around the Italian coastline in the present day.
Lyall was aware, though, that the more ancient a rock is, the less like current species the
fossils are going to be. You're not going to find very many recognizable species in an ancient rock.
But this limestone had about 95% of the species being recognizable as current living forms.
Therefore, geologically speaking, this rock couldn't really be all that ancient. However,
when he traced this limestone, he found out he passed across the plain and then passed underneath
Etna. Etna was erupted through and built up over the limestone. Remember cross cutting
relationships? That must mean, therefore, that Etna is younger than the limestone. Therefore,
the fossils must be millions of years old too. Again, taking a deep breath. If fossils millions
of years old are the same as living species, then the rate of appearance of new species
must be absolutely incredibly slow. So to progress from the ancient fossils that we find in ancient
rocks, those species to the current situation, the current biosphere, must require vast amounts
of geological time. And again, the earth must be extremely ancient indeed.
Lyle popularized his findings and Hutton's ideas, most famously in a book called The
Principles of Geology. Also made him an awful lot of money, which is also very nice. Thank you very
much. That would form the standard geology text for many years. You'd find it in schools and
universities all over the world. In fact, Darwin was very fond of it and had a copy
of Lyle's Principles of Geology while he was progressing on the voyage of the Beagle. We all
know where that would take science. Today, rather than uniformitarianism, we tend to use the word
actualism. Uniformitarianism tends to imply that the earth processes are slow and changing, sluggish.
But actualism acknowledges that and say a lot of these processes, like the wearing down of
mountains by streams, is slow, but says there are also occasionally sudden dramatic catastrophic
events, such as, for example, the eruption of a volcano or perhaps the impact of a meteorite
from outer space. Geologically, what you might call instantaneous events.
But what about providing actual dates to some of these events in earth history in numbers of
millions of years? Well, deciding exactly how old some of these events and actually how old
the earth actually is is rather problematic. So far, all we've been describing is something
that you could call relative dating, working out the relative order of events. What is older or
younger than something else, working out the relative order of strata. For example, let me just
pull something out of my pocket here. Trilobites. Trilobites are always going to be found below
certain other fossils, fossils like this.
This is an ammonite. We know that trilobites are more ancient than ammonites. That's a relative
dating technique. If you find a trilobite, you know it's always going to be in rocks older than
you're going to find ammonites. You can use a basic idea of the potential evolution rate of
creatures, potentially to work out how old things are. For example, Lyle himself used the
evolution of mollusks of clam shells to estimate a particular geological period that we call the
Cenozoic. He estimated giving the changes he could see in the evolution of mollusks that the
Cenozoic was maybe about 80 million years old. Actually, he was fairly close. We now know today
that it's around 65.5 million years, fairly close to our modern understanding. Therefore,
was Lyle. However, we must understand that that is subject to a lot of error. We have no control
of our understanding of how rates in general of evolution proceed. So, there must be better
ways that we can estimate the passage of geological time. How about this? Say you were to record how
quickly muddy sediments are accumulating, say, in an ocean or a lake, and say you worked out that
the rate of that was about 10 feet per million years. Therefore, if you find 100 feet of mudstone,
then it must represent 10 million years of the passage of geological time. Again, we're looking
at inherent errors. We're assuming there that the accumulation of rate of sediment is going to be
constant. It doesn't account for the fact that there might be periods when there's no deposition
of sediment at all, perhaps even erosion of those sediments. In addition, when you have sediments
being deposited, they get compressed as they're turned into rocks. So, that means that the pile
of rock that you're looking at probably isn't going to represent the original extent of sediment
that you set out with initially. Errors might average themselves out of a large package of
sediment, but it really is just providing a very rough estimate of geological time,
a much more precise method was needed. So, how do we provide dates on the geological time scale?
Well, we need something that is called an absolute dating technique to supplement
our relative dating techniques. And that absolute technique is called radiometric
or radioactive dating. It's based on understanding of radioactive decay. Obviously, our stunning for
that comes from Marie Curie. And it proceeds on the fact that certain elements exist in
different forms, those different forms we call isotopes. Give you an example here. Carbon has
three naturally occurring isotopes. For example, carbon 12. The 12 speaks to the number of particles
in the nucleus, six protons and six neutrons. When we go to carbon 13, still six protons,
but seven neutrons. When we get to carbon 14, we have the six protons, but eight neutrons. And
carbon 14 is an unstable isotope. That means it decays. When it decays, it gives off radiation
and forms a more stable compound, a more stable element, in this case nitrogen 14.
This rate of decay can be determined experimentally. And therefore, the ratio of the unstable
parent isotope to the stable daughter element can be used to determine the amount of time
that substance is being decaying. We have our ticking geological clock.
Unfortunately, carbon 14 cannot be used geologically. It's very useful for archaeological
studies, but for geology, it decays far too fast. But fortunately for the geologists,
there are many other isotopes that we can use that we find in rocks. A good example would be
the way that uranium 238 decays into lead 206. They decay much slowly over billions of years.
And it's that kind of decay rate that we're going to need if we're going to tell the history of our
planet, which is billions of years old. In order to make those determinations and work out that
ratio, we place it in a machine like this. This is a mass spectrometer. In a mass spectrometer,
samples are placed in one end of the machine and vaporized in an evacuated chamber. They're then
bombarded by a stream of electrons. That knocks electrons off the vaporized material, producing
these positive ions, which are then passed down that tube and passed through this strong magnetic
field. Those ions are then deflected, depending on the charge to mass ratio. And in general,
we're looking at the heavier ions being less deflected than the lighter ions. And we can
read that deflection on the detector at the end of the machine there. This is me looking rather
hunched in a lab coat that appears to be far too big for me, looking at such a machine at the
Pacific Centre for Isotopic and Geochemical Research at the University of Vancouver in Canada.
These machines are now getting extremely, extremely efficient and are producing
extremely useful and accurate dates. Various isotopes are often used as a cross check. There's
not just one isotopic system that we can use. There are many. So we cross check our results
using many different systems. And we take as many readings as we possibly can, averaging out the
result to give us with, end up with a degree of certainty in so many plus or negative millions
or tens of thousands of years. There are some limitations to the technique, though. I'm not
going to deal with them here, but just hold on to that. We're going to deal with them in the next
lecture. But in general, radiometric dating really has been a boon to the geological sciences.
So if that's the case, just how old is the Earth? Well, the very earliest parts of the story
are lost to us. The fact is that with the study of geology, the further you go back in geological
time, the less and less evidence you find. If you want to look at evidence of sediments deposited
in the last glacial period, there are lots of them all around the landscape. You want to find
rocks from the Cambrian period about 400, 540 million years ago. There are fewer of them.
It's because our planet is an active planet. The very earliest parts of Earth history have been
recycled or eroded due to the fact that we have a very active atmosphere and, of course,
plate tectonics, causing various deformational and erosional effects as well. But we do have a
salvation in terms of our early story, because even if those earliest parts of Earth's history
have been lost on our planet, there is still some of the debris left over from that early
formation of the solar system, just like those little odd screws and nubs that you find when
you've been trying to construct a piece of Swedish furniture. And it's those little bits
of leftover material from the solar system that we can use to help form an idea of the earliest
date of our planet. And I have one right here in my pocket. I don't know if you can focus in on that.
This is a fraction of a meteorite.
It fell to the ground in Namibia, and when you do a radiometric date of these particular
pieces, you come up with an astounding age of about 4.54 billion years old for the generation
of the solar system, and therefore also the generation of planet Earth as well.
We're dealing with big numbers here, aren't we? I must admit, math was always one of those
bug bears for me when I was at school. The math teacher used to come in, and I'd feel that yawning
pit of dread in my stomach. And big numbers still really make my head spin. So let's try and get
our head around some of them. Let's think about a million. Well, a million pieces of paper if
you have to pile them on top of each other would be out as high as a 30-story building. A billion
pieces of paper would be 10 times higher than Mount Everest. Think of another analogy. This is one
that I like to use a lot. Let's take all of Earth's history, 4.54 billion years of Earth history,
and condense it into one calendar year. Under that calendar year, the Earth would form on January
the 1st. The oldest rock we have preserved today on the surface of our planet comes from about
February the 1st. It's only about in July the 25th on this calendar, though, that we get the first
really tinkling parts of oxygen in our atmosphere. By November 15th, creatures with shells first
appear. Life appeared much earlier, but it's not until this very late date in the calendar that
creatures really started to get very substantial, possessed skeletons or hard parts. By December
15th, getting really late in the calendar now, dinosaurs have evolved, and by December the 26th,
they're gone. On a geological timescale, dinosaurs were around for the wink of an eye,
but it gets even more profound. The end of the last glaciation occurred on December 31st at 1159
and 18 seconds, and the birth of Christ was December 31st at 1159 and 46 seconds. Most of human
recorded history occurs in the last seconds of this geological timescale in a year. I'll put it
in another way. It's good being here in Washington. There's some incredible monuments, some incredible
buildings, and the Washington Monument is one of those incredible structures, but also very useful
in a geological sense as well, because the Washington Monument has proportions that speak
to the passage of geological time. The straight side of the Washington Monument could be equated
to a period that we call the Precambrian period, 88% of Earth's time. The little triangular part
on the top of the Washington Monument represents a period that we call the Phanerozoic. That's when
all those hard-parted creatures started to get going, where we get the most of the fossils from.
And if you want to put all of recorded human history onto this scale, you need to get to the
top of the monument and very carefully balance a piece of paper on the top of it. The thickness of
that piece of paper records all of human history. Perspective, isn't it? But it's important perspective,
because it speaks to the fact that over vast time, slow processes, like those that Hutton
described can cause vast changes in the Earth's system. One thing to know is that the Earth is
ancient, but one thing we have to do now and consider is that if we're going to tell the
story of Earth, we need to keep tabs on all that Earth history. I need to know if I'm telling the
story of one part of the geological time, say in Canada, that I'm saying the same type of story,
say in China, from the same time. We need a correlation tool to tie the two areas together
in time. And for this, we're going to need fossils, and we're going to see how they help us in the
next lecture.
