Just look at this environment. It's taken just at the back of the studios here at the
teaching company. Do you think it looks unremarkable? Well, actually it isn't. It's rich, it's diverse.
It's actually teeming with life. It's probably full of insects. There's probably a whole
microcosm of microorganisms and viruses. Some of the creatures in this image may be
obvious if you were to stay there for a while, but some of them are hidden. It's an intricate
web of life. Now, consider the job of the paleontologist. We have less evidence when
reconstructing old worlds. Often we're dealing with fragments of creatures. Very often we're
dealing with parts of the geological record that might be entirely missing as well via
erosion. So when we're trying to interpret past ecosystems, we've really got to be careful.
To make interpretations, paleontologists have got to consider a number of things. First
of all, what we call paleobiology. Basically, what were these creatures like when they were
alive? Putting some flesh and bone onto them, considering their overall form, their function,
how they moved and so on. Also, paleoacology. How did they interact with their environment
with members of other species, with the same species? But also, kind of uniquely to paleontology,
a discipline that we call taphonomy. That's everything that happens to a creature after
it dies and starts to decay up to a point where it may potentially become a fossil.
So what are we looking at in this lecture are the following things. How can we build
a picture of a fossil from what is often fragmentary evidence? What is a fossil species and what
developmental factors do we have to consider when we're interpreting those fossils? What
can we tell from fossil evidence about how ancient creatures interacted with each other?
How can our interpretation of the fossil record become biased? And also, what cultural biases
do we have to be careful of while we're interpreting fossils? So how can we build a picture of
fossils with evidence that is really often not very good?
Basically, I'm speaking here to paleobiology. What I want to know is this. How did this
trilobite eat? How did it move? How did this trilobite reproduce? These are all difficult
questions for a paleontologist. For a biologist, it's relatively easy. All you need to do is,
this gentleman is doing, set up a hide somewhere, take out a notebook, and watch the creature
see what it does. I say comparatively easy. Obviously, I'm not saying biologists have
an easy time of it. But then, in paleontology, that's not possible. However much I might
want this creature to start to move about and do something, it really isn't going to
do it. Which means that paleontologists have to act as detectives when we're trying to
interpret ancient biospheres.
One detective tool that we can use is called comparative anatomy. I'd just like to show
you what we do with comparative anatomy. Here's an obvious example. Say you find a fossil
leg, potentially a leg of a dinosaur. Now lots of creatures today have legs. So we can
go and compare the leg of the dinosaur to living creatures and generally work out how
it functioned. We can look at the articulation of the bones. We can look at muscle scars
and see how big muscles were and how powerfully they were contracting and get a really good
idea of how a creature like a dinosaur here moved. So it's fairly easy for certain circumstances
like this. But it's not always so easy. This is Helusogenia. It's a fossil from the Cambrian
Burgess Shale in British Columbia in Canada. It's frankly very, very strange indeed. That
reflects its name, Helusogenia. Just look at it. It's got those odd spines as legs and
some kind of tubes running down its back. Here's an early reconstruction of Helusogenia.
It's a bizarre looking creature. It's walking on stilt legs and those odd feelers running
down the back. What are they? Are they mouths? Are they tentacles? Nobody could really be
very sure, to be honest with you. Later discoveries of clearer specimens would turn this around
though. It would appear that those tubes were in fact paired tube feet. The stilts weren't
stilts at all. They were protective spines. What we realised was that we had the original
model upside down. This is a new reconstruction of Helusogenia. You can see it makes a lot
more sense. It's walking on those tube feet and those protective spines are doing a job
that you could understand. It makes us understand a point about paleobiology. It's all about
making models and refining the hypotheses that we might form in the light of new discoveries
and new evidence. Just as we did with Helusogenia here. Another question. What is a fossil
species? What factors do we have to consider when we're interpreting fossils? A species
in paleontology is something that we have to be very mindful of. If we are interpreting
species paleontologically, it's going to have direct implications for our understanding
of diversity in the past. When we're looking at fossil species, we have to make a determination
as to whether in one particular group of fossils are we looking at one species or are we looking
at many species, especially if they might look somewhat similar. Again, in biology it's
relatively simple. They use something called a biological species concept. Basically you
just see if those species can mate and produce viable offspring, then you can consider them
to be the same species, but consider my old friend the trilobite again here. However much
I provide mood lighting or barry white music, it's really not going to produce any offspring,
at least not in any experimentation I've heard of. In paleontology we have to use something
that's called a morphological species concept. Basically we just have to look at it and make
a determination based on the structures that we can see whether or not it's one species
or perhaps one of many. This is problematic because the same species can look very different
depending on a number of factors. Developmental factors, how old is it? Environmental factors
can affect the way species look and there's also factors of gender. To illustrate that
I'd like you to consider this. An alien paleontologist comes to earth, way after humans become extinct
through some sort of calamity. How many mistakes do you think that alien paleontologists would
make in trying to work out whether or not the specimens of these eight mite creatures
he's looking at represent one species or many, especially given as he's a paleontologist
and humans might have died out say hundreds of millions of years ago when he's dealing
with fragmentary evidence, maybe very few specimens as well. Let's consider some of
the potential errors that he might actually make. First of all there will be developmental
differences in human beings. Consider this baby and this older person here. The size is
one obvious difference. Babies are obviously a lot smaller than adults but also consider
the proportions between an adult and a baby. As Mike Myers said to paraphrase him babies
have got a head like an orange on a toothpick. They have a much larger head, a comparison
to their body. Other differences also include the fact that babies don't have a skull that
is fully formed. They have a skull that's composed of more than one bone. It isn't fused
yet. So there's a potential problem there. There's also environmental differences that
can cause variations in the same species. Have a look at these two cases. The Inuit
and a Maasai warrior. Now the Inuit live in cold conditions so there's a adaption for
cold to be kind of short and stocky, I guess a bit like me. That helps you retain heat
so they tend to be shorter stocky of people. The Maasai though live in hot climates so
there's an advantageous selection trait to be taller and slimmer. You can lose heat
a lot easier. Again a potential confusion that could be made if you're looking at representative
fossil species of these two groups. And then of course there's gender differences. Males
tend to be larger. They have more robust bones because of the greater muscle mass and females
tend to be more grusile. And of course there's definite differences in the skeleton between
males and females. In particular the females pelvis is adapted to allow for childbirth.
So there's lots of potential for an alien paleontologist to make mistakes. To maybe
erect six different species when really there is just one species with differences caused
by all the factors that we've mentioned. A recent example of how you can get this speciation
confusion in the paleontological world comes from a particular famous dinosaur from the
Cretaceous period called triceratops. That's the one with the three horns. Two horns on
its head and it's one on the nose. One of the children's favourites. Now John Sconella
and Jack Horner of the Museum of the Rockies recently suggested that in fact triceratops
didn't really exist. What it represented was a juvenile form of another dinosaur that
would be called Torosaurus. The young Torosaurus basically doesn't have the frill that we can
see on this picture and would develop as it matured into later life. Additional research
is now questioning this and we think we might be splitting that species once again into
two different species. You can see how we can get confusing with a morphological species
concept. So we've got to be careful but if we are careful we can build pictures of the
biology of fossil creatures and erect them in the correct species order. But we're going
to need more though because what we want to do is understand creatures as creatures within
an environment as part of the biosphere as part of the earth system. And for that we
need to know how they interacted with that system and that is part of paleo-ecology.
So what can we tell from the fossil evidence about ancient creatures and how they interacted
with each other? Well in order to do that I think I'd better introduce you to some terms
that are generally used in ecology to describe interactions between creatures. Here's a
good one. This is a clownfish you probably know him from a famous movie. He's here living
in an anemone. They have a very symbiotic relationship. The clownfish is immune to the
anemone's stings and it can exist there quite happily. The clownfish though is really very
protective of its territory and tends to chase off a fish including the butterfly fish that
likes to eat the anemone. So we have what we call a mutualistic arrangement here. The
clownfish gets protection by the anemone and yet the anemone gets protection from the clownfish
by beating off the butterfly fish when they want to come for a quick snack. A mutualistic
relationship. And what about an example from the fossil record? Well here we have a fossil
sea snail called platoceros and we also have here a crinoid. Now a crinoid is often called
a fossil sea lily but they're not plants. They're actually related to sea urchins and
starfish. Think of them as being a bit like a starfish on a long stalk. They were generally
fairly restricted in their movements. They didn't move around a lot, tended to be planted
in one space. There's not association that we find with these fossils though. Very often
we find platoceros associated right over the anal tube of the crinoid which is in the head
part of that organism. Now initially it was thought that this was an example of predation
but what we find is there's probably another relationship here. What we think is happening
is that the snail is getting a free meal from the crinoid. It's removing that waste material.
But the crinoid is also benefiting because in removing that waste material the crinoid
is not refiltering the seawater from which it extracts its nutrition. So it gets a cleaned
up environment in which to continue feeding. Both therefore are gaining. Both are benefiting
and it's possibly an example of mutualism in the fossil record. Another form of association
is what we call commensualism. In commensualism there's a definite positive benefit for one
side of the arrangement and neither a positive or negative benefit for the other, a kind
of neutral. A good example from the modern world would be a spider's web. The tree doesn't
benefit for having a spider's web in its branches but the spider certainly benefits
from the tree. I'd like to show you a potential fossil example of commensualism that I have
right over here. This is a fossil equinoid. It's a sea urchin. And you can see that on
its back are developed certain tubes. These are fossil tubes from probably a worm that
was making a home on the back of the equinoid. Now these tubes aren't large enough to cause
the equinoid any problems but the worm was certainly getting benefit by having a hard
substrate from which to live in. So from the fossil record we can pick up commensual
relationships. So there's another relationship we can pick up paleontologically. Another
form of association, or rather nastier one of course, is parasitism. There's a good example
of parasitism in the fossil record. At least we think there is. This is Sue. She's one
of the largest and most complete T. rex skeletons that exists in the world. Now housed in the
Field Museum in Chicago. But when you look at Sue you can see there are some odd holes
in the jaw. Holes that thought might have been at least initially evidence of predation
but they didn't really seem to match any predation patterns. In fact what they looked
most similar to were holes that you can find in the beaks and the mandibles of birds caused
by a protozoan called trichomonas galinae. We think what was happening here was that
Sue, when she was eating, she was probably a messy eater, probably didn't floss very
much, would get these protozoans into her jaw. They would cause an infection, cause ulceration
and damage to the bone, possibly fatal. So parasitism in the fossil record. Finally though
the most popular of the relationships between creatures, at least with school kids, that
is predation. One creature chomping on another. Actually for obvious reasons there isn't too
much evidence of predation in the fossil record because obviously if something is being preyed
upon the likelihood of the preyed upon creature being preserved is somewhat reduced. But we
do find examples of predation. On the small scale for example we can see here a fossil
shell that has a hole neatly bored into it. It was probably some sort of snail boring
into the clam here, in fact a brachyopod, to get to the rich nice gooey stuff inside.
On the larger scale we have pal sentis eris here, he's an ammonite. You can see that we've
got holes on the shell, those dark areas. Now some of those holes in some specimens
have been interpreted as being holes from limpets that were boring onto the side of
the shell, but not all of them are limpet borings. Some of them are puncture marks and
some of them can be tied directly to this creature. This is a mosasaur. He's an apex
predator, a terror of the Mesozoic oceans, in fact the Cretaceous oceans. I'm going to
meet him in a later lecture. Now we're ready to recreate old biospheres. Well maybe. We
still have to be careful, because there is other bias that can creep into our interpretation.
How can our interpretation, the fossil record, therefore become biased? As I said we've really
got to be careful about this. Before I proceed though, I guess I really have to define what
a fossil is. I've not defined that yet. Literally it means anything that's dug up, but I guess
you can consider a fossil to be anything that reveals evidence of past life, that can be
preserved in a variety of ways. We can have for example just impressions of fossils. We've
seen this ammonite before. It's just an impression of the shell that has been made into the sediment.
We can also have mineralization. That's the replacement of the original organic material
or life material by other minerals. And I've got a good example of that. I've got a good
material by other minerals. And I've got a good example over here. This is a creature
called a brachyopod. And you can see it's got a kind of a goldish sparkle to it. That
is in fact fool's gold or iron parietes. So the original shell material of this brachyopod
has been replaced atom for atom by another mineralizing media. And it doesn't have to
be iron parietes. You can get this replacement by other minerals, including calcite, various
iron minerals and silica as well. That replacement can be spectacular. This is a thin section,
so a section of a dinosaur bone that's been ground-armed so it's so thin you can pass
light through it. And you can see that we've got spectacular preservation detail here.
You can see a lot of the microstructure of the dinosaur bone. Again, that dinosaur bone,
not the original material, it's been replaced atom by atom by another mineralizing medium.
Freezing is another way that you can preserve fossils, and of course, the more recent fossils.
This is a baby woolly mammoth. It's about 40,000 years old. We can tell by looking at
the lung contents, which are still preserved in this creature, as are the skin and the
hair and some of the toenails of it, that it expitiated on mud. It's probably trying
to cross some slightly swampy land. Maybe permafrost has started to melt a little bit.
Then it got trapped and sank. The preservation is so good in this that we can actually open
the gut and study the gut contents and study this creature's last meal.
But there is bias in the fossil record in terms of the potential for something to become
a fossil. And when we're looking at that, we're talking about the science of tephonomy.
As I said, that's everything from the death of a creature to its complete decay or the
time when it becomes a fossil. In studying and understanding that, we can help ameliorate
any potential biases that we might come across.
What are the potential biases that we have to be careful of then? Well, there's environmental
biases. There are certain environments that are going to be more favorable to fossilization
than others. Terrestrial environments, land environments, are very poor. Counts to what
you might think, given all the shows that you might see on TV, land-based fossils aren't
really all that common. Creatures that live on the land tend to lie open on the ground
once they've died and be subject to scavengers. They'll rot very readily and be eroded.
In water, things are better. Things can get covered once they've died by sediment. And
the largest area that we have of water bearing area are of course the oceans. So we're going
to have a definite bias towards marine fossils. The majority of fossils that anybody is going
to find are going to marine fossils. They can be covered over with sediment very, very
rapidly indeed. But also in the ocean, there's going to be a further bias towards the type
of lifestyle that a creature is living in the ocean. If you're a creature that's swimming
through the ocean or planktonic, once you die, there's a dangerous period before you
can potentially become a fossil. You're going to float down through the water column and
potentially lie on the ocean floor before you're covered over the sediment. You can
be attacked by predators and start to rot. But creatures that actually live buried in
the sediment, who they're living by crawling through the sediment, those are creatures
we call epiphenyl, they'll probably have a higher preservational potential.
But there's another bias we have to consider. The world is composed of creatures that have
hard parts like myself, like clams, like sea urchins. I have an internal hard part of skeleton.
And then there is another class of creatures, a broad category that you can make, creatures
that are just soft, for example, this jellyfish. And they're more common than you might imagine.
In fact, around 60% of marine organisms in today's oceans are actually soft-bodied. And
as you can guess, the preservation potential for something that's soft and goopy like that
isn't really going to be as good for something that has a more robust shell or skeleton.
So another bias there. So how potentially can decay be slowed down such that preservation
can occur? Well, extremes in environment can help. For example, extremes in pH, whether
something, an environment is very acid or very alkaline. And I'd like you to meet a
colleague, not a colleague, I should say, maybe, maybe a distant relative of mine. This
is Lindowman or Pete Moss. He comes from a town called Winslow, which isn't very many
miles from where I was born, near Manchester.
Pete Moss was found face down in a peat bog in 1984. When he was found, the police were
called, thought that we were looking at here, was a murder victim from recent times. However,
when the archaeologists arrived and dated this specimen, they found that it dated to
the 1st century AD. In looking at the specimen, they think that it might have been the result
perhaps of murder, but perhaps more, though, of a ritualistic killing. This specimen is
so well preserved that we can see skin, fingers, hair. It's all been preserved by a particular
process due to the high acidity of the environment, the Pete Moss in which he was deposited.
Effectively, he's gone through a tanning process. This guy has been turned into leather.
Low oxygen conditions are important for increasing preservation potential. Swamps and PT areas
are particularly useful. They have a low oxygen content because of all the organic material
in there is decaying and tends to use up the oxygen very rapidly. If you look at the
Everglades here, if you were to go just a fraction of an inch below the surface waters,
the waters become very depleted in oxygen very rapidly, which means creatures that fall
to the bottom of that water possibly have a greater chance to become preserved. There
will be fewer predators. The rotting process will be arrested to some extent. That can
occur on a large scale as well. This is the Black Sea. The Black Sea is a very restricted
oceanic area. Because of that, it has a very low overturn in its water. The deep areas
of the Black Sea are very poor in oxygen indeed. Again, potentially, a higher preservation
for creatures that are living in the surface of the water sinking down into that low oxygen
environment to become preserved and potentially form fossils.
But it's not just environmental factors or factors of biology that might cause biases
in our interpretation of the fossil record. There are also cultural biases that we had
to be very careful of when we were interpreting fossils as well. This is Sir Richard Owen.
He was the first director of a place that I actually did my postdoctoral studies in
in London. This is the Natural History Museum. He was a contemporary of Darwin. We have Sir
Richard Owen to thank for coining the term dinosaur. Owen was also one of the first
people to make reconstructions of dinosaurs. It is a wonderful sample. I love to go visit
this when I'm in London. This is Iguanodon. It was unveiled in 1854 at the Crystal Palace
in London. It looks very strange, though, compared to our modern understanding of Iguanodon.
In part, that's because at that time they really didn't have many samples of Iguanodon.
A lot of the pieces were missing. In fact, when you look at the Iguanodon reconstruction
here, there's a spike on its nose. I guess they were thinking it was something a bit
like a rhino. In fact, we now know that the spike on Iguanodon goes on the thumb. But
it's more than sampling errors. What we're looking at here in Iguanodon is a kind of
Victorian bias, a cultural bias. Reptiles were lesser creatures. They weren't as good
as mammals. They were sluggish, stupid, primitive, lumbering creatures. And so they were depicted
as that, as you can see there. Their legs splayed out, dragging their tails behind them.
Today, there's a much different view towards dinosaurs, as you can see in this image. They're
regarded more as being active and dynamic creatures. And I agree with them. They probably
were. But what about bias today? Are we so advanced in our sciences that we don't have
to bother about those cultural biases? I'm afraid not. Consider once again T. Rex and
Dr. Jack Horner. He's the curator of the Museum of the Rockets and a really great paleontologist.
Now, Dr. Horner, while he was looking at T. Rex and not all the people and not everyone
should say agrees with his conclusions, thought that probably T. Rex couldn't run that fast
for a predator. He also suggested that potentially T. Rex had very poor vision. And in looking
at the teeth, he surmised that those teeth looked more like they were designed for crushing
bones rather than ripping flesh apart. And what about those tiny arms? In conclusion,
Jack Horner decided that T. Rex probably wasn't a predator. He was just a big old scavenger,
a bit like a big old vulture on the Cretaceous Plains. This was very strongly resisted,
both scientifically and by the public. And I wonder why that was? I think there was probably
more resistance to this than was really due. I think there are different games you can
play with the evidence that Jack Horner brought forward. It's possible that T. Rex was a little
bit of both, perhaps a bit of a scavenger and perhaps a bit of a predator. But I think
the visceral reaction to Jack Horner's suggestion comes really because we want T. Rex to be
a big scary monster. He's a cultural icon. How dare you mess with our biggest, baddest
creature of the Cretaceous period?
So after all that I've been through, is it even possible to interpret the ancient biosphere?
Yes, it is. Definitely. But we do have to be aware of these biases, both environmental,
biological and cultural. All the new fossils that we find are continually altering our
models, our understanding, our perception of what these creatures were once they were
living. Particularly useful are instances where we find exceptional preservation and
we call those lagerstatten, those are places where we have exceptional preservation displayed.
Here's a really famous example. This is the La Brea Tarpits in Los Angeles. It's a natural
tar or asphalt seep. And once this is covered by a thin layer of water, just looks like
a pond. And because of that, attracted lots of creatures to it, like this mammoth, who
would fall into that tarpit and suffocate. They would start to rot before they were completely
submerged and attract lots of other predators to them, like saber-toothed tigers and such.
It's preserved, therefore, a wonderful view of the animals from the last ice age. And
we'll see other examples of places of exceptional preservation later on in this series, including
the very famous Burgess Shale. So fossils, they are powerful tools, as long as we interpret
them carefully. But in the next lecture, I'd like to discuss how a German meteorologist
would start in part to use some of those fossils, and in doing so, turn the world of geology
upside down.
