Hello again. So what's the story so far? Well, to be honest with you, it's been quite
a bit of a roller coaster ride. We started with the Earth and in fact our entire solar
system emerging from a cloud of dust and gas around about 4.54 billion years ago.
We've seen the formation of the moon around about, oh, I guess 50 million years after that,
in a massive and very impressive impact event. The formation of the moon being vital for the
future stability of our planet and potentially the development of our biosphere as well.
We've also seen the emergence of a thin skin on the surface of Earth on which the first bodies
of open water would develop and above this, a thick atmosphere all held in place due to the
fact that our planet differentiated to form a metallic core which would help then produce
the magnetosphere which would hold on to that atmosphere and protect us from deadly radiation.
And also, we've talked about the emergence of life, possibly from hot hydrothermal vents
in the ocean like this one, but also possibly from other sources as well.
Earth had a troubled childhood though. As we noted, it would suffer greatly through the
late heavy bombardment period, possibly the entire surface of the planet becoming sterilized,
but life we think survived by going to its lifeboat deep inside the crust. The result,
a planet with open water, populated with a bacteria-like biosphere. So what's next?
In this lecture, I would like to investigate the what's next. So in this particular lecture,
I'd like to ask, why didn't the Earth, earlier, completely freeze over? When do we first start
to see the stirrings of our modern atmosphere and how did life's story almost end entirely
encased in ice? So there's a question, why didn't the early Earth freeze over? Well,
why am I asking that question? Well, I'm asking that question because the Earth and the Solar
System, as we know, are not static. They've been evolving, changing over time. For example,
our sun has changed since it initiated nuclear fusion and since it effectively switched on.
Initially, as we noted, it was only 70% as luminous as it is today, and that causes a problem
because with a sun that isn't as luminous as it is today, it isn't also as powerful,
which means the Earth wouldn't be receiving as much heat, which also means that at the time
when we are recording the presence of liquid oceans, there shouldn't have been any. There should
be frozen to the core. This is the young fates on paradox. How do we account for evidence of
liquid water and life when really there shouldn't have been either? There should have been ice
and potentially no life at all. But in fact, we think that life may actually hold the answer to
this paradox, and in particular, we're going back to our old friends, the archaea.
Many archaea are of a type that we call methanogens. That means that via various metabolic
processes, they produce methane as a waste gas, not unlike the way the cyanobacteria produce
oxygen as a waste product of photosynthesis. If you've ever been to a swampy area or a
marshy area, you might have seen bubbles emerging from the bottom of the water, and that is very
often evidence of methane being produced by methanogenic archaea. In fact, you can collect some
of that and you can light it. It will burn its methane. Now, methanogens are very common and
occur in very many environments. Yes, they occur in swamps, but you can also find them in hot springs,
you can find them in the deep ocean, and you can also find them in Earth's crust.
They are probably some of the most ancient life forms on Earth, and because of that,
methane was probably a major constituent of the early atmosphere following the evolution of the
biosphere. There were lots of methanogenic bacteria, all metabolizing and releasing
methane into the Earth's system. Remember, we talked about carbon dioxide. We said it's an
important gas. It's an important gas because it allows shortwave radiation from the Sun to penetrate
to the surface of the planet. It heats up our planet, and our planet then emits longwave radiation,
which is absorbed by carbon dioxide and helps keep our planet warm. It's a greenhouse gas.
Methane is also a greenhouse gas, but it's around 20 times more effective than carbon dioxide.
It would appear that the first life, or some of the earliest life on our planet,
was actually emitting a gas that helped keep the planet warm, warmer than it should have been.
If we travel back to the Earth following the late heavy bombardment period,
we would have found a warm planet, not a frozen planet, probably rich in methanogenic archaea.
You'd have seen a large moon, as we've already discussed. It was a lot closer to our planet in
those times. It would have been very large in the sky, and as it moved across the sky,
you would see that it would be moving across the sky that wasn't blue. It would be pink.
That's because of the high levels of methane in the atmosphere, and as light gets refracted
through a methane-rich atmosphere, it turns a pink colour. Importantly as well, there would be
hardly any traces of oxygen if any oxygen was there at all in the atmosphere.
That is going to change, of course. Today we have an atmosphere that has around about 21%
oxygen in it. It's a real good thing that oxygen wasn't present there in the distant past, though,
a very good thing indeed. High levels of oxygen would have been very bad for, first of all,
the development of those early organic molecules. Oxygen is a very aggressive molecule. It tends
to break down organic compounds. So when do we first start to see the stirrings of our modern
atmosphere then? Well, the most obvious source of accumulating a lot of that oxygen, which is
present in today's atmosphere, is biology, via photosynthesis. Now, the exact time of evolution
of photosynthesis is still very much debated. The last time, in the last lecture, we discussed
some of the fossils that are somewhat controversial, but it's generally agreed that cyanobacteria
had probably evolved by at least three billion years ago, and the consequence of that evolution
would obviously be an increase in levels of atmospheric oxygen. We have certain structures
known as stromatolites that are known from an earlier period, though, from about 3.5 billion
years ago. And I've got an example of one of them here. This is a stromatolite. It's not a fossil
in the strictest sense. Effectively, this is what you could call an organosedimentary structure.
So basically, it is structures produced in the sediment by the presence of life at one time.
In fact, in this case, it's produced by mats of bacteria or biofilms. These trapped sediment and
cement the sediment over time. And as the bacteria move up through the sediment, they produce these
layered columns. They dome upward, suggesting that they were photosynthetic, reaching for the sun.
Cyanobacteria were the progenitors of these stromatolites, and they are potentially evidence
in the stromatolithic form that cyanobacteria really had started to spread across the planet.
We do have modern examples of stromatolites here in Mexico in the Sea of Cortez. You can see them
here just stretching off into the distance. But probably more famously, Australia in a place
called Shark Bay. These two images are possibly as close as we can get to what that early earth
really looked like. In the Precambrian, though, these stromatolites, these columns of bacteria,
would have been an awful lot more common. That's because today, stromatolites tend to be restricted
in where they can develop. They tend to be in more extreme environments, environments that are
perhaps very salty or have low oxygen conditions. That's because if they're not present in those
environments, the active biosphere that we have today, organisms such as snails and clams and
other creatures, like nothing more than to make a quick snack of the cyanobacteria that construct
these stromatolites. So they're generally rare in what you might call normal marine conditions today.
Initially, oxygen levels would have been far too low to seriously impact the earth's system.
But those levels would rise as stromatolites and cyanobacteria spread. At around about 2.5
billion years ago, we start to see that impact. But how do we know that occurred? It's one thing
just to say that. Where's the evidence? Well, one of the most dramatic pieces of evidence that we
have of this sudden emergence of oxygen comes from a rock that I've got right over here on the table.
And it's this rather attractive banded rock here. It's called a banded iron formation or a biff commonly.
Banded iron formations are an extremely important source of iron economically. They're
extensively mined in Australia, South Africa, and you find lots of banded iron formations
also in North America as well. They're composed of iron minerals, and in particularly
two iron oxides, the minerals hematite and our old friend magnetite. Now hematite is probably
very common in this sample because hematite, as its name suggests, heme, like hemoglobin, is a red color.
They alternate these bands of iron oxides with these darker areas, which are more concentrated
in chert, a fine-grained silica deposit. There, a banded iron formation.
Before oxygen was present in the earth system, iron, like we find in the iron here, only really
existed in the oceans in a reduced ferrous state, what we call Fe2+. Iron could be eroded from
rocks on the continents and transported in solution down into the oceans, where it would
remain in the oceans in solution, possibly also added directly to the oceans at ocean
ridge systems. But as oxygen was added to the earth system, it would start to combine with that iron
in solution in the oceans and convert it from Fe2+, into ferric iron, Fe3+. Basically, we're
forming those oxides of iron, and those oxides of iron are insoluble. Basically, what we're creating
here is rust. We're rusting out the oceans, and those layers of rust would settle in layers on
the ocean floor, creating our banded iron formations. The bands of iron that we find are
really extensive. You can try and follow them in some cases for many, many, many miles. They
probably represented vast areas of deposition of iron-base minerals, and the bands themselves,
it has been suggested, may potentially represent seasonal variation. Basically, the theory goes
a little bit like this. During the warmer summer periods of the season, those cyanobacteria
would photosynthesize an awful lot more, therefore producing an awful lot more oxygen. More oxygen
means more iron is precipitated out of the water, producing the iron-concentrated bands. So perhaps
those bands represent summer periods. It's an idea anyway. The first evidence of banded iron
formations is around about 3.5 billion years ago. They peak in abundance at around about 2.5
billion years ago, but dwindle and then are very rare after about 1.8 billion years ago. This
associated emergence of oxygen, as is represented by the banded iron formations, is called the great
oxygenation event, and it would have profound consequences for the future evolution of the
Earth's system. Eventually, more oxygen would be produced than could be used up by the iron,
and that oxygen would start to escape from the ocean and travel into the atmosphere.
If you want some evidence of the fact that we see this transition within the atmosphere,
you can look at a place like this. These are rocks of the Navajo sandstone in Utah, and this
particular image here is from a geological exposure that's called the wave. What we're
looking at here is the dissected remains of a fossil desert sand dune. Now those lines that we
can see are wonderful actually. They're recording the direction of the ancient wind patterns in
the Jurassic, but what I'm interested in here is the colour of that sandstone. Remember I said
they were ancient fossil sand dune, so they're going to be mostly composed of quartz sand,
but there's also something else going to be there. A small component of these rocks is going to be
iron as well, and because that iron exists in the Jurassic, as it does today in an oxygenated
atmosphere, it rusts. It turns that orangey red colour. The iron present in this sediment
is evidence of an oxidizing, rusting environment, and by 2.3 billion years ago all desert sandstones
were this orangey red colour, but before 2.3 billion years ago desert sandstones were green.
Green is the colour of reduced ferrous iron, reflecting a lack of oxygen in the atmosphere.
Kind of neat, isn't it? So how did life's story almost end, though, encased in ice,
given that we think we've solved this initial problem with the Young Faint Sun Paradox?
Well there are going to be other consequences of the Great Oxygenation Event. Remember, first of all,
oxygen is highly toxic to the early biosphere, and life had evolved and developed in an oxygen-free
earth, which explains probably why many of earth's most primitive organisms today
are found in environments that we consider extreme, and have very little oxygen in them.
They've effectively retreated from this new toxic gas. This Great Oxygenation Event has been renamed
by some as the Great Oxygenation Crisis. Perhaps it witnesses the first mass extinction at a
microbial level that the earth is ever going to see. But secondly as well, oxygen had consequences
for our greenhouse blanket. If you pile a lot of oxygen into an atmosphere that is really
very concentrated in methane, you're going to go through a simple chemical reaction.
You're going to oxidise that methane and produce carbon dioxide and water. So what you might say,
carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas, so who cares? But remember, carbon dioxide
is a lot less effective for greenhouse gas than methane is. What we would have seen
is the skies turning from pink to blue, and as they did, global temperatures start to plummet.
This rock is called a tillite. It's a rock that is deposited by glaciers, generally deposited
at the mouth of a glacier. As a glacier moves across the surface of a rocket, gouges out various
rocky materials and can dump it in this very irregular, poorly sorted deposit. You can see
those big angular lumps in it. Now as I said, this is a recent till deposit, but we do find
glacial till deposits that are billions of years old. Deposited during an event that we call the
Huronian Glaciation between 2.4 and 2.1 billion years ago. Some of these tillites are odd though,
because some of those tillites, it would appear, were deposited close to the equator. Now that's
very strange because today large ice sheets really can't exist around the equator. It's just too warm.
If you go back in time to the last glacial period, you'll find that the equator was completely free
of ice. In fact, you could have probably enjoyed still a tropical holiday in that environment.
So what's happening here with this Huronian Glaciation? It suggests that there was a mega
glacial period, an event where ice moved from the poles but didn't stop at the tropics. It met
at the tropics, creating a complete ice coverage, a virtual snowball earth.
We're going to discuss the mechanisms of how that can occur in the next lecture,
but something very significant occurred after the ice had gone though, and that's what I would like
to look at in this particular lecture. After the ice had been removed, we find there was a big
leap in the complexity of the biosphere. The ending of the ice age, we think,
caused severe climatological disturbances, and it's that that's going to help spur life on.
We think that those severe climatological disturbances, again which we'll meet in the next
lecture, stirred the brew yet again, not unlike we talked about for the moon, mixing up the ocean
severely. This caused a massive rising oxygen levels again. It would rise to about one percent
of the levels that we see today. Now oxygen is a very energetic molecule, as we said,
and if you have oxygen in an environment and you have creatures that can actually utilize
that energetic molecule, you have the possibility of developing more complex creatures. So not only
might you see a leap in a level of oxygen, perhaps you'd also should expect a leap in the rate of
evolution of life and new life forms. Life up until this time had been, well, let's face it, slime,
prokaryotic slime. Prokaryotes are fairly simple life forms. Bacteria are prokaryotes.
They show very few internal modifications within the cell. If you were to look at a prokaryote,
you'd find that the genetic material within it is just kind of randomly distributed through the
cytoplasm. Eukaryotes, on the other hand, have complex structures within them. We call those
complex structures organelles, and the DNA is tidied away very nicely into a little discrete
nucleus. So how do we go from these rather simple prokaryotes to the much more complex
eukaryotic cells? That's not a small question, but it's a question that would be addressed by Dr
Lynn Margulis of the University of Massachusetts, and her hypothesis was called the endosymbiotic
and she proposed it in 1966. It works like this. It says, imagine two prokaryotes in an ocean.
One prokaryote approaches another and attempts to engulf the other prokaryote, perhaps attempting
to eat it, but the prokaryote that is being engulfed isn't destroyed. Instead, a symbiotic
relation is set up between the two creatures, and lo and behold, bing bang boom, we have eukaryotes.
All right, sounds like an interesting story, but where's the evidence? Again, finding the actual
paleontological evidence to support this hypothesis would be nigh on impossible. You can look for it
if you want, but good luck. But there's other evidence, evidence from biology. Let's look at
these structures. Mitochondria, for example, we've already mentioned them. These are the ATP, the
power molecule production generation centers in animals in plants, and the other molecule we have
here is a chloroplast. That's the organelle within plants that allows the plants to photosynthesize.
When plant and animal cells divide, though, we find that these structures divide independently,
and they're dividing independently with their own independent genetic material.
In effect, they're symbiotic partners within ourselves. We're all creatures in a symbiotic
relationship. Pretty cool. Now, the exact timing of the origin of eukaryotes is still pretty much
in flux, but not long after the Huronians snowball, we also start to see the evidence of something
else, which is really exciting in the progressive evolution of the biosphere, and that is cells
weren't just starting to exist independently. They are realizing that maybe it's a good idea to get
together. We're looking at the possibility of the earliest multicellularity. Now, previously,
as with our stromatolites, which are formed by our cyanobacteria, all we really have are
loose associations of cyanobacteria. They are associated together, but each of those bacteria
is an independent unit. If you're going to be truly multicellular, you want to have evidence
of a creature that has differentiated the functions of its cells. They're not all the same.
And here's a fossil of one that we think is possibly the earliest example of this. This is
baguio mofa pubescens. We think it's a member of the red algae. It's fairly small. You can see the
scale bar at the top there is about 200 microns. And you can see it's encrusting the surface of a rock.
It's recovered from the hunting formation in Somerset Island in Canada, and it's dated to around
about 1.2 billion years ago. The cells at the base of this algae can clearly be seen to be
differentiated into holdfasts. It's those cells that it was using to cement itself to the rocks.
You could imagine it would be a thin covering on the surface of the rocks. It's also been suggested
that certain areas of this algae show that certain cells had been adapted to perform specific sexual
functions as well. So there was definite differentiation within the cell structure
of this organism. Looking at the development of complex cells and multicellular creatures like
baguio mofa that probably required these elevated levels of oxygen, elevated levels of oxygen would
allow creatures to grow larger because elevated levels of oxygen meant that if you are multicellular,
oxygen can penetrate through all the cells in your body and allow you to grow to a larger size.
What about the first animal eukaryote? Well, probably we're looking at a creature like this.
This is a Tuana flagellate. He's a free-living single-celled creature. You can see the cell
at the end there. There's a collar structure, and behind it that little whip is a flagellum. It
allows the creature to propel itself through the water. These, in fact, closely resemble some of
the components of cells that are found in sponges. Now, sponges are thought to be some of the most
primitive multicellular animals that we have on the planet today. So it's thought that associations
of eukaryotes like Tuana flagellates would eventually give rise to primitive animals
like the sponges that we see in this image. This is all at 1% of oxygen in the atmosphere,
allowing this diversification of the eukaryotes and also potentially
the first truly multicellular creatures by about 1.2 billion years ago. But it's really not until
630 million years ago that we get complex, really complex creatures. The creatures I've described
so far really wouldn't turn you head if you were looking at them in a zoo. So why has evolution
stalled for what is effectively over half a billion years?
Well, why? It could actually be due to the oxygen levels itself. Perhaps they're just too low to
permit diversification and the production of more complex and more impressive creatures.
But there's also another possible reason. It's possible that Earth's chemistry had changed severely
by just this little bit of addition of oxygen to Earth's atmosphere. And that could have led
to something that we know of as the sulfidic ocean. Oxygen in the atmosphere reacts with a
certain mineral. I've got it here. This is pyrite. It's fool's gold. Its chemical formula is FeS2.
Now, in the presence of oxygen, it oxidizes producing sulfate, SO4. These sulfates could
be very effectively washed into the oceans. In the oceans, certain bacteria call sulfate-reducing
bacteria like nothing more than to use that sulfate in their metabolism. As they do that,
they convert that sulfate into hydrogen sulfide, H2S. That's the rotten egg smells that you might
detect if you go to a volcanic area or if you have a rather adolescent young child like myself
who likes going to joke shops and getting those sting bombs. But we'll forget that.
The consequences, though, of this dissolved hydrogen sulfide in the oceans is going to be
profound because it would reduce the solubility and availability of certain key metals, key metals
like molybdenum and copper. These metals play vital roles in the enzymatic pathways of very many
organisms. So it would appear that the biological innovation of photosynthesis may have ultimately
held back evolution. This really is true earth system science. Just think of all the connections
there. Changes in the biosphere have had profound changes in our atmosphere. We're producing
cyanobacteria that are releasing oxygen into the atmosphere to at least around 1%. This changed how
minerals weathered in the geosphere, the weathering of that pyrite to produce sulfate. That would alter
ultimately the chemistry of the hydrosphere by the activity of those sulfate-reducing bacteria
producing hydrogen sulfate. This would in turn have consequences back into the biosphere by
putting the brakes on evolution. Can you see how it is? It's one change in one system having
knock-on effects in many other systems along the way. In the next lecture, I would like to look at
how the next advance of global ice over our planet broke this deadlock, broke the stalemate,
and allowed for the next major innovation and leap in life.
