In the last lecture we were looking at the development of the metazoans. Remember the
metazoans are animals that are composed of more than one cell. We saw how the diversification
of the metazoans started in the Precambrian, probably the Ediacaran, but maybe even earlier.
But what about all the diversity we see in animals around the planet? Why do we have
so many different body plans?
So in this lecture we're going to ask these questions. When did the really large scale
diversification of animals occur? What was driving this diversification? And did the
diversity of creatures that we see today build gradually over time? Or was there a
big bang to that diversification?
So when did large scale diversification of animals start? Well remember we've discussed
Darwin's problem. The fact that we suddenly seem to see large creatures emerging with
no ancestors before them. And we discussed that that was no longer a problem. As Darwin
pointed out, those early ancestors were there. We just weren't looking enough for them.
Now we've found them.
The early Cambrian is still a remarkable place though, even though it doesn't see the sudden
emergence of life. It sees the appearance of really large fossils, really large fossils
with hard parts. So it really does deserve that title, the Cambrian explosion. It's also
important because it is the place where we see the evolution of the majority of today's
filer, almost in a geological time scale overnight. Remember we're dealing with geological time
here. The Cambrian explosion was virtually a sneeze.
The roots of the Cambrian explosion though, as we've noted, probably stretch back into
the Ediacaran. It's possible that some diversification had already occurred. For example we talked
about Kimberella. It could represent a member of the bilateria, representing that split of
one of the major groups of animals. Or perhaps if it's a mollusk, an even earlier diversification.
There is some early evidence of biomineralization. That's the production of hard parts back in
the Ediacaran as well. Even though, as I said in the last lecture, the majority of creatures
were soft and somewhat goopy.
We find scaffolding elements like these. These are in fact scaffolding elements of sponges.
They're called sponge spicules. They link together to form the framework around which sponges
link and provide their cell structure.
Sponges are probably some of the oldest metazones that we have living on the planet today. This
matches the biomolecular evidence that we can gain from them. It's thought that sponges
may have been around on our planet for around about 635 million years. Old live creatures
indeed.
But we find other things too. This is a fossil called Chloudin. It's part of a group of enigmatic
fossils that are found with the Ediacarans. We're not really sure what it is, but we do
know it's produced by life. It could be a Primitive Nidarian. Perhaps some sort of very
primitive coral. But it does show us definitely that creatures are starting to biomineralize.
They're starting to experiment with shells of some sort, even before the Cambrian began.
Chloudin may also show some very early possible evidence of predatory activity in the Ediacaran
period. As I said, with most of the Ediacarans, there's no evidence of teeth or claws or mouths,
so it's difficult to tie this down. But you can see there's a little hole there in the
shell. Could this be evidence of some creature trying to bore into Chloudin, trying to get
the soft, goopy stuff from inside? It's difficult to say. Again, we're waiting on more evidence.
Even so, major biomineralization would really not occur until we get into the Cambrian.
As mentioned the last time, the early geologists would use this sudden proliferation of Shelley
fossils to mark the base of the Phanerozoic, or the time, as they knew it, of as abundant
life. The base of the Cambrian and the Phanerozoic is defined in a biostratigraphic sense here
in Newfoundland. This is Fortunehead. It's a beautiful part of the world. It's a countryside
that's rugged and full of really beautiful cliff faces and rolling seas. I highly recommend
you visit it. It's here though that the golden spike, as we call it, is driven to define
the transition from the Pre-Cambrian to the Cambrian period. In that case, from the Pre-Cambrian
with the top of it, the Ediacaran, into the Phanerozoic. It's not defined by what you
might think. Remember when we were talking about biostratigraphy, we said geological
periods are generally defined by the emergence of a very characteristic fossil. Remember
back to the Silorian. When we passed from the Ordovician period into the Silorian period,
it was the appearance of a Graptolite that defined the base of the Silorian. This base
though, the base of the Cambrian, and therefore the base of the Phanerozoic, is marked uniquely
I think, by animal behavior. It's an indication that life was starting to really significantly
interact with its environment, not just sitting around it passively like most of the Ediacarans
were. It's marked by a complex association of trace fossils that defines the base, including
this trace fossil, this is Treptokinus pedum. It's probably the burrows of some sort of
warm burying into a sediment. To be honest with you, as with most trace fossils, we really
don't know what was producing them. We do know something was burrowing through the sediment
though. As I said, unlike the Ediacarans, these are actively digging into the sediment,
not passively interacting with the environment at all.
Around the base of the Cambrian, about 542 million years ago, we start to find as well
some of the first rumblings of more biomaterialization to come. We find these things, simple vase
shape tube-like structures. It's been suggested that maybe some of them could maybe represent
teeth as well, although the majority of this fossil material is somewhat enigmatic. But
there's another phase, a little later than that, but still in the very earliest part
of the Cambrian. These are a lot more recognizable as some kind of fossil. Some of them look
really definitely like shells of some type, and they are in fact called the small Shelley
fauna. They're generally fairly small, around about 0.1 of an inch long, composed of various
things, silica, calcite. Some of them are phosphatic in nature. The biological affinities
of them are still pretty much unknown for a lot of them, although we think there might
be some pieces of mollusks, kinoderms and sponges. It's dominated though by creatures
that had an ability to secrete at least some part of a small skeleton. It's possible
that some of these features that you can see here were actually the plates of an armoured
worm, which rather than secreting a whole shell over itself was secreting little plates
that it linked up together, a bit like chainmail. Remember, this is 10 million years before
the first trilobites would emerge. Final phase, of course, is one that we're familiar with,
but it's still in the lower Cambrian. Keep thinking deep geological time here. We're
looking at a vast proliferation of creatures within a very small proportion of one period
of the geological timescale. This final phase is where we do start to see the large creatures
with shells, the creatures that you can go and see in fossil stores or in museums, but
also significantly, it's in this phase that we start to see animals that can be recognized
today and placed into phyla that we recognize today. It's an incredible time in Earth's
history. The most characteristic, of course, was known to Darwin and his contemporaries,
the trilobites. These are the first creatures that we really recognize, large creatures
in this third phase of the Cambrian explosion. Trilobites are a segmented arthropod. They
got a strong skeleton of calcium carbonate, which is the mineral calcite. We think that
most trilobites were probably, especially in the Cambrian, deposit feeders on the sediment
surface. So they were trumbling across the surface of the sediment, probably shoveling
the sediment into their mouths and processing it for, perhaps, bacteria, algae or other
organic material. But what is driving this diversification? What was driving the change
in evolution? Remember, I said that in order for evolution to progress forward, there has
to be some selective advantage for evolution to progress onwards. Now, we know that the
roots of this change probably lie in the Ediacarum period, but this change that occurs
and the rate of change is still incredibly remarkable. So what are the advantages to
creatures actually developing a skeleton if soft-bodied creatures had been so successful
up to that point? Well, a skeleton is important in that it gives you something to articulate
things against. It allows you, in my case, to have an internal skeleton that I can attach
muscles to. It means that those muscles can then act and move the levers of my arms, which
means I can, therefore, also get around a lot better. It gives me a greater mobility,
a greater ability to interact with my environment as well. Also, a skeleton allows you to hang
more complex organs, potentially, within an organism. You can see trace fossil animals
were cruising around the ocean floor quite actively in things like this. This is a trace
fossil of Cambrian ocean floor, and you can see it's absolutely covered with the evidence
that creatures were quite happily moving around in this environment, disturbing the sediment
as they went. Also, though, a skeleton, or at least shall we say a shell, is going to
give you protection in shallow marine environments. Now, ozone levels were rising, as we've already
mentioned. Ozone important in that it's preventing ultraviolet radiation, or at least as much
ultraviolet radiation that used to be hitting the earth from impacting the surface, and
therefore impacting creatures that might be living in shallow environments. If you want
to live in a shallow environment, you probably need some sort of hat. Why would you want
to get into those shallow environments? Well, it's a good place to find food. The ocean
often concentrates food in those environments by wave action, so that would be a good environment
for you to exploit. But if UV radiation is still high, it would help if you had a shell
above yourself. In addition, consider these creatures here. These are limpets' nails.
They live in the intertidal zone. Now, there's an awful lot of good organic material. The
waves really do concentrate organic material in this particular zone, and on beaches, you've
probably seen it as you walk along the beach. There's a whole bunch of stuff washed up there.
But it's a very difficult environment to live in for creatures like this, because obviously
you're not going to be covered with water all the time, and if you're not quick, you're
going to be stranded out on the land. So a shell might give you the ability, as with
these limpets' nails, to clamp yourself down, hermetically seal yourself to a rock, and
just wait for the tide to return. Perhaps the most obvious reason, though, for developing
a skeleton, is protection from predation. We find the possibility of teeth in the earliest
Cambrian explosion fauna, as we've already mentioned, but is it possible, therefore,
that a predator-prey relationship was what was really driving this diversity in the animals?
Is this what is driving evolution? Is what we're looking at in terms of biology an arms
race in the animal kingdom between predator and prey?
Before we consider that, though, maybe it's not just teeth that are driving it. Teeth
are an obvious one. If you have a predator with nasty teeth, it's good if you've got
a hard shell to protect yourself. But perhaps there are other structures around this time
that were evolving that might help drive evolution and drive this diversification. Perhaps one
of the driving forces of evolution was the window to the soul. Perhaps it was the evolution
of the eye. Now, visual pigments are shared by very many animals. They're common to very
many animals, which suggest that the develop of vision probably developed fairly early
in the metazoa. The first eyes, though, in animals were little more than what we call
eye spots. So that's just concentrations of photoreceptive cells. These photoreceptive
cells could probably just tell you when light was on and light was off, and probably give
you some idea of intensity of that light. So you wouldn't be watching the TV with these
eye spots, but it's still better than nothing. If, though, you depress these photoreceptive
cells into a bit of a cup, this is going to improve the ability for you to determine
the degrees of brightness of that light source, and also perhaps discriminate the direction
of that light source as well. That's the level of vision that we see in this creature. This
is a flat worm. Again, you're not going to be going out and viewing the beautiful landscape,
but again, you're able to determine direction and intensity of light. That could be useful
if you are predator or prey. You go a bit further, though, and you deepen that pit,
and so now it's not just a cup, but we're getting to a more spherical structure and
put a little hole in the top of it. You've got something that you might have constructed
at high school, a pinhole camera. Now, this is a vast leap in vision, because if you have
constructed the pinhole camera, you know that what a pinhole camera can do is actually
produce an image. Now, that image might be fuzzy, but what does that matter? If you can
actually detect something coming towards you, that's a big leap forward. This is the type
of vision that we find in creatures such as Nautilus. Now, Nautilus is a cephalopod. It's
a creature that looks a bit like a squid that lives in a coiled shell, and it has that eyesight
very effective. It can get its way out of predators' way and can also hunt prey fairly
effectively with its pinhole camera eye. But if we want to move forward and get even more
advanced eyes, what you want to do is cover that hole with transparent cells. That's going
to protect the eye pit. You don't want sand and other debris getting into the eye, so
that might be perhaps why it was covered over eventually. But it also might help refract
light towards a developing retina, an area where those photoreceptive cells are being
concentrated. Further differentiation of those transparent cells may lead to the development
of a lens, and that's wonderful news because now you can take that fuzzy image of the pinhole
camera and focus it to produce sharp images, just as Albert Einstein did with his famous
eyes. Now, the possibility that eyes might have driven the Cambrian explosion was proposed
by this gentleman. This is Andrew Parker, and he said it would be vision within predators
that would improve hunting strategy. That would drive prey to develop harder protection
from their skeletons. Predators were finding them a lot more easily, so they better make
sure that they had some pretty good armor to watch out for these new super high-powered
visual predators that were on the loose. Some of the earliest creatures that demonstrate
some pretty advanced vision are actually the trilobites. It's the first true eye system
that we can recognize. Now trilobite eyes, not unlike insect eyes, are compound eyes,
so they have many lenses. But the lenses to the trilobites are kind of unique to them
because they're composed of calcium carbonate, they're calcite lenses. Not unlike insects
though, trilobite eyes probably would respond best to sudden movement. If any of you have
tried to swat a fly with a sudden motion, you know that it doesn't work. Insect eyes
also respond to sudden motion. The best way to get an insect to squash it is to move your
hand relatively slowly to it.
Trilobite eyes probably as well, when we look at the physics of them, probably couldn't
cope too well with bright sunlight. It suggested that because of that, perhaps trilobites preferred
to live in shaded areas. Perhaps they lived in areas of weed coverage, sea weed coverage,
or perhaps living in the shade of rocks and stones underneath the ocean. Or perhaps some
might have been nocturnal as well. But I wanted to show you this image of a rather remarkable
trilobite because this is a trilobite from the Devonian, and some of them had actually
developed a sun visor. You can see these remarkable conical eyes of the trilobite and on the top
of them is a bit of a lip. We think this was designed to shade the eyes, so perhaps this
trilobite could get about in brighter conditions. Now trilobites had a wide variety of eye types.
They were all kind of fixed though. Our eyes changed shape to focus. The trilobites though
had a doublet lens structure. Two lenses of different refractive indices acting in combination.
The shape of trilobite lenses matches the design actually of some 17th century physicists,
Descartes and Huygens. They created lens shapes that had a long depth of field with little
distortion of the image. This is the same solution that trilobites had adopted for their
vision millions of years earlier. They were well ahead of the game. Some trilobites had
many very small lenses. We call this the holocroll system. Lenses in some trilobites
got to a ridiculous number, sometimes 15,000 lenses per eye. They were crowded with lenses.
Others had fewer lenses, maybe up to 700, and larger lenses as well. This is the schizocroll
system. Many early trilobites as well had a crescentic look to their eyes and a conical
structure, giving them a good field of vision. Maybe as well it's envisaged in some reconstructions
that perhaps these eyes could swivel as well to look for predators. Perhaps as well this
conical mode of the eyes also allowed them to exist partly buried in sediment.
The field of vision in trilobites was taken to extreme by some species. This is probably
a free swimming, which is fairly rare for the trilobites or pelagic form. You can see
these massive eyes would have probably given it a 360 degree field of view. Some also placed
their eyes on the top of really long stalks. This could allow them to peek above the surface
of material on the bottom of the ocean, or perhaps they were buried in sediment, hiding
away and keeping a lookout for predators. The eye hypothesis, however popular and intriguing,
has been criticized by some for, if you'll excuse the pun, focusing on vision. There
are other sensors that could potentially drive this arms race in creatures. A lot of creatures
in today's ocean use the detection of vibrations in the water column. Some creatures detect
chemical signals for hunting purposes of two. So why should we just concentrate on vision
as being the only cause of the arms race? Indeed, some trilobites were in fact blind.
This is a trilobite called Trinucleus. We think that it used to feed on the bottom of
the ocean in very low light conditions and it has either had no eyes or it's lost them
over time through evolution. But what we can see on Trinucleus is evidence of those other
sensors being used. We can see a pitted fringe around the head or cephalon of the trilobite.
We think that those might have been sensors to detect vibration within the water column,
either to detect a predator or perhaps some of the small organisms that it might have
been interested in eating itself. But let's move on. Did the diversity of creatures we
see today build gradually over time or was there a great big bang to this diversification?
It's a very important question. The question is what was the Cambrian explosion really
like? Well, there are a number of possible views you can take of the Cambrian explosion.
Let's deal with them in turn. Let's consider it Darwin's time. Remember in Darwin's time
from the fossil evidence it would appear that life just emerged spectacularly at the base
of the Cambrian. Suddenly we get complex diverse creatures and then according to Darwin's
contemporaries a continued diversification to the present. That's the first one that
we see there. How about taking the view of Stephen Gould, Stephen Gould, famous biologist,
great writer. He allowed for a history of animal life in the pre-Cambrian unlike the
Victorians. But he suggested that there was a massive diversification of multiple filer
in the Cambrian, an incredible diversification. Many forms he estimated weren't found today,
followed rather rapidly by a severe pruning to the current level of diversity that we
see. Third possibility? Well, this third possibility is in part driven by some of the molecular
clock evidence and it suggests a very long fuse for the Cambrian explosion which starts
way back in the pre-Cambrian perhaps as far back as 900 million years ago. If that's the
case the Cambrian explosion becomes a little less spectacular. But perhaps the most widely
accepted would be this one. A Cambrian explosion with some roots in the pre-Cambrian but still
demonstrating a rapid proliferation of filer, an incredible in fact proliferation of filer
in the early part of the Cambrian. The Cambrian explosion under this model still does deserve
its name of an explosion. It's important to keep underlining the importance of this event.
Remember again geological time although we're talking millions of years it's still on the
overall history of life that we've been discussing so far. When did we think life started? Perhaps
as early as sometime around 4 billion years. This is an incredibly short period. As I said
the Cambrian explosion is minute in time to see such an incredible advance in life forms.
It sees the majority of all the basic body types or filer that we know of today. By the
end of the Cambrian the majority of all life with hard parts that evolved including these
creatures. The Brachypods. This is the northern lamp shell. Brachypods aren't so common today
but they were very important. In fact more important than the clams in the Paleozoic.
They look like clams but they're not related to them at all. There's the Molusca of course.
Now the Molusca is a really big group. It includes all the snails, the squids, the clams and the
Cephalopods as well. So it's an extremely important animal group. Then there's the
Arthropoda. This is probably the most diverse metazone group of them all. It includes the
insects and if you like shrimp cocktail it also includes the crustaceans as well. And
then the Echinodermata, the sea urchins and starfish. The Hemicordata are another group
that includes the acorn worms, the terabranchs and the Graptolites who we'll deal with in
a later lecture. And the Cordates, the ones that we tend to focus on a lot because the
Cordates happen to include a group called the Vertebrates and there's a certain interesting
species within the Vertebrates called human beings. Only the Nid area, the corals and
the jellyfish and the Periphera, the sponges, have been positively identified from the
Precambrian. All except the Cordates and the Briozoa, sometimes they're called moss animals,
emerge from this early Cambrian explosion of life. By the end of the Cambrian all the
basic body plans of later animals will be in existence. I can't stop but keep underlining
this to hopefully bring to you the importance of this Cambrian explosion event.
So what about a picture of that early Cambrian? Well in general we're looking at a fauna that
lived on or close to the surface of the sediment. Most free moving forms, not unlike the trilobites
that we can see here, were likely deposit feeders. As we said, processing the ocean floor sediment
for organic material or perhaps algae or bacteria and passing that stuff out of the gut at the
back for other free creatures to process. But there will also be suspension feeders,
so those creatures with their sights towards the water column trying to extract micro plankton
or other organic material that was held in suspension in the water. The Brachyopods were
doing that, those are one of the creatures, but also the Eocrynoids, you can see a fossil
of one here. Now these are relatives of sea urchins and they have an adaptation which suggests
that something important had probably changed to the ocean floor as well. You can see they
kind of got a stalk, so they were raised up above the sediment water interface. It's
possible by this time in the Cambrian, due to the removal of those microbial mats, remember
lots of creatures were starting to eat those microbial mats so they no longer would have
a stabilizing effect, that the ocean floor had become increasingly soupy. These stalks
would allow these Eocrynoids and creatures like them to erase themselves above this superness
and start to exploit the water column for ocean plankton. The stromatolites that we mentioned
in earlier lectures were now pretty well restricted to either extreme environments or to the intertidal
zone, which still wasn't quite yet colonized as it is to the extent that it is today. The
intertidal zone is a fairly difficult environment to live, even today it has vast salinity
changes, temperature changes and of course a change in water level two times a day. But
in the normal shallow marine environments, most of these stromatolites that have been so
common in the pre Cambrian period have been grazed away by the new mobile Cambrian fauna.
So, what's the common image of the Cambrian then? Well, it's largely of shelly creatures
and trilobites, you can find that if you look in any kids book on paleontology. However,
in our next lecture we're going to see how a man on a horse in the Canadian Rockies would
change our view of the world of the early Phanerozoic forever.
