You know how I've kept harping on about bias in the fossil record, the fact that soft-bodied
creatures aren't going to fossilize as well as creatures with hard parts and shells, and
the fact that where a creature lived may have a great effect upon its potential to become
a fossil. Well, I have to raise my hand and admit I'm guilty of creating bias too, in
a kind of I guess a cultural way, but I'm probably in good company.
If you pick up any glossy book on fossils, why not any? Perhaps some of the older ones
and flip through some of the pages. Generally what you'll find is a brief description of
trilobites in a kind of a very boring oceanic scene. And then it's bam, straight into the
vertebrates, creatures with the backbones, perhaps a few fish, but then it's right onto
the dinosaurs and all that exciting stuff, and that forms the majority of the book, probably
also with a significant proportion about humans at the end of the book. Also, there's another
bias that you find very often in these publications, a bias to the land creatures. It's almost
like after the evolution of fish, the evolution in the oceans just stopped and everything
was going on on the land. Of course, that isn't the case. Speak to a paleobotanist,
they've virtually ripped their hair out. Plants get very short mention, and yet plants
have been vital, a vital component in the evolution of the earth system, and so often
get overlooked. For this lecture, I'd like to try and redress
a little bit of the balance perhaps, at least where invertebrates are concerned. So in this
particular lecture, I'd like to take a look at how an important component of the oceans
have evolved, and those are reefs over time. I'd also like to ask who are the invertebrates
and investigate what is at the other end of the fossil scale. I'd like to introduce you
to the science of micro paleontology. So how have reefs changed through time? Here's the
great barrier reef. Beautiful, isn't it? It's probably the largest living organism in
the world. By that, we mean that it can be considered almost to be a super organism.
The individual components of the reef are so interconnected that it's almost like we've
gone on to another hierarchy in system complexity, and the reef could be considered as one living
creature. It's a big creature if it is, it stretches for about 1,600 miles, and covers
133,000 square miles in area. It's vast. Within the great barrier reef, if you're lucky
to visit there and go snorkeling, you have the potential to see 400 types of coral, about
1,500 species of fish. There are at least 4,000 types of mollusks, and a whole host
of vertebrates, arthropods, and akinoderms, and probably a whole bunch of creatures that
we still have to describe. In fact, the number of creatures is probably too numerous to list
here. We've got to be a little careful here, though, with our terminology, because reef
is used by lots of people in different manners. It's a nautical term, generally meaning any
area where you have a feature that causes shallow water. So a reef could just be an
outcrop of rock, not necessarily a biological reef. In paleontology, the definition can
vary as well. It can mean just a build-up of organisms. We call that a bioherm, though,
due in generally more than a reef. And the term reef is often restricted for a more solidly
developed feature, something that's more wave-resistant, something that you would see breakers breaking
upon in the ocean. The first build-ups, then, if not reefs, were probably the stromatolites.
We find some beautiful stromatolites from the Gunflint Chirte in Northern Ontario, and
these are preserved in jasper, and it can be this beautiful red colour. The Precambrian
stromatolites are probably some of the largest life structures, and if you were in a spacecraft
possibly travelling over the oceans at that particular time, looking deep down onto the
earth, you might even see some of these stromatolite reefs ringing the shallow, warm areas of continents.
These large domes and build-ups probably being very prominent. They reach a peak of diversity
at around about 1.25 billion years ago. In the Cambrian, the stromatolites have, we've
already seen, become more restricted to areas where there's low oxygen, high salinity, and
the intertidal zone. They've been grazed away by the new Cambrian fauna in the more
normal marine environments. And today, well, the stromatolites have even been removed from
the intertidal zone mostly. They're generally only found in areas of extreme environments.
This is perhaps the most famous stromatolite area in the world today. This is Hamlin Pool
in Shark Bay in Australia. This, like the Burgess Shale or the Grand Canyon or the Pyramids,
is another one of those UNESCO World Heritage sites. The water here is too saline to allow
larger creatures to graze, so the cyanobacteria that create these structures can get on with
it and produce these wonderful pillars. Hamlin Pool today is probably as close as we can
get, probably, to how the earth looked for pretty well most of earth history.
Well, when we're talking about reefs, we tend to think of something very different,
really, don't we? We think of high biodiversity. We think of shimmering shoals of fish, beautiful,
colourful corals. That really just isn't the case with these stromatolithic structures.
The first reefs, though, do occur in the Cambrian, but they're not corals. They're a creature
called archaeocyathus. They're probably suspension feeders, drawing in water through the sides
of their bodies and expelling it through an opening at the top, pretty well the same way
that sponges do today. In fact, they're probably fairly closely related to sponges. They were
important reef builders by the middle of the Cambrian and formed some important structures
in the oceans, but they'd see a steady decline to the end of the Cambrian, possibly from
competition from other types of sponge. It would not be until the mid-order vision that
we get the next development of reefs. And that's when we start to see the proliferation
of corals, extinct forms, like rogose and tabulate corals. Now, rogose corals formed
in a number of ways. We have solitary forms. We've met this guy before. This is a solitary
rogose coral. You can see that he's composed of a number of layers. This is where the coral
sat at each time, and the individual coral polyp sit sat in the top here. But not all
of them were solitary like this one. Some of them are what we call compound or colonial
corals, and you can see an image of that one of a colonial coral right here. All these
coralites all bounded together in a mass. Tabulate corals, though, are exclusively colonial.
They tend to have a smaller coral polyp than the rogosa corals. They tend to form reefs
with sponges and sponge-like creatures like the stromatoporoids, and they form extensive
tropical reefs throughout the lower Paleozoic. By the Devonian, the reefs have become really
big structures, maybe rivaling the Great Barrier Reef today. There's a massive one near the
equator in Gondwana land. That's an old name for a part of a continent that is now part
of Western Australia. It's so well preserved that you can still reconstruct a section through
it. The front of the reef is the area where debris would fall from the reef core, fall
down into a kind of an apron. Then we move through a wave-resistant reef core area, and
behind this would be a more calm, lagoonal area, which might contain one or two little
isolated, what we call patch reefs. This basic structure of a reef is very common today,
and very many modern reef biologists would recognize this structure from the ancient
Earth itself. These reefs are hotbeds of evolution. You can see in this image there are corals,
there are various invertebrates, brachypods, clams, but there's also vertebrates here represented.
There's always an explosion of life around these structures. There's always a deadly
game going on as well, predator versus prey, and it's probably because of this, because
of this richness and diversity and availability of opportunity, that evolution does really
go fast forward in reef systems. There's been an incredibly important area where life has
moved forward in the history of our planet. Reefs would come and go through the Paleozoic,
but perhaps one of the most famous fossil reefs of all is found in the Guadalupe Mountains.
This is the Capitan Reef Limestone, and it comes from the Middle Permian Period. At this
time, all the continents were grouped together into Pangaea. Remember, that's the super
continent that vaguely reconstructed all lands around about 200 million years ago. It was
surrounded of course, because all the continents and all the areas were in one area, by a vast
circling ocean, but there was a narrow inlet into the land areas at an area called the
Hovey Channel, which connected this large surrounding ocean with an inland sea. This
inland sea covered much of northern Mexico and what is southwest United States today,
and those areas were lying close to the equator. This inland sea had three arms. There's the
Marfa, the Delaware, and the Midland Basins. The central one, the Delaware Basin, contained
the Delaware Sea, and covered an area around about 150 miles long and perhaps 70 miles
wide, so it was a fairly substantial body of water. During the middle part of the Permian,
a reef developed on the margin of that Delaware Sea, the Capitan Reef, one of the most well-preserved
fossil reefs in the world, and there are some excellent fossil reefs preserved elsewhere,
but this one really takes the biscuit. The El Capitan Mountain now forms the core of
that reef structure. If you were to stand in the middle of the now-drained Delaware Basin
today, you're actually standing on what would have been the ocean floor looking towards
the reefs. The mountains that you can see around the edges of this basin are the actual
reef structure. It's amazing to think that if you're actually standing in that area,
you're actually standing in a fossil environment. Just replace the water and you would have
a picture of that environment with reefs in the background and probably breakers crashing
upon them. The limestone that forms the reef framework, the central portion, contains a
framework of creatures such as algae and sponges and colonial animals called bryozoans, all
kind of growing in together with one another. These are stabilized into more solid structures
by the encrusting organisms that grew over them, kind of cementing them into place, creating
this very firm wave-resistant structure. It's not just the wave-resistant reef that
survives, though. There's also other areas of that reef environment that are preserved
in this area. If you go to the back reef, you find other environments. It's a relatively
calm area behind the main reef. The main reef, of course, is taking a lot of the impact from
the wave, so the waters will be fairly calm in this environment. Because of that, we see
the deposition of fairly fine sediments, muddy calcium carbonate-rich sediments. But because
that area is fairly calm and the area was fairly warm, we think that the water would
become fairly stagnant as well and probably had a very high salinity because of the intense
evaporation in that particular area of the world. The high concentration of magnesium
that would develop in the waters because of this situation would mean that much of that
original calcium carbonate sediment has now been altered to another carbonate mineral
called dolomite. Calcium carbonate is CaCO3. Dolomite is CaMgCO3. So some of the calcium
has been replaced by magnesium in the crystal structure. Life, although not quite as diverse
as you'd expect in the reef, because of these more extreme conditions, is found, though.
We find brachypods and some crinoids in this environment. In the front of the main reef
was that foreeaf. On the reef itself, as I said, the ocean waves are crashing onto the
Capitan reef, and that causes debris to slump down into the basin, kind of fanning down
in front of it. So this foreeaf would be composed of broken fragments of the reef formless,
but it also contains creatures that are probably living there as well, trilobites, sea urchins,
and algae. Permian reefs are very complex. They're mostly composed of sponges with calcium
carbonate skeletons, but by the end of the Permian, the reef and the majority of the
reef-producing organisms, and in fact, most of life at that time would perish. We're
going to see why that was in a later lecture, foreboding, as that may sound.
Modern corals today are a member of a group called the scleractinia. They arose, we're
thinking about the triassic period. They replace the older corals, the rogues and the tabulate
corals, of the paleozoic, but they really don't produce substantial structures until
the end of the triassic period. But what I'd like to get to now is a discussion
as to who are our friends, the invertebrates. Well, the invertebrates make up over 95% of
all animal species. Basically, it's all animals without a backbone that includes the reef-building
animals, so that's an awful lot of animals. It's interesting, isn't it, that they kind
of get overlooked and we focus on the vertebrates. It's because we have a bias, we are vertebrates,
so that's what we're interested in. But when you consider the amount of information
that invertebrates provide, it probably outstrips the amount of information that vertebrates
do. Invertebrates provide information about incredibly diverse environments, about environmental
changes, and about so much more in terms of our coloring in our picture of ancient biospheres.
So I'd just like to illustrate a few of the important invertebrate groups that we use
in paleontology quite frequently. We've already met the arthropods in the Burgess
Jail. The trilobites are some of the most common. They have three parts. They have a head that
we call a cephalon, a body, which is the thorax, and a tail, the pygidium. The skeleton is
made out of calcium carbonate, but because this is an arthropod, it has to molt in order
to grow. So this probably explains the high abundance of trilobite fossils. Anyone trilobite
could probably produce lots of potentially fossilizable material. They also evolve very
rapidly. They are extremely useful for biostratigraphy in the Cambrian. In fact, they are used to
divide the Cambrian into five stages. In terms of where they live, they live pretty close
to the ocean floor, scavenging and processing sediment for organic debris, we think. We've
already met these marks, but I'd like to show you these again. These aren't just any old
marks. These are marks called cruziana, and they're actually tracks left by trilobites.
You can actually see here these little scoop-shaped marks on these runnels. This is basically
the trilobite body moving through the sediment, and these other marks are evidence of the
legs moving through the sediment. Quite an incredible ocean floor there, showing activity
of the little trilobites. There are a very successful group of creatures, in part due
to the evolution of eyes, as we described last time, but like with the corals that we
described earlier, they'd all be extinct by the end of the Permian, the same event that
killed off those beautiful Permian reef fawners. Another group, though, that often gets overlooked
to these, the echinoderms. This includes the starfish and the sea urchins. Also, the crinoids
are often called sea lilies, but they're not plants. Many crinoids today are more like
these, the feather stars, and have no stalk, but in the past, stalked forms were an awful
lot more common, like we can see in this image. Trinoids, like the trilobites, are composed
of calcium carbonate, and the stalk is often formed of discs that we call columnules. In
Britain, these columnules, and I've got some here, because they don't often always form
in these amalgamated units, they can break off into individual little hoops, a bit like
lifesavers, that are often called fairy money. But they don't only just occur in hoops, sometimes
they occur in pentagonal kind of star shapes, and then they're called star stones, forming
a part of the cultural lore, I guess, of Britain. The body on top of the stalk is called a calyax,
and from that body on the top of the stalk, you can see those beautiful arms that it developed,
and it's those arms which probably help gather food and particles from the water and passing
it into the mouth. By the middle paleozoic, the corals, these trinoids, would form vast
meadows, their disarticulated plates and remains, sometimes form really thick sediments, sometimes
they're also very important for oil as well, because the little gaps in between those little
columnules in the sediment act as perfect little hiding places for oil. For about 251
million years ago, there were a type of shellfish that you would have noticed on the ocean
floor that dominated the ocean floor in the same way that clams do today, and those would
be the brachyopods. They are with us today. Here's an image of one from the Bay of Fundy
in Canada, it's called a lamp shell. Brachyopods though, have a very different biology to clams
even though they might suff officially on the outside look like them. They have a feeding
autumn called alophaphore. It contains a ring of cilia which they use in suspension feeding,
so effectively they open their shells and create water currents to extract material from the
water body. They have a variety of habits, but most of them lived on the ocean floor,
sometimes attached to the ocean floor by a fleshy stalk called a pedicle. The brachyopods
are mostly replaced by the bivalves, the true clams, after the Permian about 251 million
years ago. The bivalves themselves are an incredibly successful group. They've exploited
far more niches than the brachyopods ever did. They've spread across all the ocean floor,
but unlike the majority of the brachyopods, they've also exploited to a great extent,
burrowing deep into the sediments as well. Some of them have even moved up into the water
column sea scallops which can escape predators by flapping their valves, and they've also
exploited another environment that the brachyopods never got to, fresh water as well. One of
my favourite bivalves is called Gryphaea. It's called the Jurassic Oyster, and there's
a great mythology around this possible, and I'd just like you to introduce you to him
over here. This is Gryphaea. You can see kind of his shell kind of almost looks oyster-like,
but his common name in the north-east of England is the Devil's Toe Nails. The story goes that
as the Devil was running across the early-formed earth, of course being the Devil, from hell,
he was extremely hot, and as he moved across the land, his toes burned into the rock and
got caught, and as he was running away, he left some of his toenails behind, and that's
what we have right here. In Scotland, they're often called the Clach Crubain, which is Gaelic,
which means the crouching shell. It's thought that you could use these, I guess probably
by grinding them up and eating them, to cure joint pain, probably a reflection of the way
that this shell appears to be tortured and crouched.
Five Alves are members of the mollusks. The mollusks are an incredible group. It includes
the snails, the gastropods, the cephalopods, that's the squid, the cuttlefish, and the octopus.
We have hints of cephalopods in the Burgess shell fawners, but they become really common in the
Ordovician. You can see a really spectacular one here in this image. This is an orthoconic
nautiloid. It is one of the top predators of the Ordovician. You'd be kind of like the anomalous
carus of the Ordovician. In the Ordovician, creatures like this could reach 11 feet in length.
Cephalopods are an important component of the Mesozoic oceans between 251 and 65 million years
ago. A particularly common form is the ammonite, basically a kind of a squid in a coiled shell.
They're an incredibly diverse creature. Some of them are very small. Some of them got really big
as well. Some of them could be up to six feet in diameter. And again, we'll meet them when we
deal with the Mesozoic oceans later. But what is at the other end of the fossil scale? I'd like
to introduce you to the science of micropalientology. We often forget they're very small, don't we?
But we're surrounded by tiny life. Think of pollen or plankton in the oceans. Tiny animals are
vital for the earth's system as they often form the base of the ecosystem, supporting all the life
that depends upon them. Remove the base of that ecosystem and the rest of life generally comes
tumbling down. The first life was probably part of this tiny community. It's interesting, isn't
it, therefore, that our perception is biased towards the big fossils. And we often forget the
micro biosphere. And just like I said, often we forget that the ocean has been evolving continually
after creatures got onto the land. Also, the micro biosphere has also been evolving even after
the evolution of the macro, the large stuff. Some of the earliest micro plankton that we find are
organic wall creatures called acrytarchs. They're somewhat enigmatic. But we think they're part of a
life cycle of a flagellated algae. We think it might be a resting stage that produced a structure
called a cyst. These cysts often demonstrate a hole in their size showing where the creature escaped
from its cysts and returned to active living. They range in size from about 15 to 180 microns in
size. And I've just got some on a slide here to show you. Obviously, you can't really see them. That
kind of tiny speckled the black dust on this slide is actually probably hundreds, perhaps
thousands of acrytarchs on other micro plankton. This dates from about 400 million years ago. Just to
give you an idea of scale, remember I said that acrytarchs are between 15 and 80 microns in size,
one micron is one millionth of a meter. For those of you who aren't too familiar with metric, a human
hair has a diameter that varies from 20 to 180 microns. Yep, these things are small. Some acrytarchs
have been reported from as early as three billion years ago. They diversified very much though around
the time of the Cambrian explosion. And it may in part explain the diversification of animal life
at that time. Possibly related to the acrytarchs are these creatures, the dinoflagellates. They're
an important component of more modern micro plankton. Some of them produce algal blooms that
we're familiar with. If you've ever heard of red tides, which have been killing fish and prevent
you entering the ocean, you've got these guys to thank for it. Now, the microfossil that I'm most
familiar with is a microfossil called chytnozoans. They formed the basis of my PhD at the University
of Leicester. My PhD was centered around silorium rocks. That's between 416 and 443 million years
ago in the Ludlow area of Shropshire. It's a wonderful place to do research, not just because
it has some of the finest pubs in the world, but also because it has some of the finest
silorium rocks there too. My research was looking at the diversity and distribution of chytnozoa
and also looking if we could detect any responses to environmental conditions in the character
of the biodiversity of chytnozoans as well. So perhaps we could use changing fornas of chytnozoans
as a fauna to help track environmental change. There are a little larger than acrytox, but
still very small, ranging in size from about 60 to 200 microns, and they range from the
Ordovician to the Devonian. That's 488 to 359 million years ago. That's some 89 million years.
Why did they go into extinction? Well, to be honest with you, we're not really sure. They
possess an organic wall. It's a chytnite substance, something that's kind of similar to your
fingernails, I guess. They take the form of vases sealed at one end by a lid or a simple
plug. They're sometimes also associated in long chains, the lid of one attached to the
base of another. How do we prepare them? Well, I thought I'd give you some insight here because
this is how we generally prepare many other organic walled microfossils. Well, the problem
we have with organic walled microfossils, in fact, microfossils in general, is that they're
micro. We can't really see them. So you can't go out like a normal fossil hunter would and
just look for them, pick them up and put them in your bag. We have to really go on faith.
We go to a rock section and we mark it up, measure it up, and grab samples as we go.
We then take the samples back to the lab and hope that there's something there. Once we
get the samples back, we scrub and we wash them. We generally take away the outer rim
of that rock to remove any possibility of contamination. Remember, these things are very small and
could become fairly easily contaminated from other areas that are undergoing erosion and
releasing these fossils. We generally crush them to about pea-sized chips, the samples
that we bring back. Next, we have to free these organic fossils from the rock matrix in which
they're contained. Many substances cement sediments together and we have to get rid of
it. So first of all, we treat our sample with hydrochloric acid to remove calcite, that's
calcium carbonate cement. Quartz cements and lots of sandy material will also be present
and they've got to be removed too. But hydrochloric acid won't do this. This is when we use a rather
scary chemical, hydrochloric acid. This is why we can't keep hydrochloric acid in a
glass container. It dissolves silica. As I said, HF, as we call it, is a very dangerous
chemical. It doesn't harm the organic fossils that we're looking at, but the vapor is extremely
dangerous and the liquid is extremely poisonous if it touches the skin. It must be used in
specially dedicated fume hoods. After we've done all that, we end up with a residue that
still contains some stubborn quartz and heavier material that won't dissolve. So after we've
neutralized it, we add a heavy liquid to it at its appropriate specific gravity and put
it in a centrifuge. The organic material floats to the surface and can be skimmed off and
either mounted on a glass slide like I've just showed you, or placed on a metal stub
where we can look at it using scanning electron microscopes. But what are they? Are they protozoans?
Well, that once-only-open system, that lid, it would appear that once it was opened, it
couldn't be resealed. So that would seem unlikely for a protozoan. If you've made a lid, you'd
probably want to be able to close it again. And it would appear that this lid was ejected
and never retrieved. Also, the fact that they occur in chains is odd as well. It's led some
people to suggest that perhaps what we're looking at with the chitinazones are potentially
the eggs of some animal. What we're going to need to solve this mystery is, of course,
a lagerstatin, a fossil bonanza, perhaps finding the chitinazone animal, perhaps with ovaries
if they are eggs that contain chitinazones. We're going to meet additional microfossils
in this series, in particular the coccolithophores and the foraminifera. They're a common and
important component of today's microplankton along with dinoflagellates. This lecture I
hope has painted a wider picture of fossils, parts of the biosphere and parts of the evolving
Earth system. And we can see that the diversity is high and wonderful. We've been painting
a picture as well of onwards and upwards in terms of life, but it's not always been
roses. The biosphere has taken knocks at times. And in the next lecture, I'd like to show
you how the biosphere can take a severe downturn.
