We tend to take this environment for granted, don't we? By this environment, I mean the
land. Actually, it's a really tough place to live. For example, just standing up. If
I was an aquatic creature, I would have the buoyancy of water to support me. But I don't,
so I have to have an intricate skeletal system, muscles, and a whole bunch of other control
processes to just let me stand here. In addition, I have to have a whole bunch of adaptations
so that my innards are staying in and not just flopping around the place. In water again,
the buoyancy of the water tends to keep things in its place. It's not an easy task standing
up, especially if you're standing on skis. Well, for me anyway, I kind of ski like a brick.
There are other problems as well, though. Temperature extremes are an awful lot more
extreme in air than they are in water. If you've ever been out on a really hot day somewhere,
you'll notice that it can be really hot on the land, but dip your toe in the water and it can
still be fairly cold. Also, you have problems with desiccation on the land. You're going to lose
water. We are effectively having to carry our aquatic environment around with us. Also, light,
sound, and gases will all behave differently in the air compared to the aquatic environment.
So for this lecture, I'd like to ask what adaptations did the plants make to get onto the
land? What group of animals were the first to conquer the land? And what was the consequence of
this new terrestrial ecosystem? So what adaptations did the plants make? Well, it's likely that plants
evolved close to fresh water. It's likely they evolved in an environment as well, which was the
interface between land and water, where it's kind of blurred. And when we're thinking about an
interface between land and water, we're generally thinking swamps and marshes, areas that aren't
quite water, but they're not quite land either. Perhaps that's the best step that we can look for
for where plants actually got onto the land surface. The lack of buoyancy is going to be a
major problem for plants. Just look at this kelp forest. It's beautiful, isn't it? I always think
it reminds me of a medieval cathedral. But you take away all that water from that kelp forest
and you get this, something which is a little less impressive. Also, aquatic plants can extract
nutrients directly from the water that surrounds them. That's not going to be optioned for land
plants. Multicellular algae had already appeared after the first snowball about 1.2 billion years
ago. And we've already witnessed that they'd already differentiated their cells into specialized
functions. They were whole-fast, like you can see this algae here clinging to this rock surface.
And we think that there had been various spores and gametes developed as well. But every cell
in these primitive algae in the ocean is still in direct contact with water and nutrients and gases.
Even so, the cells probably weren't completely independent. There would still possibly be
a necessity to dump waste products effectively and divert resources. For example, perhaps,
divert resources to the growing tip of a stem. John Raven from the University of Dundee was
thinking about how plants did make this leap and proposed a series of changes, a scenario,
if you will, which might explain how you could turn an aquatic living algae into a land living plant.
Goes a little bit like this. Imagine algae in shallow, fresh water, pretty close to the land,
so it'd be stuff that you could probably see if you were standing on the edge of a pool or a pond.
This algae probably had sporangia. Those are the fruiting bodies of algae. And if they were able
to raise those sporangia just above the water surface, they might be able to catch the breezes
blowing across the surface of the pond. And that could help distribute the spores.
That would be an advantage to them. Remember, evolution doesn't just happen because
there has to be a selective advantage for change to occur. Now, given the many problems that plants
need to overcome to completely get onto land, there would have to be a major selective advantage
to drive that change. What was it then? What was this driving force? Well, perhaps it was
light quality. Land plants have access to light for longer periods of time than plants that live
in water. In water, plants are also restricted in their distribution. They tend to be distributed
in an area that we call the photic zone. That's the depth to which light can penetrate the water.
And even in shallow water sometimes, if that sediment contains, if that water contains an
awful lot of sediment, that photic zone can be fairly narrow. Also, when you are in air,
it's easier to extract carbon dioxide than it is in water. So you have two reasons here why the
leap might be made. So let's assume, therefore, that we have a plant now with some tissues just
poking out of the water, possibly because it's distributing spores. But it's also now in a better
position to photosynthesize because it has better access to carbon dioxide and it has longer access
to light. The problem is now it is not surrounded with water if it wants to get out. It cannot
extract nutrients from the air. This would probably lead to one of the first developments in plants,
plants that get onto the land, that is, the development of something that we call a simple
conducting strand, basically a very simple piping system to carry water to the upper parts of the
plant from the lower parts of the plant. That's a simple system we see used by mosses like this.
They live in very moist conditions, as you've probably noted, either around open bodies of water
or at least areas that are very misty, full of water vapor. They are really not much use in
really dry areas, though. So plants like mosses could really only exist around the fringes of
water. They're not going to green whole landscapes. The solution to this, the solution to losing water,
comes from waterproofing. And in terms of waterproofing with plants, we're talking plant cuticle.
It's a waxy covering over the surface of the plant, the surfaces that are exposed to air,
that reduces the effects of desiccation. It also acts a bit like a repellent for water. It stops
films of water collecting on the plant. That's important because if you have a plant that has
a film of water all over it, it could cut down the uptake of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
That's one of the reasons you wanted to get out onto the land in the first place.
In addition, cuticle has an ability to provide some rigidity. So you're not going to be flopping
around so much. So you can maybe get a little higher than the couple of maybe centimeters or
less than that that some of the early plants might have been exploiting. If you have more cuticle,
you can probably get off the ground a little bit better. Plus this cuticle might have acted
as a bit of a barrier to excess ultraviolet radiation from the sun. In effect, cuticle
is a plant sunscreen. But there's a resulting problem that develops if you go with this cuticle
and all plants have. The problem is that you really now cannot absorb nutrients from the
surroundings. You really have cut yourself off to avoid this desiccation problem. And it's thought
that perhaps this would lead to the developments of roots, specialist areas of the plants that would
gather nutrients from the soil and pass it up to the other parts, which couldn't extract those
nutrients by themselves anymore. So that solves a problem of getting nutrients, but cuticle
causes another problem. Cuticle prevents gas exchange. Remember, it's that kind of structure
that is really preventing water loss from the plant, and that will also have another effect.
It will stop gas getting into the plant, carbon dioxide that the plant needs. So that probably
led to the development of these things. These are stomata. They're pores. You can see on this
diagram things that we call guard cells on either side of this pore that open and close
to allow gas exchange and also protect the plant from excess water loss during really warm times.
The stoma linked to an intercellular gas transport system between the cells, solving yet another
problem, the transport of food to the roots. Because the roots, although adapted now to transport
nutrients and water to the surface of the plant, are now cut off from the light. So they can't
flow to synthesize and can't produce food themselves. Eventually, plants would develop a
structure called xylem. Xylem is basically just dead cells placed end on end to form a kind of a
tube, and it would significantly improve the flow of water through the plant. Water moves up from
the roots due to negative pressure generated by the evaporation of water on the surface of the plant.
So we're looking at something that's called evapotranspiration. There's a complete
capillary action activity going on here. The plants with such a xylem system we call vascular plants.
Now, real high pressures can develop in the xylem under this particular system,
and so the plants needed to somehow strengthen and encase this system, and they did that by
developing a material called lignin. That strengthening material would therefore allow
plants to get even bigger than the original cuticle surrounding had allowed them to get in the first
place. There's another transport system in plants too. It's called the phloem. That moves products
of photosynthesis, such as sugars. That's important for areas needing more energy, for example,
like the growing tips of plant, and as we mentioned, moving it to the roots which cannot
photosynthesize. So that's a specialized sugar transport system in more advanced plants.
So does the fossil record tally with this scenario? Well, when do we first see
some of the indications of land plants? Well, we have some spores from the Ordovician. Now, spores
are the reproductive gametes of plants, and the spores that we find from the Ordovician
are very similar to modern spores from liverworts. They're found in marine rocks, but they were
probably washed in from a land area, but we're still uncertain as to whether or not these really
came from a land-based plant. If you want the truest oldest land plant fossils, we need to go
to the Middle Silorian period. This is Cuxonia. It's just over an inch tall, and it has this
typical Y-shaped branching pattern. You can see on the top of it you have the sporangia, the fruiting
bodies, the areas that are going to be producing the spores. Well, something that you'll also
probably notice is that Cuxonia has no leaves. It was probably just photosynthesizing along the
length of its stem. It was also linked underground by a common root structure called a ribosome.
You've probably used a common ribosome in the kitchen. Ginger is such an example. This plant,
though, would still be pretty well restricted to living in low-lying freshwater marshlands.
This isn't the plant that's going to stride out across the landmasses.
Cuxonia by the Devonian had evolved xylem, cuticles, and stomata, and by the early Devonian,
plants have probably started to look fairly modern. So how about a window like we had for
the Burgess Shale for the Cambrian into this world of the early developing plants in the Devonian?
Well, we have a really good one, and it's from Scotland, and it's called the Rhiney
Chirt. It was deposited between 400 and 412 million years ago. It was discovered by one
Dr William Mackay. He was a physician in 1914, and while hunting around that area he uncovered
an unusual rock. It was close to the village of Rhiney, that's some 31 miles northwest of the
city of Aberdeen, and when he looked at it he found these unusual structures in it. You can see
there are kind of dark tubular structures. The surrounding matrix is the chirt, that's the
fine-grained silica we've met chirt earlier when we were talking about banded ion formations.
So he made a thin section of the rock. Remember that's taking the rock and grinding it down
so fine that you can actually pass light through it, and took it to the University of Glasgow,
where he showed it to one Robert Kidston. He looked at the rock and was astounded to find
that what he was looking at was an ancient assemblage of plants from the Devonian period.
Seven types of vascular plant were recovered, but it wasn't just vascular plants that the Rhiney
Chirt contained. It also found a rich assemblage of other creatures as well and other plant material.
There was fungi, algae, lichen. It was a really rich fossil deposit and another very important
conservation lager statin. At that time Scotland was part of Euramerica, sometime it's called
La Russia. It's a large continental mass that lies between zero and 30 degrees south of the equator,
and Rhiney lies around about 28 degrees. It would be a fairly warm continental area, and if you
imagine walking across this continental area, you'd have seen a landscape that wasn't looking
quite as devastated and blasted as you had looked at when you were walking across that
Cambrian landscape that we described for the Burgess Shale. There would be perhaps a little
more oxygen in the atmosphere as well, and as you look across the surface of the land,
you would see that ponds and streams are actually lined now with a thin rim of green,
but not beyond. As you walk towards these plants and start to investigate them, you'll find that
the tallest about come up to the level of your knees. So we're not looking at forests yet,
but we're certainly starting to see significant elevation from the surface of the land.
The plants included examples like this. This is Asterozylon. He's a lycopod. He's like
modern club mosses. It's a simple plant, and it shares with Cuxonia that common root system,
the rhizome, but if you look at this particular plant, you can see that there are little scales
all along its length. These are the beginnings of leaves. Rania is a plant named for the Rani
Chirt. It's taller than the original version of Cuxonia, and it also branches a lot more,
and it would just be about eight inches in height. Now the Rani Chirt shows an absolute
astounding level of preservation, and I've just got some images here. You can see the structure
here that's labeled G. That's actually one of the guard cells surrounding a stomata preserved in the
Rani Chirt. The other picture is a transverse section. It's a 0.01 inch section through a stem
of a plant, and you can clearly see in this image xylem, phloem, and the cortex of the plant.
These are minute cellular details. This scale and level of preservation is very rare and very,
very precious to the paleontologist. But how do we get such fantastic preservation? Well,
we've already discussed fantastic preservation, haven't we? Remember when we're talking about
those fossils from China, those fossil embryos which were preserved atom for atom by phosphate?
Well, this is a similar kind of process, that atom by atom preservation,
but it uses a different mineral media, and you can see it happening right here today.
If you take a trip down to Yellowstone National Park, go and have a look at the opalescent pool
Hot Spring. The white mineral you can see around here is silica, quarts in a way.
It's precipitating out of the hot mineral-rich water. Now, occasionally that hot spring floods,
overflows, and as it overflows, because that water is extremely hot and probably full of rather
nasty toxic chemicals, it kills off the plants. But as it does, that silica is precipitated on
the plants and starts to replace some of the carbon in the plants. This is permineralization,
the detailed preservation at the cellular level by atom by atom replacement of organic material.
The Rhiney Chirk comes from a similar environment. There was rich hydrothermal activity in the
lower Devonian in this area of Scotland, and the Rhiney Flora apparently was living around these
hot ponds, probably suffering the same fate as those pools in the Yellowstone National Park.
They would flood occasionally, silica would be precipitated, and we get the beautiful Rhiney
Chirk as a result. Well, which group of animals will first conquer the land? What about the animals?
Well, we had a land flora by at least the middle Silorian. That's for sure. We have quite extensive
fossil collections that show that. But what about the creepy crawlies? The plants definitely were
the first to get out onto the land, but once there was a plant ecosystem, there was a rich,
diverse ecosystem for the animals to exploit. But the animals had to address problems as well.
Animals had to address, like the plants, problems of support. The animals also had to address
problems of breathing. Are you going to absorb the oxygen you need through your skin in the air,
or are you going to develop some sort of lung system? They would also have to face problems
with drying out on the land as well. Also, seeing in the air rather than seeing in the water is going
to be different, and sound waves will travel different in the air than they do underwater. So
you've got to modify your sensors too. So there's a whole host of problems and fixes that you need
to make if you're going to be a successful land-based creature. We have tantalising suggestions of a
creature that might have got out onto the land, probably even before the plants did. It comes
from the Cambrian. They're found in North America, and they're called climactic nites. They're trace
fossils. They are of an unknown animal, and we have these bizarre trails along sandy tidal flats.
It's suggested that they look a bit like the marks that a muscular foot might produce, the
muscular foot say of a slug or a snail. But really, we don't know whether or not this creature was
truly moving about on the land surface. He could have just been in very shallow water. So until
we find more positive evidence, I think we'll leave it there and suggest that animals didn't really
emerge into the land until a lot later. So what were the first candidates for the first animals
on land? Well, probably the best group of animals were the arthropods. The arthropods were kind
of pre-adapted. First of all, they had an exoskeleton. Think of it a bit like a spacesuit. When man
travels into space, he has to cover him completely, hermetically seal himself in an atmosphere,
and the arthropods already kind of had a spacesuit, which they could probably adapt
to keep themselves moist on the land surface. In addition, arthropods had already developed
and evolved a variety of limbs, more so than the vertebrates had done at that point. So it would
appear that they were kind of pre-adapted to move onto the land. They were probably the creatures
that were going to make the first break onto the land surface. But which arthropod? Well,
perhaps it was these creatures, perhaps the Eryptorids. The Eryptorids were the top dogs of
the Silorian. They were a diverse group, and definitely the bully boys of the Silorian as well.
A lot of them were predators, and some species like Terriguitus here were up to seven feet in length.
It's not really a creature you'd like to meet if you're swimming on a dark night somewhere in a
Silorian ocean. They're called sea scorpions, and they are indeed related to true scorpions.
Most of them lived in brackish to slightly salty to maybe freshwater conditions. There's a suggestion
on some of these creatures of structures that look a bit like book lungs. Now, book lungs are
structures that modern arachnids use to breathe. So what were these creatures doing? Well, even the
most terrestrally adapted Eryptorid were still a fully aquatic animal. Perhaps they were just
popping onto land occasionally to molt, and then going back into the water. So it's not a real true
land animal. What evidence do we have of the first true, complete land-dweller? Well, we think we
found it in 2004. And again, it was found in Scotland. This time not from a physician,
it was by a Scottish bus driver and paleontology enthusiast. He found something interesting
in a rock and studied it and found that it was some sort of fossil. We knew that the rock came
from the late Silorian period. That's around about 428 million years ago. And on further
investigation, it turned out that what we were looking at here was a fossil millipede. What's
significant about this fossil millipede that it possesses clearly structures that are called
spiritcules. These are holes on the side of the creature that connect to a vast interconnected
network of tubes that allow air to diffuse into the creature. This is a true air breather. He's
called pneumodensis pneumonii, the oldest positive evidence so far of the first true land animal.
So we now have animals moving through these early jungles, rather low-key jungles, up to about the
level of your knee perhaps, but we're still seeing a new ecosystem developing here. In order to get
a better picture of the animals that inhabited them, we once again turn to the rhinochurch.
The creatures that we find preserved in the rhinochurch come in two categories. First of all,
we have the detritus feeders, those creatures that are feeding on decaying plant matter. And we
still have representatives of these creatures today. These are the millipedes and the spring
tails. Spring tails are a kind of primitive pre-insect. So these are really quite ancient
land-dwelling creatures that are still with us. They obviously adopted a very successful
mode of life and so they haven't gone into extinction. There are also predators as well.
There's an extinct group of arachnids that we find in the rhinochurch. These are spider-like
creatures, but we think lack of the ability to spin webs and centipedes. Centipedes obviously
still with us as well, so they're a very ancient land-dweller too. But what was the consequence
of the appearance of this new terrestrial ecosystem? Plants evolved during the Devonian. Plants
continue to evolve through the Devonian and develop new structures, and one of the new
surprising structures that they would develop would be something called secondary xylem.
We know it by another name. That's wood. Plants have become trees. The terrestrial ecosystem
was set to expand upwards and expand upwards dramatically in a way that it'd never seen before.
This is archaeotorus. He's a late Devonian tree, around about 39 feet tall, so this is
definitely a tree. This would have had a profound effect on the land ecosystem. It would have
shaded the ground below them, which would have created new challengers and habitats
for the flora that existed below these virgining new forests. Archaeotorus has another invention
as well. It has seeds. Till plants had seeds, vegetation was still pretty well tied to the
water's edge. Conditions had to be damp for sperm to swim to the egg, but in seed plants,
fertilization was internal, so this would allow these plants to colonize the barren continent.
The consequences of this greening during the Devonian would be the spread of plants right
across what was mostly a barren landscape up until then, as I said, just fringed with areas of green.
But in addition to this expansion across the landscape and the development of plants up into
the atmosphere, there would also be a corresponding expansion of plant systems down into the geosphere.
We would see a burgeoning example of the development of root systems, an enhanced root system,
and with enhanced root systems, we get associated fungury as well. And these two agents are powerful
agents of rock erosion. Remember our lecture on the Snowball Earth when we talked about
the way that silicate weathering can cause the drawdown of carbon dioxide and how that was also
an factor in the Ordovician extinction event and the glaciation there. We know that silicate
weathering uses that carbon dioxide, but by the Devonian, we're probably seeing the drawdown
of atmospheric carbon dioxide by another means, this time by plant weathering. Plant weathering
eroding rocks. You've probably seen how a root can split open a rock. They're very powerful
features in the erosion landscape. We think that this drawdown of atmospheric carbon dioxide
would probably cause global cooling towards the end of the Devonian.
We find tillites and other glacial features that are moving towards the equator on Gondwana land.
Glaciers, we think, reach about 30 degrees south of the equator, so this global cooling
really was having an effect on the glacial state of the planet. This was the second
glaciation of the Phanerozoic, and it would also cause the second mass extinction the planet had
witnessed. We're looking around about 40% of the marine genera in this extinction being wiped out
completely. It's particularly severe as it was for the Ordovician in the tropical reef
fauna, including the corals, probably due to that cooling and lowering of sea level,
so removing habitat as well. It's hard to think, isn't it, that the development of plants would
cause such a crisis. Today, plants are often seen as indicators of a healthy biosphere,
but perhaps certain growing pains are to be expected in any new biosphere development.
It's been good to talk about the plants, though. They often get very short attention in the story
of life, but without them, it's likely that animal life would have never emerged. By the Devonian,
the plants and arthropods were populating the land, but in the next lecture, I'd like to return to
the ocean. I'd like to see how our side of the family had progressed into the Cambrian. I'd like
to ask what had happened to the vertebrates?
