That stuff, coal, would power an industrial revolution first in England and then pretty soon afterwards in the rest of the world.
Mae uch yn eich cyfnodayaeth bydd yma gynnig ddechrauиц i
yn Emmae.
Mae g inventorraith ynherwyddbon,人haol ynlues a tannwllodau,
merwch,itu mewn cyfnodau,
ingenisio gwahanol yn cyfnodau willயll yma eft benogle.
Felly, efallai flynyddiol ym 때도,
�니다, fi am cael ei myfyddiol ysgol o gydwyniadau,
Col can be found in various periods, but in the northern hemisphere,
Col mostly forms between 359 to 299 million years ago.
In fact, the period in which the Col form gets its name from that Col,
that is the period we call the Carboniferous.
Through this lecture, we'll investigate the Carboniferous world
and ask why was there so much of that Col produced during the Carboniferous?
What had also happened to those early tetrapods that we met from the Devonian
and what had happened to our friends, the Arthropods?
So why was there so much Col at this time?
Our family were probably one of the last families to have Col fireplaces.
I must admit, I do miss them.
I used to sit in front of the fire with my dad and we'd toast bread in front of the Col fire.
I remember seeing the Col brought to my house, generally brought on the back of a very large and dirty black flatbed truck.
It was brought in sacks and then carried into the house on the backs of large men covered in cold dust.
They looked like they'd just come from the mine themselves.
I was a curious child and would rummage through the Col sack,
enjoying the feel and the lustre of the Col.
Col feels kind of lighter than it should be.
I also enjoyed the potential mess I could make by spreading it amply around the backyard.
Not something that made me very popular.
But occasionally, I'd find faint imprints on some of the pieces.
They look like leaves and ferns, perhaps stems of something.
I was told that these were in fact fossils.
Fossils of plants that lived many, many million years ago.
Back in a time when England was a hot, tropical, steamy swamp.
Now, I don't know if any of you have visited Manchester.
It does rain a lot, but Manchester is certainly not tropical.
Calling Manchester tropical to me as a small child seemed to be stretching credulity just a little too far.
Far the Christmas and the Tooth Fairy OK, but Manchester is steamy tropical swamp.
Oh, come on.
Despite my youngest belief, though, that tropical swamp did exist.
And it was in these tropical swamps that all this coal that would power the industrial revolution
pushed the western world forward through all the history that we know of.
It would be coal that would do this.
And we find extensive carboniferous coal deposits in many places around the world, including in North America.
In North America, though, the carboniferous is split into two sub-period.
We have the Mississippian between 359 to 318 million years ago.
That's when we find more limestone than coal produced.
And then the Pennsylvania from 318 to 299 million years ago, we find the majority of the coal forming.
And boy, oh, boy, that's their vast amounts of coal being produced.
Coal forms when plant material falls into a body of water that has low oxygen concentrations.
The organics then start to accumulate.
And although some of the organics might be oxidized by oxygen in the water,
that oxygen gets very rapidly used up.
A typical analogue for this coal forming environment would be the swamps of the Mississippi.
We can see here slow, sluggish warm water.
That's oxygen. That's generally water that is very poor in oxygen.
In fact, if you were to measure the oxygen in an environment like this,
you'd find you'd have a very thin layer on the top that is oxygen rich,
and then below it pretty much no oxygen at all.
This is the ideal environment in which peat can start to accumulate.
And that's the first stage in coal formation.
As this gets buried by sediment, heat and pressure start to drive off the volatiles in this peat,
and eventually the peat will be transformed into coal.
There are several grades or ranks of coal that form as heat and pressure increase.
First of all, you have lignite.
This is a brown coal.
It's pretty much just used for electricity generation.
But if you do happen to have any jet jewellery around,
that stuff that is polished really black and shiny,
that's actually a polished piece of lignite that you've got.
It's around about 60% to 75% carbon content.
We next pass into sub-bituminous coal that has various uses,
including as a source of hydrocarbons for the chemical industry.
Further on, we're into bituminous coal that has various applications,
including the production of coke, which is used in smelting iron ore,
and sometimes was the source of power for steam engines.
And then the highest rank of coal is anthracite.
That's over 91.5% carbon.
It's the highest rank of coal,
and because of the heat and pressures that have gone into producing this,
it's regarded by some as being more of a metamorphic than a sedimentary rock.
It takes around about three to seven feet of peat to form one foot of bituminous coal.
Coal's been known about for a long time.
It was used by the ancient Greeks, by some Bronze Age Britons.
It was also used by the Romans.
Probably about 984 billion short tons of coal reserves exist today globally.
That's equivalent to about 4196 billion barrels of oil.
They're still quite a bit of it around.
Of course, the downside to all this coal is that when you burn it,
you can produce acid rain from coal that has a high sulphur content,
producing lots of sulphur dioxide.
The mining itself can cause disruption to groundwater supplies
and cause other environmental problems.
Also, burning coal is probably the largest contributor
of man-made carbon dioxide in today's environment.
Geologically speaking, coal is found in sedimentary packages that we call cyclotherms.
They follow a sequence of sedimentary units that we've known about for quite a long time.
First of all, these cyclotherms record sediments indicative
of a delta section of rivers.
That will include in some of those sediments a coal horizons,
probably representing the top of the delta where all the plants are accumulating,
eventually falling into that sluggish water to form peat
and ultimately form the coal deposits.
Thirdly, we have marine deposits.
Marine shale chains are fine grained sediments.
Also, sometimes limestones, and importantly,
so we can positively identify these as being marine deposits,
we find marine fossils associated with them.
Then, very often in this cycle of sedimentation,
we find an erosion surface.
Following that, on the top of the erosion surface,
a return to the delta and river sediments once again.
This represents a period of sea level change.
The marine sediments represent the period of highest sea level.
Then sea level starts to fall.
As sea level falls, the previous marine sediments that have been deposited
are now exposed to the atmosphere and they start to be eroded,
developing that erosion surface.
That surface is then covered ultimately as rivers start to migrate across this area
and will then start to see also the swamp conditions
returning to this particular area of space
and coals ultimately forming.
Eventually, sea level will rise again
and will have flooding and the cycle repeats once more.
Cyclathorms often occur stacked.
Sometimes they're stacked in vast numbers,
often sometimes as many as 40 to 50 at a time.
There have been 100 of these cyclathorms recorded in some cases,
representing repeated rise and fall of sea level.
In North America, some coal units can be traced for thousands of square miles,
integrating the vast extent of some of these swampy deltaic coal-forming environments as well.
But what was the coal swamp environment like?
Well, basically it was extensive flat lowland on a large coastal plain.
We're looking at tropical conditions as well
that were very close to sea level.
At low sea level, because we are so close to sea level here,
you'd have lush vegetation with these slow-moving rivers.
The swamp area would form and the extensive peak deposits,
but as sea level rise, and it wouldn't take much sea level rise,
the ocean would invade these flat areas with extensive flooding deposits
and returning us to the marine sediments that we record in the cyclathorms.
But what is driving this rise and fall of the oceans on such a regular basis?
Well, it could be local vertical movements perhaps of the crust.
Perhaps we're looking at the activity of faults.
Now, most commonly, faults are known for moving in a horizontal way,
but faults also very, very commonly can move vertically.
They can move blocks of rocks.
Potentially, you could have areas of land dropped severely by faults
and the ocean could flood in.
Also, if you have large accumulations of sediments,
those can weigh so much that they can actually cause downwarping of the crust.
For example, think about the sediments deposited by large river deltas.
As a river changes direction, sediments in a delta like this,
the Mississippi delta, will be deposited elsewhere,
and the abandoned area still has an awful lot of weight to it,
and it continues to subside and will eventually sink below the ocean's surface.
This has occurred a number of times in the Mississippi delta.
You can see the old lobes here,
the oldest of which are now disappearing below the sea
because they're no longer receiving sediment from the river.
The delta is moved to a different direction
because it is no longer receiving sediment from the river.
It just sinks below the surface because of its own weight.
This, however, these local effects, this subsidence and downwarping
caused by sediment loading or faulting activity,
cannot account always for the vast extent of some of the cyclotherms
that we've recorded in some of these coal deposits.
As I said, many of them can be correlated over vast distances.
These cyclotherms probably imply a global change in sea level.
So what was controlling global depth of the ocean in the Carboniferous?
This is Hallot Cove in Australia.
It's in South Australia, close to Adelaide.
The folded rocks you can see here are not from the Carboniferous.
They are a beautiful exposure of sants and silt stones
that were deposited around 600 million years ago.
The surface of the rocks contains some interesting features, though.
You can see them here.
I think we've shown you this image a little earlier.
You can see the scratches.
I took this photograph in 2008.
These aren't just annual scratches caused by forces in operation today.
They're actually ancient scratches.
They're the scratches or striations made by glaciers.
The glaciers we noted before can pick up rocks,
and as a glacier moves out over an area of rocky outcrop like this,
it will physically scratch a groove in the rock.
The presence of glaciers over this area
is also confirmed by the presence of dropstones.
Pooming ice did pass this way.
Similar structures are found at this time on various continents,
including South America, Africa, India and Antarctica.
Representing the repeated advances and then retreats
of what is now known as the Permocarbonyphrous Glaciation.
You may be a little familiar with this.
I actually dealt with it earlier.
This is vagueness glaciation.
This is the glacial evidence that vagueness used
to reconstruct impart the ancient supercontinent of Pangea.
This explains the repeated changes that we see in the cyclophones
from low levels of sea to high levels of sea.
As glaciers form, water gets locked in glacial ice.
The water isn't returning to the ocean,
so we're having a net loss of water returned to those oceanic areas,
and sea level will drop.
When that occurs, the low land swamps will emerge
and rivers will start to move across that newly exposed land.
During an interglacial period, a period where the ice is melting,
and returning the water to the oceans,
and when it rains, it's not falling as snow,
and staying on the land, we'll see a sea level rise.
Coal production will stop, sea level will rise,
and we'll return to the marine part of the cyclotherm.
These swamps would have been vast.
I mean, continentally vast.
The ecosystem within these swamps
would continue to evolve vertically upwards,
even more so than we noted in the Devonian Forest,
because remember we said it was then that we started to see
the plant ecosystem really moving upwards.
That's really nothing compared to what is going to happen
in the carboniferous.
Although forests and swamp conditions and ecosystems
are common today, the plants occupy them in the carboniferous
if you were to take in a little walk
through these carboniferous swamp environments
would have looked pretty strange.
The most spectacular are related to the club mosses.
Club mosses today, and like their earlier Devonian ancestors,
were very small.
They're extremely pretty, fascinating,
but not spectacular in terms of a
ooh, look at that majestic club moss kind of a way.
But in the carboniferous, it was a different story.
This is Lepidodendron.
This is a club moss that is over 100 feet tall.
It had leaves on the top of this large trunk
that look a bit like a palm tree.
It also has distinctive leaves that leave scars
on the trunk as it grew,
causing this characteristic diamond patterns that you can find.
These are probably some of the most common fossils
that you find in coal deposits.
These are in fact some of the features that I was finding
preserved in the coal occasionally
that would be brought to my house when I was a child.
You can see another tall tree in this image as well.
It looks like what's often described as a bifocating bottle brush.
It's a single area.
It's another giant club moss
and another fantastic giant of the carboniferous swamps.
Gardeners might recognise this swamp.
They often recognise it because it's a pain.
It spreads very rapidly.
It's considered a weed. It's called a horsetail.
I think they're fantastic plants.
They're fairly small today, but in the carboniferous,
up to 100 feet tall.
Imagine trying to uproot that from your bed of begonias.
But what had happened to those early tetrapods
from the Devonian period?
Well, as we've already noted,
the carboniferous flora was rich and diverse.
Kind of strange looking.
What about the animals that obviously must have been living
in those forests and swamps as well?
The tetrapods had evolved from the Devonian
into the carboniferous,
and we had a whole suite of amphibians,
amphibians that were an awful lot more diverse
than the amphibians that we find in today's ecosystem.
Today, amphibians are fairly diminutive creatures.
I guess bullfrogs are pretty large,
but you're not really going to be run screaming in terror
from a bullfrog.
We have frogs, toads, we have salamanders.
The carboniferous and permian,
some of them would resemble crocodiles.
This is a permian form.
This is prionosuchus.
This was an amphibian that was around about 30 feet long.
It's the largest amphibian ever,
and given that it looks like a crocodile,
it probably had a similar lifestyle.
Swimming in the rivers of the carboniferous swamp areas,
probably ambushing creatures on the side of the water.
Other amphibians would completely lose their legs
and become the amphibian equivalent of water snakes.
This is Ophi Dyrpeton.
It's about 28 inches long,
and it has 238 vertebrae in its backbone.
Others, like Seat Moria,
were well adapted to living on the land.
You can see it here.
It has powerful muscular legs.
It had also adapted a tough dry skin
to help reduce water loss
while it was making its expeditions across the land's surface.
In addition to amphibians, though,
in the carboniferous,
another small tetrapod had evolved.
Their ancestors would ultimately come to dominate the planet
much later in Earth's history.
These are the reptiles.
Not this guy yet.
This is Allosaurus.
He's way into the distant future.
The early reptiles are somewhat humbler creatures.
This is Hylonamus.
He's small, about eight inches long,
very lizard-like-looking.
He's probably one of the earliest fossil reptiles that we have
at around about 312 million years old.
The most famous discovery of this fossil
is from the fossil cliffs at Jogins in Nova Scotia.
This is in the Bay of Fundy.
It's a wonderful place to go and look for fossils.
You can see here the red-coloured rocks
that are dipping along the face of the beach,
which means that, as you're walking along this cliff face,
you're actually walking forward in time.
The Bay of Fundy has some of the highest tidal ranges in the world,
over 50 feet,
which means that you get an incredible tidal effect.
A tidal bore moves into these areas,
which also means that these cliffs are being continually eroded,
continually exposing new fossils,
and continually adding new information
about a forest that existed 300 million years ago.
Many of the trees in that forest
are even preserved upright still.
They died and were eventually covered over with sediments.
In and around these trees, though,
a rich fauna of arthropods and tetrapods can be found.
This has brought to the attention of a 19th-century geologist,
a very famous geologist who we've already met.
We remember Charles Lyle.
That was the guy who had been sweating up Mount Etna,
thinking about geological time
and how it might be a lot more extensive than people realised.
Lyle and a colleague, one Sir William Dawson,
were examining the fossil trees,
and they noticed that some of those fossil trees looked like at one point
they'd been snapped over perhaps during storms,
but the bowl of the tree had remained upright even so.
When they looked into the bowls of these fossil trees,
they would often find fossil reptiles.
Perhaps this was acting as a secure den for the tetrapods,
or perhaps this fossil bowl had just trapped them
and they couldn't get out.
Whatever it was there for, floodwaters at one point
had covered the swamp, deposited sediments into this tree bowl,
and entwined the creatures and beautifully preserved them.
They find hylonomus in a tree stump,
and by the way his name means forest wanderer.
In fact, the first hylonomus that they found is called hylonomus
Lyle in honour of Sir Charles himself.
This creature had a very flexible neck
and has a very lightly built skeleton.
It has hands and feet with very long digits and very sharp teeth.
It suggests that this creature may have been an early insectivore.
In fact, a lot of these early reptiles probably were insectivores.
You could imagine them moving rapidly through the trees,
scurring backwards and forwards across the forest floor,
lunging at prey with that flexible neck
or perhaps grasping insects with those long fingers.
Also, you can see that the early reptiles hearing contrast
to the first amphibians that would emerge onto the land surface
were very, very small as well.
The greatest innovation of the reptiles, though,
probably has to be their ability to break ties to the water.
All amphibians, however large and impressive and crocodile-like,
still had to return to the water to spawn.
The reptiles, though, great innovation was this, the amniotic egg.
Basically, they can take their spawning pond with them
and deposit this spaceship pond anywhere they wanted.
It's a wonderful adaptation.
We're looking at an egg as a water-impermeable membrane
surrounding a fluid-filled cavity.
The shell itself has tiny pores in it
which permits waste gases to diffuse out
and oxygen to diffuse into the developing embryo.
There's another great advantage to egg laying as well.
The embryo can pass through the vulnerable tadpole stage
and you can probably bury your egg
so hopefully predators can't get to them,
which means that your embryo will emerge
as a fully-developed mini-adult ready to go.
But what had happened to the arthropods?
We've been talking a lot all about the tetrapods, haven't we,
but to be honest with you, in this carboniferous world,
there were some very many amazing and wonderful tetrapods.
They didn't really have the world order themselves.
The arthropods were back in a big way.
We'd see many very significant developments.
The carboniferous would see the emergence of the first true spiders,
the mesothile.
These are spiders which, like modern spiders,
have the ability to produce silk.
Remember we discussed spider-like creatures from the Devonian,
but they couldn't produce webs in all likelihood.
There's some other interesting arthropods as well.
This is arthroplora.
It's a millipede-like creature.
So what, you might say?
What's so impressive about a millipede?
Well, this particular millipede is over eight feet in length.
Tracks of this creature are common.
This giant arthropod apparently was a fairly common sight.
You can almost imagine it trungling through the forest
like a large carboniferous bus or tube train.
Arthroplora was probably a herbivore.
We've found fossils that contain plant spores in its guts
and its coprolites, that's its fossil poop,
also contain these fossil plant spores.
Arthroplora, though, was not the only giant arthropod
in the carboniferous environment.
This is the Madagascar hissing cockroach.
He's around two to four inches long.
To be honest with you, I would not like to find this creature
in the bottom of my shoe or in my bath,
or in fact anywhere close to me.
However, if you don't like cockroaches today,
be thankful you're not living in the carboniferous
because in the carboniferous,
some of them could be up to 20 inches in length.
For other giant arthropods,
make sure you're not just looking at the ground.
Look to the skies because there's danger
up there. There's mega-neura,
a giant dragonfly-like insect.
It had a wingspan of around 30 inches.
It probably fed on all the other insects in this environment,
probably feeding on the smaller tetrapods as well.
This begs a question.
Why are the insects so large in the carboniferous
and why aren't they that large today?
It's possible that today they've just been out-competed
by larger tetrapods,
but I think there's probably a more fundamental
physiological reason why this is the case.
Insects taking oxygen through holes in their bodies
called spiritules.
You can see them here on this beetle of a lava.
Those little brown dots are the openings.
Remember we also identified these,
or at least that gentleman from Scotland.
Remember the bus driver who found the earliest living land creature?
These are the same structures, little spiritules.
These spiritules connect to a whole series
of branching tubes that we call the tracheal system,
and it's through these that oxygen diffuses.
The branching tubes here you can see are coloured in yellow.
This is a SEM photograph,
a scanning electron microscope photograph of a moth.
It's a very effective system for getting oxygen around a body,
but really only if you're a body that's fairly small.
This is the Goliath beetle.
It's a monster insect for today.
It's about four inches in size.
To get larger you would need to use more tubules.
Eventually you would get to a point
where the creature would be mostly tubule and not much else.
This we think today places an upper limit
on how large insects can actually grow to.
What was aligned the giant insects and arthropods of the carboniferous?
Well, we think it's oxygen that was the factor
that we need to consider here.
It's oxygen today that is the limiting factor.
There was probably vast amounts of carbon
being removed by peat formation.
In fact, the peat formation was progressing so fast
that not a lot of oxygen was able to be used up
in the decay of that plant material.
Remember we had an awful lot of plants as well.
The continents would be turning green
and all those plants would be kicking out
a awful lot of oxygen via photosynthesis.
Oxygen levels in the carboniferous atmosphere
would start to build and build.
Oxygen levels we think rose to around about 35%
in the carboniferous.
It's only 21% today.
This higher concentration of oxygen
would permit oxygen to diffuse more easily through a creature,
which probably meant that the tubules within these creatures
could be thinner, which has a consequence
meant these insects, these arthropods,
could get really big.
Another consequence of the high oxygen levels, though,
would be that Earth was turned into a tinderbox.
Fires spot by lightning probably were very common.
Apparently, toast millipede was a common dish back then.
The fusane, which is the dark, dusty stuff on coal,
could be the possible remnants
of some of those ancient porous fires.
The carboniferous was a remarkable period
and so important to the development
of what you call the modern Western world.
It's not just coal and tetrapods
that developed through this period, though.
It would also see the radiation of new plants
and plant ecosystems associated with the increase
in diversity of fungi, for example.
All modern classes of fungi had evolved
by the late carboniferous,
but the evolution didn't stop in the oceans.
Fish would continue to diversify
and bony fish would continue to evolve.
It also sees an important period
of the radiation of the sharks.
There are also extensive carboniferous coal reef systems
composed of rugose and tabulate corals
and beautiful meadows of crinoids.
For the next lecture,
I'm going to continue on the land surface.
In the next time, I'd like to look at those little lizards
of the carboniferous and see what they would become
in the next geological period, the Permian.
