Have you ever noticed how we human beings look to give names to things? We're probably providing
new names for things every day. There's probably thousands of new names for objects every week.
If you like to subdivide and categorise reality, put it into little boxes which is nice and
neat. I used to like to group my toys, remember separating them by type, my trucks over here.
I'm going to put my trains on the mantelpiece and my planes maybe underneath the chair and
then subdivide them by colour, the red trucks, the blue trucks, the green trucks and then
subdivide them by which are the most noisy and potentially annoying on a very quiet Sunday morning.
The earliest way humans possibly classified things might have been to do with something that was
fairly vital, a classification of possible food resources. That would be very important if you
are trying to survive off your wits off the landscape. So first of all perhaps classify
things into groups that are good to eat at all times, then perhaps things that are okay to eat
but only in an emergency, perhaps in times when there's no other option apart from starvation.
We've all seen that very suspect sausage sitting at the back of the fridge, not going there but
maybe in an emergency and then there are things that are poisonous, things that you should never
eat which actually might include some of my attempts at cooking. What I'd like to touch on today
briefly in this lecture is looking about how we do actually classify life. Once I've done that I'd
like to continue our story with what happened to the descendants of Little Hylonomus and also
take a look at the late Permian reptile world. So how do we classify life? Well there was a
certain swede in the 18th century who had a great passion for order, his name was Carl Linnaeus.
He looked at the world around him and decided that it was somewhat untidy,
it was scruffy, it really didn't sit well with his mind. He decided he was going to bring
order to life, he was going to edify God by classifying everything in a very wonderfully
logical hierarchical system, very Ikea. For example consider the hierarchical scheme
that I fit into. At the very broadest level I'm a member of the super kingdom eukaryota.
Remember the eukaryotes are creatures that contain a specific nucleus where the genetic
material sits, they have organelles in the cytoplasm. So basically super kingdom eukaryota
includes everything that is more complex than the archaea or the bacteria. I'm then in the kingdom
anemalia, that's anything that's an animal, anything from a worm to an elephant. I'm also in
the phylum cordata, that's anything that has a notochord like little pachaya potentially,
hagfish or a giraffe. I'm also a member of sub phylum vertebrata, that's all of the creatures
within the chordates that have got a backbone. And then there's class mammalia, this includes
cows and your little pet cat tiddles if you have one. It's all creatures with very specific features,
features such as the ability to lactate and are warm-blooded. And then order primata, that includes
the baboons, the lemurs and the chimps. Getting closer to home now, family hominidae, that's the
creatures such as Australopithecus, Xenatropes, all those remote members of our family who we
probably wouldn't want to invite to tea but they are still within our family grouping.
And then genus Homo, that's our own grouping that includes Neanderthals and finally us Homo sapiens.
Linnaeus would give creatures a generic Latin noun which we call a genus followed by a specific
adjective, a species. This is the basis of the bionomen system.
The generic name is used only once and the species name though can be used as many times
you'd like for any different genera. For example we have here Thelis domesticus, the house cat,
and Pasa domesticus, the house sparrow. The names chosen to describe species though can come from a
variety of sources. You can decide to honor a person who you particularly admire. Unfortunately
that can't be yourself, that is generally frowned upon. You can honor an area often where the specimen
was collected from or perhaps describe some feature of the species that particularly describes its
form. All these forms of course are going to be Latinized as well. For example, these are examples
actually from some of the species that I have erected from the chitonazoa, which are the group
of microfossils that I particularly study. There's Ansara catena narcissus. It was called that because
the top of the creature kind of resembles a daffodil, narcissus. We have Ansara catena
goginensis, because I collected those things from Goggin Road. And then Angocatina millerii,
that was to honor a friend and fellow micro paleontologist Giles Miller, who helped collect
the material that ultimately yielded this species. The various codes and regulations that strictly
control how new species are erected and groupings of species are erected are controlled by a number
of international bodies, including the international code for botanical nomenclature and the international
code for zoological nomenclature. Organizing life in this way, hierarchical logical schemes
is called taxonomy. Taxonomy does place life into a really wonderful hierarchical
hierarchical scheme. It inadvertently though points to a common ancestry of all living creatures.
This would have horrified Linnaeus, who was firmly opposed to any concept that was contrary to what
we call the immutability of the species. That is the idea that the species are fixed and could
no opportunity and a no event have ever evolved from one to another.
The Linnaeus system is useful, but it really does break down at times and for that I'd like to
consider what is called or was called class Pisces. Class Pisces are fish and obviously it includes
the cod that you can see here and the rather unattractive looking lungfish. Now at first
glance you have no problem classifying these creatures together. They both live in the water,
they both have fins, so yeah they're fish and under older classifications as I said they are
classified together under Pisces. However there's a problem. When you actually study in detail the
characteristics of the lungfish and the cod it would appear that the lungfish is actually more
closely related at a basic biological level to the frog than it is to the cod. Taxonomy today is
now leaning towards a system called cladistics. Cladistics groups creatures on the basis of what
we call shared characteristics, not on how each individual creature looks superficially. I guess
that could be explained in the way that today none of us would classify a dolphin with a fish
even though both might look similar we know that they're both very different species indeed.
The relationships in cladistics between animals are presented on a diagram like this,
it's called a cladogram. It's effectively an evolutionary tree of life. The ancestor of all
the species in this imaginary tree of life is right at the bottom of the figure here and the
descendants of that original creature follow through the diagram branching at various points
to form new species. Any grouping of organisms must under cladistics contain all its descendants.
For example the blue areas and the pink areas on this diagram are regarded as valid groupings.
They contain all their descendants under cladistics. This is called a monophilitic grouping and it's
okay. However a group just based on the green area here would not be valid. It does not contain
all of its descendants. We call this a paraphilitic grouping and it would definitely be a no-no
under cladistics. To be valid it would have to include the blue or both the pink and the blue
areas as well. So why am I introducing all this information at this point? Surely we're moving
towards an explanation of the radiation of the reptiles. Well that's all very well and good
but there's one thing I have to tell you. Actually in reality there's no such thing as reptiles.
Well at least not under cladistics. Reptiles are a group that does not contain all of their
descendants including the birds and the mammals. Therefore the grouping reptile is paraphilitic.
Reptiles are included in a wider group called the amniotes. That is all the tetrapods that
have a terrestrially adapted egg. We might not think of ourselves as having a terrestrially
adapted egg but we do. It's just internal. It also includes all those creatures that now
live in the oceans like dolphins. What the creatures formerly known as reptiles currently
think about this incredible change in classification is yet to be determined although I really do
get the impression that they don't worry about it too much. For convenience sake though through
the rest of this series I probably will use the R reptile word because it helps us understand what
we are talking about. We're kind of familiar what a reptile kind of should look like.
So what happened now to those descendants of little hyalonomous?
Where are the roots of the amniotes? That's what we want to talk about today. Well we do have to go
back to that primitive little lizard hyalonomous. Remember this was the lizard that was hiding
in the tree bowls in that wonderful section at Joggins, the one that Charles Lyle would discover.
Well from these groups, from this little reptile, three groups of amniote would evolve. We'd have
the anapsids, the siapsids and the diapsids and I'd like to describe them in a little detail here.
These broad groupings of amniote types are most easily differentiated by the presence
of a number of holes in the skull behind the eye socket and we find a representative of each of
these groups in the fossils in the Joggins fossil cliffs. For example, first one, the anapsids.
These are the most primitive member of the group. They have a complete skull, they have no gaps,
in fact those gaps are called finestre, windows. An example of a member of that group would be
hyalonomous. He belongs to this group which places him right there at the base of our journey from
no arm. Modern turtles are technically a member of the anapsids but they probably evolved from
forms that actually originally had finestre but were lost over time so it's not really considered
to be a true member of this grouping. The diapsids have two finestre, two holes in their skulls.
They have one directly behind the eye socket and one just slightly above.
Diapsids are an extremely successful group of amniotes. They include the lizards, the crocodiles,
the birds which are a supremely successful group and of course everybody's favorite monster,
the dinosaurs. The oldest diapsid that we have comes from about 302 million years ago in Joggins
and it's petrolachrosaurus. He's about 16 inches long and from what we can tell from this creature
he is probably an insectivore scurrying around snapping at insects. But there's a third group,
the synapsids. These are an interesting group because this group of amniotes would ultimately
give rise to the mammals. The synapsids, synapsids have just one opening, one finestre behind the
eye socket. At Joggins we also find an early synapsid. This is oceothyrus. He's a lot bigger than
the rest of the amniotes in this fauna. They're about 20 inches long, larger than the other
reptiles. It has a more powerful jaw and could probably prey on more varied creatures as well.
It is from these creatures that the amniotes and in particular the synapsids would come to dominate
the Permian between 299 and 251 million years ago. So what does that world like? Let's have a look at
the early Permian. In the north we had a large continental landmass including Euramerica grouped
into a landmass called Lurasia. That is going to collide with Gondwana in the south. It will form
a massive supercontinent called Pangea. Obviously we've met this before. This is vagueness supercontinent.
It was surrounded by a vast sea, the Panthalatic Ocean. Now most of the crust that originally
used to underlie this ocean has now been subducted many, many years ago. Still in the early part of
the Permian though we still had fairly large ice caps too on Gondwana that would start to dwindle.
Remember we said we had ice caps in the Carboniferous. Those ones that were responsible for those
repeated changes in sea level and those cyclotherm deposits. As I said they are still here in the
Permian but as we move into the Permian they're going to get smaller and smaller and by the
mid Permian times the world would be ice cap free. In Euramerica the climate is going to get
hotter and more arid. We're going to see a kind of the development of a more continental climate.
The tropical forests and swamps that adorned the Carboniferous landscape would start to dry out
and disappear. The horse tails, the club muscles of the Carboniferous would all be replaced but with
species that are maybe a little more familiar which start to see conifers,
cycads, ginkgos and seedforms populating the land. Probably the most famous early Permian
fossil locality is here in the Texas redbeds. It includes a fascinating mix of tetrapods
but also includes some spectacular synapsid reptiles, a group of synapsids called the pelicosaurs.
This is the top predator of that environment. It's Dimetrodon. Now Dimetrodon is often found
if you buy under those cheap bags of plastic dinosaurs. You'll find a whole bunch of dinosaurs,
t-rex, diplodocus but you'd also find Dimetrodon in there. But Dimetrodon is not a dinosaur.
The dinosaur wouldn't evolve for many millions of years after Dimetrodon had begun extinct.
He's about 13 foot long and has a large jaw with a set of slashing teeth. Perhaps the most
prominent feature in Dimetrodon though is this sail and we think it probably acted to aid in
thermoregulation. Now these were likely cold blooded creatures so they would have to rely
on the external environment to either cool them down or heat them up. We can see that the spines
supported a large sail and the spines have a series of notches at the base which we think
indicate where blood vessels passed into the sail itself. The blood flowing through a skin
to perhaps aid heat transfer with the environment. You could imagine a wonderful scene couldn't you
in the early Permian just looking out across a landscape to find Dimetrodon trying to catch
the first rays of the morning sun so it could heat up and get going with its business. When it
was too hot it might have stood head on into the sun to reduce the surface area or perhaps try and
catch a breeze. Some favor that the sail was used more for cooling down than it was for heating up
but it's likely that it would use for thermal regulation in some manner and also given that
massive surface area and what we know of reptiles today I think it's very likely that it was used
for display it was possibly brightly colored. What about how these things got around the landscape
though? Well Pelicas or locomotion is somewhat primitive they have what is known as a sprawling
gate that means just like when we talked about the tetrapods earlier in some of their examples
they they kind of have legs that stick out at the sides they're not really drawn under the creature
very well. They also really have no ankle joint and the toes are just splayed outwards as it walked
it might almost a little comical actually. The hind limbs in Dimetrodon are providing
much of the thrust if you want to kind of create a model of how Dimetrodon might have worked think
of all those embarrassing family parties when it's decided that it's an extremely good idea
to do a human wheelbarrow race. Now being a human wheelbarrow only really works if the person in
front keeps their arms straight and the back person the rear legs are providing all the thrust.
Dimetrodon though is not the only sailed pelicasaur in this environment as revealed by the Texas
Red Beds. We have another one Edaphosaurus was a 600 plus pound herbivore this time and also
probably one of the earliest herbivorous vertebrates to be found on the scene. That's over maybe
probably more than 50 million years that we have to wait for herbivorous vertebrates to appear
so why did we have to wait for so long? Well most plant material contains lots of cellulose and
it's very difficult to digest. Cows get over this problem by recruiting the aid of fermenting bacteria
in the gut. Now these bacteria are very fussy and they require fairly stable temperature
environment so it implies you need to be thermoregulating the body. Obviously the cow does that by the
fancy mammalian metabolism which keeps an even temperature in the body so keeps those gut
bacteria happy and it can digest the cellulose. There's another way of possibly getting stable
temperatures though. As I said we don't think that these creatures were warm blooded they were
cold blooded creatures but a way that you can maintain a fairly warm inner core of the body
is to get big. So it's likely that herbivory in the vertebrates at this early stage had to wait
until the treat creatures got sufficiently large enough to support those bacterial communities
so they could digest that cellulose. Something that's important to note though not all the
pelicosaurs had sails in fact most of them didn't but what's very significant about the pelicosaurs
is their relationship to the mammals. Pelicosaurs are sometimes called mammal-like reptiles. Now
true mammals will not evolve for a long time but they would evolve from relatives of the pelicosaurs
later in the Triassic period about 200 million years ago. So let's now look and see what happened
to those pelicosaurs in the later part of the Permian. Let's have a look at the late Permian
reptile world. Pelicosaurs remain relatively restricted to tropical regions but a new group
of synapsids would evolve from them in the late Permian and these were therapsids. The therapsids
would break out of Laurasia and start to explore this massive continent. They would move outwards
Gondwana here we come. Probably the most famous locality of late Permian animals is the South
African Karoo which is really a wonderful haven for vertebrate paleontologists. It contains many
therapsid specimens. Therapsids would adopt a variety of shapes sizes and lifestyles. They had
larger skull openings behind their eye sockets which might indicate that they had more muscle mass
in those areas to operate really powerful jaws. They also often possessed these really powerful
canine teeth. They were in addition to this probably a lot more agile than their pelicosaur
cousins. The most common therapsid is one that is a herbivorous creature. It's a disinodont
and they form sometimes over 90% of therapsid diversity. It was probably the first true really
abundant vertebrate herbivore on the surface of the planet. Part of the success of this creature
is the evolution of what is called the secondary palate. This will allow the creature to chew
and breathe at the same time. Now this is important. The vertebrates that have preceded all these
herbivorous creatures had been meat eaters. Meat contains an awful lot of energy. Plants
in comparison really contain not a lot of energy at all so it really helps if you're a plant eater
to be able to keep eating while you're breathing. It's best if you don't have to stop to breathe
and then eat because you really do have to keep pulling in all those plants to keep basically
supporting your body's energy needs. The jaw probably moved in this creature in a
shearing action backwards and forwards not sideways or up and down. Apart from the canines
though it had very few teeth. It probably had a little horny beak a bit like a turtle that it
would shear vegetation off and then grind that vegetation on the secondary palate.
These creatures came in a variety of sizes from a rat to a cow size. All of them had tusks though.
This in fact gives them their name disinodonts which means two dog tooth. You can imagine using
those little tusks for grubbing around after roots and tubers but in all likelihood as we see
with other creatures that possess these little tusks probably also for fighting and display
purposes as well. This is one of the small forms. This is diictodon. He's about 18 inches long.
Find him about 255 million years ago and this is a creature that is clearly adapted for digging.
He has really short sturdy limbs and a cylindrical body. That's a really good adaptation if you're
wanting to create burrows. It's no good being a big fat blobby creature if you want to move easily
through sediments. It also has wide spatulate kind of hands to aid in that digging. We think
that this creature was probably eating tubers underground. He lived in an expanding pangean
desert. Things were getting drier and we find him in complicated spiral burrows sometimes up to
about five feet deep. It's possible that he was adopting this lifestyle to escape the heat of
the desert but also probably escaping from predators as well. You could think of him in a way as a
Permian version of the prairie dog. He's often found concentrated with lots of other members of
the same species but unlike the prairie dogs, combs, these are not linked together. These are not
colonies. We do find some intriguing fossils of diictodon though. We find some fossils where
the diictodon are huddled together. We think that these fossils were preserved during flood events.
Waters would rise, flood across the land surface and of course fill up the burrows with sediments,
killing but preserving the diictodons inside. We can see that these diictodons are kind of
grouped together. We think that this isn't just an accident to preservation. We think that this
might be an early example of pair bonding. In all, Dysinodonts were extremely varied.
They had a variety of lifestyles and specializations. Some of them had cropping jaws,
some of them had crunching jaws perhaps designed to crunch large seeds and nuts and some of them
probably existed by grubbing around for roots and tubers. All these varieties of lifestyles suggest
a climate that is reasonably mild, relatively stable as well, so it supports a relatively
stable food supply. We're looking at a biosphere that is supporting a high diversity of life.
The top predators in the late Permian, I really like them. They're called Gorgonospians. I even
like the name. The name comes from the Greek myth of the Gorgons. It means terrible. These were the
first real saber tooth killers of the planet. They had a massive gape. Their jaws could open
really wide and they had these massive sabers that would sink into their prey. The Gorgonospians are
part of a group called the Theriodonts. This is the group of creatures in which we mammals belong
as well and they have very mammal-like features. Some of those include teeth that are really
differentiated now to perform different functions, just as our teeth are. We don't have a simple
row of peg teeth or teeth that are all little pins. We have differentiated teeth to perform those
different functions. They have a fully developed temporal finestry and they also have real legs
that are more pulled in underneath the body and also in common with us, they'd started to develop
little bones in their skulls, ear bones, which were allowing them to hear.
They had long, slender limbs as well. They could probably run down its prey. You could imagine
a creature like this galloping across some of those dry-arid landscapes in the late Permian.
The largest known is Iostransevier. He was found in Russia about 251 million years ago. He was as
large as a bear and had a skull that was around about one and a half feet long. Seeing this thing
galloping towards you would have probably given you pause for thought. The rapsits, though,
live beside other types of reptile, including the diapsid reptiles, a particular diapsid
reptile as well called the archosaurs. Now, the archosaurs would be a minor component of this
particular reptile landscape, but these creatures show great promise because it's from the archosaurs
that we all get crocodiles, flying pterosaurs, birds, and, of course, the dinosaurs.
Another diapsid reptile that is really worth the mention from the late Permian is this guy.
This is Silora Sorovus. He's about six inches long. He has long projections from his rib that
probably supported a wing membrane. It would appear from the evidence of these fossils that the
vertebrates of long glass had joined the arthropods in the skies. Most of the Permian seas are rich
and diverse biosphere. We see land animals exploiting new niches. Herbivores were there for
the first time. Vertebrates had joined the arthropods in the skies. We see the evolution
of a much more modern-looking plant flora. In the southern hemisphere, we had the Glossopterus
flora. Remember, this is part of the flora that Wagner used in order to reconstruct Pangea.
The oceans were full of rich coral reefs. Remember back to the El Capitan reef system?
Complex reef communities supporting a host of beautiful reef-building organisms.
Invertebrates and vertebrates are plenty. Everywhere as diverse and as complex as
modern reef systems are today. But remember the tropical paradise of the Ordovician,
that world that ended suddenly in ice? Well, the biosphere of the Permian would end too,
but this time by heat. We'll see this in the next lecture.
