We've just dealt with devastation.
We've dealt with the almost complete destruction of a biosphere, so I thought after gasping
through those particular events, it might be time to lighten the mood just a little
bit.
So let's travel forward in time to instead one of the great flowerings of life on our
planet.
Let's go and look at what the late Jurassic was like.
In this lecture, I'd like to walk through the late Jurassic garden.
It's often known as the Golden Age of Dinosaurs, but how did we get to a dinosaur heaven?
So let's also consider where and when the dinosaurs came from, and finally, how did
the dinosaurs come to be so diverse in the late Jurassic?
So first of all, let's look at that Golden Age.
The late Jurassic was a time of climatic stability.
Tropical conditions extended much further than they do today.
An ocean, the Tethys Ocean, was starting to split up the continent of Pangea from east
to west, unzipping it.
When you knew ocean, an ocean we're familiar with, the Atlantic was just starting to form.
On land, the forests would have looked kind of similar to what they do today.
You would find conifers and ginkos, but also giant cycads as well, and wandering through
them, possibly some of the most spectacular and awe-inspiring animals that have ever existed.
The largest of those, and of course these are the dinosaurs, are the sauropods.
These are the classic dinosaurs that you see kids drawing, the four-legged creatures with
long necks and long tails.
This particular species here is Brachiosaur.
Brachiosaur is found in the Morrison Formation in the west of the USA.
The environment that the Morrison Formation represents are lots of slow-moving rivers
and swamps and lakes.
You find these deposits in Colorado, Utah, and Wyoming.
Brachiosaurus was a high browser, obviously, look at that neck.
He was nibbling on the high treetops, he was probably as high as 30 feet, the giraffe
of its day, but definitely in the mega-giraffe scale, if you want to put it that way.
But this wasn't the only sauropod, though a whole bunch of sauropods, each adapting slightly
different strategies.
For example, another crowd-pleaser is Diplodocus.
He was built a little differently to Brachiosaurus.
He was built more like a cantilevered bridge, and rather trying to get to the highest treetops,
Diplodocus was more low-level.
He was moving his neck in probably long sweeping arcs, almost like a vacuum cleaner, eating
up all the vegetation.
Diplodocus would get to lengths of about 90 feet from nose to the tip of its tail.
Sauropods possessed fairly simple teeth.
They were kind of peg or spoon-like teeth.
Do you think they were designed to kind of strip away vegetation of plants, so they'd
grasp around a plant and pull it away, and as that would strip the leaves off a branch?
They probably had to feed, though, all the time.
Remember what I said?
Plant material, compared to meats, are very low in energy, so in order to support a massive
bulky creature like this, you'd probably have to be dining all the time.
Extracurricular activities for dinosaurs of this scale would involve eating, more eating,
making babies, and then eating again.
But who could forget another favourite dinosaur, another one that generally occurs in children's
diagrams of dinosaurs?
This is Stegosaurus.
Now, he is roughly the size of a school bus, about 30 feet long and about 14 feet tall.
He's a bizarre looking dinosaur, and there are some very bizarre looking dinosaurs.
Look at that really tiny head and how low it is to the ground.
He also has very short forelimbs and a somewhat sprawling gait, which is odd, because most
dinosaurs had brought their legs fairly well underneath the body.
It's got a stiff tail armed with those nasty looking spikes, which I would imagine it could
probably swing around at predators if it felt threatened.
Probably the most recognisable feature, though, of course, of Stegosaurus are those large
and wonderful plates running down its back.
Now, it was originally thought, in reconstructions, that they lay flat, white shingles.
So in this orientation, rather than that orientation, hence the name Stegosaurus, which means
roofed lizard, and the function of those plates, well, I guess you tend to think that they
must be defensive in nature, but they appear oddly placed.
They really don't protect the important parts of the animal, they're not protecting the
flanks at all, which look very vulnerable in this reconstruction.
Also, when you look at the structure of these plates, they appear to be very fragile, so
perhaps not that much use in a protection model.
Perhaps therefore they were used in thermoregulation, remember back to Dimetrodon, using those large
sails to help itself cool down or warm up, and it's likely that these plates had blood
vessels running through them as well.
And I like to think as well that potentially the skin covering these plates, being supplied
with blood, could perhaps also be brightly coloured, perhaps even change colour.
I like the idea of my Stegosaurus wandering across the Jurassic landscape, flashing its
plates as it went.
With the head low to the ground, it probably fed by cropping low level vegetation.
The horny beak that we find in this creature is designed probably for cropping food, such
as mosses, ferns and the horsetails, which were very common around then.
It's not a very smart beast, in fact, of the dinosaurs, and the dinosaurs as we all know
are not well known for having big brains.
He had one of the smallest brains of the lot.
For an animal that weighed around 5 tons, he had a brain that was about 2.8 ounces.
Probably wouldn't be doing too many crossword puzzles.
Of course, if you have giant herbivores, you've got to have giant predators too, and of course
this is what the children really want when you're talking about fossils.
Of course, in the Jurassic, we don't have T-Rex yet.
He emerged until the Cretaceous period, but in the Jurassic we had something just as scary.
We had the Allosaurus species.
This species, which is saurophaganx, was as big as T-Rex, about 4.5 tons, and was around
about 39 to 48 feet in length.
See, it was an impressive beast, even so.
The complete picture, then, of the Jurassic biosphere is of a dinosaur-filled landscape,
filled with dinosaurs of all different shapes and sizes, occupying all different types of
niches.
But there was also other things there as well.
There were some of the first birds, like Archaeopteryx.
Also there were the turtles, lots of different types of crocodilian.
The mammals were there as well, although probably fairly diminutive and hiding around
in the undergrowth, scurrying around the feet of the dinosaurs, and possibly also the first
representatives of the modern-day blizzards.
As you can see, it's a truly amazing menagerie of life.
But don't forget the oceans as well.
They too were absolutely brimming.
They had recovered from the Permian extinction.
We're looking at many, many species of bivalves.
The gastropods, who, as we said, just struggled through the Permian extinction event, would
radiate into the Mesozoic and by the Jurassic, there were many species indeed.
The Akina-derms had flourished as well, and the reefs had recovered.
We would see in this area the development of modern hexacorals, also called scleractinians,
and also sponge reefs would be coming as well, and also a particular form of reforming
bivalg called lithiotis.
We've got a sample of one here.
They're odd creatures.
They're kind of conical vowels, and they used to have a flap on the side of them.
You can see that they're actually kind of standing up vertically in this sawn-off section
here, and they would have formed quite considerable and important reef structures during the Jurassic.
Just look at this beautiful ecosystem full of ammonites and belemites.
These were an important part of the biosphere.
These are the cephalopods, those creatures related to squid, but that had a shell.
Also we can see for the first time in this environment the really modern fish, the teleosts.
From these we'll get everything from a salmon to a seahorse today, but also fantastic marine
reptiles like the ichthyosaurs that swam through the oceans.
The land though was definitely dominated by the dinosaurs, but how did this come about?
From when and where did the dinosaurs come?
Well to adequately answer that, we have to turn the clocks back again to just following
that period of devastation, just following the Perma Triassic extinction event in the
early Triassic, a time well before we'd see the emergence of the first dinosaur.
From the reptile populations that would struggle through that extinction event, the dinosaurs
would ultimately emerge.
It would take about 30 million years or so for complete ecological recovery after the
Perma Triassic extinction event.
That sounds like a long time, but remember, removing the biosphere to around about 95%
of the species, it's not too surprising that the earth took such a long time to get back
on its feet.
The early Triassic was still a planet that was dominated by a Pangaea.
We had the beginnings of the Tethys Ocean, but certainly no Atlantic.
Creatures across this vast landmass could migrate freely right across the supercontinent.
It was still very dry and arid.
In fact, warm temperatures probably extended right to the poles in the Triassic.
It's been suggested by some people that this is possibly one of the hottest times in recent
earth history.
By recent, I mean the Phanerozoic.
One of the most common reptiles, the Therapsid reptile, Lystrosaurus, existed in vast herds
in the Triassic of Pangaea.
In some cases, it occupies around 95% of the fossils in some deposits.
Like the Permian relatives, they have that semi-spauling gait, the limbs kind of sticking
out of the side of the body.
We think it might have been a powerful borrower as well, probably using those tusks that you
can see at the front of the creature to grub up roots and tubers.
There were other groups of the reptiles as well, the Sinodonts, such as Thrinaxodon
here.
Now this is a cat-sized creature, but one of the things that's very interesting about
it is that it's potentially, we think, from certain specimens that we find covered in
fur.
Also, there are pits on the skull, possibly indicating the presence of whiskers.
It probably lived in burrows, and it's really starting to look, as you might see, a lot
like a mammal.
In addition to the fur and the whiskers, it has seven-necked vertebrae, which is the
same as modern mammals do as well.
Perhaps what we're seeing here is the creature, or creatures like this, which would eventually
give rise to the mammals later on.
Large amphibians would be present.
For example, this is Cyclotosaurus, it's about eight feet long, and belonged to a group of
amphibians, a very successful group called the Labyrinthodonts, and they would patrol
the Triassic rivers, slowly moving through the rivers like modern crocodiles, probably
snapping at anything that got foolishly too close to the water's edge.
But what are the other group of reptiles from the Permian?
What are the diapsids?
Well, they had diversified into a number of forms, including a group called the Arcusaurs.
The Arcusaurs are important because they give us the crocodiles, the pterosaurs, the birds,
and of course, the dinosaurs.
This is an early Arcusaurs.
This is Euparcaria.
We think it was an agile animal, probably moved fairly fast, around about 24 inches
long and an insectivore.
Now this is not a direct ancestor of the dinosaur, but it's probably related to the groups of
creatures that would eventually evolve into them.
Now Euparcaria was also possibly semi-bipedal, so it's one of the firsts that we have, first
evidence that we have of a creature that had started to get upon to two legs.
It probably scurried about on four legs and then would occasionally move upon to two to
perhaps grasp at insects with its two front legs.
What of the dinosaurs?
Well, there's some tantalizing hints published in about 2010 that suggest the possibility
of dinosaurs in the early Triassic.
There's potential for about a cat-sized creature that's been tentatively named Prerotodactylius,
but it's only known from its footprints in Poland, and so far we don't have any tangible
real bone fossil evidence.
The earliest known dinosaur fossils are from the late Triassic, from the Shigrolasto Basin
of Argentina.
The sediments deposited in this area originally were in a river valley, and it's here that
we find a very special fossil.
We find one of the first dinosaurs that we can recognize, we find Eoraptor.
Eoraptor was a small bipedal carnivore, or possibly an omnivore.
He wasn't that big, he was about three foot long and probably weighed about 22 pounds,
so as you can see, we are a very long way off here from Brachiosaurus, Stegosaurus, or
Stegosaurus, or any of those giants from the late Jurassic.
There were other larger creatures found with Eoraptor.
This is Hororosaurus, a fully bipedal carnivore.
He looks exactly like those pictures that the kids want to draw in their dinosaur dioramas.
He's about 10 to 20 feet long, so he's not yet at the super-predator size, but it still
isn't something I'd like to see galloping towards me on a dark night.
By the end of the Triassic, dinosaurs were present, but just a component of an ecosystem
that had a rich variety of tetrapods.
They certainly weren't dominating that fauna.
That fauna included the cousins of the crocodiles, like this, this is Postersuchus.
This odd-looking creature was about 12 to 15 feet long.
He has long curved claws and dagger-like teeth in what looks very much like a crocodile-like
snout.
In fact, he looks very much like a crocodile on long legs.
He has rows of plates to protect the back of the animal, and it's been suggested by
some that maybe this creature, too, might have been for a short period able to rear
up onto its back legs.
It had keen eyesight, and we think from what we can tell from the fossils, a very keen
sense of smell probably as well, very much an apex predator of its time.
So here is a picture of the late Triassic landscape.
In this image we can see flocks of a bipedal dinosaur called Celophysis, again diminutive,
scurrying away, hiding in the undergrowth, keeping a wary eye out for these larger and
scarier creatures.
But how did the dinosaurs then come to be so diverse by the late Jurassic?
How effectively did the dinosaurs take over?
As we said, dinosaurs were present, but not the dominant part of the Triassic ecosystem
at least, at the end Triassic.
We think the event though that would eventually allow the dinosaurs to rise to dominance was
another one of those difficult times for life.
It was another extinction event, but this time at the end of the Triassic.
The Triassic and Jurassic extinction event, or sometimes called the TJ event, occurs both
on land and on the oceans, and in the oceans, as it has to be if it's going to be a mass
extinction event.
The extinction event would remove those remaining thoraxid reptiles that have been so beautifully
diverse through the Permian and survived into the Triassic.
But the dinosaurs would survive in greater numbers.
What was the cause of the extinction this time?
Well, the obtuse answer is the Atlantic Ocean.
Well, at least the initial phases of its formation.
We think that a mantle plume, a new mantle plume, developed below actually the continent
of Pangea.
In addition to large outpourings of lava, this would have another effect as well.
It would start the continent of Pangea to start to rift.
It would start the breakup of that supercontinent.
It splits the continent, and new ocean crust would form in between these drifting blocks.
Just look here along what would eventually become the eastern edge of North America.
You can see that there are a series of lakes and basins.
This represents the line of rifting that will eventually form the North Atlantic.
In effect, in this reconstruction, you're seeing the very early birth of an ocean.
A continental plume had developed underneath Pangea, which would initially at first have
caused doming of the rocks.
Now continental rocks are relatively cold and brittle, and they had fracture along fault
lines, fault lines that we call normal faults.
They would kind of slip and slide, and as a result, the continent would start to thin
and stretch as well.
These faults would open up rift valleys parallel to the zone of rifting, forming those series
of lakes along which is now eastern North America.
It would also be associated with volcanism.
Lava would seep to the surface along the cracks in these thinning crust.
You can see a similar rift valley today.
If you want to go look at an area where this is happening right now, go to the East African
rift system.
Here, part of the East Africa has initiated rifting away from the rest of Africa.
This is part of what is called a triple junction system that includes the Red Sea and the Gulf
of Aden.
If this continues, an ocean will ultimately develop between some of these blocks.
At the moment, these blocks here across the side of the East African rift system can be
regarded as proto-plates.
We have the Nubian Plate, which is everything west of the rift, and the Somalian Plate,
which is everything east of it.
Just as of the case with the rifting that would eventually form the Atlantic, this modern
event is also associated with lots of volcanic activity, an indication that something very
serious and momentous geologically is happening in this area.
In North America, though, back to our story, these rift valleys would fill up with sediment
from Nova Scotia to Virginia.
It forms an incredible package of sedimentary rocks that we now know of, know as the Newark
Supergroup.
It's a vitally important geological record of a continent that is starting to split apart.
Eventually, the rifting would proceed to such a degree that ocean crust would be formed.
Now, ocean crust is much lower than the surrounding continent that rides above oceanic crust.
The ocean would break through, and a new ocean, the Atlantic Ocean, would be born.
It would have probably looked something like we can see here.
This is the Red Sea.
This is just as what happened in the Red Sea.
Africa and the Middle East had been split apart by the development of a newly formed
ocean, so there'll be a spreading center running right down the middle of the Red Sea.
The Triassic rifting generated considerable volcanism, much more than we're seeing in
the East African rift system.
It's often called the Camp Event, or the Central Atlantic Magnetic Province.
Some have suggested that the activity might have been similar intensity at times to the
Siberian Traps organism that caused all those problems way back in the Permian extinction,
and there would have been similar detrimental effects.
We'd have seen lots of sulfur dioxide and so on produced, but perhaps again, the biggest
killer in this event would have been the carbon dioxide and the associated greenhouse effect
that would come with it.
We have a neat indicator of the development of a global greenhouse at this time at the
end of the Triassic, and it comes from what might sound like an unexpected source.
It comes from fossil leaves.
Remember how in the Devonium, we saw the Silorium, we saw the plants getting onto the land surface,
and as they get onto the land surface, they are subject to lots of desiccation, so the
plants start very early on to develop the cuticle around themselves, that waterproofing that
stops them from losing a lot of water.
Remember as well that that cuticle caused problems.
The problem was that the plants could no longer absorb the gases they need from the atmosphere,
so the innovation that the plants came up with were the stomata, those little pores that
could be opened and closed and allow exchange of gases with the environment.
In times of high carbon dioxide, the number of stomata are low.
It's easy for plants to get carbon dioxide, so they don't need as many stomata on their
leaves.
With lower carbon dioxide levels, you will find higher numbers of stomata because the
plants are trying to maximize the amount of carbon dioxide they can actually grab hold
of.
Plants in Greenland and Sweden notice in the fossil leaves that you can find there a marked
decrease in the stoma of plants, indicating increases in carbon dioxide that match the
timing of the camp volcanism.
The end triassic would be around 5 degrees higher in temperature than it is today, but
following the camp activity, it probably rose by another 5 to 6 degrees, and would see a
familiar pattern of extinctions on land, death of plants and then collapse higher up
of the food chain of all those creatures that relied on that base.
Again, the base had been taken out and the rest of it would collapse in.
The end triassic extinction is not as really well understood as we'd like it to be.
It's still a great area of research.
After it though, the dinosaurs would no longer be part of a tetrapod fauna, they would dominate
it.
But why?
There's a number of possible models.
Perhaps it's something to do with the way that dinosaurs moved.
Dinosaurs generally have an upright stance, as I said, they've brought their legs underneath
their body, which makes them fairly stable.
They're not like the Therapsis, which had more of that sprawling sense.
So dinosaurs had what's called an advanced mesotarsal ankle.
It's kind of a bit like a simple hinge, but it provides a lot of stability all the animals
are running about.
Perhaps this ability to zap around the landscape, perhaps capture food resources, gave the dinosaurs
a competitive edge over their competitors.
The suggestion by Bob Backer as well.
Bob Backer is a dinosaur paleontologist and an all-round very colourful scientist.
He's also a great artist.
If ever he does a talk, you can see him at the front of the room drawing beautiful dinosaur
pictures that he signs and gives to the children in the audience.
He believes that dinosaurs were endothermic, warm-blooded, like us.
General perception of dinosaurs is that they're cold-blooded, isn't it?
In fact, when we get back to the Victorian age, there was much of a perception of the
dinosaurs as being lizard-like, sluggish, clumsy.
Backer, though, things, though, that were active, warm-blooded creatures that were active
and dynamic, and it was this that gave them the edge.
But perhaps the dinosaurs were just lucky.
Michael Benton of the University of Bristol proposes this.
He says, we see no evidence of dinosaurs really out-competing other creatures.
Perhaps dinosaurs were just effectively the first of the blocks in the Jurassic, rapidly
moving into those ecological niches that had been made vacant, and once they were in those
ecological niches, they couldn't really be displaced.
But how did the dinosaurs become so diverse in the late Jurassic?
Well, the dinosaurs in the early Jurassic are not as diverse as they would become later
on.
They can be very numerous.
For example, dinosaurs like lexilophysis would be very common.
But what drove the diversification to the point that we see that high point in the late
Jurassic?
The problem is we have very poor records of the intervening period, the middle Jurassic.
It's often referred to as the problematic middle Jurassic.
But something obviously important happened during the middle Jurassic, but for a long
time there were very few fossils that were shed light upon this.
The best possible explanation, therefore, is related to the fragmentation of Pangaea.
From the middle to the late Jurassic, we are seeing an accelerated fragmentation of that
former vast supercontinent.
There were more barriers between areas and less mixing of creatures.
Think back to how we talked about biodiversity and how that is related to continental fragmentation
early on in this series.
Dinosaures were becoming more endemic.
They were having to adapt to environmental conditions in whatever part of the world they
happened to find themselves.
Now when you had a massive supercontinent, you could just migrate out of unfavorable conditions
or you could migrate as seasons changed.
However, with this new rapidly expanding fragmentation and dinosaurs being isolated in various pockets,
it was definitely a time of adapt or die.
It's confirmed from rare middle to Jurassic sections in Patagonia.
In the middle of Jurassic, Patagonia still had lots of easy access between North and
South America.
The dinosaurs are often indistinguishable from one another.
As time moves on, though, these sediments record that the disparity between the two forms
– the North American and the South American forms – was increasing, reflecting the
connection starting to disappear.
This would drive the dinosaurs to diversity, eventually resulting in the fantastic and
beautiful dinosaur summer of the late Jurassic.
In the next lecture, I would like to look at the way that dinosaurs are commonly depicted.
Dinosaurs are shown doing lots of different things and they obviously did have many different
lifestyles if you want and occupied many unusual niches.
So what I'd like to ask next time is how can we tell the way that these beautiful creatures
actually behaved?
