Life is truly amazing. I mean, really spectacular, isn't it? I mean, just consider all the environments
exploited. You take a trip to Everest or any of the peaks in the Himalayas, you'll find
life there. Then take a submersible, dive deep down into the oceans, go to those mid-ocean
ridge systems that you're boiling with volcanic geysers. You'll find life there too, not just
one or two species, but a rich biosphere. You also find life in boiling pools of volcanic
water. We've seen how we can find it in solid rocks. You can find life on any continent
you care to think of. It's in all the oceans, but it also exists, suspended in the atmosphere.
Different members of Earth's biosphere have left the ground. In this lecture, I'd like
to examine who they were and how they did it. Flight takes on a whole bunch of different
types of forms. For example, there's passive forms of flight, just floating on air currents.
In fact, there's tons of creatures right now floating around in air currents all around you.
A kind of disturbing thought is you're probably breathing a lot of them in right now. In order
to do this, though, you've got to be small. For example, take this baby crab spider. It
gets around or it disperses itself once it's come out of the egg by producing a very thin
strand of silk. This then is raised to the air and it gets caught in the wind currents
and it is taken away dispersing the population. We also get development of parachuting. Some
creatures such as this dandelion produce structures that are specifically adapted. In fact, the
dandelion seed is quite a wonder of evolutionary engineering. In both examples, though, the
crab spider and the dandelion, you're pretty well much at the mercy of the air currents
and the winds. You really can't direct yourself anywhere. You have no control where you'll
end up. Gliders have a little more control. They employ some sort of an airfoil in order
to generate lift and they can alter their position a little bit, but essentially they're
still a falling body. Soaring is a kind of gliding and it can keep a body aloft for real
extended periods of time utilizing thermals. Think of an albatross or an eagle. In fact,
I'll often watch eagles soaring above the city of Vancouver, seeing them rising on the thermals
there. They can stay suspended without flapping their wings. It would appear for hours, truly
amazing creatures. But when we're thinking flight, what we're generally thinking about
isn't it, is powered flight. And that implies some sort of activity, some sort of flapping
motion. That's going to require the development of a very special flight organ, the wing.
But it's not just the wing that we're going to need. We're going to need other specialized
body parts. We're going to need a light strong body. We're going to need also probably some
form of advanced respiration. It's going to take an awful lot of energy to flap hard enough
to get a creature into the air. So in this lecture, let's ask who got into the air first?
Also, who were the first vertebrates to get airborne? Then how did the birds get into
the air and just who were their ancestors? And what about our group? What about the mammals?
So who got into the air first? Well, it was probably the plants. It's not too surprising,
is it? After all, they were the first out of the water and onto the land. This is a
scanning electron microscope image of spores of a liverwort. Now, liverworts are fairly
primitive plants. The strands that you can see in this image, all weaving around those
circular objects, are called elators. And those elators, the circular objects that look a little
like golf balls, are actually the spores. And when the sporangia opens in some species,
those elators flick physically the spores out of the sporangia and up into the atmosphere,
giving them a bit of a head start to catch those winds and get themselves distributed.
We have evidence of spores way back to the middle-order vision. Remember, we talked about
that quite a while ago. So this is about 475 million years ago. We could imagine, perhaps,
plants, even if they're not yet fully on the land. Remember, the first plant fossils are
from later, they're in the Silorian. Perhaps these plants were just sticking sporangia just
out of the water, even though they were a fully aquatic plant, an attempt to just catch some
of those winds and get those spores spread out across the water surface. Likely, the origin
of summertime allergies would really proceed from then.
What about the first animals in the air? Well, we think that would likely occur soon after
we get the first land-based ecosystems in the Silorian Devonian. Just like we can see
here, this is the reconstruction of the landscape in Rania. Remember, with the Rani Church and
that beautifully preserved fossil evidence we have of early plants. The first creatures
in the air probably were those floating mites or the juvenile forms of some land arthropods
which would then distribute themselves right across this burgeoning new ecosystem. But
what we really want to know about, obviously, is powered flight. When does that develop?
Well, it's going to be the insects that are first off the blocks here. But the origins
of insect flight are still pretty hazy, at least from a fossil evidence standpoint. The
first fossilized insects that we find come from the Carboniferous. And as you can see,
these dragonfly-like creatures are already very well adapted to life in the skies. Dragonflies
are really very remarkable creatures. There's a pond not too far away from the offices here
at the teaching company and it's full of dragonflies. Just sit there and watch these creatures
performing just incredible aerobatics. Like all insects, the wings are essentially dead.
They have all the tissue removed from them to make them an awful lot lighter. If the
first fossils, though, were of creatures like dragonflies and could perform the activities
like dragonflies do, that's hovering and then suddenly darting away at different angles
requiring a lot of skill in the air, that means there's a lot of the story, at least
a lot of the fossil story, of how insects got into the air in the first place is missing.
So can we perhaps come up with some other clues as to how they actually manage that?
To answer it, we have to return back to the water. Now early arthropod limbs were paired.
They have a walking limb and a jointed structure behind each limb. It's called an excite. It's
used for filtering water. It can also act as a gill as well. You can see them in this
mantis shrimp. The plate-like structures here are also, though, being used for locomotion.
And insects often demonstrate these structures in the larval nymph stage of an insect life
cycle. In the adult, these structures very often become the wings.
For clues to the early origins of flight, let's consider one of the most primitive flying
insects that we still have with us. And that would be the mayfly. It maybe will provide
us with clues as to how flight emerged. The mayfly, unlike the more advanced forms of
insects, cannot fold its wings along by the side of its body. The nymph stage is aquatic.
See the nymph here. And it has those well-developed plates along the abdomen. Now these can be
flapped in order to increase water movement for respiration. And they can be used to propel
the creature as well. So these structures appear to be in some way pre-adapted for flight.
They already have a muscular flapping ability without having to modify an existing limb
as other animals would have to do when they got into the air.
Due to the small size of an insect as well, the hydrodynamics of rowing through water
isn't that too dissimilar from the aerodynamics of flapping in the air. The viscosity difference
of the two mediums is really not that critical when you're that tiny. So it's not surprising
therefore, giving all these pre-adaptions that the insects had, they would be the first
animals to develop this powered flight. You can imagine, can't you, a real ancient prehistoric
scene. Primitive aquatic insects crawling up the stems of reeds, perhaps steadying themselves
as they're malting and steadying themselves against the breeze using those plate-like
gills. These plate-like gills possibly eventually being adapted to allow these insects to fly.
But who were the first vertebrates to get off the ground and get airborne? Well, we've
already seen one of them. We met him a number of lectures ago. This late-perman diapsid reptile,
Lora Sovius. He's an interesting creature. He's a body that possesses 20 long, curving
bones at about 90 degrees to the body. There's a skin membrane attached to those bones and
stretched across it. The bones are jointed at the bases as well, so I think this creature
could probably fold its wings by the side of its body, probably while it was scurrying
up trees, so it would just keep them out of the way. We see similar gliding reptiles today.
This is Draco. He's a gliding reptile from Southeast Asia. Draco is an insectivore.
See, Lora Sovius was probably an insectivore as well. In addition, Draco uses his aerofoil
for display purposes. You can see those bright colors there on the wing surface. But we also
know that Draco uses this wing surface for thermoregulation to help it heat up in the
morning or cool down perhaps when it's too hot. We've already seen reptiles that have
done this in the fossil record. Remember Dimetrodon was employing the same strategy, putting
that big sail up to catch the early morning sunlight. Perhaps smaller forms originally
developed solar panels for catching the sunlight, and they were later adapted for gliding purposes.
Draco can be very effective in moving around the forest. It can get around very quickly,
leaping from tree to tree. But we're still lacking here a vertebrate that can cross open
areas. And if we're going to find a vertebrate that can move across open areas, of course
we need powered flight. And for those, meet these wonderful, wonderful creatures. These
are the pterosaurs, the winged lizards. These creatures were fully flight capable vertebrates,
built with air spaces in their bones so that the bones would be very strong, but at the
same time very light, an adaptation that the birds would later employ as well. They're
an extremely successful group, very common around the Mesozoic and have about a 140 million
year history on our planet. They might look a bit like bats, but there's a big difference,
not only just in the biology, but also in the wing structure as well. You see, in the
pterosaurs, they support the wing membrane just along one very long and slender finger,
whereas the bats use multiple fingers in order to support their wing membrane.
The majority of pterosaur fossils are found in shallow marine sediments. When you find
these fossils, they're often associated with fishy debris, scales and bones. So it's like
likely that a lot of these creatures were probably fish eaters. Possible that some fed
like the skimmers and the pterosaurs. It's also possible, and it's nice to think of it,
that these creatures might have dived into the water. But probably with these animals,
probably the only to the head and neck would go into the water. The wings would probably
be far too delicate to withstand the boisterous activity of diving like you see with the
gannets. Some, though, would look really strange. Some would develop filter feeding mechanisms
like flamingos. This is pterodorstro. He's probably used these bristle structures to
strain micron organisms and algae out of the water. And some of them got really big. This
is Quetzalcoatlus. He's from the late Cretaceous. He had a wingspan of 33 to 36 feet. We're
getting to the size of a small aircraft here. It's possible that Quetzalcoatlus was a scavenger.
You could imagine him there, can't you? Rising on the thermals above perhaps some of these
Cretaceous planes, looking out for creatures that have just died or waiting for a T-Rex
to leave a kill, so that it could descend and start to feed on the carcass. The oldest
pterosaur, though, is Eudymorphodon. He's from the late Triassic of Italy, around 210 million
years old, and was a lot less impressive in size than Quetzalcoatlus. He's about 3.3 feet
in terms of his wingspan. Like many of the pterosaurs, there's a suggestion that this
little beast was covered with a fine, downy hair. Is it possible that these creatures
were maintaining internally generated heat? Is it possible that it might have been warm-blooded?
It's an interesting question. It might have helped them, though, with all that active
flapping that they had to do. What about the origins of the group? Once again, we meet
the same problem here that we had with the insects. Eudymorphodon is a fully adapted
and able flyer, so we're lacking transitional forms. That early part of the fossil record,
which will tell us how whatever the ground-living reptile was, got into the air. Pterosaurs
are commonly depicted as living with dinosaurs, but they're only distantly related to them.
The last common ancestor was an archosaur back in the Triassic. Remember, the archosaurs
would also give rise to the dinosaurs, the crocodiles, and the birds. A commonly sighted
ancestor is Scleromoclus. He's from the late Triassic. He has an anatomy that suggests
that he was an able leaper. He had a small body and really long hind limbs. He also had
hooked claws, which might have allowed him to climb up trees. So how did the creature
potentially that evolved from that earlier beast develop flight? Did it leap into the
air to grab at things, perhaps in sex, or did it glide from the ground to the trees?
We will consider a similar dilemma when we're dealing with the evolution of flight in the
birds. For the moment, though, without transitional fossils, these questions for the pterosaurs
will have to remain in the realm of speculation. In short, we have to wait for more fossil
specimens to improve our models. So how did the birds get into the air, and just who were
their ancestors? Obviously, when you think of flight, you mostly think of birds. They
are, in fact, probably one of the most successful and diverse vertebrate groups to have ever
evolved. They are also descended, of course, from that group, the archosaurs.
From hummingbirds to the albatross, they show incredible diversity. They're highly active
and warm-blooded animals. They also have a much more efficient respiratory system than
mammals do, but are actively pumping air through the lungs to support all that flapping motion.
The earliest bird that we know is probably the most famous fossil in the world, Archaeopteryx,
from the late Jurassic of Germany, about 150 million years old. The first partially complete
specimen was discovered in 1861, but probably the most famous specimen, the one that's
called the Berlin specimen, is now housed at the Humboldt Museum in Germany, and it was
discovered around 1874. It's preserved in the Sollenhofen Limestone that was originally
deposited as a rich line sediment on the edge of the Tethys Sea along an island archipelago.
The conditions were semi-arid to subtropical. There was a whole set of lagoons. They had
high salinity. There were probably oxygen-starved. We're looking at that old scenario, aren't
we, of creating that warm lid on the top of the water that stops circulation in the lower
parts of that water body. The high salinity and the low oxygen conditions would arrest
the decay of any creatures that were either washed into there or fell into it in the case
of Archaeopteryx. The fine-lined mud as well would preserve fascinating detail, not just
the bones which are beautifully preserved, but the impressions of body outlines as well,
and of course, feathers too. The fossils are relatively rare, but when you find them, they're
spectacular. Look at this dragonfly here. You can even see the veins in the wings of
it, and this is a pterosaur. This is Ramferincus, provided some spectacular paleontological
information. Archaeopteryx, when it was found in this deposit, caused quite a stir academically.
It has many bird-like qualities, in particular the feathers of course, but other features
are very reptile-like. It has a beak that's full of teeth, a long bony tail, and claws
on the wings. Just as Darwin had predicted, this is a true transitional form from a reptile
to a bird. Unlike the story of flight of the insects, or the pterosaurs, the earliest
fossil is not yet a fully developed aeronaut. We're definitely looking at a transitional
form here. Archaeopteryx, in all likelihood, was not a very strong flyer. The fossil of
Archaeopteryx provides an opportunity for us to really tie down how flight happened, from
the ground-living reptile to a bird. You'd think there would be no argument. Well, in
that case, you'd be wrong. The fact is, even with Archaeopteryx, the exact origin of flight
is still highly contested and debated. But it's not only the exact origin of flight, it's
also what was the origin of birds themselves. Consider another fossil that is found in the
Solonhofen limestone. It is Comsognathus. He's a terrestrial dinosaur. The skeleton
that you find from this creature is not unlike Archaeopteryx without feathers. In fact, it's
been said that if no feathers have been found in Archaeopteryx, you would probably just classify
it as another dinosaur, something pretty well like Comsognathus. This similarity of theropod
dinosaurs, like Comsognathus, and birds was noticed by Thomas Huxley, a famous supporter
of Darwin, often called Darwin's bulldog. He would have been very bullish in his support
of the theory of evolution. However, he didn't suggest a direct link between dinosaurs and
the birds. Instead, he suggested that birds may have evolved from creatures that resembled
small bipedal dinosaurs. Today, however, the dinosaur origin of birds is widely accepted,
and in particular, it's thought that they evolved from the theropod dinosaurs, those
are the bipedal dinosaurs. Everything from little Comsognathus to T-Rex are included
in that group. But this still doesn't answer the question of how dinosaurs might have developed
a flight. There are two main hypotheses, just like those proposed for the pterosaurs.
First of all, the arboreal hypothesis. This was the earliest idea. It believed that birds
evolved from feathered, tree-climbing theropod dinosaurs. They would jump from trees to
the ground or jump to another tree, just like you would see today in a modern flying squirrel.
The hypothesis, however, received an awful lot of criticism. It was difficult for people
to imagine how an animal, perhaps like Comsognathus, could climb into trees and eventually evolve
into a gliding ancestor. More popular was another idea, the curesorial hypothesis. This is a
ground-up hypothesis. It speculates that there was an ancestral feathered dinosaur. I know
that there are feathered dinosaurs. The feathers originally evolving, probably, to keep the
creature warm, or for display purposes as well. And as this creature was running along
the ground, it might be leaping in the air trying to catch insects. This case, the feathered
arms would become secondarily useful for adjusting body attitude in mid-air. It might also help
the creature maintain balance as it landed, so they're already using these feathers for
a slightly different purpose. It's also been suggested that perhaps the flapping motion
that would develop could help these creatures get up inclined surfaces. Now, that was the
general view until this fossil was found. It's from the early Cretaceous, around about
120 million years old. This is from the An'ing province in China. It was discovered by Zhu
Xing of the paleontology department in Beijing. This is micro-raptor. You can clearly see
the feathers on the fallings of the creature. No surprise there. We have feathered dinosaurs
with forearms covered in feathers. But look carefully. Look at the hind limbs. And we
can see we have long feathers there too. Are we looking at a four-winged dinosaur? When
you look at the feathers of micro-raptor, you find that they really are quite modern-looking
as well. They're asymmetrical around the shaft. This particular structure means that
it will generate lift. So we do have a four-winged dinosaur. Micro-raptor probably couldn't
flap, but it certainly could glide. Micro-raptor also, because of those long feathers on its
hind legs, probably couldn't run. It must have glided from the trees. Even though it
post-dates Archaeopteryx, it is less advanced as a flyer. So perhaps flying could have gone
through a gliding phase. So perhaps the arboreal hypothesis is back on the table. But it's
not just the origin of flight that is currently hotly debated. It's the relation of birds
to dinosaurs that's also being questioned. The general view is that birds like Archaeopteryx
suggest a close link to the bipedal theropod dinosaurs. But researchers, including John
Rubin of Oregon State University, suggest that birds are only a sister group of the dinosaurs
and not descended from the dinosaurs at all. In his scenario, birds evolve separately from
an archosaur ancestor, developing feathers and flight, as you can see in Archaeopteryx
and Micro-raptor. Then some of them lose the power of flight. The result, we start to see
feathered dinosaurs like Velociraptor and Proto-Archaeopteryx, which is found later in the Cretaceous
period. This, according to the hypothesis, would explain why feathered dinosaurs only
appear in the fossil record after Archaeopteryx. This is an area of great debate, though. Recently,
though, additional feathered dinosaurs in China have been reported to be older than Archaeopteryx.
Perhaps now, once again, the feathered dinosaurs could be ancestral to birds. The debate is
literally up in the air. And this micro-paleontologist is going to be watching with great interest
how my colleagues in vertebrate paleontology work through this one.
But what about our group? What about the mammals? Well, we have gliders like the flying squirrel.
But when we're talking about real flying creatures that are mammals, flapping creatures, we're
obviously talking the bats. Now, bats are quite often overlooked as an mammal group,
but I found this car the surprising myself. They are the second most diverse group of
mammals. Rodents are number one. Bats have about a 60 million year geological history.
They've evolved into many different niches. Some are fruit and pollen eaters. Some are
insectivores. In fact, an awful lot are insectivores. We can thank bats for eating some of the nasty
biting insects. Some are fish eaters. And just a very small proportion, although you wouldn't
believe it from the attention they get in movies, just a very small number are vampires.
The paleontological record is very poor. The bones of bats are very delicate. Obviously
they're going to be light anyway because they're adapted for flying. The nuances of their evolutionary
development then are, to say it to the very least, are very challenging. But there are
some exceptional discoveries. For example, we have a specimen here at 52 and a half million
years. This is Oniconic Terus. This animal has a little surprise though. It lacks features
around the inner ear that are used in echolocation in modern bats. The implication there is that
it probably had to rely more on sight to go hunting insects. Whilst this animal await
during the day then, unlike the majority of modern bats, it opens up an interesting possibility.
Is it possible that bats were driven into the nighttime existence by another creature?
Is it possible that they were out-competed and driven into this nocturnal existence by
birds perhaps? But from what group of animals did bats evolve? They probably went through
a gliding stage like the flying squirrel. But what was the last common ancestor of bats
and whatever else we can think of? Well, once again, it's hazy. It's waiting a true transitional
form. Oniconic Terus is still a bat. The limb proportions and the clawed fingers of this
fossil suggests that the ancestor may have been a very good climber. Perhaps a common
ancestor of both the bats and something a little surprising. The sloths as well. Slightly
less energetic than bats. The story of flat bats is complex and fascinating and the story
will continue to evolve as new fossils are discovered and new exciting fossils of pterosaurs,
birds, bats and insects are being found all the time that are really starting to fill
in a lot of these missing gaps in our understanding of the origin of flight. For the next lecture
though, I'd like to move out of the skies but not onto the land. I'd like to dive into
the oceans of the Mesozoic and explore what was lurking deep in the depths.
