Remember in an earlier lecture I said I wanted to redress the balance. I wanted to concentrate
on some of the forgotten fossils. Remember I said that very often it's the vertebrates
that get all the attention and the invertebrates get kind of forgotten about. It's also important
to remember as well that evolution didn't just end in the oceans when our famous fishapod
started to struggle out onto the land's surface. For this lecture I'd like to consider the
oceans of the Mesozoic between 251 to 65.5 million years ago. Some of the creatures
that we're going to meet in this lecture will look very familiar. Others will seem
fairly strange and some of them you'll probably realize that if they are around today would
be extremely dangerous. What I want to introduce are some of the components in the Mesozoic
oceanic biosphere. For example who were swimming in vast shoals through the Mesozoic seas.
Who would compete with the corals and sponges in the reef ecosystems and also in accordance
with either the big kid, showman or sensationalist in me I'd like to ask who were the real monsters
of the Mesozoic oceans. So who were swimming in those vast shoals through these Mesozoic
seas. This is a modern view of a modern ocean, a fertile sea. You can see it's full of vast
schools of fish of all shapes, sizes and colours. Now this would have been a familiar scene
in the Mesozoic as well. The most common fish today, the bony fish, had been evolving since
the Devonian and that life would be very abundant at this time too. Shoals of fish would be
a common sight in Mesozoic oceans. But other creatures would be present as well. In vast
numbers, probably in greater numbers than they are today, the relatives of the squid
are mollusks that belong to the cephalopods. Cephalopod means head foot, so mollusk which
is an invertebrate of course. We met the cephalopods way back in this lecture series. Remember
the terror of the Ordovician seas, the orthoconic nautiloids. Those large squids effectively,
if you want to think of them in those ways, stuck into a long conical shell, but a conical
shell that could be seven feet long. Well by the Mesozoic these evolved into many different
forms, including the bellumnites. Now bellumnites look a little bit superficially like a modern
squid. They had ten tentacles, but rather than the suckers on those tentacles, the modern
squid exhibit, they had a double row of hooks which they probably used to grab their prey
with and then pass it to the beak. The internal shell is usually the only part of the animal
that survives in the fossil record, but we do sometimes get exceptional fossils, where
we actually can find the outer outline of the creature plus evidence of the tentacles.
That's why we know that they had ten, plus in some really great fossils we find the inc
sacs as well. Apparently the bellumnites, just like their squid ancestors, could squirt
ink at a potential predator and escape in a cloud of black smoke. Bellumnite the word
comes from the Greek bellumnum, meaning art, dart or arrow, and it was thought back in
ancient times that bellumnites were the thunderbolts of the gods cast down from the heavens, which
when they intercepted into the rock would be turned into these pointed bullet shapes.
The cousins of the bellumnites are very familiar to us. They're the Ammonites. They're named
for a different god though, the Egyptian god Amon. Amon is often shown with rams horns,
which is easy to see when you consider that the Ammonites are a coiled shell. These two
are very common in the Mesozoic oceans, and they're very often the main biostratigraphic
tool during the Mesozoic. In fact, a lot of the Mesozoic is subdivided biostratigraphically
into what are known as Ammonite zones. That's because the Ammonites evolved very rapidly,
producing many short-ranging forms. They're also spread across many continents, so it
can subdivide geological time very effectively using the Ammonites.
Ammonites, and also the bellumnites, move backwards as do squid and octopus. The Ammonites
achieve this through a special organ that's called the siphunkel. Effectively, they pump
water at fairly high pressures through this tube, and this would give them a kind of an
underwater jet proportion. Also, given the numbers that Ammonites are found in, it is
likely that some of the species move through the oceans in vast shoals. It must have been
breathtaking seeing these beautiful creatures all moving in formation above a cretaceous
coral reef or crossing oceans.
You can see how Ammonites grew in this cut and polished specimen. The creature would
add a new body chamber to the shell in a kind of a spiral form, adding a successive chamber.
The animal was living at the end of the cord in the outer moist chamber. It was still attached,
though, to the rest of its shell by a tube that interconnected with all the previous
chambers. It would use this to control its buoyancy or position in the water, we think,
by varying the amount of fluid in each chamber. It could move in a vertical sense as well
in the water column, in addition to moving laterally.
If you have a polished Ammonite fossil, or if you go to a fossil shop, they very often
have these, you can sometimes see the traces of the walls that we call scepter, which are
the chambers of the Ammonite expressed on the surface of the shell. We call these suture
lines. You can see them on this diagram here. Each of those swiggles is defining an internal
chamber within the shell of the Ammonite.
The most primitive forms, these are called goniatites from the Paleozoic, have a very
simple suture line. It's kind of a zigzag pattern. But why do the Ammonites develop
such a complex suture line? Well, that's quite a matter of debate. Perhaps it's because
if you have a more irregular surface, that outermost chamber would provide a surface
upon which that Ammonite creature, the soft bits, could attach muscles that be more firmly
attached to its shell. Or perhaps it's more to do with that moving around in the water
column. Perhaps it's bracing. If you're a submarine, you certainly need to brace that
submarine. You can't just have a hollow tube. It would very rapidly become crushed by high
water pressures. So perhaps what the Ammonite doing here is bracing its shell. And by making
those bracing struts move in this zigzag pattern, in this highly contorted way, they
brace more of the shell. So perhaps it's an adaptation for the Ammonites to dive deeper,
perhaps in search of prey. But for whatever reason they were developed for, they certainly
make for extremely attractive fossils. But what about the mode of life of Ammonites?
Some probably move fairly slowly on the ocean bottom, or perhaps you'd find them just pottering
around reef systems. But many of them were probably very able and very fast swimmers.
You can see this in some of the shells that they've left behind. Some of them are extremely
thin, hydrodynamic objects designed to cut and slice through water very effectively.
Ammonites are found in very many environments, including the open ocean. We're pretty sure
that a lot of Ammonite species were ocean crossing species, which is one of the reasons
why they're really good for correlation. The reason we can tell this is because when
you find a lot of Ammonites, you find them in very fine ocean sediments with no other
shallow water fossils around, indicating that this must have been a deeper oceanic environment.
The Ammonites are probably swimming over this area, died and sank to the bottom of the deep
ocean in between continents. The Ammonites and Bellamnites would be gone by the end of
the Mesozoic, but during that period they were an incredibly successful and important
part of the Mesozoic oceans. But let's take a quick look at some of the less mobile forms
in those Mesozoic seas. Let's look who would be competing with the corals and sponges in
the reef ecosystem at this time. You remember that the corals got really
hammered in the Permatric Extinction event? Well, new corals would evolve in the Mesozoic,
the hexacorals, sometimes called the scleractinians. We'd also see in the Mesozoic lots of sponges
becoming important reef builders. But you also remember we described in another lecture
a Jurassic bivalve, a clam called Lithiotis. It was an odd cylindrical bivalve that also
helped build reefs. Well, there was another important bivalve that we're getting on the
act as well. These are the rudists. Some stood vertical in the water column like this. One
valve vertical and the other valve of the clam kind of forming a lid on the top. Others
encrusted hard surfaces. At times they occurred in such great numbers during the Cretaceous
that they were almost the most important components of some tropical reef systems. They were particularly
important on the margins of the Tethys Ocean, that's the big gap out of the side of Pangaea
there, or was formerly Pangaea, and the Atlantic, fringing North America from the Gulf of Mexico
to the Canadian Maritime Provinces. These reefs could be many hundreds of feet tall
and they were very laterally extensive as well. Obviously there are a very successful
organism, but why don't we have similar extensive bivalve reefs today? Well, we do have the
occasional buildup of oysters, but nothing like we see in the rudists. It could be related
to ocean chemistry. Many of the Cretaceous oceans were saltier, and perhaps as much as
14 degrees centigrade warmer than they are today. This could have been too warm and salty
for many of the corals to survive, leaving many oceanic areas open for other less common
reef builders to basically get in on the act. We all look at the odd unique ocean and climate
system that existed during the Cretaceous in the next lecture though.
Rudist reefs have been studied in quite a lot of detail, partly because they really
are quite unique and very odd, and so we want to understand what they are about. But they
also have a great importance to the oil industry. For oil to accumulate, you need an impermeable
lid to stop, first of all, the oil escaping to the surface. For example, a fine-grained
rock like a shale. And also, below that, you need to have a very permeable body of rock
to collect that oil. And if you would have to look at a rudist reef, you'd find it has
many nooks and crannies in it, lots of spacers, and in geology, we call this porosity. Given
the large extent of the fossil reefs and the high porosity, they make great places for
oil to accumulate. It's quite likely that if you were driving to the supermarket today,
you may have been using gas that was at one time sitting around in a fossil rudist reef
for millions of years. But who were the monsters of the Mesozoic oceans? Well, imagine swimming
above one of those rudist reefs, watching shoals of fish, but also vast shoals of ammonites
and bellomites cruising across the oceans. But it's not just these invertebrates that
are here. Tetrapods share this environment, too. Some of those early pioneers who explored
the early Devonian landscape have given up their legs and returned to the seas. For example,
swimming through the oceans, particularly of the Jurassic, are creatures that at first
glance might look very familiar. If you were to look at these from, say, quite a way off,
you might mistake them for dolphins. However, these are ichthyosaurs. They are streamlined
fish eaters and very much reptiles. The main superficial difference between these animals
and dolphins is in the proficient position of the tail. You can see that in the ichthyosaurs,
the tail is vertical, whereas in dolphins, the tail fluke is horizontal. Some ichthyosaurs
grew to absolute enormous sizes. This is Shonosaurus. It's about 50 feet long. There's a fantastic
fossil discovery where 37 triassic specimens have been found in Nevada. They're all found
fossilized side by side, all pointing in the same direction. We think this might be fossil
evidence of a paleo-mass stranding event, similar to the events that we sometimes witness
in the whales and dolphins today. All ichthyosaurs had really good eyesight. You can see these
large eye sockets here in the skull. But there's also those odd structures in the eye
socket as well, these plates. And we think that these were likely an adaptation to prevent
water pressure distorting the eye as this creature dived. These creatures probably dived quite
deeply and freely, up and down through the water column chasing fish and ammonites and
the like. Like dolphins, ichthyosaurs also gave birth to live young. There are quite
a number of very unique fossils that actually record the death of a female actually in the
process of giving birth to a fully developed baby ichthyosaur. The resemblance of these
creatures to dolphins demonstrates though an important concept in evolution. It's a
concept that we call convergence. Have you noticed how many cars, especially the gas-efficient
ones, are starting to look very much the same today? The new Chevy Halitosis or the new
Ford Gingivitis, all starting to adopt the same shape. The reason? Well, fuel economy.
There are certain optimum shapes that reduce, drag and maximise efficiency. Obviously there'll
be certain specialists that will evolve their own peculiar shapes. Think of the Humvee in
this analogy. But if you are a tetrapod that lives like a dolphin, in all likelihood you're
going to end up, at least on the outside, looking like a dolphin. ichthyosaurs and
dolphins demonstrate this concept really beautifully. They're very different biologically. One's
a reptile, one's a mammal, but they look very similar even though they're separated by
many millions of years. The reason once again, as they lived in similar environments and
likely exploited it in similar ways, they've come to look the same. Convergence at work.
While I was working at the Natural History Museum in London where I was doing my postdoctoral
work, I would often walk past exhibits of ichthyosaurs in the public galleries. They
were absolutely fantastic. They're all down one gallery in beautiful frames and I'd stroll
past them every day. Some of those fossils I've passed were collected by a remarkable
paleontologist and her name was Mary Anning. Mary Anning was born in Lyme Regis in 1799.
Lyme Regis is in the county of Dorset on the southern coast of England. The cliffs of Lyme
Regis are beautifully exposed. In fact, the whole area there in Dorset, all that coastline
is beautiful, well worth a visit. But the cliffs around Lyme Regis also contain many
fine Jurassic fossils. In fact, it's very famous for them. Mary's father, who was a cabinet
maker, would supplement his income by finding and selling these fossils to tourists who
would visit that area then. It was a touristy area at that point too. And from there on
as well, Mary got the fossil hunting bug as well. Mary Anning was the first person to
discover and extract an ichthyosaur and many other marine reptiles. In fact, she was also
the first person to find a pterosaur outside of Germany. Even more remarkable though was
that she was able to do so much science and so much really important science when so many
obstacles were placed in her way. Remember the problems that William Smith had with his
map? Back in the 19th century, science was carried out by gentlemen scholars, people
of quality or ordained ministers. People like Smith, who was the son of a blacksmith, they
really weren't very welcome in that circle. Outside this group, you'd find it very difficult
to get into any branch of science at all. Of course, Mary had another problem. She was
a woman. As such, she could not join or even present her work at this research at the London
Geological Society. It was even worse than that. Women weren't even allowed to attend
lectures. Even so, Mary would still become the world Jurassic Marine reptile expert and
she would be visited by many very famous geologists at the time. Eventually, she'd be given an
honorary membership of the Geological Society. Also, I guess eventually, she would also be
given a small pension from the British civil list to recognise her contributions to the
science. She was still denied though the opportunity to interact effectively with her peers, a
situation which I am pleased to report has now changed.
Mary Anning is not alone in this regard though. Beatrix Potter, someone you might be a lot
more familiar with in terms of the tales of Peter Rabbit and lots of other stories, would
also suffer similar sexism. Her extensive research on fungi being dismissed mostly because
of her gender.
Anning's contributions were significant in another regard though. Not that she was just
one of the first early paleontologists who happened to be a woman. It's important that
her work also supported ideas of George Cuvier about extinctions. Remember, Cuvier was responsible
for developing that useful tool, comparative anatomy that we use to fill in some of the
flesh on fossils like dinosaurs. But he was also responsible for suggesting that some
creatures that had existed in the past are now extinct.
Extinction was a difficult pill for some theologians at that time to swallow. They thought it implied
that there were imperfections in God's creation now. So to get around this problem, some suggested
that the fossil forms that were turning out were probably not extinct. They were just extremely
rare. Perhaps they existed in some unexplored area. However, the bizarre and large creatures
that Mary Anning discovered were a big problem, weren't they? Where could they be hiding?
Mary's discoveries in fact helped change the view on how the biosphere has changed over
time. Just consider this following illustration. It's a beautiful picture. It's a reconstruction
of the Jurassic Ecosystem. It was painted in 1831 by Henry de la Bèche. Now it might
look very old-fashioned. It certainly has that kind of Victorian iconography, nature
red in tooth and claw. Everything is biting and attacking everything else. But it's still
very important though. It shows that there is an understanding now that past ecosystems
existed, past ecosystems filled with extinct life. It shows that ideas regarding the past
were changing in no small part thanks to Mary's work.
This is another bizarre creature that Mary found. These are plesiosaurs and they come
in two varieties. You have short neck pliosaurs. For example, this is Cronosaurus. He is a
Cretaceous pliosaur. He lived around 112 million years ago. He's about 40 feet long. He hunted
fish, ammonites and probably other marine reptiles as well. And then there were these
wonderful creatures, the long neck plesiosaurs, some of the most iconic of Mesozoic aquatic
reptiles probably. Like pliosaurs, these creatures would use their paddles in a kind of underwater
flying. The body was tightened by long and strong ligaments along the creature. In fact,
the presence of these ligaments can often be seen in lines that are actually carved
into the fossil bones. This was a highly strong and taut beast.
Plesiosaurs are significant for another reason though. They are the only Mesozoic aquatic
reptile that some claim still exists. And for that, we need to take a little trip to Scotland.
We need to go to Loch Ness. Loch Ness stretches for about 23 miles. It contains more fresh
water than all the water in all the other lakes in England and Wales combined. So for
the United Kingdom, this is a very large body of water indeed.
The Loch follows the line of the Great Glen Fault. Now, like the San Andreas Fault, this
fault used to demonstrate horizontal movement, but it's not been significantly active now
for many millions of years. In effect, this fault represents a zone of weakness where
continents once collided. But more recently, this weakness has been exploited by ice. Once
the ice retreated, the valley that was left behind was filled with water and Loch Ness
was born. But what about its famous monster?
The first reports of a monster come from an account of St Columba, an Irish saint on a
mission to convert the Pictish people of Scotland in for 563 A.D., who apparently needed a jolly
good converting. He came across locals along the Loch who were burying a man who had apparently
been mauled by a monster. Sounds like an excuse for a lynch mob myself.
Anyway, Columba sent one of his followers to swim across the water to lure the beast
out. Now remember, this is Scotland. It's not a tropical lagoon. And there's a monster
in the water as well. You can almost imagine Columba's followers coughing and kind of
looking at their feet when he said, come on lads, who's up for a swim? Anyway, the monster
appears. We don't really know, I think, whether or not the guy who was swimming was eating,
but Columba stops it, steadying its tracks, and everything is great.
The next report of the monster? Well, quite a way ahead of them. 1933, one George Spicer
and his wife were taking a nice ride along the Loch in the sunshine, when something strange
and large passed right in front of their car, causing him to break and swerve. They said
this something had a thick body and a long neck. It disappeared into the Loch. The Loch
Ness pleosaur and a whole new tourist industry was born in that instant.
The Nessie story was further developed by this photograph taken the next year by a doctor
Wilson, claiming to show the head neck of the monster just poking out of the water there.
The photograph today is mostly regarded as a hoax though, but over the following years
many blurry photographs and jumpy films have been released, supposedly showing the monster
crossing the Loch.
So is it possible? Could there be a plesaur in Loch Ness? Well, there are problems with
this hypothesis. First of all, the lack of any plesaur fossils during the Cenozoic. Also,
it's unlikely that plesiosaurs could have moved around on land on the way that the Spices
described in their first account, and also for a viable breeding population of plesiosaurs
to exist in the Loch, there'd have to be an awful lot of them.
To be fair though, paleontologists have been surprised before. Remember the seal can? Thought
extinct for 65 million years and then, hey presto, up it pups. It wasn't extinct at all.
It was just living in areas that were very, very remote. In 2003 it was decided to try
and sort this problem out once and for all. Modern imaging techniques would be used on
the Loch and sort out whether or not Nessie actually was there. They were going to use
sonar and complex satellite tracking mechanisms to finally tie Nessie down. Unfortunately,
and I really do mean unfortunately, because I would like nothing more for there to be a
plesiosaur living in Loch Ness, but nothing of any substantial size was found. So,
are all these eyewitness accounts and reports hoaxes? No, certainly not. You've got to remember
that there are many tricks that distance and light can play on the eye. It can be very difficult to
get an accurate idea of how large something is in open water, and also remember sometimes we really
want there to be a monster. Just take this eyewitness report. Every time I've seen it,
it's just like the bottom of an upturned boat, but a little bit more humpy and it's black.
Sometimes I've seen it looking dark brown in some of the sightings, but it's really just a great
hump, and I have never seen the head and neck. The key here is not that the head, that no neck or
head was seen. It's a common feature of many of the Nessie sightings, no neck, no head, just a body.
It's mostly a kind of a hump that they see or a series of humps, and that could very well be
something like this, a submerged log at distance. Another explanations? Well, seals have been seen
in the lock. They could certainly explain the hump, and perhaps even in some instances the rarer
head and neck sightings. Perhaps even the humble Scottish otter at a distance may account for
some of the sightings of the monster. But another explanation? How about one that might even be more
ancient than Nessie herself? How about a sturgeon? The fish that's famous for producing caviar? These
are ancient creatures. They first appear around about 200 million years ago, and still are still
with us today. It really is a living fossil. Occasionally they're seen in Loch Ness, which might
explain the bizarre humpback sightings. This creature has a kind of a hump on its back as well.
It would appear after all, there really is a prehistoric beast living in Loch Ness.
Whatever Nessie's status, Plesiosaurus were not the only monsters of the Mesozoic oceans, though.
There were giant alligators as well. This is Dinosuchus, a beast that probably
waited in ambush for dinosaurs that were foolish enough to come close to the water.
But there was something even scarier. This is a Mosasaur. The largest Mosasaur ever discovered
was Tilosaurus, over 57 feet long. They fed on, well, they fed on anything they wanted to really,
possibly also other Mosasaur's as well. Their jaws were armed with rows of backward-pointing
teeth which would hold onto its prey and secure it in its mouth. They also had a bizarre additional
set of teeth, it's called a terrigorge. It would hook into the severed flesh of its victim and
push it down the gullet. Mosasaur's didn't chew, they gulped. They were probably ambush predators,
probably lying in wait on the ocean floor. Then using a quick swish of their long tails and
their powerful flippers would rapidly move up to the unsuspecting prey from below.
These wonderful creatures had vast oceans to explore. Just look at how the continents were
flooded here during the Cretaceous. Europe was reduced to a series of tropical islands
and North America was cut in half from north to south by a shallow body of water. Much of the
Sahara was a shallow tropical sea. In the next lecture, let's examine what would allow for such
high sea levels and such tropical conditions during the Cretaceous. Let's see what caused
Walter Wall-Jamaica Earth.
