We keep returning to the concept of how Earth systems are connected, intimately connected.
Obviously, this is Earth systems science.
It's one of the main themes, one of the threads I hope we've been pulling through this series.
Everything that we've covered so far could in some way be regarded as an interplay of events,
or the snowball event, the glaciations, changes in ocean chemistry and atmospheric composition,
and of course, the mass extinction events that we've covered.
Interactions, though, don't necessarily have to always produce a severe and catastrophic global mass extinction.
Sometimes you just see a general turnover in species, one group of species generally just replacing another.
And we'll consider this while describing some events that occurred in the Americas,
with a particular focus this time on South America.
This is a time after the dinosaurs, when other wonderful creatures were moving to inherit the Earth.
The more recent the time that we investigate paleontologically and geologically, the clearer the picture becomes.
It's quite obvious why, isn't it? The rocks are going to be generally less deformed.
They've gone through less history, less potential mounting building events,
and there's going to be more of them as well.
There's going to be less time for erosion to occur.
So effectively, the pages that we book, of our book at this particular stage, are going to have less ripped out.
So we can get a more detailed record, a clearer image of those times.
And one of the stories that we're going to tell in this particular period after the dinosaurs
is how North and South America, although initially separated, were gradually brought back together with some very interesting consequences.
In this lecture then, I'd like to examine the following.
Where was South America in the latter part of the dinosaurs' reign?
Let's also take a brief look at what is known as the megafauna of Australia.
Also, what was South America like during its 60 million years of isolation,
and explore what actually happens when neighbors collide.
So what was South America like in the latter part of the dinosaur time?
Well, here is South America in the early Cretaceous about 120 million years ago.
You can see that the North Atlantic is well developed.
You can really spot that there, the first part of the Atlantic Ocean to open up.
You can also start to see where Africa and South America will part.
So you can see the beginnings there, the hints of the South Atlantic.
Note as well that as you move up between North and South America there, there is at the moment no hard contact.
Although if you were to fly over that area, you'd probably notice perhaps a series of small islands just dotted in between them.
Now, in our time machine, let's spin the clock forward a bit.
We're now at around 105 million years ago.
This is the mid-Cretaceous, and things are starting to look just a little more familiar.
This is an image that we've met previously, and you can see all those wonderfully shallow seas
around the edges of the continent, and those vast inland intercontinental seas.
At this point, Africa and South America are now completely parted,
although at parts it's still very, very narrow indeed.
The separation would continue through the Cretaceous.
This is 90 million years ago, the planet now starting to look even more familiar.
By the extinction event at 65 million years ago, we've got a continental configuration that really is looking modern,
but South and North America are still separated.
There's still no firm land bridge between those continental masses, and as you can see, sea levels are still pretty high.
Look at Africa, for example, while the Sahara still has oceanic conditions present.
As we start to tell the story of South America and its fauna, we must consider Earth System Science.
The dance of the continents that we've described will have profound consequences for the creatures in and around South America.
The geosphere, in effect, is having profound effects on this part of the biosphere.
But most of the Mesozoic and Cenozoic, the history of South America, is one of isolation.
It's like basically a massive, isolated island continent.
Australia is well known for acting like a kind of a lifeboat for the marsupials.
South America did the same thing, protecting unique creatures from waves of new forms that would migrate through other parts of the world.
South America was isolated from the other continental landmasses by at least the mid-Cretaceous.
As a result, it preserved also many early Cretaceous and perhaps some late Jurassic dinosaurs and mammals that weren't extinct in the other parts of the world.
But take a little closer look at the end of the Cretaceous.
The separation of South and North America at the end of the Cretaceous isn't actually completely perfect.
Central America was probably a peninsula of North America then.
And again, there might have been a series of islands between North and South America.
Marsupials, pouch mammals and placental mammals, the group that we belong to, probably were able to island hop from North to South America by this time in the late Cretaceous.
These animals could probably swim the short distances between the islands.
It's also possible that smaller animals could have been raftered there, swept between those islands, between the continents on mats of vegetation.
One marsupial arrived in South America and would ultimately migrate, some people think, all the way via Antarctica to Australia by about 50 million years ago.
So let's take a brief look at the megafauna of Australia.
It's been suggested that from that little initial wanderer there would have been a radiation of Australian marsupials giving us kangaroos, koalas, wombats,
all potentially traced back to a relative of a South American marsupial known as the Little Mountain Monkey or Dmitriops.
The Australian radiation of marsupials would include more than kangaroos and koalas though.
We would see the evolution of an Australian marsupial megafauna as well, a unique group of large Australian animals that would grace the continent for around about 1.6 million to 50,000 years ago.
Most of them would be extinct by around 46,000 years ago, which appears to match the timeline of the arrival of humans in Australia.
It's been suggested that a combination of burning the landscape, which was done in order to drive, we think, and move prey during hunting and just physical hunting itself would eventually lead to the demise of these large creatures.
And lots of other creatures as well that weren't actually marsupials, including genomics. It's a class of flightless birds, some of which may have been carnivorous.
There's also here megalania. It's a giant ripple as it is, the common name it's given to it. It was basically a giant guana.
It was around about 23 feet in length. And megalania, it's an 8 foot turtle that had various horn and protrusions all over its shell.
You can see there wasn't really intriguing and wonderful fauna there in Australia.
Examples of the giant marsupials include diphtradon. It means two forward teeth.
He was a rhino size wombat. Wombats today are moderately sized creatures, so big perhaps, certainly not the size of a rhino.
He's about 10 feet from nose to tail and around about 6.5 feet at the shoulder.
He inhabited open woodland and grassland areas, probably eating leaves and shrubs and grasses.
Some of these unique fossils have also been found to contain, have been females that have been found to contain babies in their pouches.
So some of the fossil evidence is really quite spectacular.
It's been suggested that this animal may be behind the bunyip, a mythical creature in Aboriginal mythology that was said to lurk in swamps,
suggesting that there was a time when humans and these creatures actually interacted.
Also in Australia at these times we find the giant short-faced kangaroo.
Proctodon Goliath, he's about 6.5 feet tall.
He had teeth adapted for chewing tough desert plants and could probably jump an awful lot higher than modern kangaroos.
It had an odd pair of extra long fingers with claws that we think was probably designed to attach to trees
and hook them and bring the leaves towards its mouth.
Then there was another relative of the modern kangaroo, but this time not the amiable vegetarian light Skippy.
This is Propleopus Sicilians.
He had large shearing teeth.
He was, we think, perhaps an opportunistic omnivore.
He would eat fruit, soft leaves, but probably also small animals as well.
About 160 pounds and around about 6 or 7 feet tall again.
I would have advised seriously against trying to box with this kangaroo.
But there were large predators too.
At around about 220 pounds this is Thicoacaleo carnifex, the marsupial lion.
He certainly looked like a cat and he had large slicing cheek teeth, which are kind of unusual, and a retractable thumb claw.
It's been suggested this creature was possibly an able climber and maybe ambushed creatures by dropping upon them from above.
It's possibly also depicted in cave art that we find in Australia.
So again, there's possibility that there was interactions between humans and these creatures.
They're also regarded as being one of the contenders for holding the record for the strongest mammal bite, about 220 pounds of pressure.
It probably hunted the large wombat bear Dipton and the giant kangaroos.
But what was South America like during its 60 million years of isolation?
Well, South America's tectonic history on wandering are reflected in the changing character of its ecosystems.
Following its isolation at 80 million years ago, the animal population would evolve independently for 60 million years with just occasional invaders.
As we noted earlier though, the South American fauna was mostly safe from the waves of the evolution of other animals that would sweep through the rest of the planet.
As a result, that continent would develop a unique and quite wonderful ecosystem with its very own character.
Some of these marsupials have subsequently moved out of South America and are still with us today.
We can find them in North America.
For example, if you have an opossum in your backyard, he's actually a visitor from the South, from the very, very deep South.
But many creatures would evolve that are no longer with us today.
For example, this is the kangaroo rat.
This is argulagus.
He had very large eyes and we think might have been a nocturnal plant eater.
There was also a mammal that resembled a rabbit.
This is protopetherium.
Like rabbits today, he was probably an agile burrow.
You can see he's got those large, spatulate paws.
And of course he has those rabbit-like ears as well.
But unlike rabbits, he may have also had carrion as well as plants.
Protopetherium, like many South American forms, demonstrates something that we discussed in another lecture.
That is the idea of convergent evolution.
Creatures that might belong to very different groups starting to resemble each other due to the fact that they're occupying similar ecological niches.
This is the amazing horse-like diodorphus.
He's pretty small though.
He's about four foot and a similar size, I guess, to a sheep.
But he has three toes, one of which touched the ground like a hoof.
So again, a very horse-like creature, convergence probably going on here.
We have another example.
We have a kind of a camel-like creature as well.
This is Macrocina, first discovered as a fossil by Charles Darwin.
He's about ten foot long, so a fairly large creature, but has this bizarre, very short trunk in the front of its face.
In addition, the arrangement of its ankles and shin bones suggests that this creature could not only run very fast,
but he could probably also change direction very rapidly.
And it's likely that the camel-like creature was trying to evade a creature like this.
This is Thylacosomyleus.
He belongs to a sister group of the marsupials and probably is one of the most dramatic examples of convergent evolution between North and South America.
He was a 330-pound predator.
He had massive, self-sharpening sabers that he would use to sink into the flesh of its prey.
But he also had these quite bizarre but wonderful protective scabbards running along them as well.
He is the South American equivalent of Smilodon that lived in North America.
Smilodon is the saber-toothed cat.
Another top predator of this world that would be preying on these giant marsupials potentially were the burrohyenids.
They were definitely marsupial-like. They had a pouch to carry their young.
They were about five to six feet long and had strong, bone-crunching jaws.
It's a group of animals that probably resembled modern Tasmanian devils, but an awful lot larger, of course.
And there are other impressive forms, relatives of the armadillo, sloths and anteaters.
But probably my favorite is this one. This is Glyptodon, a heavily armored animal.
He's about the same size and weight as a VW beetle.
Glyptodon provides another wonderful example of convergence, but this time with a much more ancient creature.
It resembles very much Ankylosaurus. Ankylosaurus was a late Cretaceous dinosaur that was common in western North America.
You can imagine both of these creatures trundling around their respective worlds like heavily armored trucks.
The shell of Glyptodon is composed of a round about a thousand one-inch-think osteoderms or scutes.
Each species had a particular characteristic pattern of these scutes.
It couldn't withdraw its head into its shell like a turtle, but instead it had that kind of an armored cap to protect the head area.
The vertebrae in the backbone of this creature also fused, we think, because it had to support the weight of that massive shell on its back.
Perhaps the most iconic animal, though, of the South American fauna was another fossil that was found by Charles Darwin during his voyage on the Beagle.
I remember walking past the fossil of this particular specimen every day.
Remember I told you I walked down the ichthyosaur gallery?
But then just before I went through the door into the paleontology research department, just to my left was this beautiful fossil.
I want to describe to you the account that Darwin gave of finding this particular fossil.
It was on Sunday, September the 23rd in 1832 in Punta Alta.
He wrote, to my great joy I found the head of some large animal embedded in a soft rock.
It took me nearly three hours to get it out.
Indeed it did.
In fact, made in late for the ship.
Apparently it was dark by eventually the time that he got back.
You can imagine the rather prickly Captain Fitzroy was definitely not amused.
What he had found, though, was Megatherium, the giant elephant-sized ground sloth.
It's probably one of the largest mammals that has ever existed.
It's around six tons in weight.
Although it could walk on all fours, fossils have suggested that it could potentially also walk on two legs as well for some times.
And when it was actually reaching up into the tree, we think that it might have used its tail as well
to create a kind of a tripod structure that would allow it to reach high into the boughs of a tree.
It's also been suggested that this creature might not have been a complete herbivore,
might have been an omnivore, perhaps using its large size to scare away predators from their kills.
You can imagine if that thing was lumbering towards you, you wouldn't want to hang around for very long.
This was not evolution, though, in this continental mass in complete isolation.
There would be occasional invaders.
For example, around about 31 million years ago in the oligocene, animals started to arrive from abroad,
but possibly not from where you would imagine.
They wouldn't come from North America.
The first invaders to the New World would actually come directly from the Old World.
They'd come from Africa.
Although the Atlantic was well on the way to developing at this time, it was certainly not as wide as it is today.
This probably allowed for the arrival of species on rafts and drifts or plant material,
probably a lot of mangrove material which exists obviously in coastland areas.
It would only probably take a few individuals, and perhaps a pregnant female,
to start the population of South America with African fawns.
Some of these pioneers from Africa would include rodents.
These would evolve in South America, producing various unique South American fawns,
including the Kappa Bayer and the Chinchillas.
In the same manner about 25 million years ago, primates would arrive in South America.
These would diversify into the New World monkeys like the squirrel monkey here.
Can perhaps imagine the scene, a torrential downpour and a flood in Africa.
A river breaks its bounce and starts to tear away at the mangrove swamps,
carrying with it a terrified monkeys and rodents,
clutching to large mats of vegetation who would then sail west for the New World.
But there would be another African invader as well, tortoises.
Tortoises though, even after they arrived in South America, wouldn't just stop there.
They would cross, continuing their journey across South America,
and then once again embark on another sea journey, floating out into the Pacific
and eventually colonizing the Galapagos Islands.
There they would diversify into a number of forms where Charles Darwin would eventually encounter them.
And in part, it was them who would start to get him really thinking about the theory of evolution.
Tortoises are actually particularly well adapted to this kind of aquatic invasion.
They can float with their heads out of the water for a long time.
They can also survive without food or water for up to six months.
It's probably not a surprise then that they have distributed themselves so widely.
But around six million years ago, creatures related to raccoons started to invade South America from North America.
And some of them would evolve into massive, bear-like animals.
At least initially, some of them were actually mistaken from bears.
In fact, what they resemble more was kind of a giant panda.
This is Chapalomania.
He's a five-foot-tall raccoon, basically.
Probably replaced the Bora hyenas that we met earlier.
This migration, though, of creatures was not one way.
There were some forms that Ireland hopped the other way as well.
Megatherium-like ground sloths actually managed to work their way over to North America by about nine million years ago.
But there was one other import. It was quite a scary one.
There were flightless terror birds that existed in South America.
Probably some of the most ferocious predators in that continent.
Some of the skulls that we find of these terror birds are around about two-and-a-half feet in length.
And it's been estimated, by looking at their leg bones, that they might have been able to run at around speeds of 30 miles an hour.
It's also possible to deduce that looking at the size of the beaks and some of these creatures,
they could probably swallow a small dog in just a single gulp.
The only North American terror bird, the one to make it a cross, and you probably only need one, to be honest with you,
was found in the southern states.
This is Titanus Wallerii. He arrived about three million years ago.
He's about eight foot tall.
The skull of these creatures is not too well known, but it's likely that it too had a large, powerful, hook-like beak.
It still had wings that were pretty well vestigial, but can you imagine this guy wandering towards you on a golf course in Florida?
Well, let's consider now the end of this isolation, even if it was a kind of a spotty isolation.
What actually happened when the neighbors finally collided?
As we said, South America's isolation would not last forever.
It had a good run at it, of course.
South America would drift towards Central and North America,
and the ocean plate below the Pacific would become subducted below the Caribbean Plate.
Above this line of contact, a series of volcanic islands would develop, indicating where that contact and that subduction was occurring.
This probably allowed for some of the island-hopping migrants to move between North and South America,
but it's also thought that the collision of the two plates started to actually push up some of the ocean floor above the surface of the ocean.
Sediments eroded from the islands and from both North and South America would gradually fill in the gaps in between,
eventually forming the isthmus of Panama.
That would have serious consequences for the South American fauna.
Actually, it would also have potentially serious consequences for the rest of the world.
The land bridge was opened by three million years ago.
Now we can get easy exchange between North and South.
Camels, elephants, bears, deer, tapirs, the gunks, rabbits, cats, dogs, kangaroos, rats and shrews.
They would all make the journey into South America from North America and moving from South to North.
Monkeys, possums, anteaters, sloths, armadillos, porcupines and glitodont would all take the trip.
The net result?
I'm afraid it would be a net overall extinction of the South American forms.
The terror birds were mostly outcompeted by cats and dogs from North America.
Thalaco Smilus was outcompeted by his North American counterpart, Smilodon.
The giant raccoon bear, he was replaced by real bears and most of those beautiful savanna grazers were replaced by their North American equivalents.
The only really successful migrants northwards would be armadillos, possums and porcupines.
In fact, possums did very well indeed.
This species, Diadelfis virginiana, is known to have reached as far as northern Canada.
But why this asymmetry? Why did the South American forms do so badly?
I think part of the reason is something to do with climate.
Creatures that could survive tropical conditions in Central America, here called in blue, would find that climate was not too much different as they travelled south.
Those travelling north though would very quickly encounter far drier and eventually colder conditions.
This would effectively place a lid on their migration.
But perhaps there's a more profound reason as well and it relates to the playing field of evolution of both groups.
South America had been isolated, so competition would only come from within that landmass.
But look at North America, it's a physically larger landmass but also looked towards Alaska.
This opened up numerous times. It's known as Beringia.
It's a landmass linking North America to Asia.
It's about a thousand miles in width from north to south, so this was a large corridor and it was particularly important during ice ages when sea level will fall.
It was not glaciated and probably only experienced light snowfall due to southwest winds from the Pacific having lost most of their moisture by the time that they got here.
It was probably just a large grassland step, perfect for the movement of creatures across.
Creatures as far away as Africa were free to migrate and mix and mingle with North American forms.
The result? A much tougher proving ground for North American animals, the waves of migration of forcing natural selection.
Basically we are looking at basic survival of the fittest.
Not too surprising then that the South American native foreigners would suffer so badly.
They found it difficult competing with the battle-hardened Northern immigrants.
Can't help think though that a planet that still had gliptodons and megatherian lumbering around the landscape would be a much richer one.
Remember though, we have to think about the wider consequences of the formation of the Panama isthmus.
We've got to think in the context of Earth system science.
And firstly, the opposite effect immigration would occur in the oceans.
And this has been called the Great Shism.
Basically it stops the mixing of the Pacific and the Caribbean Sea creatures,
which would lead to some independent evolution in some marine form.
So we might see the emergence of some new species.
But also the removal of nutrient bearing currents from the Pacific into the Caribbean Sea led to extinctions as well.
Particularly in forms that were dependent on the nutrient-rich waters.
But there are other consequences as well.
It would lead to changes in the Gulf Stream.
Now the Gulf Stream is a body of water that keeps my former home in the UK from freezing during the winter.
It may also be a causal factor in the cooling of the planet by about 2.6 million years ago, you see.
The ice would be back.
We will see how the Gulf Stream was changed by the isthmus of Panama next time.
In the next lecture, we will look at a broader view of the mammals
and see how they evolved to adapt after the dinosaurs
and ultimately how they would cope when glaciers once again started to roll across the...
