I'm going to take a little bit of a step back in time for this lecture. Previously we looked
at the mixing of the mammals across North and South America by the formation of the
Panama isthmus that allowed that mingling of the two forms. I'd like to place that event
though into a wider context of the evolution of mammals in the senozoic after the death
of the dinosaurs. So for this lecture I'd like to ask what was the nature of the mammalian
radiation of new forms after the dinosaurs? Also how did the earth return to the grip
of ice? What happened to the big mammals? What happened to the mammalian megafauna?
So what was that radiation of new mammalian forms like? Before we look to what happened
to the giant mammoths and other wonderful mega beasts from the last ice age that are
so familiar to us we really need to review them in the context of how the mammals first
appeared I think. This might be surprising to many but mammals actually evolved about
the same time as the dinosaurs in the late Triassic around 200 million years ago. They
are obviously completely outcompeted by the dinosaurs for the role of the dominant land
animal during the rest of the Mesozoic. Mammals had probably evolved from synodonts, a group
of synapsid reptiles such as this creature here, this is synonathus. Synodonts as we've
noticed from some previous lectures may have had the first indications that they were becoming
really very mammal like. Some may have had whiskers and some may have had fur like the
modern mammals. One of the earliest mammals that we find fossils of though is this creature.
This is mouse sized megazostridon from the late Triassic. It was probably more of an
infosectivore and probably nocturnal. It was probably the best time to get out as a mammal
when the dinosaurs weren't quite as active. He also probably laid eggs like their synodont
ancestors and also like their modern relatives, the monotremes such as the echidna and also
of course that creature made up of various evolutionary spare parts, so it would appear
the platypus. There were some early large forms in the Triassic like this creature here.
This is Repenomammus. He's about one meter long. Some of these fossils have been found
with a belly full of young dinosaurs, so it would appear at least this guy was snacking
on small dinosaurs, although to be perfectly fair this is really the exception rather than
the rule. Mammals in general were restricted to the undergrowth, screwing around the feet
of the dinosaurs. This may also explain why the mammals really weren't very diverse through
the Mesozoic either. The dinosaurs were already occupying all the ecological niches the mammals
had nowhere to diversify into because when they tried to they'd find a dinosaur already
occupying that niche. This placed a kind of an evolutionary lid on the diversification
of the mammals. So when the dinosaurs disappeared mammals rapidly radiated to fill vacant niches
right? Well actually not really. Following the extinction of the dinosaurs, mammals
remained relatively small in sector force not reaching even the moderate sizes until quite
a while after the end of the Cretaceous. Why not? Well in order to understand that we need
to look at the early Paleogene Earth, the period that follows directly after the Cretaceous
in fact the first period of the Cenozoic. It was much warmer than it is today, the tropics
and subtropics extended further north and south. Deciduous trees grew fairly close around
the North Pole spreading probably large leaves during the short summer before the long winter
would set in. One hypothesis for the lack of radiation is that much of the earth at
this time was covered in dense forests. It was kind of a forest world almost partly because
perhaps there were no large dinosaurs those large sauropods for example to browse the
trees and trample the vegetation. This really reduced the variety of ecological opportunities
for mammals to exploit. Basically there was just forest so they didn't really adaptively
radiate as much as you'd expect them to. Amongst the small scurrying mammals in this
image are a raccoon like omnivore called Characus. Climbing down the tree is an ancestral Cretaceous
mammal that had made it through the extinction event. This is Tillardus. Still a far way
off though isn't it from the magnificent mammals of the African savanna or even the
fantastic megafauna of Australia and South America that we described last time. Temperatures
though would continue to increase through this period reaching a high point at around
about 56 million years ago. Temperatures increased by about 6 degrees over 20,000 years. Fossil
alligators are found towards the North Pole and palm trees have been found in parts of
Alaska. Some of the first primitive dog-like mammalian carnivores also appear at this time.
The misonicates. These are primitive horses as well and primates that are also seen and
also off the coast of Pakistan another one of those very important transitional forms.
This is Ambulacetus means walking whale. He's about 10 foot long and is from the early
earseeing period about 49 to 50 million years ago and probably spent an awful lot of his
time in the water. You can tell that he has webbing in between his claws there. But this
is a four-legged land creature. He was quite able to walk about on land. It's likely that
all the whales and dolphins that we see in today's oceans would evolve from Ambulacetus
later in the Cenozoic. One of the best windows into this tropical forest world of the earseeing
is from the Messel Pit in Germany. It's about 35 kilometers southeast of Frankfurt. It's
been known about for a long time and coal and oil shale have been extracted from there
since about 1859. But also it preserves a remarkable suite of fossils. During the earseeing
about 47 million years ago this area was tropical forest. Not too surprising there. A lot of
the world was. It was tropical forest though surrounding a series of lakes and the bottom
of those lakes have become rich in organic debris from all the material that was falling
at their sides. Hence we get lots of coal and oil shale. This created one of those environments
we've discussed a lot of times. An anoxic bottom environment. Creatures that fell into
the lake and settled to the bottom had a high probability of becoming fossils. It's been
suggested that there might be another factor in the preservation here as well. It's possible
that this area had a lot of volcanic sources and occasionally these had released an awful
lot of carbon dioxide gas that would move through the forest like a silent killer. Killing
off the creatures that lived around the edge of the lake would then fall in, sink to the
bottom and be preserved, later be turned into fossils. And there are some wonderful fossils.
Here are just a few examples of them. This is a boa snake. This is one of the top predators
of the ecosystem. You can see that all the vertebra and the ribs and potentially as well
the outline of the body have been preserved. But we also find things like monitor lizards,
there are crocodiles and even this beautiful fossil ibis. Of the mammals we have a number.
We have Archeonic pterus, a very old primitive bat and this wonderful creature, Leptictidium.
He's about 24 to 36 inches long. He's fairly small but what's really interesting about
him is that he's bipedal. He probably scurried through the forest, not using his fores but
having a strange hopping motion like a kangaroo. And then there's this, Propalaeotherium, a
cat-sized ancestor of the horse, picking his way delicately through the dense undergrowth
a long way off from the beautiful plains dwelling Equus that we know today. As we can see in
this reconstruction, most of the mammals are small. That's probably because of this
dense environment. You just don't want to be as big as a rhino or an elephant trying
to pick your way through this tangle. But there's another reason why these creatures
are so small. This is Gastronis. He's almost six feet tall and he's a flightless bird,
one of those terror birds. He possibly was one of the first creatures that tried to take
over the dominant role once the dinosaurs had left off. He had powerful legs, large
talons and a huge hooked beak. He was the, well, at least one of the major top predators
terrorizing the tiny little mammals of that ear-seeing world. But let's consider the general
environment of the ear-seeing for a while. Why do we have these high temperatures? Well,
that's a matter of great debate but there have been a number of possible causes postulated.
Well, one of the easiest is to imagine we have a lot of carbon dioxide gas in the atmosphere.
Perhaps we're looking at an increased greenhouse effect, perhaps caused by increased volcanic
emissions, but an intriguing possibility that is that it might have resulted from burning
of peat. The paleocene is known for high-peat accumulation. Perhaps as well it was changes
in the Earth's orbit that helped keep the planet warm. Whatever the cause, the warming
may have destabilized gas clathrates. Remember those deep icy methane deposits that we referred
to in the Permatrassic extinction event. They would release methane and increase the greenhouse
potential for the planet. This was the time when the world would be at its warmest. Following
this period, the Earth has slid into a long period of global cooling. By the end of the
eocene, mammals had really started to dominate the Earth though. The terabirds had been outcompeted
by larger carnivorous mammals, replaced by scary looking beasts like Andrew Sarkas here.
He had an enormous skull about 33 inches long. The paleobiology of this creature is a little
uncertain but we think he might have been a large predator and maybe also a scavenger
as well. Unlike our modern carnivores, Andrew Sarkas has been suggested to be more related
to modern sheep and goats and perhaps pigs. Unless I admit, I find the idea of a killer
lamb chop somewhat disturbing.
Turbivores got pretty big as well. This is Brontotherium. He's a rhino looking creature
but a rhino that is about two times larger than modern rhinos. But perhaps some of the
most spectacular developments that we'd see would occur in the oceans. We'd see the continued
evolution of Ambulocetus and we'd find a whole bunch of creatures now that were no longer
terrestrial that had completely given up their legs and turned them into flippers. They diversified
into a whole number of beautiful, fully aquatic mammals including this one, Bacillosaurus. He's
about 52 feet long. He's the apex predator in the Eocene oceans, a worthy successor to
the Mosasaurus of the Cretaceous period.
The world was starting to change though. For the first time in a very long time, we started
to see permanent ice present at the South Pole and climatic patterns started to shift.
By the oligocene, around 43 million years ago, we had ice at both poles but the North
Pole was certainly not completely covered. With more ice at the poles, sea levels started
to drop as well. The world was still warm but it was getting more seasonal. Many areas
were seeing wet and dry seasons. The steamy lush jungles of the Eocene were less common
and a more open landscape was developing. During the oligocene, we start to see many
more familiar looking creatures evolve. Many of the modern frogs would evolve and also
many modern insects. You can see in this image an image of a midge that's trapped in fossil
amber, one of the more annoying creatures to evolve in this period. Also, ape and monkey-like
primates would make an appearance. Plus, the carnivora, modern meat-eating mammals, would
replace those earlier carnivorous mammals like Androsarchus. It's not to say that there
weren't some rather strange beasts around at this time. For example, this is Intracatherium.
He's a long-legged herbivore. He looks a bit like a rhino but on stilts. He was almost
17 feet tall at the shoulder and probably the tallest mammal to have ever lived.
Intracatherium shared the world with some really scary looking predators as well. For
example Hyenodon. Some species were around about four and a half foot at the shoulder
and almost ten foot long. It's estimated that he had a bite potential of about a thousand
pounds per square inch of pressure. And then, as everyone's favorite of this period, the
Hellpigs and Teledont. This is a distant relative of the pig, standing about four feet high,
probably an omnivore but likely one of the apex predators of its time. These would have
been scary creatures. We've worked out by looking at the fossils that it could open
its mouth a full 90 degrees and deliver a bite a lot harder than that of a crocodile.
But how now did the earth return into the grip of ice? By the Miocene, about 23 million
years ago, the biosphere was starting to look quite modern. We'd see continued cooling though
of the earth and the forest started to shrink. Grasses and herbs spread into an increasingly
seasonal climate. The rhino and horse families started to become less common and dear and
above a day that's the antelope, sheep, goat and cattle started to replace them. That's
a trend that continues today actually. Carnivores would also take on their modern forms. We'd
see more recognizable dogs, cats, bears and hyenas. All these important families would
start to make an appearance. No more killer pigs. There'd be a brief return to warm conditions
in the early Pliocene about five million years ago. In fact, Britain has evidence of nearly
subtropical conditions, but by two and a half million years ago, we had entered into the
current ice age. This shows the trend in temperature from the warm Eocene maximum. In general,
with a few up and downs along the way, climate is pretty well deteriorated steadily till
today. You take a little closer look at the most recent times, the past five million years
ago. Let's zoom in on there. At around two and a half million years ago, temperatures
really started to drop. This is the start of the current ice age. During that time, during
that ice age, numerous glacial and interglacial periods would see the advance and retreat
of ice across the planet. You can see this in this rapid, well geologically rapid, changes
in temperature. It's important to note that we are today still in an ice age. We are currently
just in one of those interglacial periods. As we entered the current ice age, three ice
caps formed. There'd be one over North America, one in Greenland, and Scandinavia. Today in
the North, only the Greenland ice cap survives, although fragments of those ice caps are still
found in North America and Scandinavia. You can visit them as well in the mountainous regions.
For example, if you're ever taking a trip up into Alberta in Canada, you might come
across this. This is the Athabasca Glacier in the Jesper National Park. It's part of
the Columbia ice field. It's a remnant of that ice cap. It's also positioned conveniently
close to the highway, although it has been retreating at an alarming rate away from
it over recent years. But what caused these glaciers? That still is quite a matter of
debate. CO2 levels dropped to pre-industrial levels, but that would be some 2 million years
before the ice age. Why didn't we go into an ice age at that time? Remember, we had
a similar lag time in the Ordovician glaciation. The ice didn't advance until Gondwana was
well under the South Pole. We would have expected as soon as Gondwana reached there, the ice
age would have started, but we needed a trigger for the ice to start to roll. In that case,
it was the drawdown of CO2 by weathering in more tropical regions.
So what was the tripping factor in the most recent ice age? Well, we think the tripping
factor was this. The ismas, the Panama, and the effects it's going to have on the Gulf
Stream. The Gulf Stream is a rapidly moving warm ocean current. It forms around Florida
and follows the east coast of North America. It then moves out into the Atlantic and towards
northern Europe. This is why Manchester is a relatively warm and wet and ice-free place
during the winter. It was famously mapped by the polymath Benjamin Franklin, who also
gave the Gulf Stream its name. Today, trade winds from the west, from the Sahara, carry
water evaporated from the Atlantic to the Pacific. This makes the Atlantic more saline
than the Pacific. That makes the Gulf Stream, which is on our side of the Panama isthmus,
more dense, which causes the Gulf Stream to sink just north of Iceland. It's a dense
water body. But look at the situation just before the formation of the isthmus. The waters
of the Pacific and the Atlantic are free to mingle, so the salinities in the Gulf Stream
are lower and the water less dense. This permitted the warm waters from the Gulf of Mexico to
now flow further north, keeping the Arctic free of ice. The isthmus was likely in place
by three million years ago, and soon afterwards ice starts to gather in the northern hemisphere.
But what was controlling the numerous glacial advances and retreats that we see here? Well,
to explain that, we have to turn to a civil engineer and mathematician from what is today
modern Croatia. This is Mulletin Molankovic. In 1914, he was interned by the Austro-Hungarian
Army in Budapest. He studied extensively in the library of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences,
and in studying all the data that he could in that particular area, developed an interest
in planetary climates. He started to publish ideas as well, and famously in a book called
The Mathematical Theory of Thermal Phenomena, caused by solar radiation. Yeah, it probably
wouldn't be on a bestseller list, and I doubt that you would be reaching for it on a nighttime
table, but it was a great body of work. Molankovic's career would receive a boost as well, when
his work was included in another publication called Climates of the Geological Past in
1924, which was compiled by a certain Alfred Wegener, who we met earlier. Just as Wegener
believed that the continents were not fixed in their locations, but had been moving around
the globe over many millions of years, Molankovic believed that the Earth's movement through
space were not uniform either, that they were varied over time. The movements would affect
the amount of solar radiation reaching the surface of the planet, and as such, affect
potentially the climate of the past. Let's right now just have a look at some of the ways
in which the Earth's movement in space can change. First of all, the eccentricity cycle.
It describes how the Earth's orbit changes from a circular orbit, where conditions will be warmer,
to an elliptical, where it will be cooler at times, over a period of about 90 to 100,000 years.
Then there's obliquity. That describes the axial tilt of the Earth with respect to a vertical line
drawn at 90 degrees to the plane of the Earth's orbit around the Sun. The maximum tilt is around
about 24 and a half degrees, with a minimum at around about 22 and a half degrees. Today,
we're around about 23 and a half. To move from the maximum tilt to the minimum tilt takes about
41,000 years. During times of minimum tilt, the polar regions get the most heating from the
sunlight during the summer. And then there's procession. Procession cycle is about 26,000 years,
and it describes the way the Earth's axis moves. If you want to think about what that might look like,
take a wobbling top or a gyroscope, you can see how it spins around like this. That's procession.
Imagine now if all those cycles combined to a point where the Earth was receiving minimal sunlight.
Note that the Sun itself goes through cycles of activity and the amount of radiation that it emits.
If this all coincided with low levels of carbon dioxide, perhaps when all those came together
like the perfect storm, this can explain those glacial advances.
But the change in sunlight actually hitting the surface of the planet appears to be too small.
It shouldn't really cause such a massive glaciation event, so why would the Molankovic cycles
have such an effect on glacial periodicity? This is still very much debated, but it's likely that
other factors, including some positive feedback mechanisms, are amplifying the effects.
But these glacial periods do appear to match the orbital forcing mechanisms that we're reading.
The last glacial advance was between 35,000 to 12,900 years before the present,
and it's referred to by a number of different names depending on where you are in the world.
In North America, it's referred to as the Wisconsin stage,
and in Britain, it's referred to as the Davenzian stage.
It peaked about 20,000 years before the present.
Sea levels dropped considerably, and large areas of low-lying land open up.
For example, that explains why we get such a wide Beringia correction between North America and Asia,
which allowed the migration of all those creatures around the planet.
The equivalent in Europe is Doggerland, which connected the United Kingdom with Europe.
It was a vast area of open grasslands, which creatures migrated freely across as well.
The spectacular megafauna that evolved in a cooler and drier world would be very familiar to children.
It includes animals like the woolly rhino, the mastodons, and of course the mammoths.
But with spectacular megafauna herbivores come spectacular megafauna carnivores as well.
This is the short-faced bear. He's at least 21% larger than a Kodiak bear.
He's the definite apex predator of this environment.
He would have been a very scary guy to contend with.
And also, probably one of the most iconic creatures of his time.
This is the saber-toothed cat. This is, of course, Smilerdom.
But what happened to all the megafauna?
What about also the megafauna of the Americas, creatures like Megatherium and Glyptodon?
These and the other so-called megafauna disappear rapidly,
many between 15,000 and 10,000 years before present.
In North America, 33 taxa go extinct, and in Eurasia, about 21 are found to go into extinction.
What's driving the extinction this time? We're not looking at a mass extinction,
but it does seem to be hitting these big creatures.
There's much debate over the years.
Many extinctions occur as we move in and out of ice ages, perhaps,
so perhaps it's climate change that caused extinction.
But there have been numerous glaciers and interglacials
and no associated loss in the megafauna species.
So what was driving the extinctions this time?
Of course, there's another important factor we've not considered,
a new factor, a recent factor.
There was a new super-predator on the horizon, humankind, migrating through the world.
Cave paintings like Lascaux in France show that humans certainly lived at the same time
as these enormous creatures and were aware of them.
In North America, we have a very early human group, the Clovis people.
They came from the stone tools, beautiful stone tools they made, the Clovis points.
Their appearance coincides with some extinctions in the megafauna.
So could overhunting by humans be the cause of the extinctions of these beasts?
Well, perhaps a combination of climate change and overhunting.
It would also explain potentially why in Africa we retain much of the megafauna,
giraffes, elephants and the like.
It suggested that the reason that is is because the megafauna there evolved together with humans.
When humans moved, though, into Europe and North America, they met a more naive fauna.
And as a result, they didn't have the adaptational behavioral adaptations
that would allow them to survive this new wave of super-predators.
Could people have also brought disease,
spread by humans and the domesticated animals that they traveled with them?
Well, no evidence has really been found of that, and it's difficult to imagine
how disease could jump so many species.
But there's another possible cause as well.
Of course, every time you mention impact, mention extinction, everybody has to think impact event.
And the impact event for this period is focused on something that's called the black band in North America.
It occurs about 12,900 years before present.
The black band is thought to represent continental-wide wildfires
and also associated with micro-diamonds, which are a product of impact, and also iridium.
But why is the extinction then not synchronous in other parts of the world
if we're looking at an impact event causing the extinction?
Why is there no indication of a population decline in the Clovis peoples?
Why is there no extinction on isolated islands where mammoths, for example,
would survive until as recently as 3,700 years before the present day?
The cause of the megafauna extinction is still a mystery waiting to be clarified.
Despite this setback, though, the mammals were doing well.
Why would they do so well?
Well, we think the answer probably is teeth.
Mammals, unlike fish, amphibians, and most reptiles, have highly differentiated teeth,
canines, incisors, and various cheap teeth.
Mammals could adapt to a variety of diets and environments, from mice to mammoths,
from seals to saber-toothed cats. Mammals are a diverse and phenomenal success.
In the next lecture, though, we're going to examine the story of one particular group.
Thank you.
