Remember, we've talked a lot about bias when we're talking about telling the history of
life on our planet. Land-based creatures are often described more than oceanic creatures.
Humans are often abandoned in favour of the animals and interest is then pretty well focused
on the vertebras. But very often whole chapters of books are devoted to just one species, one
subgroup of mammals, homo sapiens, us. Is that a bad thing? Well, not really, I think
as long as we keep perspective and opposition in the tree of life, evolution has not been
operating over 4.3 billion years potentially to produce us. As Carl Sagan said, we're the
product of four and a half billion years of pejuitous, slow biological evolution. There
is no reason to think that the evolutionary process has stopped. Man is a transitional
animal. He is not the climax of creation. However, it's only natural to have a curiosity
about our own story, isn't it? Humans are significant in other ways as well. It's likely
that we are more than any one individual species to have such profound effects on the entire
earth system. The questions I'd like to ask in this lecture are, just where do we humans
fall in the tree of life? Also, what are the early origins of our family, the primates,
and what ended the golden age of the apes, and what was the nature of the first eight
men? So, where do humans fit in this tree of life? Well, we've looked at various controversies
surrounding fossils, haven't we? In particular, fossils that speak to evolution. Remember,
tiktalic, that creature that spoke to the transition that there was a lobe fin fish
went through from a fully developed aquatic living creature transitioning through to a
tetrapod with legs, their pre-adapter to get onto the land. Then, of course, archaeotrics
linking the story of the birds and potentially the reptiles as well. But if you think those
stories were controversial, you won't see nothing yet. Darwin was well acquainted with
what a touchy subject human origins could be. In his famous book on the origin of species
in November 1859, he deliberately left human origins alone, saying that it was surrounded
with prejudices, only stating that light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history.
Even so, as you can see from this cartoon, people really did connect the dots. They realized the
implications of Darwin's theory. Clearly to them, Darwin was proposing a man from monkey's
hypothesis. Darwin would later nail his colours to the mass, though, in the Descent of Man in
1871, where he fully explored his ideas regarding human evolution and the relationship to the rest
of the apes. Since then, though, human controversy in terms of our origins has never really gone away.
Paleoanthropologists, or paleontologists who particularly study human origins, are at the
forefront of this controversy. The area of research touches on our own species' narrative,
and to those who take a literal interpretation of creation accounts of human origins,
you can find this a very difficult area indeed. But where do we fit overall, though, in the tree
of life? Well, humans are a member of a mammal group, the primates. That includes
the lemurs and the tarsus. Of the primates, we are in the anthropoid, or the higher primates.
That includes the monkeys and the apes. Within the anthropoids, we make a group called the
hominidae. That's the great apes. That includes the gorillas and chimps, orangutans and gibbons.
Along with the chimps, pan, we form the homininae. And within that group, we are the sole surviving
representative of Gina's homo. Under the Linnaean scheme, we had the hominidae, all to ourselves.
All the other great apes were excluded to reflect how very extra special we humans were,
and how very different we were from the apes. To paraphrase Douglas Adams,
earthmen are not very proud of their cousins, and never invite them round for dinner.
Under clodistic analysis, though, that special position just disappears. We cannot claim the
hominidae. Chimps, gorillas and orangutans all have to be included, otherwise the grouping
is not valid under clodistic schemes. Back in the time of Linnaeus, our special position
in the tree of life had more to do with anthropocentric views of the position within our biosphere,
a case of over-inflated ego. We, at the end of it all, are just another ape.
Genetically, really not that very different from the rest of the apes. We are, after all,
over 98% chimp. With this in mind, though, let's investigate the origins of just one species in
all of Earth's history, Homo sapiens, and we'll see what less than 2% difference in genes can
make to a species. So, what are the origins of our family, the primates? Well, I guess it depends
on what you mean with the origins and how far you go back. It's quite an open question,
where do you draw the line? For example, you could start way back. Let's go back to the
Cambrian, for example. Our ancestors, you could say, include little hycoicthes here from the
Cambrian period. Remember, he was one of those purported early fish, potentially. Or how about
going to the Devonian and considering a cantistega, that tetrapod that was potentially going to make
a break for the land? For the purposes of this story, though, I'd like to bring us to a point
past the evolution of the mammals and consider some of the first members of our own order,
the primates. Some primate features, just to tell you who we're dealing with, though. We have
five fingers with opposable thumbs. We also have big toes. There are nails on the fingers and toes
of most species. We have forward-facing eyes, and we have eye orbits encircled in bone. And we tend
towards a shortened snout and a flattened face as well. One of our earliest possible ancestors,
or answers to the primates, is this shrew-like creature. He's called purgatorius. He's not very
big. He's about six inches long. The characteristics of his teeth definitely identify him as a primate,
though he certainly doesn't have the face of a primate. It's pointed, elongated, not flattened.
We think that this creature was likely a diurnal insectivore. In addition, look at those paws.
Was this a creature or borrower? That'd be a very unusual activity for a primate.
Purgatorius has been recovered from the Hell Creek Formation in Montana. That was originally
thought to be late Cretaceous, which means that purgatorius would have been there scoring around
the feet of T. rex. Later in investigations, though, it was placed around about 63 million years ago,
just after the extinction of the dinosaurs. Even so, it's thought likely that the ancestors of the
primates probably did evolve during the time of the dinosaurs, and obviously kept a pretty low
profile. If we come forward in time, though, to more recently, we get to about 55 to 58 million
years ago, we find this creature. This is Plesiodavus. He looks a little more primate-like,
like a limo, which is probably why the artist has given him this striped tail.
He's fairly small, about the size of a squirrel, but has these chisel-like incisors and a long
snout that makes it look somewhat more rodent-like than a primate. It's unclear where this creature
lived. Did it live in the trees like the primate, or was it more happy on the ground, perhaps?
Now, arboreal creatures, tree-dwellers, don't commonly leave a great fossil record. They don't
leave very complete skeletons. However, Plesiodavus is known from quite very well-known and preserved
fossils, suggesting that perhaps this animal was more of a ground than a tree-dweller.
For an example of an early tree-dwelling primate, try this. This is Dryomomus. It's about 56 million
years ago. It's about the size of a mouse. But it begs the question, why did the primates make
the move to the trees anyway? Is it possible that they were being out-competed on the ground?
Perhaps they are being driven upwards by the more successful rodents.
An interesting possibility, isn't it? It drives home an idea that our ancestors were not always the
super-new kids on the block. Rather, they've often been out-competed by other forms, forced to adapt
to a different niche altogether. This is kind of a common theme that we can trace in many parts
of the evolution of the vertebrates that would ultimately lead to us humans, a humbling thought.
By the Eocene, 56 to 34 million years ago, we start to see early primates, the prosimians.
They were well-established in dense tropical forests that covered much of the planet, as we've
already discussed. Various lemalike creatures would evolve into this environment. A very famous
fossil from this time caused rather a bit of a stir in 2009. This is Darwinius, Marsilii,
or Eida, 47 million years old. Recovered from the mesopit fossil deposit, remember we discussed that
last time, those lakes surrounding those forests surrounding those lakes and creatures occasionally
being overcome by carbon dioxide and falling into the lake, perhaps that's what happened to
Eida, falling from a tree into the lake to be preserved at the bottom. She was hailed at the
time as one of our most direct ancestors. Many now believe that it's only distantly related to humans
and probably more directly related to the lemas and losses. Even so, Eida gives us a clear picture
of what was leaping in the Eocene tree-cap and canopies. An important change is noted in some
of these forms though. I'd like to illustrate that by showing you the base of this skull over here.
As bipedal creatures, the large opening in the base of our skull that connects to the spinal cord,
it's called the foramen magnum, is located in a position right here, right underneath the base
of the skull. It's because basically our skull is balanced on the top of our spine. However,
with tetrapods like cats and dogs, the spine is essentially horizontal, so the foramen magnum,
rather than being at the base of the skull, is more towards the back of the skull.
Some fossils from this time show the foramen magnum starting to move forward. Early primates were
possibly developing a kind of a bipedal skipping mechanism perhaps as we see today
in some modern lemas. Important echoes perhaps of what was to come in the future.
By the Myocene period, after the Eocene at 23 million years ago, monkeys had evolved. One of
the best known forms is this. Egyptopithecus, he's about the size of a house cat. These monkeys,
technically known as anthropoids, probably out-competed and replaced those earlier prosimians,
which explains why animals like lemas are only found where there are currently no monkeys in
existence, or they've adapted to nocturnal existence. Up to about 8 million years ago,
the world could be described as being a fairly golden age for the apes. There were over 50 species.
Some were very large and like the orangutans today, like cyvipithecus here,
others were tiny like limnipithecus and probably lived high in the treetops. They were very diverse.
Between 7 to 8 million years ago, this high time for the apes suddenly ends. Why? And how does this
relate to the evolution of the human ape? So, what ended this golden age and how does it relate
to our evolution? Early paleoanthropologists were pretty sure what was driving human evolution.
It's obvious, isn't it? It's all around us. It's our intelligence. It's what separates us from the
rest of the apes, all our art, our literature, our vast monuments like stonehenge, like the pyramids,
our ability to explore our environment. In effect, our culture, all driven by one very
important thing, our big brains. We obviously knew, therefore, what the missing link between
the apes and the humans should be like. It should look like an ape, but have a big brain. So,
they went looking for it and they found it in England in Piltdown Man. It was discovered in
1912 by Juan Charles Dawson. It was found in a gravel pit near the village in Piltdown in East
Sussex. Just as expected, it was a human-sized brain over the face of an ape and, of course,
most importantly, he was British. The scientific community at the time absolutely
lapped this up. It was just what they'd expected and it would remain the touchstone for understanding
of human evolution for over 40 years. Unfortunately, of course, it was all utter garbage.
The cranium is from a modern human. The jaw belongs to an orangutan.
Some of the teeth were filed down for good measure to make it look like it had probably been eating
seeds and other things in the environment and the bones have been treated with chemicals to
make them look old. And hey presto, out of thin air, you have created the oldest Englishman.
I'm still not sure who perpetrated this hoax. Was it Dawson himself? Or was it perhaps planted
there for Dawson to find? You can almost imagine someone hiding in the bushes and sniggering,
can't you? Bizarrely, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle has been implicated by some the writer of the Sherlock
Holmes mysteries. But even many years later, after the pilt down hoax was exposed, the big brain
theory of human evolution would just not go away. The search for the big brain human ancestors
continued. But there have been important discovery in 1974 that would really turn things around.
Dr. John Johansson was returning to camp in the afar region of northeast Ethiopia. He was looking
for hominids and apparently it hadn't been a very good season so far. And he noticed an interesting
lump of something sticking out of the ground. This particular lump would turn the ideas about
human evolution upside down. When that lump was examined, it was found to be an elbow joint.
Later excavation revealed an incredible skeleton, about 40% complete. Remember, we are symmetrical
creatures so when you have 40% of the skeleton, any material that's missing, you can kind of mirror.
While Johansson and his team apparently were looking over these fossils, probably with a
great joy out of my gin, apparently the Beatles Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds was playing on a
tape and as such, Lucy got her name. First appearances, she might look a little disappointing.
It's not really what we expected. She doesn't have a big brain. In fact, the brain size is
very little different from that of a chimp. What is important about Lucy though is how she's walking.
She's not walking like the Victorian image of our ancestors. She isn't lurching in an
ape-like fashion across the landscape. She is walking like a human being upright. Lucy walked
like a human but had the head of an ape. It would appear that big brains did not evolve first.
It would appear that it was getting upon two legs that drove us on our path away from the other apes.
The formal name is Dostralopithecus afarensis, that's the southern ape from afar. She still has many
ape-like features though, including a very ape-like face and curved fingers, possibly an adaptation
that points to her still being a very able tree climber. She's dated to about 3.2 million years ago.
Soon afterwards, in 1976, the footprints of a hominid were found.
This is footprints of possibly the same species as Lucy or possibly closely related. They were
discovered in a layer of volcanic ash in Latoli in East Africa by Mary Leakey. Mary Leakey,
that's the wife of Louis Leakey, the mother of Richard Leakey, together probably the most
famous family of paleoanthropologists ever. For me, these prints are as moving as the Mona Lisa.
They're preserved in volcanic ash from a nearby volcano. After a brief rainfall, that ash was
turned into a substance a bit like wet concrete, and these hominids passed over the surface,
which dried out in the hot sun, preserving the trails. They were later covered by a further
covering of ash from the same volcano. These are our ancestors, or at least closely related cousins,
moving purposely across the landscape, likely recording the passage of three individuals.
It's possibly two males, one following you think, closely behind in the footprints of the other.
There's either a small female or perhaps a child following close behind,
dated of course because we have the ashes quite accurately to 3.5 million years ago,
perhaps the first record ever of a family outing.
It would appear then that walking upright is what drove human evolution. The theory goes a bit
like this. Walking upright frees your hands. When you have free hands, your hands are free
to make and use tools. This helps the selection of better tool makers, which means bigger brains.
So, braininess follows walking, not the other way around. So, what caused us to walk upright?
Now, a lot was changing at the end of this golden age of apes. To understand these changes,
we need to go back in time and consider the geological history of the Indian subcontinent.
Around 140 million years ago, India was part of Gondwana,
along with Africa, Australia, Antarctica and South America. In the late Cretaceous though,
about 90 million years ago, a part of this continent that included India and Madagascar
rifted. India ultimately rifted from Madagascar and started to move fairly rapidly actually,
about eight inches a year, northwards. By 10 million years ago, India had collided with Asia,
and the Himalayan mountains were rising. These rising mountains caused the rain that used to
fall in Africa to now fall during monsoons over India and Asia. That meant that the air that
reached Africa now was dry. As a result, the tropical forests started to dwindle. They started to
shrink into patches separated by open grasslands, savanna. Extinction occurred in those forest
dwellers, and adaptive radiation of the survivors was found, those moving into a new environment,
the plains dwellers. Some of those apes took the initiative to move between those patches of
dwindling forests and to the open savannas. These apes would start to walk upright, perhaps
standing up to look over the tall grasses to watch for predators. The results hand started to
be freed, which would allow us to collect food or make tools, bipedal walking selected for,
and set in motion, and our conditions for later big brains. Well, at least that was the story,
until even older upright walking hominids were discovered. That early hominid is Ardipithecus.
The first fragments of Ardipithecus were discovered by Tim White of UC Berkeley,
between 1992 and 1993. Other fragments, including a partial skeleton, about 45 percent complete,
were also recovered. The most complete skeleton was given the name Ardi. She's a female, has a
brain that's smaller than Lucy's, but like Lucy, Ardi was found close to volcanic ashes,
so we could date this creature fairly accurately. Radiometric techniques point to this creature
being about 4.4 million years old. That's one million years older than Lucy. Ardi had some
surprises as well. Well, she was bipedal, no surprise there. We're a long time after that
proliferation of the apes in the forests. The surprise is in her feet. Lucy has fairly modern
looking feet, but Ardi still possesses a large grasping big toe. Ardi also still has really long
tree climbing arms and those massive long fingers. It's also found associated with fossils that
indicated that this creature lived in a dense woodland. This creature was not a plains dweller.
So, time for a rethink. Bipedal locomotion had apparently not evolved as a result of our ancestors
walking across the open savanna. Some of our ancestors were already walking upright in the
forests. It would appear our ancestors were pre-adapted to exploit the savanna landscape,
just like the tetrapods, such as a canthistega, were pre-adapted for walking on land,
even though they developed their limbs in water. This leaves a big question, of course.
What advantages does walking on two legs have for a forest dwelling ape?
There must be a selective advantage, because walking upright has so many severe disadvantages,
the very least of which is that it makes us very slow. So, there must be a really good reason to
get up on two legs. Dr Owen Lovejoy of Kent State University reckons there are maybe some
clues that we can derive from the teeth of Ardipithecus. Ardipithecus canine teeth are short
and stubby, like human teeth. They don't have these large pointed canines like we see in male chimps.
Chimps are using these teeth when fighting over females. Lovejoy suggests that the loss of the
large canine teeth in the male ardipithecus meant that males had to woo females in another manner,
perhaps by bringing them food. If you stand upright, you have two hands free. You can bring
more food back to your mate. It's an interesting idea, isn't it? Upright walking, the result of
needing to impress your girlfriend, early hominid version of a box of chocolates and a bunch of
flowers. Ardi is described by Tim White as a mosaic creature, neither a chimp or a human.
It's not the closest ancestor between us and the chimps. That lies somewhere further back in the
past, but Ardi is certainly getting close. But let's for now return to Luciano kind. It would
appear that they were already pre-adapted planes dwellers. So, what were they using those hands
for? Were they making tools? Tim White in the Afar region of Ethiopia discovered another fossil,
Australopithecus garai, earlier descendants or relatives of either descendants or relatives of
Lucy. This species are found associated with simple tools dating to about 2.5 to 2.6 million years
ago. They were probably used for butchering the long limbs of animals like antelope,
trying to get to the marrow which is very high in calories and useful actually for supporting
large brains. The idea of Australopithecines butchering animals was taken to an extreme by Dr
Raymond Dart. He was an Australian anatomist and anthropologist. Dart was famous for one of the
first discoveries of Australopithecus, a species called Australopithecus africanus in 1924.
Dart had taken up a position as professor of anatomy at the University of Waterstrand in
Johannesburg. During November 1924, he was sent two crates full of fossils from a limestone quarry
in Tong, which included an interesting skull. This creature had either fallen into the cave
or perhaps six remains just ended up there and water rich in minerals had precipitated calcium
carbonate over the skull. It took Dart a full month to remove the surrounding rock.
What he uncovered though was the Tong baby, a young primate. He noted though that the
foreman magnum, that hole into which the spine connects was under the skull, an indication
of an upright walker. It also didn't have the big brain case that was expected of our ancestors
at that particular time. In addition, the ancestor was from Africa, not from Europe.
He published his data in Nature and the idea was just pretty well rejected. A lot of people back
then in the 20s obviously had pilt down as their image of what our ancestors should look like.
It was definitely a fossil baby gorilla. We want an ape with a big brain. Of course,
subsequently discoveries have vindicated Dart. Africanus is obviously more recent than Lucy.
Exists between 2 to 2.85 million years ago in the Pliocene. It's less primitive as
a flatter face. It's not quite looking as ape-like but still has some of the primitive features as
well. It still has those curved fingers. Dart also though put forward an interesting hypothesis.
It's called the killer ape theory and it suggested that antelope bones found associated at the site
were probably being used as weapons. Early hominids were organising into rather vicious
top predators moving around the landscaping groups. Dart believed it was these violent
tendencies born in the killer ape that drove human evolution. It was the killer ape in all of us
that explains why Homo sapiens is such an aggressive species. The theory is not really
supported though by paleonsological evidence. Australopithecines have been found with
big cat tooth marks right in the back of their skull. Now this is the preferred method of hunting
of the big cats like jaguars who catch their prey and then physically drag them up in a tree to eat.
Australopithecines like other bipedal apes were in all likelihood more prey than predator. At best,
the descendants of Lucy were probably just opportunistic scavengers. They would get
meet where they could but probably only after every other animal in the landscape had taken its
pick. They'd be going for the marrow breaking them open with those primitive tools. In the next
lecture I'd like to examine our own story. Our own story, the branch of the upright apes which
conforms to us, Gina's Homo. I'd also like to consider the flowering of human culture
and the implications that would have for the earth system.
