We've come on a long journey through these lectures, haven't we?
We've seen the birth of star systems from clouds of interstellar gas and dust through
to the emergence of a biosphere and its diversification into the wonderful forms that we see today.
What we see here with humans, though, is something special.
We might as well come clean and admit it.
We see the evolution of a part of the biosphere that has become self-aware.
That is not to say that other animals do not possess some sort of self-awareness, but
we do seem to demonstrate this quality with a remarkable regard.
In this lecture, I want to further develop our part of the story and ask, who were the
early members of our immediate family, and what made them different from the other walking
apes?
Also, who was the first great explorer in Genus Homo?
When did we become aware, is another question we'll look at.
And also, might we have to start to define new earth systems and new geological periods?
And finally, let's consider taking our biosphere beyond the earth system.
So who were the early members of our immediate family?
Here is what identifies our branch of primates.
I must admit, these images still send a kind of tingle up and down my spine.
These, though, are really just the same as the rocket that we saw.
Basically, they're tools, obviously somewhat less complex, but still evidence of technology.
It's important to note, though, that tool use is not a key identifier of the Homo branch.
Other creatures use tools, for example the woodpecker finch and the Galapagos that use
as cactus spines to pick insects out of holes in trees.
You've probably all seen images of chimps using sticks to extract grubs from a rotten
log.
But no other group of creatures uses tools so conspicuously as we do.
Tool use and the development of tools are really a vital part of the human story.
We've already seen that Australopithecus was using tools.
The first member of the own genus is actually named for their numerous and more advanced
tools.
That is Homo habilis, handyman, and we found him from about 2.4 million years ago.
It's not just tools that separate habilis from the Australopithecines, though.
He also has an increased size in his brain.
He's about 600 ccs.
It's about 200 ccs more than Lucy.
These upright apes, about 5 feet tall, are starting to get brainy.
Homo habilis still retained many apelite features, like though he had arms that are
fairly long compared to ours.
But they are developing a flatter face than the Australopithecines, even though it did kind
of still jut out in a very apelite manner.
Habilis is likely eating more meat as well.
Analysis of molar teeth show that they were very sharpened, designed to shear meat, rather
than the flat surfaces that you see in Lucy.
Lucy was probably more adapted for eating soft fruit and berries than meat.
But had habilis become Dart's killer ape from the last lecture?
To be honest, it's difficult to tell.
Habilis was creating more sophisticated tools, and it's tempting to think that the larger
brains they were developing may be allowed them to hunt more effectively as a team.
Habilis, though, was still likely a prey item for the large cats.
For example, dinofilus here, which means terrible cat, a jaguar-like animal that has also been
a terror of Lucy's kind.
The best I think we can offer for habilis is that he might have been a more effective
scavenger.
Perhaps using group cooperation, they could scare away other scavengers or perhaps predators
from a kill.
It's a risky business still, but it still has higher rewards.
Meat, especially the rich fatty marrow, that's an important contributing factor in the development
of big brains.
It's also important to remember that during most of hominid evolution, there was never
just one type of upright ape.
Today we're in quite an unusual situation, as far as we're aware, we're the only one.
But species of hominid likely shared the landscape with other bipedal apes, and habilis
is no exception.
This is parenthropus bozii, often known as nutcracker man.
He inhabited savanna woodland and mails for around about four foot three inches and weighed
about 150 pounds.
But just look at that skull, a massive jaw.
And can you see there's a ridge, kind of a crest along the surface?
We think that that ridge was designed to attach powerful muscles that were activating this
really large jaw.
There are also really large molars in bozii's jaw, so we think he was eating tough plants
and roots and nuts.
Perhaps you could imagine him being something a little like a two-legged modern-day gorilla.
One of the first species though to demonstrate a very human-like looking body was Homo erectus,
actually means upright man.
Body forms are found around about 1.9 million years ago and are sometimes referred to as
Homo agasta.
Agasta incidentally means workman, which also is a reference to the more advanced tools
these creatures were using.
The body wasn't that different from the modern human, although I do question that he had
developed sufficient modesty skills to be wearing a loincloth.
Agasta was tall, over six feet, and if you'd seen this creature from a distance or behind,
you might mistake them for a human being in the modern day, but if they turned to look
at you, the face that would greet you would still be very ape-like to us, but the brain
was getting larger, about 860 cc's on average.
It's been suggested that Agasta also might have had a hairless body like we do and possibly
possessed sweat glands to regulate temperature.
Now other mammals of course pant in order to cool down.
The development of sweat glands meant that Agasta didn't have to pant.
Perhaps this permitted Agasta to do something special.
Perhaps he could use his throat and breath for speech.
Now speech would be extremely useful.
It would help cement social groups together.
It would also permit planning and the coordination of hunting and foraging expeditions.
Plus good communication skills would also mean more success in securing mates and obtaining
food.
So there would be a definite advantage for speech and bigger brains.
The debate is very much open, but braincasts of Agasta and Homo erectus have been discovered
that show a development of a particular area of the brain called the Broca's area, and
in modern humans this is the area that controls speech.
There's also some interesting fossils that have been recovered from Spain related to
Homo erectus.
It's called Homo heidelbergensis.
They've been found to possess something that's called a hyoid bone.
In the human neck, the hyoid bone supports the root of the tongue and it's critical
for making a whole range of vocalization.
These are interesting ideas and may point to the possibility that Agasta and the related
species might have had complex speech.
We mean may never be able to be completely certain though, providing definitive paleontological
evidence of speech is obviously difficult without a time machine.
Even so, as early humans likely hunted in groups, I think speech is a good possibility.
But now let's consider who was the first great explorer in our family.
Well Agasta had advanced tools and there's also evidence that he was using fire as well.
So it appeared that this species was kind of adapted, ready to move out of the African
cradle, but in general it's regarded that it was Homo erectus, who was the first of
our family to get really itchy feet and start to move.
But I begs the question, why would the humans move these early humans?
And for this we turn to something that's called the Saharan pump hypothesis.
It proposes the development of alternating wet to dry conditions in the Sahara.
During wet times, grasslands would develop and animals would start to use this corridor.
During dry times, animals could no longer migrate along this route, which had once again
turned to desert.
When the corridor was open, animals could move into Arabia and along the coastline of
the eastern Mediterranean, extending across Asia towards Indonesia.
Homo have actually termed this whole area because of the grasslands that would have
been present during these wet times as savannah stan.
Homo erectus is possibly one of the first species to take advantage of this great green
bridge.
You can regard the erectus as being a human in the long line of explorers, including
Zanghi, Magellan, Columbus and Neil Armstrong.
Some of the earliest human fossils we have though outside of Africa come from the Manisi
in the Republic of Georgia, the dated to about 1.8 million years ago.
The brains of these fossils though are smaller than those of Homo erectus, but it's not
just the brains, the whole group of fossils that we find there suggest a species that
is smaller in stature, less than five foot tall.
Now some regard these fossils as being earlier forms of Homo erectus, a species that they
call Homo georgicus, but some think that it might be an entirely different member of
our family.
This opens up many possibilities in terms of the human story.
Although the initial evolution of humans started in Africa, perhaps older hominids, perhaps
even looses kind, spread out of Africa earlier.
It's therefore possible that significant evolutionary leaps might have occurred in our family in
Europe and Asia too.
Even so, Homo erectus was a widely dispersed species.
Find Homo erectus fossils in South Africa, China, Java and in Western Europe.
Even if he wasn't the first to get out of Africa, he certainly did get around.
But an important question now, when did we become self aware?
Homo erectus and related forms would eventually be replaced by us.
We probably evolved from Homo erectus via numerous intermediate stages by about 200,000
BP.
Some hold to a hypothesis that humans evolved from erectus populations into space and they
say that explains why we have the different races around the planet.
However, fossil and genetic evidence suggests an out of Africa hypothesis.
Modern humans moving out of Africa are around about 70,000 years before the present, replacing
the more archaic forms of genus Homo as it's spread.
The very base of our history, we are all Africans.
The migration of modern humans and the replacement of earlier hominids is fascinating.
It's a very complicated story as well.
But for the last part of this series, I'd like to look at another question.
The question is, when do we get the evidence of that first flowering of human culture?
That heightened degree of self-awareness, that self-awareness that expresses itself
today in human culture in a whole manner of ways from the Mona Lisa to the Beatles Sgt.
Pepper's album.
The evidence, potentially, of this culture are found from the Atapakura Mountains in
Spain.
Caves in that area, which incidentally are now regarded as being so important that they
are a UNESCO World Heritage Site, are found to record thousands of years of human habitation.
But they also contain the remains of that close relative of Homo erectus, Homo heidelbergensis.
Now heidelbergensis had a fairly large brain, between 1,100 to 1,400 cc.
That means it overlaps with the modern human, as are about 1,350 cc.
Which might explain why these creatures were producing a really more complex array of tools.
There have been some very significant finds, though, in a particular cave, it's called
Sima de la Huesos, that's the Cave of the Bones.
Now this cave isn't easy to get to, you have to go through at least 42 feet down a deep
shaft and then you got to crawl for quite a long time in the dark, in a 2,000 foot passageway.
However, at the end of all this crawling around, 28 heidelbergensis skeletons were eventually
found.
Given the difficulty it is to get into that cave, it seems unlikely that they were just
washed in there, and it would appear potentially that they might have been deliberately placed
over time.
Also there's something else that's found there, this handaxe, beautiful handaxe, a really
large one, in fact it's so large they're called a Excalibur, and it's made of an odd substance,
it's made of a rock called Quartzite, it's a red Quartzite that isn't found in the local
area, suggesting possibly that this has again been deliberately placed.
Is this a funerary offering?
If this is evidence of burial, it's extremely significant, because such an idea requires
the preparation of the dead and ritualistic offerings.
It also shows an ability to conceptualise beyond normal existence.
The concept of an afterlife shows an ability to imagine, and from our imagination our culture
is born.
This is very compelling, but somewhat isolated evidence, and very open to interpretation.
So when is it that we get definite evidence of this ability to imagine, and really what
should we be looking at?
Imagination on the face of it wouldn't fossilise, but perhaps in a way it does, perhaps we should
be looking towards the symbolic language of art.
When we look at the emergence of art, it appears to emerge almost spontaneously around 33,000
years ago.
The most spectacular example of this is from southern France, close to the Vallon Pont d'Arc.
The limestone cliff and caves above this particular river were being explored by a Mr. Jean-Marie
Chavaux, and in the December of 1994 he was able to detect currents of air at the back
of one of the caves, and suspected at the back of that cave there might be more extensive
cave systems.
What he discovered once he returned the next day and cleared away the debris was amazing.
The shaft opened up into a series of connected caves that were strewn with bones, but not
just strewn with bones.
On the walls were these spectacular paintings dating to about 32,900 years before present.
These and similar paintings at Lascaux in south-west France depict various animals in
their landscape.
They also display chimeras of humans and other creatures, and also some very significant
and strange dot and lattice patterns, lattice patterns in a geometric shape.
Initially, it was thought that the artists were depicting the animals that they hunted,
so you could imagine you'd go down into the depths of the earth and appeal to the earth
spirits to bring them success in hunting.
The problem is that when you look at the many butchered animals in and around these caves,
they don't often match the animals that are depicted on the cave walls.
Nigel Spivey, the University of Cambridge, and David Lewis Williams of the University
of Whitwathastand in Johannesburg, have an interesting idea regarding these patterns
of dots and grids, these lattice patterns, and they say that they're actually very similar
to the hallucinations that people experience during times of sensory deprivation.
Is it possible that people were deliberately isolating themselves in dark caves like this
and having sensory deprivation-induced spiritual experiences in dark places?
After these hallucinations, then, lighting a fire and drawing the dot and lattice patterns
that they saw on the walls of the cave and incorporating them with the animals above them
in the world that they inhabited and knew so well.
It's an interesting and, I think, very exciting interpretation.
For me, though, some of the most spine-tingling images are signatures of artists communicating
their presence from the past to us here today by the imprint of a hand.
I was here.
It's not just cave art, though.
There are other forms of expression at this time.
We find decorative beads and pendants, complex tools and blades made from stone, bone, and
antler, also figurines like this.
This is the Venus of Willendorf, discovered in Austria in 1908, dated to about 22,000
years before present.
Both figurines have been found like this.
We're uncertain what it actually represents, but it's likely it was some sort of fertility
symbol.
This very sudden flowering of art, though, does pose a problem.
Modern humans evolved in Africa about 200,000 years before present.
Recent discoveries in Israel, around about 400,000 years before present, may perhaps
change ideas of the timing and location of our evolution, but whatever the date of the
evolution of modern humans, there's a big gap between the evolution of Homo sapiens
and the art that we find in those caves in France.
What was happening in between?
Richard Klein at the University of Stanford suggests that what we're looking at here is
evidence of a sudden genetic mutation, which switched the human brain on.
Click.
This would explain the sudden emergence of the cave paintings, an explosion of consciousness
called the human revolution, similar in scope, I guess, and impressiveness to the explosion
of animal life at the base of the Cambrian.
This explosion, though, is much more rapid.
It's troubling because it's not how we understand evolution occurs in comparatively slow steps,
even if you allow for the more rapid changes of punctuated equilibrium.
The explosion of consciousness is almost instantaneous.
There are no primitive forebears, no more simple forms of art leading up to the beautiful
and complex forms in the French caves.
This is not unlike Darwin's dilemma, with the trilobites at the base of the Cambrian.
Remember, suddenly big creatures emerging with apparently no more primitive ancestors
beforehand?
Klein suggested that this explains why another group of hominids, the Neanderthals, were
replaced by our species very soon afterwards.
We suddenly switched on, became self-aware, and got even more smart and just replaced
the rest of our family.
There's been a challenge, though, to this human revolution theory from Dr. Chris Henshelwood
of the State University of New York and Stony Brook.
He was looking at a discovery that he found in the southern Cape Coast in South Africa.
It's in a limestone cave called the Blombos Cave.
It was excavated between 1992 and 2009, and what they find is red ochre.
Now red ochre is a mineral pigment in red paint, and it doesn't occur naturally in
this area, so it must have been brought to the cave's delivery, in fact it looks like
it's been placed specifically within the caves, but even more significant than that.
Some of that red ochre has something engraved on it.
Geometric designs crossed hatch patterns surrounded by two parallel lines, divided in the middle
by another line.
Now these have been analysed at the microscopic level, and these aren't cut-marts.
These were made by a point.
This is an abstract design that has been made deliberately.
These date to about 70,000 years before present, well before the proposed blooming of the human
mind.
If this is art, then image and abstract thinking develop gradually over time, not in an instantaneous
explosion of consciousness.
Art and awareness were just like any other part of the human story.
They've developed slowly in incremental stages, not in a sudden genetic mutation.
At the moment, this may represent one of the earliest pieces of evidence of the world
to come, a world that was going to be increasingly shaped by one species.
This is likely unprecedented.
Let's think then about now defining new systems and periods.
We've been talking a lot about change all the way through this course, or change our
own species just through this lecture, but as we know, change is not uncommon.
We've seen how cyanobacteria would convert our planet's atmosphere to one of abundant
oxygen.
We've seen how changes in the biosphere in the Precambrian alter the atmosphere and
plunge the earth into a snowball earth event.
We've seen how changes in ocean chemistry allow for the development of large animals
at the end of the Precambrian and how hot rocks rising from the depths would alter our
planet in such a way that it would throw it into a dramatic pruning of life at the end
of the Permian.
We've also seen how the collision of India and Asia causes the rising of the Himalayan
Mountains that would change weather patterns and rainfall in Africa and cause a certain
bipedal ape to adapt to a savannah existence.
These are all examples of intricate parts of the Earth's system acting together to
cause change.
What is unusual about change today is that it is possible that it is being driven by
just one species.
There's no denying it, we are having an effect on the character of the Earth's system.
The debate as to the extent, trajectory and possible consequences come up with uncertain
answers.
It would take up a whole other series of lectures to explore those.
But the Earth's system has evolved and changed over billions of years and it will continue
to do so.
The question to us right now I guess is, after this current change has completed, is it a
place we would be happy to live in?
Some Earth system scientists have now decided that we need to erect a new system.
Do we now need to recognise the existence of the Anthrosphere to account for the impact
that Homo sapiens are having on planet Earth?
You can see those impacts all over the place, deforestation, drainage of wetlands, the release
of toxic chemicals and oil spills, but perhaps the most controversial impact is probably
the production of carbon dioxide and its proposed effects on global warming.
Now most geoscientists actually believe that human activity is responsible, but this is
still hotly debated, but I must admit the sudden leaping carbon dioxide levels at the
same time as the Industrial Revolution is certainly compelling evidence of a possible
link to this new Anthrosphere.
But how are we actually having such an effect on warming?
Basically it all comes back to Earth systems and how carbon circulates through them.
There are a number of ways that carbon, pathways that carbon takes through the Earth system.
There's short term cycling.
Carbon is extracted from the environment by plants and animals and then returned to the
environment when the creatures die.
This is rapid.
It takes a period of 100 years perhaps to complete.
Some of that carbon though is eventually gets locked into the geosphere.
Think of coal or oil, even limestones.
Coal and oil bearing rocks get buried, but then uplifted by tectonic processes.
The exposed rocks are eroded and the carbon dioxide is returned to the atmosphere again.
That process takes millions of years.
However, our ability to imagine the gift of consciousness has allowed us to develop some
fabulous technology which now allows us to bring that oil and coal to the surface early.
In short, we are short circuiting this cycle of carbon.
By turning oil and coal into carbon dioxide prematurely back into the atmosphere, we are
now adding greenhouse gases more rapidly to the planet than they would naturally.
The result?
Well, difficult to predict.
I think this is where the reasonable debate still lies.
The potential effects are rising sea levels, changing climatic patterns.
Basically the Earth system shifting into a different state.
However, Earth systems are linked.
Large scale changes in one system will have effects in all the others.
Some scientists are suggesting that with all the change that's happening in the Earth
system right now means that we could now potentially define a new geological age, the Anthropocene.
What will mark this period in the geological record?
Remember we usually define geological periods by the emergence of new species.
Perhaps we could use other features.
Perhaps the presence of large scale human habitation.
Or perhaps the presence in the geological record of plastics or stainless steel.
The years are very long lasting.
Or perhaps the record of radioisotopes from the testing of nuclear bombs that already
form an identifiable horizon in the sediments of the oceans today.
But for the very last portion of this lecture, I would like to consider moving to the next
level.
Let's see if we can move beyond the Earth system.
Is it possible that we have all our eggs in one basket?
We have seen that catastrophic events have occurred on Earth.
Massive volcanic eruptions, giant glacial events, massive impacts from space.
Remember though the average lifetime of a species has been suggested to be around 3
million years.
Given our understanding of that and the fact that we live in what could be considered to
be a relatively dangerous universe at times, perhaps we should be looking outside the Earth
system.
Sure we would be thinking about moving Earth's biosphere to the next level of system hierarchy
out into the wider solar system.
If this is the case then we have to look for another place where we could transplant life
from Earth.
When you look at the planets we have available there are no immediate candidates.
There is no planet like our planet with this bizarre, oxygen rich atmosphere.
It means that we have to use that imagination that evolved thousands of years ago and imagine
how we can use tools to alter planets to our needs.
We call this terraforming.
This is not entirely in the realm of the sci-fi author.
Many famous scientists including Carl Sagan have written extensively about planetary engineering.
In 1961 Sagan suggested that the planet Venus might be seeded with algae, converting the
carbon dioxide rich atmosphere into organic compounds and ending the runaway greenhouse
effect on that world.
This though was well before what we really truly understood about Venus.
It's an extremely hostile place.
In fact there is even sulphuric acid blowing around in those winds on the surface.
A much more likely candidate for this transplant would be Mars.
Why?
Well at one point Mars was much more hospitable.
It had a warm atmosphere with liquid water on the surface so perhaps it can again.
Mars also has some of the main components needed to successfully terraform a world.
It has soil, an atmosphere and water present as ice which it all melted would form a fairly
extensive body of open water.
How to achieve that?
Well firstly we need to warm Mars up.
The best way to do that is to use carbon dioxide, increase the greenhouse effect.
Now Mars has CO2 ice locked up at the poles so if we start to warm the planet this could
start a positive feedback releasing an awful lot of CO2 into the atmosphere and warming
the planet further.
But how do we start the warming?
Well there are many suggestions and I guess this is where it does sound a little sci-fi.
You could bomb the planet with CFCs which are also a very good greenhouse media or
set up robot factories on the surface of the planet that would process the Martian soil
and produce various greenhouse gases or warm the surface of the planet using large solar
mirrors in orbit.
Eventually as the atmosphere warms and thickens it would start to melt the Martian ice deposits
returning oceans to the planet perhaps the first time in billions of years.
After that we could maybe start to add components of Earth's biosphere starting with the humble
cyanobacteria to start the planet on a path towards an oxygen rich atmosphere.
Obviously this is pretty fanciful, there would be massive problems to overcome.
For example with no magnetosphere how do we stop the sun from stripping away all this
new atmosphere?
So we're only just starting to understand how the Earth's complicated systems work
to make our planet habitable.
Building an entire planet, a life-supporting planet that is a Mars system frankly is really
daunting.
It's an exciting thought though isn't it?
The thought that our biosphere could transcend the Earth's system that gave it birth and
move out into the universe.
One thing is for sure though, these are interesting times for us and our planet.
As the conscious part of this Earth system I think we have to be its advocate and pose
the question that Carl Sagan asked, who speaks for Earth?
I think it is Carl himself who answers that question best.
We speak for Earth, our obligation to survive is owed not just to ourselves but to that
cosmos ancient and vast from which we spring.
