If you watch political or historical content on YouTube, you're probably aware of Johnny Harris.
He's hard to miss because YouTube's algorithm recommends his videos a lot.
Back in 2021, the YouTuber Tom Nicholas made a video about Harris getting sponsored by the
World Economic Forum to make a video promoting a book they wrote. Tom used that video, called
How China Became So Powerful, as an example of how money can be used to get seemingly independent
YouTubers to make paid propaganda. Harris then responded in the comment section. He admitted
that the video was made in partnership with the WEF, but said that he didn't see a problem with it.
Then in another comment, he bemoaned the fact that no one was taking the actual argument of
his video seriously. According to him, he'd done exhaustive research, sifting through lots of data
to make that video, and people were just using the fact that it was made on behalf of the WEF
as an excuse to avoid engaging with its actual content. Johnny should have been careful what he
wished for because it's come true. In this video, we're going to be refuting the actual content
of the video in question, which is not very good to say the least. If it was actually the result
of him spending loads of time researching, then his research skills should be seriously questioned.
This video was made possible thanks to my supporters on Patreon and Ko-fi.
This video is broadly indicative of Harris' content in general. He likes to act like he's
teaching you something new, profound, and different. Hidden knowledge of the powers that be have kept
on the down low. Things that go against the status quo and the taken for granted opinions that most
people hold. In reality, though, most of his videos are simplistic slump that serve precisely to
direct the audience towards conclusions that uphold the status quo, either through obfuscation,
or, as in the case of this video, by outright supporting it. They're usually just barrages
of rapid fire statements that Harris, and whoever works for him because he's definitely not making
these videos by himself, make little to no effort to actually explain, let alone back up with any
sources. Before you can think about what he's saying and the fact that he's not really giving
you any reason to even believe it, he's already moved on to telling you what to think about something
else, while stock footage plays with inspiring music and camera roll sound effects in the background.
Here's an illustrative example from the video in question.
This was China, the Middle Kingdom, and right next door, India. This was the center of the global
economic universe, but around the 1800s, that started changing.
Over here in Europe and the United States, there was a major revolution that started taking place.
Science, then machines, then weapons, trains, cars, flight, bombs, factories, cities,
and with their new power, these countries started to expand to take over large swaths of the map.
China remained a great civilization, but as the West started showing up,
knocking on China's door with their big guns, China couldn't really match their firepower,
and they had to concede land to Britain, which is how we got Hong Kong.
The Industrial Revolution didn't really happen in China the same way it did in the West,
and by the middle of the 1800s, China began a massive decline in its economic standing in the
world. A century later, that situation got way worse, as China was invaded by its neighbor,
Japan. China's economy was no longer the prosperous Middle Kingdom, but rather a shadow of itself,
a poor country that was being occupied by outsiders. Once World War II was over, the West
devised a new global economic and financial system. It was modeled after the economic system that
was working so well in the West, capitalism, free enterprise. That's really the essence of
Johnny Harris right there, a flurry of no context statements thrown out with little explanation and
backed up by nothing more than stock footage and his word. In the course of about 90 seconds,
he describes China as having been one of the most powerful countries in the world.
Then industrialization just sort of magically happening, which subsequently enabled the West
to get stronger, expand, and attack China. Then there's a 100 year time skip. It's now 1945,
and oh, Japan is invading China now, yes? So China is suddenly relatively weak now,
and oh, there's capitalism too apparently. What a ride that was. Harris has all of this
completely backwards. He presents the industrial revolution like it's what enabled the European
colonialism that he refers to as expansion. Yet said colonialism predated the industrial
revolution, which began in the 18th century by hundreds of years. So it was the colonialism
that enabled the industrial revolution, not the other way around. The historian Eric Williams
showed via exhaustive archival research that the profits that funded much of the first industrial
revolution, and thus led to everything that came afterwards, came from British slave colonies in
the Caribbean. And that's just one small example of how the murder, subjugation, and dispossession
of much of the rest of the world is what the West's economic power and the development of
capitalism was built on. So it was colonialism elsewhere that gave the Western countries the
advantages that they needed to subsequently colonize China and eliminate it as a competitor,
rather than just some magical sudden explosion of technology and science that they then took
advantage of. I love how he actually verbatim just exclaims science. It's like a Tim and Eric
skit. Science. So huge L to China for making the fatal mistake of not killing, robbing,
and enslaving people on the other side of the world to spur their own industrial revolution.
The main narrative throughout this video is that free market capitalism is amazing. So his reasons
for skipping over what actually happened so egregiously can be deduced pretty easily. It's
a lot easier to make a video celebrating capitalist free enterprise if you ignore the much less
savoury reality of how it came to be. And he especially needed to do this because the World
Economic Forum probably wouldn't be very happy about a video that presents the early development
of capitalism and capitalism in general for that matter in anything but a glowing light.
The final bit of that clip and what comes after it is particularly characteristic of the often
chaotic poorly structured zero substance nature of Johnny Harris's videos. The West devised a new
global economic and financial system. It was modeled after the economic system that was working so
well in the West. Capitalism. Free enterprise. Still with some government oversight and high
taxes for the rich and corporations, but it was still capitalism. So there's a 100 a year time
skipped to 1945 and capitalism is only being introduced now. Not with the industrial revolution
of two centuries beforehand, which he covered about a minute earlier. He then tells us that
before this, this capitalism was working so well in the West. But this is contradicted by the very
fact that what he's describing here is the Bretton Woods economic system established by the USA and
other Western countries at the end of World War II. Though you might have missed that because he
just glosses over all the details entirely. He just flashes Bretton Woods on the screen and explains
nothing about it beyond it apparently involving more government oversight and higher taxes on the
rich. The post war Western economic order, which is known as the Bretton Woods system was a pretty
substantial departure from how things were before it and we'll be going into that in more depth later.
The point here though is if things were going so well beforehand as Harris claims,
it was modeled after the economic system that was working so well in the West.
Then why would such substantial reforms have even been carried out? They wouldn't have been,
obviously. This was just six years after the end of the Great Depression, the worst economic crisis
in recorded history, which was immediately followed by World War II, the worst war in recorded history.
So capitalism clearly wasn't actually working well at the time at all and that was precisely
why these reforms were instituted. Harris is honestly often kind of difficult to respond to
because he just makes statements like that which amounts a little more than things were good,
so everyone agreed to do more good things. In reference to the fucking Great Depression,
World War fucking II and the sweeping economic reforms that were carried out afterwards in
an attempt to try and ensure that those things didn't happen again. It's genuinely childish.
He presents history as if it has no context, no continuity, no nothing. To refute him,
I had to go over the basics of what actually happened from scratch because his video just
doesn't actually explain anything at all. And it's not like he's just getting some minor details
wrong either. He's grossly mischaracterizing everything and leaving out so much crucial
information that contradicts him that any response to his claims takes 5,000 times more effort than
he put in to make them in the first place. Like he just blurts out that capitalism was working
so well. That's a pretty bold statement to make about the world in 1945, given everything that
had just happened in the decade or so prior. You'd think he'd at least expand on why he's saying
that with some examples as to why and maybe even, I don't know, provide some proof to back it up,
but Johnny Harris is above such pettiness. He just says stuff and then moves on. The audience
is to just trust him. His videos are just a barrage of statement after statement, 90% of them
backed up by nothing more than his undue confidence, maybe 10% of them actually being followed up with
any attempt to explain the why and how of what he's saying, and even fewer than that backed up by
anything even resembling a source. When he finally does get around to trying to present some evidence,
it usually doesn't even actually back up what he's saying. And it sometimes even presents it as if
it's some sort of special event. It's snappily edited and the music ramps up as if to say,
look guys, I'm citing a source. I did it. You can trust me. He does exactly that in this video
actually. After seven minutes of rapid fire statements with next to nothing presented to
even try to back them up, this happens. I have two graphs I want to show you. They look like this.
Wow. Great graphs he got there, dude. Excellent job. You finally presented a source. It's really
propaganda theater. It's made to look and sound like it's insightful, informative, authoritative,
and thus correct. But it falls apart immediately if you watch it while paying full attention and
think about what's being said and what you're being shown. The video that we're covering here is an
amazing example of all of this. It is the Johnny Harris video, par excellence. I speak good French,
but it's also a paid propaganda video designed to dishonestly present the worst ideas from the
world's most powerful and ghoulish capitalist and their corporations hatch for the purposes of
maintaining their own power and wealth as if they're actually beneficial to the average person.
Despite the title ostensibly being about China, it really has little to nothing to do with it.
China is just used as a framing device to celebrate free markets, neoliberal capitalism,
and then suggest more neoliberal capitalism as the solution to problems caused by neoliberal
capitalism on behalf of the elites who have themselves benefited the most from neoliberal
capitalism. Johnny Harris's videos already tend to be pretty childish propaganda, and in this one,
where he's being paid by the World Economic Forum, he becomes a parody of himself.
Something that Tom Nicholas didn't quite cover in his video is that Johnny Harris
completely misrepresents the ideas that he's being paid to promote here, which are actually
even worse than what they already seem like on the surface. He lied in order to paint a scheme
crafted by billionaires to institute direct corporate rule over international governmental
systems such as the UN as actually just little more than corporations being a bit nicer to their
workers. And I'm well aware of the fact that that sounds like a conspiratorial exaggeration,
but as I'm about to show you, it's really not. We're going to continue on here from the second
half of the video, and then we're going to go back and dissect the rest of the first half afterwards.
This is because it's only at the halfway point that he actually plays his hand
and gets down to the real point of the video, which is to be propaganda for the World Economic
Forum. So dissecting this bit is the most important thing to do here, and it's also very important
context for the first half of the video too, because it's just so blatantly wrong about
everything that it only really starts to make sense once you realize that the reason that it's
like that is because the creator was being paid to lie. Part one, Johnny lies for the World Economic
Forum. The World Economic Forum, which Johnny Harris very dishonestly presents as just a
think tank, and I was able to partner with the World Economic Forum, which is a think tank that
I respect, is the world's most powerful advocacy group for corporations and the ultra rich. On the
one hand, it uses resources from its paid members, including pretty much every single one of the
worst corporations that you can think of, to lobby governments and international organizations,
such as the UN, to adopt policies that benefit them at the expense of everyone else. This is the part
of the World Economic Forum, which is most insidious, and it often goes under the radar. So how convenient
it is that in this video, by coincidence, we're going to be covering it. On the other hand,
it and the events that it organizes, such as its yearly summit at Davos in Switzerland,
act as a public relations exercise for its donors and members, as Tom Nicholas explained very well.
Davos and the World Economic Forum then are essentially where the richest 1%
go to pretend to have a conscience. While I'm sure there's plenty of backgroom
wheeling and dealing which is facilitated by the World Economic Forum, in terms of its public
facing activities, it serves as a means for global corporations and the super rich to repeatedly
pretend to have seen the error of their ways and to be on the cusp of change before they go back to
their boardrooms to carry on with business as usual. So Harris establishes the basis for his
talking points taken directly from decades of World Economic Forum propaganda by making a couple
of core claims. Firstly, he claims that the shift in economic policy in the West in the 70s and 80s
towards neoliberalism made the West more prosperous. He makes this clear by continuously praising
probably the most famous neoliberal ideologue of all time, Milton Friedman, and implying that the
policies that he supported worked really well and that he had a point. Milton Friedman sort of had a point
and it led to huge prosperity in the West as the US economy exploded.
All of this is false and we're going to be refuting it in detail in part two of this video.
Side note, if you're confused by me talking about neoliberalism here, then don't worry because I'm
going to be explaining more about it as we get through the video. And I also have a whole video
that explains it and its history in detail that you can check out. To be honest, you'd almost
certainly learn way more that's actually useful by watching that video over this one, though it's
also going to be considerably less entertaining than watching Johnny Harris get embarrassed.
Pick your poison. The second core claim that Harris bases his conclusions on is the idea that
the most important defining part of the modern economic era, again beginning in the 70s and 80s,
is that corporations are now driven by a desire to make profits for their shareholders. So important
and different this has supposedly been that it even merits being delineated as a completely
different form of capitalism known as shareholder capitalism. The idea at the core of this financial
and economic system was that companies would get investment from people who own shares in that
company, we call this a corporation, and that the sole purpose of this corporation was to make
money for these owners or these shareholders. Now this simply isn't true. The defining thing
about this era was that neoliberalism inspired economic policies began to be implemented in
practice in the 1970s and spread all over the world in a couple of decades. Not that there was some
sort of massive paradigm shift where companies started seeking profit more than they had before.
A shareholder is after all just someone who owns a part of a company, which might vary from a
completely insignificant amount to a controlling stake. Corporations have obviously always been
driven by seeking as much profit for their owners as possible. You can go back 110, 120 years or so
to the era of standard oil for example, one of the most infamously horrible corporations in history
and see that things were much the same. Companies seeking shareholder profit, which according to
Harris is the most important defining part of the neoliberal era, is actually so unimportant to
it that Friedman, the theorist who he cites approvingly throughout the video, didn't even mention
that in his own definition of neoliberalism. He wrote, Neoliberalism would accept the 19th
century liberal emphasis on the fundamental importance of the individual, but it would
substitute for the 19th century goal of laissez-faire as a means to this end, the goal of the competitive
order. It would seek to use competition among producers to protect consumers from exploitation,
competition among employers to protect workers and owners of property, and competition among
consumers to protect the enterprises themselves. The state would police the system, establish
conditions favorable to competition and prevent monopoly, provide a stable monetary framework,
and relieve acute misery and distress. The citizens would be protected against the state by the
existence of a private free market, and against one another by the preservation of competition.
So the actual crux of neoliberalism according to Friedman is that competition is everything,
that the best society is a dog-eat-dog capitalist one, where everyone and everything is in a
competition with one another at all times, with the spoils going to the winners and the losers
getting as little as possible. Friedman says that the government should try to foster such a society
and froze in some platitudes about this all supposedly being to protect people and a laughable
bit about preventing monopoly. There's nothing about shareholders there, and that's because
shareholder capitalism is just a buzzword that the World Economic Forum likes to use to divert
attention away from neoliberal economic policies and blame the problems that they have caused on
a complete red herring. Harris is just parroting them here, which is, you know, what you'd expect,
given that they paid him to make this video. A good basic summary of what neoliberalism is in
practice comes from the economic historian David Harvey. Neoliberalism is in the first instance
a theory of political economic practices that proposes that human well-being can best be advanced
by liberating individual entrepreneurial freedoms and skills within an institutional framework
characterized by strong private property rights, free markets, and free trade. The role of the
state is to create and preserve an institutional framework appropriate to such practices. The
state has to guarantee, for example, the quality and integrity of money. It must also set up those
military, defense, police, and legal structures and functions required to secure private property
rights and to guarantee, by force if need be, the proper functioning of markets. Furthermore,
if markets do not exist in areas such as land, water, education, healthcare, social security,
or environmental pollution, then they must be created by state action if necessary. But beyond
these tasks, the state should not venture. State interventions in markets, once created,
must be kept to a bare minimum. There has everywhere been an emphatic turn towards neoliberalism
in political economic practices and thinking since the 1970s. Deregulation, privatization,
and withdrawal of the state from many areas of social provision have become all too common.
Almost all states, from those newly minted after the collapse of the Soviet Union to old-style
social democracies in welfare states such as New Zealand and Sweden, have embraced,
sometimes voluntarily and in other instances in response to coercive pressures, some version
of neoliberal theory, and adjusted at least some policies and practices accordingly. That's all
exactly the sort of thinking and exactly the sort of economic policies that the World Economic Forum
advocates for and that its corporate members benefit from. So they pretty clearly aren't
actually against the fundamentals of the economics of this period. So what they instead do is try
and convince people that the economic problems of the last 40 to 50 years haven't actually been
caused by these policies or by flaws in capitalism itself, but rather just by corporations making
a mistake and seeking too much profit. Which apparently wasn't a problem before this,
because if we believe this, then they can sell us the idea that the way to fix this problem isn't
actually by governments taking meaningful action to rein these corporations in, or any change at all
to the economic system itself, but rather by just leaving it to corporations to change how they
govern themselves. Just trusting them to voluntarily stop being driven by profit,
become socially responsible in other such buzzwords and fix it all themselves. Surely
that being honest here, that'll definitely work. This is how the WEF tends to conduct a lot of its
public relations exercises. They acknowledge the issues caused by pro-corporate policies,
such as massive inequality and climate change, because it's kind of impossible for them to ignore
them at this point. But they frame these problems as being caused by things other than their actual
causes, because if we accept their alternate explanation, they can then lead us to the conclusion
that the overall direction of economic policy should remain fundamentally the same as it has
since the 70s and 80s, which is, you know, exactly what they want. It's simple diversion.
So, once Harris has finally stopped lying to the viewer about the cause of those problems in the
exact same way the World Economic Forum does, he, shocker, proposes the exact solution they do.
But of course, he first takes a second to just offhandedly scoff at the idea that socialism
might be an alternative solution. In true Johnny Harris fashion, no reasoning or explanation for
this is given. So, what's the solution? Is it socialism? No, it's not. It is simply a new
version of capitalism, a reframing of how we think about business and globalization.
No, he says with utmost confidence. The real solution is to move on to another form of capitalism
from this non-existent shareholder one. What we need to do is just change the way we think about
business and globalization. He's not actually calling for any action in that buzzword salad,
just a change in thinking, which is reflected in the solution that he's about to propose,
doing the same stuff, but reframing it as somehow actually beneficial for workers.
The mythology of neoliberalism supposedly being good for normal people can no longer be upheld
since the last 50 years of its practice have shown us clearly that that's not true. So,
it needs a rebranding. And here it is. The solution isn't to scrap capitalism altogether,
but instead to expand it, to not just focus on shareholders and delivering them short-term
profits as quickly and as efficiently as possible, but to also focus on other people
who are affected by the business. You can call these stakeholders. This is like the customers
and the suppliers and the employees and the government and the overall economy and the planet
and, of course, shareholders. This is called stakeholder capitalism. And it's basically
just an acknowledgement that businesses that focus only on profits for shareholders don't
end up benefiting everyone. There are winners and losers. So, the solution to the problems
of corporations being motivated by self-interest is for corporations to magically just no longer
be motivated by self-interest and to start just miraculously renouncing the profit motive,
getting themselves a conscience, and voluntarily helping everyone out of the goodness of their
hearts, which they don't have because they're corporations. There's not any sort of actual
call to action to make this happen. No government intervention, no regulations, no nothing. It's
just something that we need to trust corporations to do themselves. Yeah. Obviously, this isn't
going to happen. Corporations are not just going to regulate themselves out of a sense of social
obligation. They're not just going to give up their wealth and power because they feel bad about
having it. On the occasions that they do actually concede things to other so-called stakeholders,
it is overwhelmingly because they're forced to do so by government action. And on the very rare
occasions where it might seem like they're taking such actions themselves, it's certainly not out
of a sense of obligation to other stakeholders. It's just because they've calculated that doing
so won't damage or will increase their profits in other ways. For example, by giving them good
publicity, by increasing worker productivity, or by keeping workers just happy enough that they're
less likely to start advocating for something that might end up costing the company more. A good
example of this is Amazon instituting a minimum wage of $15 an hour for American employees.
It helps to make them look like they care about their workers, while at the same time,
they do everything possible to bust their workers' efforts at unionization to prevent them from
actually being able to exert collective pressure on the company and advocate for their own interests
on their own terms. It's not about the company legitimately caring about its stakeholders or
anything even remotely like that. It's about unaccountable executives deciding to give them
a little bit in the hopes that they don't start demanding something more substantial that would
lower their profits more. And Amazon, completely coincidentally I'm sure, just so happens to be
one of the World Economic Forum's strategic partners. Tom Nicholas summed up the essence of all of this
very well. The World Economic Forum's decision to work with Johnny Harris to create a video about
how companies such as Apple and Walmart are currently enthusiastically moving away from
shareholder capitalism and towards this vague notion of stakeholder capitalism is just another
in a long line of examples of the forum attempting to convince us that against all the evidence
they are even remotely concerned about anything other than profit. With everything that we've
just been over in mind, I want to present you with a quote from this book, Stakeholder Capitalism,
which is the book that the World Economic Forum paid Johnny Harris to make this video to promote.
The head of the World Economic Forum just launched a book called literally Stakeholder Capitalism.
It's an in-depth look at not only the rise of Asia and China, but also other major trends that
help us understand the need to upgrade our capitalism. Klaus Schwab, the founder of the
World Economic Forum, writes within it, I therefore advocate for a third system which can be defined
as stakeholder capitalism. It is capitalism in the traditional definition of the word.
Individuals and private companies make up the largest share of the economy. This is, I believe,
a requirement for a sustainable economic system. Private individuals and companies must be able
to innovate and compete freely, as it unleashes the creative energy and work ethic of most people
in society. The economic activities of such private actors must also be protected and guided,
to ensure the overall direction of economic development is beneficial to society,
and no actor can free ride on the efforts of others. This is the kind of capitalism we ought to
endorse. Do you notice how that sounds oddly similar to Milton Friedman's description of
neoliberalism that we went over earlier? That's because it is just the same thing. The whole
notion of stakeholder capitalism, as presented in this video by Johnny Harris, and as obsessed about
by the World Economic Forum, is just a rebranding of neoliberalism. Harris and the WEF erased the
existence of neoliberalism entirely, creating this phantom of shareholder capitalism to shoulder
the blame for its problems and act as a sort of non-existent scapegoat, in order to propose a
solution that they frame as literally an entirely different version of capitalism, which even the
slightest scrutiny reveals is still just neoliberalism, with some vague, PR speak buzzwords thrown in
to try and make it sound like it's somehow different. It's not. As political scientist Kyle
Bailey wrote, now that the myth of free markets can no longer convincingly naturalize the public
role of states, in imposing actually existing neoliberalism, the discourse of stakeholder
capitalism represents its continuation by other means. Despite pretensions to move beyond profit
maximization, corporations' attempts to satisfy extra economic interests remain firmly grounded
in the same capitalist market imperatives that proponents of stakeholder capitalism now claim
to be addressing. Here's an even worse thing though. Harris isn't even actually being honest
about what's stakeholder capitalism, as promoted by the World Economic Forum in the book that he's
trying to sell to his viewers here, actually is. His presentation are that he's already incredibly
misleading, dishonest, and really just full of lies, but he also left out the more unsavory and
much more serious parts about what this term means to the World Economic Forum. You see,
they don't just think that companies should take their stakeholders into account or whatever.
For them, this notion of stakeholderism extends to everything, including national and international
governance. They consider multinational corporations to be stakeholders of the world itself, who
should have much bigger and much more direct seats at the table when it comes to political
decision making. The BS about corporations saving the world out of the goodness of their hearts
by deciding to treat workers slightly better rather than seeking profits is cover for their
ultimate idea of giving corporations even more political power than what they already have.
This is articulated in the book itself. A company that has a multinational scope of activities
not only serves all those stakeholders who are directly engaged, but acts itself as a stakeholder
together with governments and civil society of our global future. So, according to the very book
that Harris was paid to promote, multinational corporations need to be stakeholders on the
national and international stage, on the same level as national governments and civil society
organizations, the latter meaning things like NGOs, which are themselves overwhelmingly founded
and or funded by those same multinational corporations and so advocate for their interests
as well anyway. This is what the stakeholder capitalism buzzword is actually about for them,
giving corporations even more direct decision making power regarding the direction of global
politics on top of all of the incredibly pervasive and destructive ways in which they already
influence global politics. They hide this goal of wanting to make themselves even more powerful
stakeholders in international governance behind this notion that all they want to do is make you
a stakeholder of the company that you work for. The economist Jens Martens summarized the WEF's
overall agenda. The World Economic Forum postulates that a globalized world is best managed by a
coalition of multinational corporations, governments, including through the UN system, and select civil
society organizations. It argues that governments no longer are the overwhelmingly dominant actors
on the world stage and that the time has come for a new stakeholder paradigm of international
governance. The World Economic Forum vision includes a public private UN in which certain
specialized agencies would operate under joint state and non-state governance systems such as with
the Food and Agriculture Organization through a global food agriculture and nutrition redesign
initiative. This model also assumes that some issues would be taken off the agenda of the UN
system to be addressed by pluralateral, often multi-stakeholder, coalitions of the willing and
able. What the World Economic Forum is advocating for with this red herring of stakeholder capitalism
is not the solution to the problems of neoliberalism that Harris presents it as,
nor is it meant to be. It is rather the final form of neoliberalism, the fundamental neoliberal
notion of total and complete competition is taken to the ultimate extreme, corporations competing
with governments for the power to govern in a much more direct way than they have before.
And it's even worse with a bit more added context. Klaus Schwab, founder and chairman of the WEF,
whose name is on the cover of the book, though you know it was almost certainly ghost written,
has said that he considers nation states to be obsolete and that they should be replaced with
a global issue alliance, which based on their other statements would probably be made up of
multinational corporations. In context with everything else, it really makes it seem like their
ultimate goal is not just the already incredibly worrying idea of taking substantial decision
making power away from states and handing it directly to multinational corporations,
but rather to get rid of governments entirely and create some sort of anarcho-capitalist cyberpunk
dystopia, where corporations just plain control everything. Now I don't want to fear Monger too
much about the WEF's agenda here, while they have laid it all out pretty clearly and pretty
explicitly, that doesn't mean that they've gotten their way or that they will. There is no
world economic forum led, new world order government on the way or anything, which conspiracy
theorists often claim. Though given the kind of stuff that the world economic forum advocates
for that we just went over, I can really understand how such conspiracy theories come to be.
The WEF is just an advocacy group for corporations that ask the question of,
how can corporations get even more power? And they came to the quite rational conclusion from
their perspective of, they should try to seize more direct decision making power from governments
themselves. This is completely predictable and expected, which is precisely why corporate
governed dystopias were already being presented in fiction, long before the WEF proposed such
ideas themselves. It's simply the logic of capitalism being taken to its ultimate conclusion.
But these goals also aren't zero sum. It's not either they establish the literal anarcho-capitalist
cyberpunk dystopia or their failed. They just want as much direct influence over decision making as
they can get, and they've actually already been making inroads on this for quite a while now.
In the UN for example, the influence of their rhetoric can clearly be seen. Buzzwords for
pervasive corporate involvement, like multi-stakeholderism and public-private partnerships,
have become more and more common in UN documents. And multinationals have an even more prominent
and direct role in the UN and other global initiatives than they've ever had before.
In 2019, the World Economic Forum even signed a strategic partnership agreement with the UN.
This is extremely bad, not just because more corporate power and influence is bad in general,
but also because it's even more undemocratic than things already were before. While average people
may be able to exert at least a tiny little bit of influence over their governments through things
like voting and protests for example, they have nothing even resembling that minor little bit of
influence when it comes to corporations. So with every little bit of decision making ability that
corporations wrestle away from states, nationally or internationally, you and people like you lose
more of whatever little decision making power you've got left. It's being appropriated from you
and being handed over to capitalists and executives directly. In order to even think about fighting
these sorts of initiatives, we first need to actually know that they're going on. And now you
do, despite the fact that Johnny Harris kind of forgot to inform you of that in his video. Harris
outright stated that he read the book and thought that it was great. The book is really good. Yet
he nonetheless decided to leave out the whole, corporations should be stakeholders in global
governance and get their own seats at the UN thing. He's even proudly gloated that he was personally
involved in that year's WEF summit at Davos. The Davos summit happened this week and I'm really
glad that I was able to be a part of it. So he's clearly familiar with the organization and he
should be familiar with their broader agendas too. They're outlined in the book that he supposedly
read. The book that he promotes in this video. His video is already garbage immoral propaganda,
but with this extra context, it is even worse. He lied knowingly in exchange for money. It's
that simple. And we haven't even covered the rest of the video yet where he lies a whole lot more.
Part 2. The Debunking
Now with the most important part out of the way, it's time to go back to the first half of the
video and refute the historical narrative of neoliberalism bringing amazing prosperity and
the claims that Harris makes to craft it, which is the foundation that he uses to propose the
ideas that we just dissected. How the video has a title about China, I just don't know. It's
mentioned in the intro, promptly forgotten about for a while, and then glossed over for a minute or
two later. It's actually a video about how great free market capitalism supposedly is, and China
is just used as a framing device for that to pull the viewer in to what is actually a paid propaganda
video. This part is going to be quite long and detailed, partly because the effort that you have
to put in to debunk misinformation is incredibly high relative to the effort that it takes to make
it up, and partly because that's just how my videos are. I like to be thorough. So let's recap
and expand upon what we went over at the beginning. The video starts off with this zero context
presentation of the industrial revolution as some sort of miracle that just magically popped up out
of nowhere. Inverting reality to make it sound like it was the industrial revolution that birthed
western colonialism rather than the other way around. And capitalism doesn't sound quite as
good if you actually include the fact that what Harris frames as the West's amazing success was
built on the subjugation of billions of people. It's important to emphasize that the development
of the industrial revolution was hardly some sort of miracle of free market capitalism, as is often
taken for granted, including by Harris here. It happened under the circumstances of pervasive
government protection of local industry, combined with the aggressive destruction of competitors
abroad, and the importation of resources and capital to be invested from the Americas. The best
example of this is the development of the British textiles industry, the first truly fully mechanized
industry in the world, and the most emblematic development of the first industrial revolution.
This industry was not only supplied by slave farmed cotton from the Americas, but was also
fostered by the government, who put restrictive tariffs on textile imports from India, which at
the time had the most important textile export sector in the world. This encouraged investment
in the local textile industry to replace these imports. This is commonly known as import substitution
industrialization. All of this happened while the British were also simultaneously colonizing
India and directly destroying the Indian textile industry. The result was that the British textile
industry became the world's most important, even exporting its products to India itself.
So the industrial revolution was built off the back of colonialism and spurred by very
anti-free market government interference, contrary to pretty much everything about
Harris's narrative throughout this video. Most developed countries today in fact industrialize
with these sorts of policies, protectionism, import substitution, etc, and they only started
with this rhetoric of free international trade once their own industry was developed enough as
a result to out-compete that of other countries. So anyway, moving on. As we went over earlier,
Harris then finally introduces capitalism in 1945, about 200 or 300 years depending on who you ask,
after the time that it actually developed, conveniently skipping over all of the absolutely
horrible things about it during that period. He then moves on to inverting reality again,
claiming that capitalism was working so well while simultaneously introducing the post-World
War II Bretton Woods Accords. Bretton Woods was an agreement between mostly western states that
govern the rules of international trade between them for about 30 years afterwards. This was
specifically implemented because capitalism actually wasn't working very well and had just
been through its worst ever crisis, the Great Depression, and you know the whole World War II
thing too. The Bretton Woods era was characterized by fixed currency exchange rates for international
trade which were backed by the gold standard, tightened government regulations on business,
strong welfare states, and so-called mixed economies involving both private and public
sector ownership. Academically, this is often known as the period of embedded liberalism.
The embedded part comes from the work of the economic theorist Carl Polanyi who used the
word to emphasize the controls put on markets by outside factors such as the government as opposed
to disembedded, which describes a more free market that is not subject to such controls.
David Harvey summarized the causes and characteristics of the period of embedded
liberalism in the West. The restructuring of state forms and of international relations
after the Second World War was designed to prevent a return to the catastrophic conditions
that had so threatened the capitalist order in the great slump of the 1930s. It was also
supposed to prevent the reemergence of interstate geopolitical rivalries that had led to the war.
To ensure domestic peace and tranquility, some sort of class compromise between capital and
labor had to be constructed. The thinking at the time is perhaps best represented by an influential
text by two eminent social scientists, Robert Dahl and Charles Limblum, published in 1953.
Both capitalism and communism in their raw forms had failed, they argued. The only way ahead was to
construct the right blend of state, market, and democratic institutions to guarantee peace, inclusion,
well-being, and stability. And so a variety of social democratic, Christian democratic,
and dyrihista states emerged in Europe after the Second World War. The US itself turned
towards a liberal democratic state form, and Japan, under the close supervision of the US,
built a nominally democratic but impracticed highly bureaucratic state apparatus,
empowered to oversee the reconstruction of that country. What all of these various state forms
had in common was an acceptance that the state should focus on full employment, economic growth,
and the welfare of its citizens, and that state power should be freely deployed alongside, or if
necessary, intervening in or even substituting for market processes to achieve these ends.
Fiscal and monetary policies, usually dubbed Keynesian, were widely deployed to dampen business
cycles and to ensure reasonably full employment. A class compromise between capital and labor
was generally advocated as a key guarantor of domestic peace and tranquility. States actively
intervened in industrial policy and moved to set standards for the social wage by constructing
a variety of welfare systems, healthcare, education, and the like. This form of political
organization is now usually referred to as embedded liberalism, to signal how market
processes and entrepreneurial and corporate activities were surrounded by a web of social
and political constraints and a regulatory environment that sometimes restrained but in
other instances led the way in economic and industrial strategy. State-led planning and in
some instances, state ownership of key sectors, coal, steel, automobiles, were not uncommon. For
example, in Britain, France, and Italy. The neoliberal project is to disembed capital
from these constraints. So yeah, not exactly the sort of thing that Harris is advocating for in
this video. Harris glosses over the amount of government intervention that actually characterized
this era, acknowledging only that it involved government oversight and higher taxes and regulation,
but nonetheless framing it as largely the same as before. A continuation of something that was
working so well, which is a very audacious thing to say about the period immediately following
the Great Depression and World War II. He then credits a vague notion of capitalism with rebuilding
Europe after the war, as if it was just the wonders of the free market that did it or something.
Seriously, he talks about this in the same way that a missionary would tell you about the miracles
of Jesus Christ. Capitalism, free enterprise, still with some government oversight and high
taxes for the rich and corporations, but it was still capitalism. And after the war,
this capitalism would go on to become a miracle for many countries. Rebuilding Germany, France,
Japan. For many in the West, post-World War II capitalism was like a magic elixir that was fixing
everything. He verbatim calls it a magic elixir that was fixing everything. At least try to be
subtle, come on. His core claim in that segment is that capitalism caused a miracle that rebuilt
Europe after World War II, implying that what happened was some sort of miracle of the free market.
That couldn't be further from the truth. What happened after the war is that much of Europe
was destroyed while the USA, due to its geographic position, came out not just unscathed, but with
a booming economy. So Western European countries, along with others such as Japan and South Korea,
were absolutely desperate to rebuild. And the USA was the only game in town, since they obviously
wouldn't have let them seek help from the USSR, even if they wanted to. The US used this monopoly to
create the Marshall Plan and other adjacent initiatives, which gave aid to those countries.
The catch was that this money could only be used to buy resources, such as food and building
materials, from sources that the USA had chosen, which usually meant from the USA itself. This not
only meant that the money from the aid was just flowing right back to the USA anyway, but it also
allowed its exports to penetrate into Europe in a much more long-lasting fashion. All of this was
imposed by the USA on countries that were in no position to refuse. So it was an initiative conceived
by the US government, directed by them every step of the way, to give their country a functional
monopoly over post-war trade and ensure their influence over the aid recipients. That is how
these countries were actually rebuilt after World War II, not by the wonders of free market forces,
but by pervasive and often coercive state action. But Johnny Harris frames it as some sort of magical
free market explosion, where the magic words of capitalism and free market just caused miracles
to happen. But again, the reason that Harris can't be honest about this and just glosses over it so
childishly is because the thesis of this part of the video is just that free market capitalism is
super awesome, because that's what the World Economic Forum mandated conclusion needs it to be.
So if you acknowledge the fact that the post-World War II rebuilding of Europe was carried out under
just about the fervorce thing from the principles of free market capitalism imaginable, his entire
narrative would crumble. Harris then makes this statement. It was working so well that more and
more people started to believe that we needed to get government out of capitalism and let the market
just do its thing. This is another claim that's just contradicted by his own narrative. Everything
was just working so well after the war with embedded liberalism that this drove people to
want to change things by completely abandoning everything that had characterized that system
and all of its magical miracles, where only two minutes in and Harris has said something stupid,
nonsensical or contradicted himself just about every other sentence. Anyway, so this just isn't
true. Normal people, one suddenly like, ah man, this sucks. I hate being guaranteed a decent wage.
I hate having public health care and social welfare. I hate that corporations can't just do
whatever they want and that I actually have some bargaining power so they have to at least give
people like me some concessions. You know what I want? I want all of that gone. Now, the people
that were advocating for this were businessmen, executives, and their paid propagandists,
Johnny Harris's forebears, like Milton Friedman, the one singular person who he actually presents
as evidence for his idea of people wanting to just let the market do its thing. One of the major
advocates for this idea of unfettered capitalism was this guy. There has never in history been a
more effective machine for eliminating poverty than the free enterprise system in the free market.
A Chicago-based economist named Milton Friedman. If they fail, they bear the cost. If they succeed,
they get the benefit. This turn towards letting the market do its thing,
as Harris describes it, began in the early 1970s. It's called, as we went over earlier,
neoliberalism, not shareholder capitalism. And its conception actually long predates the time frame
that Harris seems to ascribe to it. It's public advocates who had been paid to push it from the
mid-1940s onwards by the ultra-rich via think tanks such as the Mont Pelerin Society and the
Institute of Economic Affairs had long been lobbying for a turn to neoliberalism. This advocacy was,
from the very beginning, in opposition to embedded liberalism and bread and woods,
because capitalists considered this system to be too restrictive on their interests. Not,
as Harris claims, the post-war period being super awesome, causing people in general to,
for some reason, just incomprehensibly decide to get rid of everything that had characterized it
and replace it with something else. The actual reasons behind this turn to neoliberalism are a
lot less savory than that. Embedded liberalism began to run into problems in the early 1970s,
and the 1973 oil crisis was the definitive nail in its coffin. Numerous prominent scholars on the
subject like David Harvey, Gerard Domeniel and Dominique Levy have concluded that the upper classes
took advantage of this chaotic situation to push for the replacement of embedded liberalism with
neoliberalism. Up until this point, neoliberalism had been little more than a fringe economic
theory pushed by their think tanks and a couple of board and paid for university economics departments
like Friedman's University of Chicago. But now they had a chance to make it reality,
to rapidly put it into practice. The post-war system had greatly reduced their economic power
from its pre-war levels, and they wanted it back. Neoliberalism in practice was first
implemented via imperialism. The USA backed a bloody military coup in Chile, where an elected
socialist government was overthrown via military coup and replaced with a neoliberal military
dictatorship. Economists trained at the aforementioned corporate funded Chicago School of Economics
by the same Milton Friedman who Johnny Harris uncritically presents as some sort of genius,
were shipped in from the US to dictate the direction of social and economic policy.
They took on massive foreign debt via loans from the International Monetary Fund,
opened up natural resources to unregulated corporate exploitation, privatized swaths of
public assets, abolished or privatized public services and social welfare, and opened up the
economy to the free market exploitation of foreign companies. Chile, along with other violently
imposed US-backed neoliberal experiments of the early to mid-70s, was used as something of a lab
to see whether neoliberalism would really work in practice in the way that the rich
had hoped it would. Economic inequality skyrocketed practically immediately.
Wealth was redistributed very effectively from Chile's working class to the richest segments
as well as to the rich of other countries. So the experiment proved a resounding success at its
aim of redistributing wealth and power back to the rich, which inspired implementations of the same
in the West itself. Margaret Thatcher subsequently took power in 1979 in the UK on a neoliberal
platform, while Ronald Reagan became president of the US in 1981. Reagan's economic policy was
written for him directly by the Heritage Foundation, a corporate funded think tank founded by
conservative businessmen to promote neoliberalism in the wake of the collapse of the bread and
wood system. Like literally, they founded it a year or two later. They clearly saw the blood in
the water and were ready to pounce. The results from Chile were then reproduced in those countries.
The share of national income of the top 0.1% of the population in the US and the UK had been falling
throughout the entire post-war period and reached its lowest level in history around 1978,
right before the Thatcher and Reagan era began. In the following two decades as neoliberal policies
were implemented, the trend shifted. Their income share in the UK rose from 1% to 3.5% by 1998 and
2% to 6% in the US. In the latter case, this rivaled the levels of wealth and power held by the
ultra-rich during parts of the Great Depression. This was concurrent with a massive fall in real
wages, meaning average worker wages adjusted for inflation for the purposes of being able
to compare wages at different times. Real wages in the US had grown substantially all throughout
the bread and woods period, then fell slightly due to the oil crisis in the mid-1970s before
stabilizing and rising again. They then completely dropped off a cliff once Reagan introduced neoliberalism
in the 1980s and by the year 2000 had only just managed to recover to 1966 levels. Even today,
real wages in the US are stagnant and are still only around the same level they were in the late
60s. This all happened while GDP growth and increases in productivity levels remain the
same as before. Throughout the bread and woods period, wages increased as the economy grew,
while in the neoliberal period, wages started decreasing, becoming decoupled from economic
growth. This means that what neoliberalism actually achieved wasn't the prosperity that Harris
nauseatingly repeats it did throughout the video, but rather it ensured little more than that huge
shares of income that previously were going to workers would go to the rich instead. I'm getting
ahead of myself a bit here because what I just said actually also contradicts large parts of
Harris's narrative that we haven't even gotten around to yet, including the very next sentence
that he utters. Now, let's contrast the reality of the neoliberal turn that I just went over with
Harris's own explanation for it. More and more people started to believe that we needed to get
government out of capitalism and let the market just do its thing. Now yes, I know that's just a
short summary and that's not the problem here. The problem is that it's just completely wrong
and that even for a short summary, it simplified down to a kindergarten propaganda level.
Capitalism was awesome and magic, so people decided that they wanted the government out of
capitalism and that's how we got neoliberalism. I genuinely am kind of worried that there seems
to be many grown adults out there who this sort of thing works on. Harris then does the whole
world economic forum thing of obscuring neoliberalism by claiming that it's actually shareholder
capitalism, you know, the stuff that we just went over. Since we've already gone over that,
I'm going to skip ahead about 30 seconds to where he argues that Milton Friedman was right
because neoliberalism, according to him, actually did work really well. And his proof for this is
a graph of raw GDP per capita in the USA. And if you look at the data in the United States and the
West, Milton Friedman sort of had a point. Now, first off, I already kind of refuted the argument
that he's making here by showing that after neoliberal reforms in the US, GDP and productivity
continued to rise at the same rates as before, but real wages dropped. But even if GDP per capita
had actually been growing at a higher rate than before during the neoliberal period, as he claims,
the massive drop in real wages would indicate that this increased growth was just going straight
into the pockets of the ultra rich, while normal people were just getting poorer and poorer every
year. This is demonstrative of how GDP and GDP per capita are usually not at all useful measures
of anything actually indicative of living standards on their own. But even if we do ignore all of the
more relevant metrics aside from GDP per capita that show that neoliberalism hasn't actually been
good at all for anyone but the rich, even by Harris's own measure, he's wrong. Since 1870,
real GDP per capita in the USA has grown at a steady rate overall, so much so that its trend
can be charted by a straight line. The growth rate had already recovered to the average rate
throughout US history of around 2% per year. So neoliberalism didn't actually even make the US
economy grow any faster. The growth of the neoliberal period is rather exactly on trend,
with the average rate of growth throughout US history. All up, the growth of the period of
embedded liberalism from 1950 to 1980, where GDP per capita nearly doubled, was actually higher
than the growth from the 30 year period after Reagan brought neoliberalism to the US from 1981
to 2011, where it only increased by 65%. By starting his graph in 1960 and using simple
raw GDP per capita figures, Harris obfuscates this. Though this was probably unintentional and just
the result of him not being good at research, because the first result on Google for USA GDP per
capita is a graph from the World Bank, which his animation lines up with exactly. The reason why his
graph has that rather flat curve during the Bretton Woods era that makes it look like neoliberalism
increased GDP per capita at a higher relative rate afterwards is because this graph is of GDP per
capita in current US dollars, meaning not adjusted for inflation. So the seemingly flatline growth
in the 1960s in Harris's graph is an illusion. Inflation was low and stable, and then it skyrocketed
in the 70s and 80s. Even though this money was worth significantly less relatively, as prices
had greatly increased, the raw GDP per capita number nonetheless still went up as a result.
On Harris's GDP per capita graph, this makes it look like economic growth had shot up from a
rather stagnant curve into a straight line, when in reality it was a straight line the whole time.
Constant US dollar graphs, like the one that I cited, are adjusted for inflation,
and the World Bank website, which is where Harris pulled his graph from, also has their own constant
US dollar graph. It's just not the first result on Google. As you can see, it tells quite a different
story from the one that he used. So, this is the first actual source that Harris tries to present
in this video. Three minutes in, after having already made a ton of claims that were just screaming
out to be sourced. It is the first result from Google, and it doesn't actually prove what Harris
claims it does. The opposite is actually true, because inflation adjusted versions of this graph
disprove his claim that Milton Friedman was right, as GDP per capita did not actually grow any faster
after neoliberal reforms. On top of that, GDP per capita used as the only metric here to argue that
neoliberal policies were making things better would hardly be enough to prove his claim anyway,
even if the data was actually on his side, since that says absolutely nothing about how that
income is actually distributed. As you can see, on the odd occasion where Harris does bother to
try and source a claim, it can go pretty catastrophically. Harris continues on from here.
And it led to huge prosperity in the West, as the US economy exploded.
No, the US economy did not explode, and it did not lead to huge prosperity. The economy grew
at the average historical rate, yet the average person started receiving less of that growth,
proven by real wages falling dramatically, while bottom 50% income share also took a huge nosedive.
In my book, personally, that's the exact opposite of huge prosperity. Luckily for him though,
Johnny Harris is not beholden to things like actually presenting evidence for his claims,
so he can just say whatever he wants and then move on, treating it as if it's true just because he
said it, which is exactly what he does throughout the entire video and throughout pretty much all
of his videos. Wait a minute, but what about China? Are we talking about China and its economy,
you know, the Middle Kingdom, China? So all the US and Western economies are thriving because of this
corporate free market capitalism that was taking over the world. Okay, so we're finally back to
China, and he prefaces this segment by again confidently stating that the West was thriving
thanks to corporate free market capitalism. It's like he's trying to wheel his version of history
into existence by just repeating it over and over. We've already established that this just
isn't true. What's interesting about those statements to me is the taking over the world
part because neoliberalism was bad for workers in the West, but it was even worse for people
elsewhere in the world. By focusing so much on the West, Harris misses the forest for the trees.
While neoliberals came to power via elections in much of the Western world, neoliberalism was
imposed by usually US-backed dictatorships in other places. As David Harvey wrote,
How was neoliberalization accomplished and by whom? The answer in countries such as Chile
and Argentina in the 1970s was as simple as it was swift, brutal, and sure. A military coup
backed by the traditional upper classes as well as by the US government, followed by the fierce
repression of all solidarities created within the labor and urban social movements which had
so threatened their power. So the neoliberal turn for the rest of the world went even worse,
while the Americans, Brits, French, Australians, etc. were merely misled into voting for neoliberalism.
For many others outside of the West and outside of the global North, the turn was much more violent,
being instituted by usually US-backed dictatorships or through coercive loans from international
institutions, aka front organizations such as the International Monetary Fund, with conditions that
forced the recipients to adopt neoliberal reforms. Many of the countries who received these loans,
such as Mozambique, had only recently gained independence from colonial rule and were in
a similar situation to what Europe was in after World War II, in desperate needs of funds to
rebuild. So they simply had no other choice. The same policies were implemented in these countries
as in Chile, the US, and UK with similar effects. Increases in the income share of the rich and
decreases in the income share of everyone else. But in that case, neoliberalism fostered not just
the redistribution of wealth from workers to local rich people, but also from workers to
capitalists in the West, and particularly the US. Now, let's finally see what Harris has to say
about China. So while the US and Western economies are thriving because of this corporate free market
capitalism that was taking over the world, China was descending further and further into decline.
Instead of joining the capitalism party that the West was spreading throughout the world,
China resisted, turning to a one-party rule communist system, headed by this guy, Mao Zedong,
who destroyed any chance of China's economy ever joining the prosperity happening around the world.
By the 1970s, China was a place of widespread poverty, the once prosperous kingdom had reached
rock bottom. This part is really something. So the West was apparently prospering due to
corporate free market capitalism, right? And it was spreading this around the world,
just kind of out of the goodness of its heart. They just wanted everyone else to enjoy free
market capitalism too. But unfortunately, China was ruled by Mao and the communists,
who were just too stupid and evil to press the big red button marked prosperity and join this
capitalism party. Instead of joining this feisty fiesta, they decided to instead press the poverty
button, and then they hit rock bottom as a result. This is the most generic, propagandistic rhetoric
imaginable. It's precisely how American propaganda has always framed its enemies. Their actions simply
can't be explained in any way, but by them being innately evil. Because who in their right mind
would oppose the freedom and prosperity that we so generously want to bring them? The entire recent
history of China, like, you know, colonialism and war, which had left the country in destitute poverty
long before the communists had ever taken power, is glossed over in order to make it seem like
there was no possible rational explanation for why China might have been a bit skeptical of the
western capitalism. Rather, China just had two buttons. One that said good things, and one that
said bad things. And they pressed the latter because Mao is evil and hates prosperity. A vague,
undefined, positive sounding term that Harris repeats throughout the video to signal to the
audience when they're supposed to like or dislike something. The implication of this is that any
country that's poor is poor simply because its leaders want it to be. For Johnny Harris,
things need to be this simple, because his video is a propaganda piece made on behalf of the world's
worst billionaires. It's best for him to be uncritical and unthinking and just try to win the
viewer over with sophistry, because basic things like evidence and rudimentary logic aren't on
his side. There's three other things that I want to address about this part. One, Mao was in power
from 1949 to 1976, entirely during the embedded liberalism period, which as we've already gone
over, was not characterized by corporate free market capitalism. So if there was prosperity in
the west during this time, it was due to something quite different than that. Harris once again screws
up his chronology for like the 20th time in this video. Two, Harris refers to the Cold War period,
in which the west was aggressively spreading capitalism throughout the world as the capitalism
party, as if this was something altruistic and as if every other country was free to just copy
what they were doing and was positioned to be able to do so. This was anything but the case. The vast
majority of countries at this time had no industrial base whatsoever from which to build such a system
off, let alone one nearly as advanced as it was in most western countries. Many of them were also
still colonies or recently liberated former colonies. Most were also overwhelmingly agrarian,
with populations made up mostly of peasants and economies based around primary products like raw
resources or agricultural goods. In short, they were really in no position to just copy what the
richest countries were doing at the time one to one. They needed to industrialize from scratch,
but the west wouldn't let them. The U.S. in particular very aggressively prevented other
countries from replicating anything resembling the policies that characterized the embedded
liberalism era, like the regulation of markets, controls on capital flows, and forcing companies
to compromise with workers. Those sorts of policies were reserved for themselves and their allies only.
When other poor countries tried to industrialize in much the same ways that they had, tried to
regulate the ability of foreign countries to extract their resources, or did pretty much
anything aimed at curbing the power of corporations to better conditions for normal people, the USA
and their allies would step in to try and stop or at least impede their progress. Guatemala,
Indonesia, and Iran are just free examples out of the many countries they targeted that were
trying to pursue regulated capitalist paths to development because that was inconvenient for
the profit of the west. So they intervened to ensure that they were violently stopped from
doing so, with at least hundreds of thousands of people being killed as a result. So there was no
capitalism party that was just open to be joined. Harris' characterization of events is not just
simplified, it is outright wrong and intentionally misleading propaganda. At least I hope it is
because I really hope that he's not this dumb. He needs to have a simplistic villain who solely
threw their own personal, irrational evil, prevented China from joining the good guys and doing
capitalism to become prosperous because the reality casts this supposed party of free market
capitalism in a much less flattering light. Free. The Maoist period in China was definitely
not rock bottom. Living standards actually improved greatly during it and the overall economy expanded
at a decent, steady rate, even despite major catastrophes like the Great Leap Forward. GDP
per capita grew by about 2% per year, which is not incredible or anything, but still better than
before, and around the same as the average growth rate of the US economy throughout its history.
This economic growth data also has to be considered with the caveat that the Chinese economy at the
time was run fundamentally differently. Its income was allocated more equally and it had
provisions for basic needs that GDP, designed to measure economic activity in a market economy,
can fail to account for. GDP is already a highly imperfect way of measuring production even in
a capitalist country. In a socialist and largely agrarian, non-market one, it's even less useful.
More direct indicators of living standards are much more useful. By 1978, peasants were earning
more than double the raw income they had earned in 1954, a trend confirmed by its replication
across multiple different data sets and metrics. Raw income among the urban population doubled
as well. This is also corroborated by the doubling of real expenditure per individual,
meaning how much money the average individual person was spending per year adjusted for inflation.
The purchasing power of the average person doubling in less than 30 years is at least
a half decent increase in prosperity, in my opinion. Daily caloric intake increased. Life
expectancy shot up very rapidly, rising from 40 in 1953 to 65 in 1978. Infant mortality dropped
from 175 deaths per 1,000 births to 37 per 1,000. Access to education was greatly expanded,
with primary school enrollment rates increasing from 48% in 1952 to 94% in 1978. Literacy rates
also correspondingly increased rapidly. So, contrary to Harris' fairytale narrative of
there just being a big bad man who hated good things for no apparent reason, the Communist
Party at the time both wanted to make China more prosperous and did so. Assuming here that prosperity
means living standards improving, Harris never actually tells us what he means by that word,
so I'm kind of guessing. And it certainly wasn't anywhere near rock bottom, especially not compared
to the previous hundred years or so, which were full of war and colonization, much of it at the
hands of these same Western capitalist countries that Harris spends most of his video praising.
I also want to note that the photos that Harris uses here are not actually of the 1970s as he claims,
but rather from the 1900s to the 1940s. They're squarely from the period of nationalist, aka
Western-aligned, rule. It seems like he went looking for photos of poverty from the 1970s to
back up his argument, but wasn't able to find them, so decided to instead present photos from
before the Communist ever came to power as evidence of them being bad. Kind of slimy, dude.
Next, Harris moves on to China's market reforms in the late 1970s under Deng Xiaoping,
because the entire point of him even talking about the Mao era was just to make it sound as
horrible and illogical and evil as possible, to then frame everything that followed it as even
more amazing in comparison. The worse that he can make the former sound, the better the latter
sounds in contrast, helping with the overarching, childish, uncritical celebration of free market
capitalism as some sort of magic narrative of the video. The once prosperous kingdom
had reached rock bottom, but that was all about to change.
So it's the 1970s and this is China's new leader, Deng Xiaoping. He came into power hoping to turn
around this 150 years of humiliation in China, the decline of China as a superpower. Elsewhere in the
region, China's neighbors had economies that joined the global economic party that was happening
in capitalism and they were thriving. They saw immense economic miracles and pulled millions
out of poverty. Really all he does is just make statements and then use positive sounding adjectives
to tell the audience what they're supposed to think and feel. Thriving economic miracles.
The reality of what happened in these countries is nowhere near as simplistic as Harris needed to
be for his propaganda to work. Singapore and Hong Kong, for example, are tiny city-states.
Used as hubs for global finance and trade due to their unique status as separate jurisdictions
from much larger neighboring countries. And they only even came to have this status in the first
place due to unique historical circumstances related to colonialism. That's not something that
can at all be replicated in the vast majority of countries, let alone a massive one like China.
And whether replicating it would even be desirable at all is also very questionable. Given that Hong
Kong, despite its very high levels of gross wealth, has one of the worst poverty rates in the
entire global north and hundreds of thousands of people who live in what are basically cages
because they can't afford anything else. Singapore is also hardly a model of the
corporate free market capitalism that Harris is trying to promote. Singapore is widely considered
in the academic literature to have developed via state capitalism. A highly government-directed
form of capitalism with considerable state control and ownership of important sectors
of the economy. They directed economic policy and leveraged state power at every step of the
way, which resulted in the government being the most important economic actor in the country by far.
This has resulted in an economy where, quoting a paper on the matter, the shareholder-centric
corporation virtually does not exist and where the state owns 37% of the stock market capitalization,
95% of the land, 80% of the housing, etc. Quite contrary to Harris's notion of
shareholder capitalism having created prosperity. Of the other countries that Harris points to,
the three most worth looking at are Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. Due to the context of the Cold
War and the end of World War II, the USA attempted to bring all of these countries under its hegemony
by providing them with considerable economic aid like it had with the Marshall Plan in Western
Europe. Because of this, they were able to pursue levels of state economic intervention and planning
that weren't nearly as tolerated in countries not aligned with the West. And this state direction
was pervasive, especially in Taiwan and South Korea, which were ruled by outright military
dictatorships all the way up until the late 80s and early 90s. South Korea had straight up,
actual five-year plans inspired by the USSR all the way up until the 1990s, painting their economic
growth as due to the simple wonders of free market capitalism is very misleading. Economist
Ha Jun Chang commented on the common misconception that these countries followed mainstream free
market style policies. Many of the things that the East Asian government officials did in the
miracle years, protecting infant industries, forcefully mobilizing resources away from
technologically stagnant agriculture into the dynamic industrial sector, and exploiting the
linkages across different sectors, contradict the free market view. Had the East Asian countries,
and indeed most of the rich countries in Europe and North America before them, run their economies
according to the principles of free market economics, they would not have developed their
economies in the way they have. All of this is especially true of the period that Harris is
covering here. These countries did eventually adopt neoliberal dogma in the 80s and 90s,
dialing back the state intervention that had characterized their economies throughout the
50s, 60s, and 70s. But the Chinese government's market reforms happened in the 1970s, so clearly
they were not inspired by what he calls corporate free market capitalism in East Asia because it
didn't exist there yet. I've said this already but it's worth repeating. Harris's content,
and indeed a lot of other content on YouTube, relies a whole lot on just confidently stating
things that aren't true as if they are. Without even trying to actually substantiate these claims
either, they're acting like the point has been proven regardless, and moving on to making another
fundamentally incorrect statement that also rests on the previous one, and all of the others
before that, having been true. So his whole narrative here of free market capitalist prosperity
has been crafted on a very, very long chain of falsehoods.
Deng specifically went on a visit to Singapore early on in his term, where ethnic Chinese had
adopted the free market, and they were thriving. He felt inspired. The malice economic doctrine
that had failed was over, and it was time to see if China could rebuild its economy,
experimenting with some version of capitalism. People didn't adopt the free market. That's
not how this works. You can't just individually decide that you want to do free market capitalism.
No more than I can just individually decide that I want to do communism. These are overarching
socioeconomic systems, not individual choices. These people lived under capitalism not because
they had adopted it, but rather just because they happened to live in a capitalist society.
But yeah, we've already been over what Singapore actually is and was, which conflicts greatly with
Harris's narrative here. What do you think it was that Chinese government officials may have seen
when they visited Singapore? That Chinese people are capable of running businesses,
like they have some sort of essential business running essence or something that they want to
wear off before, or a state-led economy that they might have been able to learn something from
for their own state-led economic reforms in their country? You don't need to think about it very
hard to arrive at the latter conclusion, because the first option is kind of ridiculous, and that
is in fact the case. The Communist Party came to see Singapore as something of a reference,
precisely because it was an example of an already existing model in which the state remained economically
dominant. But apart from that, Harris's timeline is again just totally messed up. Deng visited
Singapore in 1978, the same year in which the economic reforms in China began, but he and other
Chinese officials didn't start to promote Singapore as a special model to be followed in China
until 1992. Before that, it was just one of many different places that they'd studied,
so their decision to begin market reforms itself has really nothing to do with Singapore. For Harris,
though, it's very convenient to reduce a complicated, multi-causal decision, one which was
itself the result of power struggles in the Communist Party, to a simple Eureka-style moment
of epiphany. After decades of the evil Mao denying his people prosperity, along with other positive
sounding nouns, Deng saw the glory of the free market firsthand in Singapore, and he was so
awed by its incredible greatness that he had no choice but to go home and immediately replicate
it. It comes off as a childish, apocryphal propaganda story because it is one. In reality,
the reforms were already underway beforehand, the visit to Singapore was very short and uneventful,
the Chinese government only started paying special attention to Singapore 14 years later,
and the reason they did so didn't actually have much to do with free market capitalism at all,
rather something quite antifical to it. China's turn to a market-based but still state-dictated
economy has infinitely more to do with other factors, like the aforementioned political conflicts,
chiefly among them the one of the Soviet Union. So yeah, firstly, there was that,
which led to China and the USA establishing diplomatic relations again in 1972. Before this,
the People's Republic of China had no access to international governance systems like the UN,
as they were mostly controlled by the West, who had still considered the Republic of China
government in Taiwan as the legitimate government of all of China. So suddenly, all of the world's
most important and richest markets, made up of many countries who had spent the previous century
colonizing China and most of the rest of the world, were now finally open to China. This was a drastic
and sudden change in circumstances that enabled options that were previously closed to them,
like foreign investment from the advanced capitalist countries and the ability to export to them.
Second, Deng Xiaoping had been inspired by the new economic policy of the Soviet Union.
After the Russian Revolution, the Soviet government under Lenin decided that because
the country was overwhelmingly agrarian, much like China was, that they would allow a state-directed
capitalism in the hopes of developing an advanced industrial capitalist society,
because Karl Marx had theorized that that would be something of a prerequisite for communism.
This was highly successful, as the USSR rapidly recovered from the devastation of its civil war
and World War I. In 1961, following the disastrous attempt at rapid industrialization known as the
Great Leap Forward, Deng was then already the key player in an ill-fated attempt to implement
NEP-style reforms in China, to industrialize China in a very different way to the one that Mao
had just tried. So the idea before the market reforms that he started to implement in 1978
was not actually new at all, not in the history of China, nor in the history of communism,
nor even in Deng's own political career. So the international conditions that enabled China's
market reforms only came to be in the 1970s, and that clearest precedent and inspiration didn't
come from the West in the 1970s, but from the East in the 1920s, and they had been proposed in China
since at least the 1960s. If it isn't already clear from everything that we've just gone over,
Harris' narrative of China joining the capitalist party in the West is also just plain chronologically
impossible. He clearly means to imply that China was inspired by free markets, neoliberal capitalism,
rather than the embedded liberalism of the Bretton Woods period, given his constant references to
arch neoliberal Milton Friedman, his earlier delineation between the Bretton Woods period
and the neoliberal period that came after, and the fact that he outright praises free market
capitalism like a dozen times, actually more than that. But China's reforms actually started
before the turn to neoliberalism in the West. They started in 1978. Thatcher was elected in 1979,
Reagan in 1981, so they couldn't have been inspired by Friedman-style neoliberal reforms there,
because they hadn't even been implemented on a national level yet. In this video, it really
seems like Harris has like an uncontrollable desire to use the term West as synonymous with
correct and good. His presentation of the world is one where it's just kind of self-evident,
that the only way forward is to copy the superior West. If something happened that he considers to
be good, he does everything possible to ultimately credit it to Western influences or inspirations,
without feeling any sort of need to actually back that up, or check whether his argument even
makes any chronological sense, or consider the possibility that Chinese people might be
capable of thinking for themselves, having their own ideas, or being inspired by anything other
than the same countries that had colonized and devastated their own. This is juxtaposed with
his treatment of Mao, who was apparently just completely irrational and evil, because that's
the only way that Harris can apparently think of that could possibly explain someone not simply
copying the superior West. It comes off as at least a little bit racist. In the next bit,
Harris reduces all of Deng's market reforms to just him focusing on one little village,
the special economic zone of Shenzhen. He frames it like Deng started out by creating a little
secret capitalist project, developing this one town into a bustling industrial city. But the
reality is that this was just one small part of a much wider reform program, which also included
free other special economic zones established in free other places at the same time. So why
does he focus on it so heavily? This remark makes it clear. Deng Xiaoping designated this little town
as quote a special economic zone, where foreign companies could set up and invest in a very
capitalistic free market, claiming China's highly regulated very state directed system,
as some sort of success of free market capitalism would obviously be ridiculous. So in an attempt
to get around this complication, Harris, providing no evidence for his claims at all, says that Shenzhen
had a free market, and then he just casually acts like that represented the rest of China,
and that it was replicated everywhere else. Despite having done absolutely nothing to even
remotely argue for or evidence this extremely false claim, he then uses it as the basis to
claim China as a whole as a victory of the same type of free market capitalism that Milton Friedman
This starts happening all over China, and meanwhile Milton Friedman's back in the U.S. being like
Yep. Told ya. Soon there were a bunch of cities designated in China for special economic activity
or basically capitalism in a socialist country. Something I haven't mentioned yet is that big
parts of his narrative here are just ripped straight from the World Economic Forum propaganda
book that is being paid to promote here. I've actually been giving Harris way too much credit.
He didn't come up with like half of this stuff himself. The Singapore story,
followed immediately by the Shenzhen story, comes straight from the book, but Harris actually went
even further than the book did. Its description of China's special economic zones is simply that
there are places where foreign companies were allowed to operate with some tax incentives
under government-imposed conditions in contrast to the rest of the country where such enterprises
were entirely illegal, a surprisingly accurate description, and far from free market capitalism.
Sometimes you can just refer back to the very book that he's advertising here and use it to
refute him. Anyway, so onto the Milton Friedman part. Friedman absolutely did not approve of
China's state-led economy. He certainly may have liked it more than what it had before,
but it was far from anything close to resembling his neoliberal ideal. We have direct evidence of
this because Friedman actually went to China and spoke with Communist Party officials who outright
argued against him about the very fundamentals of his beliefs. They had major disagreements
on topics like private property rights, state interference in the market, and state economic
planning. If anything, China proved Friedman wrong that the sort of government interference that he
so despised could achieve what he'd claimed it couldn't, but Harris, undeterred by the truth,
just inverts reality yet again and claims the exact opposite. One of the things you might have noticed
that Harris does a lot in this video is to muddy the distinction between different types of capitalism,
ironically while also trying to create his own distinction between different types of capitalism.
His video is very overtly pro-free market capitalism specifically, yet in one sentence
he'll talk about how great the free market is, and then in the next he'll just say capitalism
alone. And this last bit about China is where this muddying of the waters came to its head.
China has obviously never had anything resembling free market capitalism. Harris pays a tiny little
bit of lip service to this fact for like a second, then just forgets that he ever said that and
immediately continues on as if China is nonetheless an example of the free market dogma that is trying
to promote. It's the same thing that he did earlier when he claimed the Bretton Woods period
and the Marshall Plan as examples of miracles of the free market rather than the heavy state
economic interference, planning, and control that actually characterizes them. Johnny Harris
in the corporations that the World Economic Forum represents probably wouldn't be very happy if we
went and looked at the actual reality of China's state-led economy with fairly routine executions
of billionaires and took it as a model to be followed, yet such is capitalist propaganda,
contradictory by nature. China becoming a world power through heavy state intervention and very
directed and deliberate government-led economic policy doesn't fit into their narrative of what
kind of economic policies are supposed to work best, so they need to obfuscate those facts and
find roundabout ways to claim that it's actually still somehow an example of the wonders of free
market capitalism. This video is a fine example of that practice. But wait, I haven't yet actually
provided any evidence for my claim that China doesn't have a free market economy. Silly me,
allow me to cite a source, a book called Stakeholder Capitalism, by the founder and head
of the World Economic Forum. In recent decades, another form of capitalism emerged as an alternative,
state capitalism. In China, to take the most notable example, the private sector now produces
more than 60% of GDP. Despite this, the state is still considered the most important stakeholder
and retains power over individual shareholders. The government achieves its dominant role in at
least free ways. First, it keeps a strong hand in the distribution of resources and opportunities.
Second, it can intervene in virtually any industry. And third, it can direct the economy
by means of large-scale infrastructure, research and development, education, healthcare, or housing
projects. So Harris' video is fundamentally based on this idea that China is a success of free market
capitalism, of freemanite neoliberalism, to the extent that China supposedly stands as proof
that Milton Friedman was right. Yet the book that he was paid to promote in this video says
something entirely different. That it's the prime example of something very different to the neoliberalism
that it misleadingly calls shareholder capitalism and stakeholder capitalism. The book even gives
this state capitalism props, saying that, were it not for state capitalism, large parts of the
developing world may not have seen a major growth spurred at all. Yet Harris frames it entirely
differently, as if the free market is actually to thank for the perceived successes of state-led
interventionist economies. I don't mean to give the book any credit here, it's garbage, ghost-ridden
propaganda. It only acknowledges these things because they're undeniable, and it does so to
create this false impression of nuance so that the reader is more likely to be convinced by its main
argument that the way to fix the problems of neoliberal capitalism is with more neoliberal
capitalism, along with a nice helping of giving corporations even more power. I just think it's
telling that Harris clearly read the book, given that he both claimed to have done so, and that
parts of his video seem to come directly from it. Yet to sustain his argument that everything good
ever is all thanks to the West's amazing free market capitalism, he still has to editorialize
the World Economic Forum Propaganda Book to get rid of the parts where the book is frank about the
fact that the things that he's crediting to the wonders of Milton Friedman are actually due to
something very different. Harris's video comes off as even more of a piece of unthinking capitalist
propaganda than the literal World Economic Forum Propaganda Book does. Now, let's move on to the
big graph moment of the video, which comes out of nowhere after Harris is finally done lying to us
about how neoliberal capitalism actually saved the world and made everything better
contrary to what all the evidence shows.
I have two graphs I want to show you.
They look like this. Okay, let's look at this one first. It's called the elephant graph. Do you
sort of see why? Let's deconstruct this graph and try to understand what this says about the
past 30 years of the rise of China. On this axis is everyone on earth ranked by their income
grouped into percentiles. So these people down here make an income that is the 10th percentile,
the lowest 10% in the world, and then the 20th percentile, and so on and so on. Up to these
people up here who are the richest in the world, they have an income that puts them in the 90th
percentile. This axis here shows how much growth in income these people have had over the past 35
years, basically during the heyday of shareholder capitalism and the rise of China. So you'll
see how this plays out in just a second. Let's start plotting how much income growth each of these
groups saw over the past 35 years. The bottom 10% saw their incomes grow by around 75%, not bad.
These are people who live in the poorest countries who make the lowest income in the world. The 20
to 30 percentile saw huge growth in their income, 125% and more over the past 35 years. This is like
the new middle class in China and other Asian countries who saw huge income growth due to
globalization. They did really well under this system. Just want to pause for a second here to
note how Harris is again claiming China for what he calls shareholder capitalism, despite the very
book that he's promoting calling it something very different. But then you start to get to the
people in the 50th and 60th and 70th and 80th percentile. This is basically people who live
in the middle class in the West. Their incomes have grown much slower, sometimes under 50%
over the course of 35 years, which is little over 1% a year, not very much income growth.
So did you notice the contradiction there? It's a pretty big one. Harris goes his entire video
telling us how awesome shareholder capitalism was for the West, how it made the economy explode,
and how it proved Milton Friedman right. But then the graph that his entire video led up to
paints a different picture. Now it seems that things actually didn't go that great for people
in the West. There's no consistency in this video at all. He just contradicts himself so often.
And some of these people in the West have seen their incomes shrink,
like the blue-collar workers in Detroit and the rust belt whose jobs disappeared to China.
So so far you can sort of see why this makes sense. The people in China who benefited from this mass
industrialization saw huge benefits. And the people here in the United States and in the West
who saw jobs go overseas to China saw a way slower growth in their income.
So this part is kind of ridiculous. Harris blames production moving to China for that portion of
the graph having comparatively less growth. But as we've already established, the US economy
continued to grow at the same average rate that it always had. And given that the income shares
of the top percentiles saw massive increases that work on current with this, it's clear that the
extra income from this growth was taken from them and given to the rich in their country,
rather than to normal people in China who are at the very bottom end of this graph,
Harris just can't seem to help himself here. He has to find some way in which he can blame
your woes on Chinese people, rather than the capitalists who are actually to blame because,
well, they're paying him to make this video, aren't they? I'll let him finish his spiel on the graph now.
get us a little bit more granular. These are the people who have the highest incomes in the world.
Let's see how their income has grown over the past 35 years.
You can see that their income has exploded under this system. They're seeing tripling of their
income in the past 35 years. Now, a reminder that this is 35 years of data from every economy on
earth. This shows everyone on the planet. So this gives us a view of who are the winners and the
losers of this shareholder capitalism that has globalized to Asia and around the world. The top
1% of income earners saw the biggest benefits from this system. They are the ones who disproportionately
benefit from shareholder capitalism and the growth of globalization.
Again, wait, wasn't this supposed to actually be super awesome for the West?
So awesome that it inspired China to copy it all? He said this earlier.
So all the US and Western economies are thriving because of this corporate,
free market capitalism that was taking over the world.
But his own framing of this graph is kind of contradicting that quite a bit.
Whatever. Anyway, so you probably won't be too surprised to find that this graph is extremely
cherry-picked. It compares income growth rate, not actual income. For an example of why this
is not exactly very indicative of anything, let's say you make $1,000 a year and your income increases
by, say, 125%, like it did in this part of the graph here. Then you're now making $2,250 a year,
$1,250 more. But if someone say from this part of the graph, which Harris claims represents
the Western middle class, is making $50,000 a year, and this grows by only 45%, which seems much
lower in comparison, then that income has increased to $72,500 a year, or $22,500 more, which in
numeric terms is 18 times more than the increase in income of those in the lower percentile.
So while that income might be growing at a slower rate, that's not really indicative of anything
useful on its own. Those in the middle can still be getting a much larger share of raw
global income than those at the bottom. The reason why propagandists like to use this so-called
elephant graph, comparing income growth instead of numerical increases in income, is because the
latter graph completely destroys the narrative that this elephant graph is used to push, that
free market neoliberalism has actually been mostly beneficial and has only been slightly negative for
a relatively small group of people in the West. That's wrong, and it would be even if we assumed,
for the sake of argument, that China, which makes up the vast majority of the growth in those lower
income sections of the graph, has a free market economy. The YouTuber Unlearning Economics has a
great video about this whole narrative of neoliberal progress, where he specifically refutes the abuse
of the elephant graph, so I'm just going to play that clip to explain it to you more.
The elephant shape comes because the gains at the very bottom of the global distribution
on the left hand of the graph have been low. Moving right along the x-axis, we can see they
are much higher for the global middle class, are low again for the middle class of rich countries,
and are high again for the very rich. This paints a picture of globalization as a largely positive,
albeit flawed, process, compressing the global income distribution by creating a much larger
global middle class, while neglecting the middle classes of the rich world, which have seen high
and possibly rising income inequality within their borders. But the elephant graph hides an
assumption which is pervasive in these debates. These are relative changes, expressed in percentages.
If you look at the raw changes in income, shown on this graph, the income gains are largely
flattened at the bottom of the distribution, and the graph takes the familiar hockey stick shape,
albeit with a slight bump in the middle, due to the impressive growth of China and other
Southeast Asian countries. This is also in Lakhnar and Milanovic's original paper,
though the elephant version has been shared more widely. Although incomes rose by 60% for both the
top 1%, and those in the middle of the global income distribution, this was an absolute increase
of $23,000 for the top 1%, but just $800 for the middle. The rich gained the same in relative terms,
but 30 times as much in absolute terms. The elephant shows the former measurement,
while the hockey stick shows the latter. The implication of this is pretty clear.
Almost all of the growth in the global economy was captured by those at the top of the distribution,
failing to go to those who need it most. Yeah, you heard that right. Both of these
graphs are from the same paper, yet those who pushed this narrative took one of them and ignored
the other. I wonder why? Take a look at the income growth of the bottom 20% here. Their incomes
increased by $217 in 30 years, adjusted for inflation, and purchasing power between different
countries. Now, what about someone in the top 80%, in line with the western middle class?
Their incomes increased by $2,218. 10 times more. Again, this is adjusted for purchasing power parity,
so it's not like that money is worthless due to the higher prices of goods in richer countries.
It is actually just straight up 10 times more. So clearly, it's not the poor Chinese factory
worker whose income has increased by a whopping $217 in 30 years, who's robbed the average
westerner of their share of economic growth. It's the people represented on the far right side of
the graph, whose incomes increased by 28 times that of the global average. The elephant graph
was cherry picked by the World Economic Forum, Harris, and many other propagandists to mask
inconvenient facts for their narratives like these. So, Harris started out by claiming that
neoliberalism, which he calls shareholder capitalism and free market capitalism, increased
economic growth in the west by using a misleading graph of per capita GDP, which was not adjusted
for inflation. Now, he's implying that neoliberalism was actually disadvantageous for most people in
the west, and that there was a massive redistribution in income from them to the rest of the world,
and the richest 1% and up. This narrative is not only incredibly contradictory, but also untrue.
There was a massive redistribution in income, yes, but only to the top 1%. The empirical data,
no matter what metrics you use, no matter what variables you adjust by, consistently shows this.
Neoliberalism has accomplished absolutely nothing but the redistribution of income from the majority
of people to the richest people, and it's like that by design. So, next and finally,
Harris shows us a graph of global CO2 emissions for some reason.
The second graph looks like this. This shows the amount of CO2 emissions by country.
You've got Europe and the United States, and then up here you've got China, the world's
largest emitter of CO2. Like the elephant graph, this graph combines loads of data to show us that
shareholder capitalism focuses so much on short-term profits for shareholders that it leaves out any
consideration for how this economic activity affects the planet we live on and our ability to live on it.
He makes sure to point out that China now has the world's largest share of global CO2 emissions,
when you measure them by country at least, neglecting to mention that until, like,
a couple of weeks ago actually, China had the world's largest population, congratulations India,
and it still hasn't approached the per capita emissions of the West,
and especially not the US, where the average person emits about three times more than the
average Chinese person. And given that Harris also noted in his video that
And more and more foreign companies flocked to China for its cheap labor. It became the world's factory.
Then it would stand to reason that a fair bit of those emissions are also on behalf of the West.
Yet they still count against China and not against them.
His analysis of this graph is very short and just seems kind of tacked on in superfluous,
like he wanted to throw in a token acknowledgement of climate change at the end,
so that he could subsequently imply that stakeholder capitalism would magically fix it,
while also driving home the general sort of anti-China vibe of this part of the video.
Right after him telling us how awesome it was that China finally came to its senses and copied
the free market capitalism that's work so great for the West, there's this jarring tone shift.
Now it seems that free market capitalism hasn't actually gone that well for the West.
China's success also came at the expense of the average Westerner,
and China even bears massive blame for climate change.
So which is it? Is China an awesome example of free market capitalism success,
or a massive threat to the livelihood and well-being of the average person in the West?
What's really most jarring about this to me though is that it seems like
people don't really notice when he does this.
At least from reading the comments, you won't really see anyone picking up on these sorts of
contradictions and incoherency. Kind of worrying to me, and I hope that maybe my video will
sort of encourage people to consume YouTube content, not just Johnny Harris videos,
but all YouTube content with a bit more of a critical eye.
Anyway, so it's especially nonsensical for Harris to bring up climate change in this video,
because the only actual evidence that he presents throughout the entire video
for the supposed success of free market capitalism was that one graph of raw GDP growth.
For Harris, growth is just sort of good in of itself, and it improves what he calls prosperity,
yet that is precisely the sort of thinking that led to runaway climate change.
The reality is that, as the last 40 to 50 years have shown,
there is not necessarily an automatic correlation between economic growth
and improvements in living standards. Growth just means more national income,
and if most or all of that extra income is being distributed straight to the people on top,
the benefits for everyone else will be marginal or non-existent, while the costs,
like the impending climate catastrophe, will be shouldered primarily by everyone outside of
that privileged minority. And this is a big reason why capitalism just is never going to
work that well for most people. While, particularly in state-directed forms,
it does grow wealth better than the systems that came before it, it also creates a tiny minority
of people with immense economic and thus political power, which they then use to ensure two things.
One, that efforts at power and income redistribution are stunted as much as possible,
so that as much of this growth as possible goes straight to themselves.
And two, that this growth continues as unabated as possible in order to ensure themselves as much
income as possible, even as this makes the planet increasingly less habitable for humans.
The World Economic Forum is the most important representative body of exactly that class of
people, and Johnny Harris was paid by them to make this video about how awesome economic growth has
supposedly been throughout the last 40 to 50 years or so, you know, with some very minor caveats,
like runaway climate change and immense inequality that they only acknowledged because
they're now completely impossible to deny. But don't worry, they swear they'll fix them for
us out of the goodness of their hearts if we just adopt their vision of a new form of capitalism,
which is not only fundamentally the same as the old form of capitalism, but which would
also just so happen to hand them, the ones who cause these problems in the first place,
copious amounts of additional direct governmental power. Yeah, that sounds like a great idea.
Anyway, so after the CO2 emissions graph part, the conclusion that we dissected at the beginning
of the video begins. So we're pretty much done here. There's really just little about this video
that makes any sense without the context of it just being a particularly poorly made propaganda
piece. It's just a guy presenting a very disjointed historical narrative with massive
unexplained time skips that's very loosely based on reality, where he insists that free market
capitalism is responsible for anything good that's ever happened, while presenting nothing but a few
misleading graphs or just outright lying to sustain that narrative. Then at the end, he pulls out
more misleading graphs, contradicts everything that he just spent seven whole minutes telling you,
and then insists that the only way forward is to do exactly what the world's worst corporations
tell us to do. It is utterly embarrassing that Johnny Harris frames himself as a journalist
who according to him does copious amounts of research for his videos, including this one,
where he gets pretty much everything wrong, provides next to no evidence for his claims,
and messes up to a comical level when he does actually try to provide a source. And this video
is indicative of the quality of research across his entire channel. It's garbage. But unfortunately,
it seems to work regardless because he gets a whole lot of views. And as the link for this
response video makes clear, it takes infinitely more effort to refute made up bullshit than the
effort that goes into making up the bullshit. In conclusion, Johnny Harris is a liar. Worse.
His lies are about as complex as lying to a child that babies are delivered to your doorstep by stalks.
Way worse. He took money to lie and mislead on behalf of one of the world's most nefarious and
damaging, ultra-rich advocacy organizations, and even seemed proud of doing so when he was called
out on it. If there's anything actually useful that you should take from this video beyond that,
it's one, that neoliberalism actually sucks, and that other forms of capitalism pretty much
suck too, though quite a bit less, and two, that all of the problems that I've outlined here about
Johnny Harris's content are not actually unique to his content. The vast majority of YouTube
infotainment, particularly historical infotainment, is exactly the same. It's just people who make
confident-sounding statements that the audience is just supposed to take for granted because
they said so. It's rare for them to even explain their reasoning, let alone provide anything resembling
adequate evidence for it. The average YouTube history video is so bad that treating it as
anything more than background noise while you clean the house or something is a huge mistake.
That's all for now. If you liked this video and want to see more like it, then subscribe
and check out my other videos. And if you really like my stuff, consider supporting me on Patreon
or Ko-fi. It all really helps, because unlike some other YouTubers, my videos aren't funded by
billionaire advocacy groups, but rather by voluntary contributions from my viewers. Anyway, bye!
Thank you all for watching. See you next time!
