Hello, and welcome to the 2021 Fields Metal Symposium in honor of Peter Schulze.
I'm Jared Weinstein, Professor of Mathematics at Boston University, and it is my great pleasure
and honor to be giving this introduction to Schulze's work.
So who is Peter Schulze, and what are his contributions to mathematics?
Schulze was born in Dresden in 1987 and grew up in Berlin.
Early on, he displayed an extraordinary talent in mathematics by winning three gold medals
and one silver medal at the International Mathematics Olympiad, a contest for high school
students featuring fiendishly difficult problems.
Schulze attended the University of Bonn and completed his bachelor's, master's, and
doctoral degrees in the space of five years.
His doctoral advisor was Michael Rappaport, whose advisor in turn was Pierre Delinia,
winner of the 1978 Fields Metal.
Schulze's dissertation at Bonn settled a problem posed by Delinia decades earlier.
This dissertation, which carried the title, Perfectoid Spaces, was an instant sensation.
Now, we'll get to what perfectoid spaces actually are in a moment, but suffice it to say, the
appearance of the idea was a tectonic shift for the field.
In universities and institutions throughout the world, professors and students gathered
in seminars for a few hours a week just to discuss the ideas of this 22-year-old from
Bonn.
There were international conferences, special semesters, graduate student workshops, and
all manner of publications devoted to the topic of perfectoid spaces.
Anyone researching in the field of arithmetic geometry quickly realized that Schulze's
dissertation on perfectoid spaces was required reading.
In 2011, Schulze himself came to the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey
to give lectures and meet the researchers who were working there.
I was fortunate enough to be one of those researchers, and Schulze's visit led to a
collaboration which, frankly, changed the course of my career.
In the decade that followed, Schulze would go on to collaborate with many mathematicians
and produce articles and books totaling thousands of pages.
He would also go on to win many awards, including the Cole Prize, the Fermat Prize, and the
Leibniz Prize.
As you know by now, Schulze's Fields Medal was awarded in 2018, but already in 2014, there
were whispers that a medal was coming his way since he was so young it was just a question
of which year it was going to be.
So what exactly did Schulze accomplish, and why did it electrify so many people?
To answer this, I must explain what it is that research mathematicians do.
Many people are surprised to learn that mathematical research is a thing, because the math they
learned in school was presented as static or already solved.
But it's quite the opposite.
Mathematicians will never run out of things to do, because there are plenty of unsolved
mathematical problems, and mathematicians come up with more every passing year.
Problems in math are considered solved when a mathematician produces a formal proof, just
like you might have done in grade school plain geometry.
The result of solving a mathematical problem this way is called a theorem.
But far from being an exercise in drudgery, a proof for a theorem can be considered elegant
or even beautiful by mathematicians if it produces a maximally powerful result with
a maximally simple or short sequence of steps.
To write elegant proofs, you need elegant definitions.
For a mathematician, a definition is not quite like what you see in a dictionary, rather
coming up with a definition is like writing down the rules for a new game.
For instance, the axioms you use in those plain geometry proofs can be seen as a definition
of the Euclidean plain.
Their elegance and economy are the reason they've endured for 2,000 years.
We also have a definition of the basic concept of number, as well as the concept of set.
In the 20th century, geometers wanted to study some more complicated shapes than the plain,
like this donut-shaped object or this shape.
Alexander Grotendeck, who won the Fields Medal in 1966, gave us the definition of a scheme,
a marvelous abstraction tying together all shapes that can be described using algebraic
equations.
Grotendeck's concept of a scheme was essential to all kinds of breakthroughs, from Pierre
Delinia's proof of the Vey conjectures to Andrew Wiles' proof of Fermat's last theorem.
To these definitions, we now add Schultz's perfectoid spaces, as well as other exotic
novelties, such as the diamond and the condensed set.
Schultz and his collaborators wrote down definitions, proved the basic theorem surrounding them,
and then they and other mathematicians used those definitions to solve all sorts of problems.
Somehow a dam had burst.
The enormous opportunities to solve new problems meant that everyone working in the field of
arithmetic geometry was now obligated to learn all things Schultzian.
So what makes a definition useful in solving problems?
Brevity and simplicity are key.
Schultz himself says that when he works on mathematics, he prefers to work without writing
anything down.
That means that he must formulate his ideas in the cleanest way possible.
As he puts it, I'd like to take this idea further and offer an analogy.
A spider's brain may be too limited to grasp the large-scale structure of its web.
It certainly does not have the coordinates of where each thread is to be placed, but
it can still spin the web by executing a simple set of rules.
In this analogy, the spider is the mathematician, the simple set of rules is the elegant definition,
and the web is the complex mathematical object brought into existence by that definition.
So coming up with the right definitions, the right rules of the game, is much of the battle
in math.
Simple rules can produce complex and useful results.
Once you have the right definitions, even the most difficult theorems seem to prove
themselves.
I haven't said anything yet about the actual content of Schultz's work.
Now, Schultz's work spans quite a few topics throughout mathematics, but there's a common
element to much of what he does, p-addict numbers and p-addict geometry.
Let's talk about numbers for a moment.
One starts counting with what we call the natural numbers, one, two, three, and so forth.
We learn methods for adding and multiplying natural numbers.
Then we learn about representing numbers in between the natural numbers using decimals,
and we learn how to add and multiply those as well.
At some point, we learn about numbers like pi whose decimal representation doesn't end,
but nonetheless, our rules for adding and multiplying extend to these as well.
The numbers you can write down with decimals, infinite or not, are called real numbers,
so-called because they can represent quantities in the real world.
How many kilograms is Mount Everest, or how many meters from here to the moon?
The answers are real numbers.
So we have here a decent definition, the rules of the game, for real numbers.
Actually, there's one more rule we mustn't forget.
Point nine repeating equals one, and more generally, a tale of repeating nines can be rounded up.
Now, you may have found this rule strange when you first encountered it, and you might
have even resisted it a little bit.
If so, you might be stumbling upon some Schultzian ideas.
Imagine a number system without the rule of repeating nines, in which point nine repeating
really is less than one.
It seems simpler that way, but this number system has some, let's say, continuity problems.
If Zeno of Alaya wants to move one meter forward, he will first have to move nine tenths of
the way, and then nine tenths of the remaining distance, and so on.
But without the rule of repeating nines, Zeno never makes it.
Dropping the rule of repeated nines seems to exclude the possibility of continuous motion.
What's left of the real numbers resembles nothing so much as a disconnected cloud of dust.
When we re-impose the rule, the cloud of dust condenses back into the real number line.
This is, in fact, the idea behind condensed sets, a deep new idea developed by Schultzian
and Dustin Clausen.
The idea is that almost any shape can be thought of as a cloud of dust, together with a rule
that tells you how to glue the dust back together.
Anyway, after settling on the rules of the real number game, we can start talking about
geometry.
Arrange all the real numbers in a row, and you get a line.
Add another dimension to create the plane, where each point represents a pair of real
numbers called coordinates.
An algebraic equation relating those coordinates determines a curve.
The interplay between equations like this and the shapes they represent is called algebraic
geometry.
An algebraic geometer might look at an equation like this and say, of course, that's a hyper
elliptic curve of genus 2, and its solutions look like a donut with two holes.
So far, so good.
Let's revisit the rules that govern real numbers.
The digits are permitted to go off to the right without end, but what if we tweak the
game a different way so that the digits are now permitted to go off to the left instead?
The usual rules for addition and multiplication still apply.
These new numbers don't quantify anything in the real world, but as mathematicians we
come up with definitions, the rules of the game, and then stand back and see what happens.
What we have defined in this game are known as the ten attic numbers, an entirely different
number system from the reals.
There are some similarities.
In the real numbers, fractions like one-third have repeating decimals, and in the ten attic
numbers they have repeating decimals as well.
In the real numbers, we impose the rule that .9 repeating equals one.
In the ten attic numbers, there's a corresponding rule where repeating nines give you negative
one.
And finally, in the real numbers, irrational numbers like the square root of 41 have non-repeating
decimals.
The same is true for the ten attic numbers.
We have described the ten attic numbers here, but by working with a base other than ten,
you can define the P attic numbers for any base, P.
For reasons I won't get into, mathematicians usually only allow P to be a prime number.
And in case you were wondering, the idea behind the name is to extend the pattern, dyadic
for two, triadic for three, etc.
Now the P attic numbers are nothing new.
They were first described by Kurt Hensel in 1897.
So what did Peter Schulze and his collaborators do with them?
The answer has to do with the kind of geometry you get when you replace the real numbers
with the P attic numbers.
What happens to the familiar real number line?
Well, various attempts have been made to visualize the P attic numbers, and all of them seem
to have a self-similar or fractal nature.
But none of them is perfect.
Our little spider brains can't quite fully grasp the P attic number line the same way
we can grasp the real one.
As an example of how mind-bending P attic geometry is, consider the following two facts.
Every triangle is isosceles, and every point within a circle is the center of that circle.
Very strange.
Another nice thing about real geometry is that no matter how complicated a shape may
be, if you take a magnifying glass and zoom in on any particular spot, the shape becomes
rather simpler.
You could then figure out a lot about the shape by describing how these pieces fit together.
But in P attic geometry, applying a magnifying glass to a shape doesn't seem to make it
any simpler.
The fractal doesn't become any less of a fractal when you zoom in on it.
In the 20th century, brilliant luminaries made huge strides in this field.
But it was Schultz who came up with the incredible idea of just using a better magnifying glass.
Schultz discovered that when you zoom in ever closer on a P attic shape, a new sort of entity
appears, and that's what a perfectoid space is.
It's a little like the discovery of a new elementary particle, smaller than the atomic
nucleus.
Now that we know about perfectoid spaces and how they fit together, we can gain all kinds
of new insights into P attic geometry.
Schultz's latest work, in collaboration with Laurent Farg, is a 350 page treatise entitled
Geometrization of the Local Langlands Correspondence.
It came out just a few months ago, and my colleagues and I have been feverishly studying
it.
This new work strikes a dagger into the heart of something called the Langlands program,
which is sometimes described as a grand unified theory of math, bringing together so many
different objects in math into perfect harmony.
Naturally, intimate knowledge of perfectoid spaces is a prerequisite.
At this point, you might be asking, this all sounds fascinating.
Clearly a lot of people are interested in it, but what is the real use of P attic geometry?
Does it have any practical applications?
Now as a mathematician, I am obligated to remind you that basically all the technology
and science that makes society function rests at least partially on mathematics.
But between you and me, when someone like Peter Schultz discovers new math, he is not
thinking about applications or even anything related to the physical world.
Instead, he is peering into a universe all its own.
What others might describe as invention or creating, he might describe simply as learning.
Thinking about structures and patterns that are already there.
As Schultz puts it, for me doing research is really like discovering certain things
that are just out there, the sense of discovering something that's there completely independently
of the world.
It's a unique sensation.
Mathematicians may disagree on whether math is created or discovered, but they all agree
that learning, writing, discussing mathematics brings a powerful sense of satisfaction and
joy.
A large part of this joy is sharing it with the community of like-minded souls.
I myself am immensely grateful to have Peter Schultz in our community of mathematicians,
and I hope you'll join me in congratulating him on winning the Fields Medal.
Thank you.
