time for a talk. And the speaker now is Al Gore and he's going from from McGill, yes.
Well, I looked and saw that Udi was from Hebrew and I thought, wait, what happened? Okay,
so this is Al Gore and he's going to speak on foliations on Shemora varieties. Go ahead, Al.
Thank you, Jim, for the introduction. And thanks to all the organizers for the opportunity to speak
in this wonderful conference. So my talk is about foliations on Shemora varieties. It has to do
with the geometry in characteristic P in positive characteristic of Shemora varieties.
And suddenly the structure of Shemora varieties in characteristic P and even periodically
is of great interest to Steve. Well, generally because of the connection to the Kudla program.
But today this morning we heard from Michael Rappoport about the work together with Thomas
Think about periodic uniformization. So suddenly, I think it's a subject that is of interest to him,
but I was hard pressed to find any direct link between my talk and Steve's work.
So in particular, there are no theta functions or theta correspondence.
There's a theta operator, but I don't know if this really counts. So I thought, well,
at least I'll try and find a picture, which many have done. And I discovered that I have exactly
one picture of Steve. But in fact, it couldn't be more perfect. So let me show it to you.
So here we see this picture is taken in Barbados, where we held many conferences.
Steve participated in several of them and helped organize them and spoken them.
It was a great presence in these activities. We see Steve and his wife, Selmas.
And also, happily enough, my co-author, Udi de Shalit, appears here. So just a perfect opportunity.
Okay, so let me move to business. So I'm going to talk about foliation. I'm going to start with
some introduction to the topic of foliation and then explain how we use this in the study of
Shymor varieties in characteristic B. Okay, so I will actually focus on two examples today,
the Hilbert modular varieties and Uniter Shymor varieties, examples that are familiar and often
used in the context of Steve's work. And we hope that we'll be able to extend all this work at least
to the context of simple Shymor varieties caught with sense, but there's still a lot of work to be
done together. And my goal is to explain two kinds of foliations on these examples. I will use the
Hilbert modular varieties to explain one sort of foliations and Uniter Shymor varieties to explain
another source of foliations. Okay, so to begin with, let me define what a foliation is.
So let S be any non-singular variety of an algebraically closed field K that could be a
characteristic P or zero actually. So the first requirement, a foliation is a sub bundle
of the tangent bundle of the variety. Now the tangent bundle, if you think about it as a
sheaf of derivations, it has a structure of a Lie algebra or sheaf of Lie algebras, namely
if you think about sections of T of the tangent bundle as derivations, we could
calculate their Poisson brackets, namely compose them in two different ways and take the difference
that's another derivation. And the first condition we put about F is that it's involutive, namely that
it's closed under those Poisson brackets. We also want it to be a saturated sub-sheaf, so if we take
the quotient of T modulo F as an OS module, it should be Poisson free. And in characteristic
zero, that's where it stops, that's the whole definition of a foliation. In characteristic
P, the Lie algebra, sorry, the tangent bundle has another property that it's so-called P closed.
So when you have a derivation in characteristic P, if you iterate it P times, it turns out to be a
derivation once more. It's not true in characteristic zero, but it's true in characteristic P.
And we require that F is also closed under this P power operation. So there's some sort of
lack of uniformity in the definition between characteristic zero and characteristic P.
Okay, so when those conditions hold, depending on the characteristic K, we say that F is a
foliation and we call it smooth if it's locally everywhere of a direct summand of T and not just
generically, so okay. So as to the motivation of studying foliation, it really comes from
two different sources. It's a huge subject in the study of geometry and topology of
differential manifolds or hyperbolic manifolds, study of differential equations.
I recently checked on math, sign it and found that there are about 3,500 papers
with foliation appearing in the title, but in contrast, there are only 55
where foliation appears in the title and they're also under the subject code 14 of algebraic geometry.
So there's much to do about this subject in the context of algebraic geometry.
One reason this is such an important notion that given a foliation in characteristic zero,
say over the complex numbers, gives you a lot, gives you an interesting
geometrical or topological information about your manifold. For example, Frobenius theorem
says that whenever you have a smooth foliation F on a complex variety S, it's integrable,
mainly given a point on this variety. There is an analytic sub-variety passing
through this point, such that the tangent bundle of this variety agrees with the foliation.
So in fact, because of this theorem, there are two ways to think about foliations and
characteristics. Zero one is the way I define it, the other one is dividing the manifold into
sort of parallel in quotes, analytic sub-varieties that all together cover the manifold.
Okay, and the interesting point is that even if S, the variety, the foliation and the point
of algebraic, this leaf of the foliation passing through X is most often transcendental and not
algebraic. And we see this example already for Hilbert model of surfaces. Okay, see this phenomenon.
Okay, now there's another completely different source of motivation to study
foliation, and that's really where we come into that. But before, let me give you one particular
example. So this is due to a TNG. Let's take A to be a simple complex abelian surface.
Then given any tangent vector at the origin, I can just translate it over the whole abelian surface
using the group structure and get this way an unvanishing vector field that I can
just saturate to get a foliation, a sub bundle of the tangent bundle, which is also involutive.
And if A is simple, there are no other smooth foliations that some of the whole
source of foliations on a complex abelian surface. But if A is not simple, if it's
ogenous to a product of two elliptic curves, there are other foliations called turbulent
foliations. I'm not going to define them here. I'm just going to say that they're reminiscent
of the so-called red foliations on real two-dimensional tori. So if I have a real two-dimensional
tori, which withdraws a square with identify opposite edges, there are first the linear
foliations, the one I discussed here. Given a tangent vector, you can sort of promote it
to a foliation of the whole surface. But there are also other things you can do.
You can define this torus into strips, so to say, and define on each strip this
kind of different foliation where you glue opposite sides. In fact, not necessarily in a
perfect linear way, but you can identify opposite sides using a deformed morphism
of this interval and get more complicated structures. And in fact, you can also get
foliations of this sort. And this is really what called red foliations. So again, I'm just kind
of giving some sort of intuition about the richness of the subject. I'm not really getting
into the details here. So the TNG's paper is a great source to learn about that.
These examples that you gave, you can do them also in the algebraic setting, not only in the
transcendent? Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. So G's is really in the algebraic setting. And here,
just to give an indication of what's going on, I'm drawing the analog for two-dimensional real
tori. Does this example work for a higher than two-dimensional? Yes. Yes. Definitely this kind
of linear foliation works in quite generality. And also these, as long as you are over the
complex numbers in characteristic B, we know much less at this point. So for any complex
abelian varieties of arbitrary dimension, this works. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Thanks. Yeah. Definitely.
Okay. So I should just mention some modern contributors to foundations of
sort of foliation theory in the context of algebraic geometry. I should mention Gryffindy,
Gabriel, Ekadal, Mioka, Bogomel, Brunella, McQuillen, Sheppard-Barn, and many others.
And a recent landmark achievement in this area was the classification of foliations on
algebraic surfaces, algebraic foliations on algebraic surfaces. And one of our examples,
the Hilbert-Mollow surfaces actually plays a special role in this classification.
Okay. So let me now get to the other source of motivation, which was actually our entry point
into the subject. And that has to do with inseparable morphisms in characteristic P.
Okay. So let's suppose that we have an algebraic variety, two algebraic varieties,
S and Y in characteristic P, and a morphism between them. Then we say that this morphism
is of height one, if it factors the Frobenius morphism from S to SP. Okay. So if I can complete
this diagram by another morphism from Y to S, such that the composition is Frobenius from S to SP.
And situations like that arise often for Shimuro varieties in characteristic P. We'll see some
examples today. Perhaps the simplest example is the modular curve X naught P. We all know
the picture that it, in characteristic P, it factors or separates into two curves. On one of
them, the natural map is an isophism. And on the other strand, the natural map is essentially
the Frobenius, the Frobenius map from that curve to itself. Okay. So that that's one of
one basic example where this arises in the context of Shimuro varieties.
Such situations also arise in the context of a billion varieties in characteristic B. I'll give
you an example in a second. But before that, let me introduce a little bit more terminology.
Okay. So the fundamental result in this story is the following correspondence due to Jacobson,
who actually defined it in the context of fields and used it to create a sort of Galois theory
for inseparable field extensions. But it can be easily promoted to the context of varieties,
and it goes like that. Let S be a non-singular variety of our perfect field of characteristic P.
Then on the one hand, we have foliations. Okay. So those are subtly algebras of the tangent bundle
that are also closed under P power operation. And on the other hand, we have finite morphisms
from S to a target, which is a normal algebraic variety. And there's a bijection between the two.
And furthermore, F is a smooth foliation. Namely, it's everywhere locally a direct
summand of the tangent bundle, even only if Y is a non-singular variety. So this is a very
powerful tool to study global geometry of varieties in characteristic P. In particular,
we're interested in it because it complements other tools we have to study Shimuro varieties
in characteristic P, which are the local models, which, as the name suggests, provide very good
local information, but are not that efficient in providing global information. So that tool
of foliations we are hopeful would be kind of complementary to the use of local models.
Okay. So we'll use the notation given a foliation. We'll denote this Y by S,
modulo, the foliation. And just a sketch of how do you get from foliations to Y. Well,
in some sense, OY is just the function on OX that are killed by all the derivations
coming from F. This always contains the P power functions. You have S and Y. What is X? Oh, I'm
sorry. X is S, I guess. X is X. Thank you very much. Okay. Yes, notation changed as I was preparing
the talk. Thanks, Joe. Right. So this always contains the P power function. So it's a rather big
shift to begin with, so to say. And you add all the functions that are killed by the derivations
coming from F, and that allows you to go in this direction. So just to give a hint how this goes.
And here's an example. In some sense, that's an example we all know, but it's reinterpreted
in this language of foliations. So let A be an abelian variety in characteristic P, and let G
be a group scheme, which is contained in the connected component of the p-torsion
of the abelian variety. So it's a local group scheme. And we let F to be the tangent bundle,
the tangent space for this group scheme at the origin. That's contained in the tangent space of
the abelian variety of the origin, but we sort of promote it to a foliation again by using
translation by the group elements. So this tangent space is the origin now by translating,
gives us a tangent space at every point, and the whole thing fits into a sub-shef of t,
which is closed under Librex, etc. Then the quotient of the abelian variety by this group scheme
is the same thing as taking A and dividing it by the foliation F. So it's just reinterpreting
something that we use all the time in the context of abelian varieties and group schemes.
All right. So as I said, I want to present two types of foliations in the context of
Shimura varieties. The first kind we call tautological foliations because they rest
on the structure of the endomorphism ring. So we are in the context of PEL, Shimura varieties.
The second kind we call V-foliations because they rest on the Vershibung, they use the Vershibung
map very strongly. So let's start with the tautological foliations.
Yeah, go ahead. Yes. Can I ask something? Yes, go ahead. In the context of complex
foliation, I can imagine that any foliation should have some kind of natural dimension,
right? I mean, if you have the Frobenius theorem, what kind of dimensions do you get
in the setting in the characteristic P? Because once it contains the P-th power of everything,
it looks... No, it's a sub bundle of the tangent bundle. It could be of any rank,
of any dimension. It depends on the situation, but a priori it could be of any rank.
And it's a locally free subchip. And for example, if you're dealing with an abelian surface,
which is a product of elliptic curves, you can find here any things of any rank.
Okay, but if it contains O X, O S to the P, then shouldn't it be of maximum rank anyway?
No, no, it's not related. Okay. This has to do with the fact that Y,
what you're saying would have to do with the Y having the same dimension it is.
Yeah, something like that. Yeah.
Okay. All right, so as I said, the tautological foliations,
my example will be Hilbert model of varieties, but I will begin with the example of a real
quadratic field. So Hilbert model of surfaces, the general picture is generalization of what
I'll explain for surfaces. It's just for surfaces, I can really kind of draw nice pictures and things
like that. So I prefer to start with this particular example. Okay, so let L be a real
quadratic field. And we're looking at the modular space of principally polarized abelian surfaces
with action of the ring of integers of L. The complex points of this variety is the upper half
plane times itself moded out by a certain discrete subgroup of SL2L that you can
write this way, the precise definition is not so important. And we have two foliations.
So at every point, the tangent space at every point is somehow in a natural way,
just C2. And we have two natural directions to go, if you will, which is this way or this way,
this defines two foliations on the upper half plane. If you want to draw all the leaves,
so to say for the red foliations, this one, they're all sort of parallel to one of the Xs.
And because of the way this group acts, you could see that those foliations descend to the
cautions and give you a foliation on the Hilbert model of surface. Those foliations
extends actually to a toroidal compactification. So if you look at what happens at the boundary,
when you're doing a toroidal compactification, you have a chain of P1s appearing in the boundary
and near the boundary, those foliations, sorry, they kind of look something, I don't know, like that.
In fact, what happens is that both components, so to say, all components are integral
sub-right, is for those foliations, no matter which of the foliations you took. So it's an
interesting phenomena that somehow the components of the boundary managed to be integral for both
foliations. And those foliations actually are singular at that point, namely, they are not
any more locally free of rank one. So this is the type of fixture that we get here for those
foliations. Now, the only algebraic integral curves that's something you can prove are either
the components, well, Molly's speaking, that's just the components that you added to the boundary,
the smooth toroidal compactification. Any other integral curve that you had
transcendentally actually becomes, remains transcendental when you go to the Hilbert
model on surface, so it kind of keeps striping around forever, it's not algebraic, that's
something you could prove. There are little caveats here having to do with the elliptic
points that they put in footnotes, but I really don't want to discuss them, it's just because
I didn't want to use level subgroups here where there are no elliptic elements, so there's something
going on with the elliptic points, but it's really not essential to get into. Okay, so this is a
transcendental description of foliations of Hilbert model surfaces, it uses the universal
covering space, which is h times h, the upper half space times itself. But in fact, you can
define those foliations completely algebraically. Okay, so let's look at another way to define them,
we take, we let omega a be the relative cotangent space at the origin of the universal
abelian surface a, parameterized by m, oal acts on the universal abelian variety, so therefore
the cotangent space at the origin and it actually factors it into a sum of two line bundles,
which I'll call l1 and l2, depending on the two ways you can embed oal in the complex numbers.
And this is not such sort of esoteric construction, in fact, Hilbert model of forms of weight k1, k2
are just global sections of l1 to the k1 tends to the l2 to the k2. Okay, so this,
this is really something familiar that we're all working with. And the codar Spencer isophism,
in this case, gives you an isophism between the tangent bundle of the Hilbert model of surface,
Hilbert model surface as l1 to the minus two dark sum or two to the minus two.
And here this actually works so mathematically, so I can really look at the modular scheme of
abelian surfaces with real multiplication and principle polarization, and we have this isophism.
Okay, I'm using this isophism to define two foliations, f1 and f2. Okay, so f1 is just this,
f2 is just this. Okay, now I'm saying foliations, but I'm actually slightly miss speaking,
because, well, one interesting feature is that they're defined integrally, but in fact, in
characteristic p, they need not be p closed. Okay, so if I look at characteristic zero,
those are just another incarnation of the foliations we define using the picture
of the universal covering space. In characteristic p, well, because the aligned bundle, the condition
of being involuted, being closed under the Libraquets, or the Poisson brackets is automatically,
is automatic, but being be closed is not, and there's an interesting story happening,
which I want to explain. Okay, so let us assume that p is split
in the totally real field, and now let's consider those foliations in characteristic p,
then in fact, there are foliations that are closed under this p-power operation,
and in some sense, they come from a Shymor variety with level p-structural. Now,
because p splits, p is a product of two primes in the totally real field, p1 times p2, sorry,
that should be p oil, it's factors into a product of two primes, and there are two
level sort of Shymor varieties, one associated to any of those primes, and the picture is like that,
if you want to sort of visualize it. On the Hilbert model surface, there's a
stratification that they started with old. There are two types of curves,
toe 1 and toe 2, they are defined as the vanishing locus of two different Hasein variants.
They intersect transversely, so red components do not intersect with red components, and blue
ones don't intersect with blue ones, and the Shymor variety with level p-structural looks
roughly something like that, it has two horizontal components that intersect at the pre-image of
this particular sort of part of the non-ordinary locus. The other part behaves differently for
this particular choice of, so it looks like something like that when you go to the other part,
okay, so this one separates into two branches, one lying on each horizontal component,
and the statement is that, okay, instead of telling you how those maps look like on the
horizontal components, I'm telling you something which is equivalent to this, that you could think
about this, so the two horizontal components, one is so-called multiplicative, and it's just
isomorphic to m, like in the model of curve x0p, and there's another component that they call
the etal component, this component is related to m in the following way, that if I take m
and divide it by the foliation f1, I will get the Frobenius transform of m0 p1 etal, okay,
now it's interesting because this map is a map of, the map from m to m module fi is actually not
the Frobenius map, it's dividing, it has rank p and not p square, so it's like a half the Frobenius
map, and this describes, if you wish, in a precise way the etal component of this modular space,
okay, now if p is inert, actually those fi's are not foliations, okay, the picture is much more
complicated in this case, again the sort of the non-ordinary locus is defined, divided into two
components, but this m0 p has two, actually two horizontal components that are
related to m in a way which is either a foli, well,
either Frobenius map or an isomorphism, they intersect along the whole super singular locus,
those two components, that's a more complicated geometry, but it's much more complicated than
that, over each of those there's also p1 bundle, vertical components that map are completely,
I mean, it's vertical over the corresponding curve inside m, okay, so this whole p1 bundle,
that's a p1 bundle sitting over m, et cetera, and over those particular points that are the
super special points, there are actually two different p1s, one coming from
this p1 bundle, the other one coming from the other, okay, so the geometry is kind of a very
rich picture in this case, okay, and the last case is what happens when p is ramified, in some sense
this is, there's something subtle going on here, so in this case, the foliation is not defined
everywhere, but so-called under upper port locus of those hillbill-womental surfaces,
so the hillbill-womental surfaces for p ramified are actually singular at finitely many points,
those are the non-ropper port locus, they are certain, they correspond to certain
super special abelian surfaces, and the foliation is not defined at those points,
to define it at those points, we have to blow them up, and then we get those p1s,
those components that you see in this picture, meant to be components of the non-ordinary locus,
there are p plus one of them coming into each singular point, when we blow it up, those of
course separate, and something that Andreata and me found a long time ago, that there's a certain
interesting symmetry to those surfaces, namely that there is a map which is sort of a blow-down map
from this, once again to the Hilbert surface, that what it does, it actually takes those
blue components now and shrinks them to points, while those, this non-ropper port locus that
we had to blow up for the foliations, actually now stays horizontal, so it becomes those
those components, okay, so there's a beautiful symmetry to this whole picture, and in fact once more
this is part of a gamma zero p type of moduli problem, I think it's actually very much related
to so-called those splitting problems starting by Papas and Rappaport, and the foliation is
serving us also in this sense that here I put this blow-down in quotes, because it's not really
a blow-down to get a precise description of it, what happens is that you have something that
looks very much like that, and you have a map from one going to the other, which is dividing
by this foliation, okay, this is an inseparable map of degree p, it's like a square root of
a Frobenius morphism, and here finally there is a true blow-down, okay, so those subtleties
that you can't really see on geometric points are well explained by this this kind of foliation
structure, okay, so this is the picture for Hilbert blow-down surfaces, maybe even in too much detail,
let me tell you what happens more generally, okay, so we just have to introduce a little bit more
notation, so instead of dealing with a quadratic imaginary field, we deal with a totally real
field of degree g, and to simplify the situation, I'm just going to assume that p is unremifed
in this totally real field, it factors into a product of prime ideals,
once more we look at the moduli space of princely polarized abelian varieties with oval action,
but I'm going to focus now on characteristic p, and as a notation, I'm going to look at all the
embeddings of l into qp bar, this set decomposes into a disjoint union according to the primes p
dividing p in oil, so every such subset I'm going to call b sub p, and Frobenius acts transitively
on each such subset, okay, the degree of bp of course is the number of elements here is the residue
degree of the corresponding prime over p, and we have so-called the Hodge bundle, it's exactly what
I denoted before by omega of the universal abelian variety, and as before it decomposes
into a dark sum of line bundles, indexed by the embedding of l into qp bar, you can also do it
arithmetically, you don't have to work locally, okay, so analog of the codyse Spencer isomorphism
that we've seen before is that the relative tangent bundle of m over a spec of oil decomposes
into a dark sum of line bundles that are closely related to this, they're all just
the those line bundles to the power minus two, okay, so the dual of l t raised to the second power,
and that's sort of a handed, this the composition is handed to us, and we're going to call f tau
the corresponding component, it's a line bundle, so it's automatically involutive,
okay, and again the main question would be whether it's closed under this p power operation when we
think about f tau as derivations, as sections of this, as derivations of the Schieffer functions,
we can raise derivations to a p power, and the question is if you take a derivation here,
would it p power still lie there or not, okay, so there's an interesting story that
I want to present, once more it will involve a certain gamma zero p moduli problems,
and for every prime p dividing p there is this moduli problem m zero p, so before I didn't explain
what it is, now I'm sort of coming clean and explaining what it is, it classifies, so to say
over a, the additional data of a group scheme contained in the gothic p torsion of a, okay,
so I fix a prime p, then I define a moduli problem by parameterizing subgroups of this part of the
p torsion of their building variety, the things that are killed by the primary d l p, and I want
them naturally to be oil invariant, that's the context we are walking with, and also we'll take
them to be maximized or tropic, so this is the definition of m zero p, okay, of this level p,
and as we've seen already for surfaces, it's a very complicated space, so one would want to find
tools to understand its geometry, okay, so here's the theorem, if you did this construction in
characteristic zero you will find the dose of foliations, but the leaves are transcendental
except at the boundary, okay, so in some sense this is of less interest to me right now,
now generally speaking such an f tau will not be a foliation, you have to sum all the
tau's corresponding to a Frobenius orbit of embeddings of the totally real field into Qp bar,
okay, this is the case why for surfaces in the north case f tau was not a foliation,
I would have to take in that case the two foliations f1 and f2 sum them together,
but then I will just get the whole tangent bundle which corresponds to the Frobenius map
from the surface to its Frobenius transform, okay, but those are foliations in a sense you
cannot do better, namely if you take a sub sum, sub direct sum of this it will not be a foliation,
and they're associated to this particular level p moduli problem in the sense that if I take
its tau component, okay, that again one can define it means that this h here, sorry the h that appeared
here is a tau, so if I take the, where am I, if I take the tau component and take its Frobenius
transform, this can be described as modding m by the foliation which is the sum of those
foliations from the prime ideals that are not p, okay, so it gives us a way to access those
level p-shimura varieties in terms of the original moduli problem that has no level p in
itself plus data about its tangent bundle, and in fact certain integral sub varieties of those,
those are higher dimensional analogues of those blue and red curves that they drew before are so
called the certain strata defined by Orton and myself which can be described in terms of those
partial Hassan variants h tau, and in fact those are the only ones that we know outside boundary
components, okay, so it's a very interesting problem I think to understand if there are any
other integral sub varieties, okay, so it's in some sense could be viewed as a, as a, as an
Adre Ort type of problems, type of problem, but well, okay, I won't go more into that, okay,
so those are the only integral varieties we know that, and the obstruction for f tau to b
foliation, namely as I said again this is a line bundle contained in the tangent bundle
of m, the obstruction for it to be closed under the p-power operation is, is this, okay, so if
you're dealing with tau that is equal to itself under composition with Frobenius, namely if we are
dealing with a prime of residue degree one, there's no, no obstruction and we get a foliation,
in this case this bp is just the singleton con, con sort of corresponding to tau, the singleton
tau, and it's the same statement that if this, this holds, then this is a foliation that's the
same statement, but if tau is, is not of relative degree one, residue degree one, so if sigma tau
is not equal to tau, there is a non-trivial obstruction and we can show that's sort of
a nice phenomena that this obstruction is exactly the square of a certain partial
harsh invariant, okay, which are those Hilbert model of forms in characteristic p that I defined years
ago, they play an important role in the theory of Hilbert model of forms because they're responsible
to all congruences between q expansions of Hilbert model of forms, okay, so maybe a very quick
word about the proof or a particular aspect of the proof, so I was talking about
the obstruction for something being a foliation, so by a lemma of Ikadal actually, the obstruction
can be viewed as a map between the pullback of this line bundle under the absolute Frobenius
morphism of M and the tangent bundle modulo, this f tau, now if you remember this decomposition had
to do with Hilbert model of forms and you can show using results of Diamond and Cassay that in fact
this morphism which is a priori something that leaves here is must actually reduces to
morphism between L tau to the minus 2p to just one of the line bundles appearing here, okay,
and you take this to the other side, so you find that the obstruction is a certain Hilbert model
of form, of a very particular weight, this sort of 2p minus 2 if you will, which is the same
weight as this partial Haase invariant, so using, they prove the result of a certain non-existence
of Hilbert model of forms of certain certain weights result that was, was conjectured,
conjectured by Andruata and myself and they actually proved the stronger statement and
using the result we could actually determine that the obstruction lies exactly here, not just
in here, and in fact it has no choice but being a scalar multiple of this partial Haase
invariant and then we're using some beautiful lemma of Cass about the Kudarsmetz behavior in
the formal neighborhood of the boundary to find that in fact this constant is just one, okay,
so it's precisely the partial Haase invariant, which is the, or the square of it, which is the
obstruction for f tau to be affoliation, okay, so all this fits very well with structures we already know.
Okay, so this was a tautological FOID liations, the strong tool was the action of the endorphism
algebra on the moduli problem of the universal abelian variety therefore on the cotangent bundle,
kudarspenser and all this stuff. There's another source of foliations which uses sort of a different,
it comes from a different source which is what we call v foliations and that's what
they want to discuss next, okay, so this is in a sense a more subtle construction, it uses
vurshibung and very particular properties of the Gauss-Mannin connection and while
the tautological foliations were something we could discuss arithmetically this is a purely
characteristic p phenomena, okay, so let me remind you that given an abelian variety of a
characteristic p field we have the relative Frobenius homophism from A to its Frobenius transform
and there's a morphism going in the other direction which is the vurshibung such that the
composition of those two is multiplication by p either way you do them. In particular I could use
v to pull back differential forms from A to AP, okay, that's something I'm going to use in a second.
Okay, so once more I begin with the example of surfaces where it's a little bit less technical
we have a quadratic imaginary field E that appeared a lot actually in this conference
M is the modular space associated to GU21 if you will, it parameterizes a bit in three
folds with OE action and I'll take principal polarization although that's not important
as long as p is prime, relatively prime to the degree of the polarization.
MCE is the Picard model or surface and I think actually that nicely connects to
this conference because of Steve Kudlas and Jim Cogdahl's very first papers that had to do with
the Picard model or surfaces and the compact analog and analog of the Hirzl-Buchserier
theorems in that context. Okay at any rate we choose a prime which is inert in this field
and we consider aim changing notation and simply consider aim over the residue field
of OE which is a field with p-square elements. In this case there's no obvious construction
of fluctuations coming from characteristic zero in fact and that's why we sort of need to introduce
a new tool to define fluctuations. Okay now we have the universal Abinian threefold A and it has
its shape of relative or its relative cotangent bundle omega A, it's a rank three vector bundle
over the modular space and the action of OE on it decomposes it into a sum of two vector bundles
P because it has rank two the two has to do with two appearing in the signature
and L suggesting it's a line bundle that has to do with one appearing in the signature. Okay so
there's the composition of omega A this way and this is the Kudas Spencer isomorphism in this case
P tensor L is isomorphic to relative to omega one of the differential of A.
Now the pullback map that I mentioned before on differentials okay so this P leaves inside omega A
and the pullback map on differentials from omega A to omega AP I can restrict it to P
and it has a kernel which I will denote PV okay so those are those differentials that we kill baby
and I could take this PV which would be a line bundle in this case okay tensor it with L okay so
this now leaves somewhere inside this so this whole tensor product leaves inside omega one and
I'm going to take its perp out of the natural pairing between the tangent bundle and differentials
okay so I'm going to get a line bundle sitting inside the relative tangent space
of A and this is a defoliation in this case okay that's its construction okay so a theorem which
is funnily enough we started our interest in this subject started several years ago and started with
the more complicated construction and more recently we arrived at those thought logical
constructions okay so the story is it's kind of a little bit reminiscent of what we've seen for
hillbill moment of surfaces at the bed primes this fallation is defined on M everywhere except
that the super special points so on the surface there are those finally many super special points
and there's the the complement of of the non-ordinary locus actually there are many
components coming coming in here okay so right maybe like that it's defined everywhere except
those green points the super special points in particular on every super singular this super
singular curve that comes by the way this was studied by uh ink and fallout in our thesis
she determined that each component of the non-super singular of the non-ordinary locus
is actually from our curve there's a very nice uh global description of what's going on here
but this fallation is not defined at this point and to make it well defined you have to blow them up
okay and then those those uh those curves will will kind of separate this way okay this blow up
defoliation is defined uh you could ask what are the integral curves for those fallations what are
the curves whose tangent bundle is exactly described by defoliation and we could show that the natural
shimo curves living on this pical surface in characteristic p those coming from u11 actually
uh our our integral curves uh except sorry as well as those components of the non
non-ordinary locus and we conjecture that there are no other integral curves
on this surface no other algebraic curves that are integral for this uh fallation
okay there is an m0p moduli problem associated to this that has
sort of an etal horizontal component and a multiplicative horizontal component
and it's not a how to draw okay so if i wanted to to draw this moduli problem this m0p
uh the best i can do in real time is basically give you the things you need to glue together
to get this m0p so there's one copy of m0p which is the multiplicative component which is just this
blow up of the base moduli problem at the super special points there's another component which
is rather similar to it in the sense that this etal component of m0p is this m-sharp
divided by defoliation okay now this is interesting because this etal component is actually
is not sitting a finite flat those points were blown up to get m-sharp okay so this is something
nice that we can do with the fallations m0p etal generically is easy to understand over the
sort of the mere ordinary locus but if you want to understand it globally namely if you take this
risky closure to get a component it actually doesn't make map finite flat anymore it's essentially
the blow up of of of m it's essentially m-sharp but to me more precise it's m-sharp divided by f-sharp
okay so so you have those horizontal components but besides that there's a lot of other stuff
that goes on there are sort of p1 bundles many
p1 bundles that are sitting horizontally over the
the base moduli problem with no labels p structure and in fact over super special points you have
sort of like comms of p1
okay so this is certain comms of p1 so if you have to take all this stuff and glue it somehow
together to understand how the base moduli problem looks like so those comms of p1 map into
to those points over those curves you have those p1 bundles that you have to take into account and
then there are also two more horizontal components okay so over the general point over the mere
ordinary locus those are not really ordinary billion varieties that's why the mu appears here but
nevertheless over the mere ordinary locus there is there's another way you can you could construct
follyations a priori which is using Ben Mohnen's generalized third state theory okay so this
comes from understanding the deformation theory of those a billion varieties with
or e-multiplication and this deformation theory suggests another construction of follyation and
we show that it agrees with our construction and another fact to mention is that in another work
we define a theta operator on picard model of forms and we could we can show that this
theta operator in a certain sense is taking the derivative of a picard model of forms
only in a particular direction okay which is the direction of the follyation that we define
so I really don't have the time to explain what I mean here it's just a hint that this connects
to picard model of forms and this theta operator which is important for understanding
filtration of color representations okay okay so let me see what I can reasonably say in the
remaining three minutes about the general case so there is a general theory for the general case
for the unitary shimmer varieties of signature m in that appeared in this conference already several
times so we take signature where m is less than n because if they're equal we don't get
a follyation okay so the m is less than n they're associated to quadratic imaginary field
there's a universal a bn variety living over this moduli problem that lives over oe
and once more the relative cotangent model of the origin of this universal bn variety decomposes
because of the action of e now into two pieces that are vector bundles are frank
in and in respectively okay so p and q and once more we have codice spencer
we have again the worshiping morphism that allows us to look at the map of the differentials
of of a to its to a p and we take pv the kernel of that and once more by exactly the same machinery
this pv tensile q lives inside omega one and we could take its perp in the relative
tangent bundle of m of okay and that's uh that's f okay that's what we call f by construction it's a
sub vector bundle of the tangent bundle of of m and um likewise there's there's a level p
moduli problem associated to it so i was trying to be more precise about what it is but in the
interest of time i'll skip this precise description and just say what the theorem is so what we
constructed the theorem is that it's a foliation and it agrees with the deformation theory uh of
ordinary object which is coming from modern's theory of generalized state parameters it also
agrees with a theta operator on picard model of forms we have some information about uh
integral sub varieties there are a particular echodal old stratum that we can describe uh
very precisely and once more this foliation does not exist everywhere it actually exists
on a certain part of the moduli problem like for surfaces that we had to blow up to super
special points here there's a really a sub variety that you have to blow up and to
define the foliation and that's what we call m sharp only there the foliation
um exists and it's interesting because um you really need to do this modification of
aim this blow up to understand this shimmer variety with level p structure okay so the theorem
is that once you blow blew up m to extend the foliation you can now divide by it and that divides
defines the tile component for this gamma zero p uh level structure okay so perhaps
I'll just mention uh theorem proven by uh my phd student Reginald Libert that uh actually shows
that any echodal old strata that the disfoliation actually induces a foliation on any echodal old
strata uh on which it's defined uh so that describes that means that we can understand
how echodal old strata are behaving under this map from m zero p the gamma zero p moduli problem
for unitary shimmer varieties to the base unitary shimmer varieties okay I wanted originally to draw
another picture but um out of time so uh I'll finish here and thank you for for listening
all right does anyone have any well we're still clapping okay does anyone have any uh questions
or comments for al I'm wondering when can shimmera sub varieties in characteristic zero this is the
uh uh integral sub varieties or leaves of a foliation no there aren't so for example
um well for the p car example we don't really have uh
affiliations in characteristic zero it's purely a characteristic p construction I mean you could
think about other things of course like totally geodesic sub manifolds in the sense of
cuddler melson and things like that I'm not talking about that uh but if you look at the
hillbeth model old case um so um you had the upper half playing times itself and the foliations were
really um kind of those those kind of either this way or this way the the horizontal leaves
but if you look at the uh for example the twisted uh model all curves that map in the hillbeth model
all surface they really go they're like going like that okay so they're not they aren't um
so there's no foliation that has that as a leaf even a even if it's the only one well that I don't
know the the thing is the foliations exist foliations exist in abundance okay especially
in characteristic zero so for example if you take a surface in characteristic zero well what
what are you asking you're asking for a sub bundle of rank one of the tangent bundle and you just
restrict to some zoisky open a neighborhood where the tangent bundle is trivial and you take
any line bundle sitting inside it because it's a line bundle it's automatically involuted so you
are done on this open zoisky open neighborhood and there's no other requirement of being peak
closed in characteristic zone and then there's a general principle that you can always extend
foliations if you allow singularities right so in some sense you can there's so much so to say
too much freedom uh in this construction so the the interesting thing of course in this business
is to try sort of find foliations that would teach you new things about the geometry uh of of the
shimmer varieties
I mean if the signature's not n minus one one what was this exceptional locus
yes so this is uh so-called uh we call it
um
m4 okay it's not it's a name we invented so I don't expect anyone to know what it means
the thing is that the echidal old strata in this case are are sort of
parametrized by nm shuffles
okay so it has to do with the structure of the the vial group in this case
so those are permutations sigma in the symmetry group with n plus n letters
and the so shuffle means that if you write your permutation as say one two uh up to
um
n plus m then the numbers when you start writing the image under the permutation of one two up
to n plus n the numbers between one and n will appear in order on the bottom row not necessarily
consecutively so it could be something like you know uh one two three etc up to n and also
the numbers from n plus one to n plus two they will inter leave with uh sorry up to n plus
m they will inter leave with those but will appear also in order okay so that's a shuffle
and in this language uh this m4 is associated to a very particular shuffle
where it's the shuffle where you have one two up to n minus m then it changes to
let me choose a different color then you have n
plus one up to n plus m
and then um it continues with n minus m plus one up to n okay so it's a very particular
it's a very particular permutation very particular shuffle corresponding to a very specific
um echidal old strata okay so every echidal old strata that contains this in the boundary
defoliation is defined on it and uh maybe i should mention that it's a very if you draw the picture of
echidal old strata it's a very complicated diagram even for all those simple shimmer varieties
okay so if if this means going to smaller strata okay so
it could be very non-symmetric diagram you know and so on so somewhere here
somewhere here there's this s fall m fall a particular echidal old strata and everything
containing it in its boundary uh has defoliation is defined on it but there could be um
there could be strata of rather high dimension in fact there will be at least of co-dimension
two but there could be of co-dimension two on which this is not not defined defoliation is not defined
so um yeah that that's that's the picture um the un one case so if you just allow me to expand on that
it's a very interesting example it's a very pleasant example where the echidal old strata are
sort of linearly ordered in the un one case and defoliation is defined uh everywhere except
at the lowest strata which are finally made in super special abelian varieties
and if you need to blow only those up so you'll get the projective spaces as the exceptional
divisor and then defoliation will be defined everywhere and if you divide this blow up by
defoliation you'll get the tile component of this gamma zero p level structure
all right do we have any more questions or comments for al
so which which level structure are you so you mentioned maybe you skip a page so which level
structure for that yeah that it's uh it's yeah it's the tiny bit uh
um sorry where was it it's a tiny a bit uh technical so um
so the the sort of part of the data is rather obvious so you're taking h contained in the p
torsion that are always stable isotropic okay that's expected but the rank here would be p to
the 2m where m is the smallest uh smaller signature okay so we're not attempting to get
to the maximum possible it's p to the 2m and you require it to be renault so this is a
condition that we actually learned from belaysh belaysh's thesis this condition to be renault
can be phrased al renault in terms of how the augmentation ideal for these groups can look
like but you can also phrase it in terms of the do the name module so if you had take the do the
name module of such a group scheme uh over any geometric point this do the name module
has an action of oe because it's an always stable group scheme and it decomposes into a
direct sum of two modules according to the oe action one we call this one the sigma part and
the other one is the sigma part and you want them to have the same dimension that that's
equivalent to renault and the reason is the same reason that michael arbuckle mentioned this morning
we you have to put such conditions to avoid to get the flat modulite problem otherwise you'd get
some extraneous components in characteristic p some some abelian varieties that actually cannot be
lifted through characteristics there so you kind of you throw them away by introducing this
renault condition in this case yeah so this this is necessary for the unitary in the unitary case
but in the hillbett model case for example there's no need to do that al marriage is that this is
can be checked to be the same as the eva hurry integral structures that are defined i think in
chapter six of the rougher board sing book yeah so i mean that's in terms of the modulite problem
we like it this way but it can yeah yeah good point thank you
another question when when you have this decomposition according to when you have in
in general the case of u and m you have this decomposition into p and q and you take the
restriction for the first she boom for the asian you take the restriction to one of them
easy to take one say one of the smaller dimension or one of the of the larger dimension and if you
can take for both what kind of symmetry you have there by one kind of the other one
you take it for the larger dimension
as if you take one for only one then you can discuss any symmetry because you don't
because the other is irrelevant or you or you can say something about the one with the low
dimension as well with the low dimension okay so now you got me uh at least for the pical model
of surfaces when you when you take the lower dimension you'll get everything so to say
so you'll get um where am i yeah so when you define the foliation you at least for sorry
just looking for the definition yeah at least in the case of surfaces so if you if you try to
use this q instead you take the kernel of the shiba one q you'll get q itself okay so so here
you'll get the whole omega one and here it'll get zero which is not necessarily uninteresting i mean
but uh yeah i mean it's rather a trivial construction uh in uh in the higher dimension case
yeah um
i don't remember offhand maybe it would be it would be remembers
if it kills q also in the higher dimension case yeah no i think we checked it we checked it yes
are you only are you only yeah the only construction is going from yeah by higher dimension you mean
un one for any n or for un m for every n and m for every n and m for every n and m yeah
i'm just wondering yeah no it's it's a good question um it's a good question i just didn't
but it has a simple answer remember yeah yeah no as what he said that if you if you took the
kernel of v from q on q it will be the whole of q so if you're trying to do this you'll have p tens
of q which is the whole of omega one so you get something trivial um yeah thanks it's nicer to
have an older core so can you remind you great thanks yeah all right are there any more questions
or comments uh can you can you say why uh m equals n does not have variation yes when m is
equal to n actually the the general abelian variety is is ordinary so you're not going to get
you're not going to get the only thing you you'll get by that is something trivial
right so uh i i guess um i guess in this case this pv would probably be zero
and here we have the zero thing and its perp will be the whole tm which in sense might be not
uninteresting i mean it it could be we need to check that it sounds reasonable that in that case
you'll get that this m zero p is uh is it's a tal component is like the Frobenius transform of
of your base g-more variety okay but uh from the point of view of getting non-trivial
filiations you're not getting not going to get something in that case okay also the thing you
sorry go ahead go ahead i didn't mean no no
you go ahead oh i was maybe i should let you finish what you were gonna say i was gonna
ask more about this m zero p etal component
no i was just uh meant to say that when m is equal to n or if p is split actually that the
general point is an ordinary abelian variety and not mere ordinary and in this case if you're
trying to do something just on the ordinary locus you could ask yourself well what happens
what happens for those general abelian varieties so um when p is inert and m is less than n there's
this deformation theory of moanen of of cascades that suggests that when you're looking at the
deformation of those mere ordinary abelian varieties they're prefer directions it's um
the deformation space just has this particular structure that picks up prefer directions
but when m is equal to n or p is split um the the general abelian variety is actually
ordinary and and this theory just amounts to the usual circuit theory where the
the formal deformation space is the formal torus in which there's no prefer direction
okay so that's that's another reason why why you won't get anything sort of interesting out of it
uh when m is equal to n or p is split so is this where you mentioned something about moanens uh
or maybe someone else yeah thick like total or geodesic sub variety or something like that
yeah moanen has this theory of cascades that or generalized circuit parameters that is used to
study the deformation theory of um of general points of shimor varieties where when they are not
ordinary okay so um it's a much more complicated structure it's not a formal torus anymore like
in the case of the zygomodular varieties it's it's a sort of um in the simplest case it's kind
of a bi-extension of two p-divisible groups by a torus that that what happens in the case of u21
in general it's a whole cascade of p-divisible groups that are composed together to describe the
deformation theory but in case of u21 there's a certain structure of bi-extension of two p-divisible
groups by a torus and that torus that sits there gives you a certain prefer directions in the
unitary shimor varieties and we show that it agrees with the filiations we defined but one
advantage is that our definition already gives an extension of the filiation deep inside the shimor
variety which is not something you can get from moanens walk okay let me stop here because um
and let people go if they if they need to um I'll let Sidharth put the
