So what I would like to explain
is how this circle action leads to this curve
that Falk and Fonsin has constructed
in a Piatto-Coste theory.
So if we have a curve X,
and a point on the curve,
so I will call the point infinity.
So we should think that X is a complete curve
and in a second I will take X to be just the projective line.
So then we have the inclusion of the complement
of this point, which is open.
But Grotendijk has told us that we should think
of the formal completion of X along infinity
as a tubular neighborhood of the point.
So we don't have tubular neighborhoods
in algebraic geometry,
but the formal completion behaves as if it was
a tubular neighborhood.
In particular, this map here behaves as if it is
an open inclusion and an affine map.
And then this thing here, which is actually open,
now behaves as if it's closed
because we can think that there's not much difference
between this and X, but not Y instead.
And then here's this punctured formal completion.
And this philosophy is substantiated
in this Rue Colmog between the stable infinity categories
of quasi-coherent sheaves.
So we have the quasi-coherent sheaves on X,
the quasi-coherent sheaves on this tubular neighborhood
and the quasi-coherent sheaves on the complements.
And this behaves as if it's a closed inclusion
and this behaves as if it's an open inclusion.
Also this function, this push forward here
from the formal completion is T-exact,
which it should be if it is affine.
Okay.
So now on this curve, we have these,
so we have the structure sheave
and then we have this shear twist,
which we can think of as functions
with a simple zero at infinity.
And we have its dual,
which we can think of as meromorphic functions
with a simple pole at infinity.
And then the way we get the curve
is that the curve is part of this graded ring,
which we get by taking global sections
of all these shear twists of the structure sheave.
Okay.
So how does this look in the case of P1?
So let X be P1 and let T be a coordinate
around this chosen point.
So then if we calculate,
yeah, so now we move the sheave to these three pieces
and there we can calculate the sections.
At this complement,
we get a polynomial algebra on T inverse.
At the punctured formal neighborhood,
we get a Laurent series ring in T.
And then here we really get a power series ring,
but the way it includes here depends on M.
So it includes as this sub K double bracket T module,
which is generated by T to the minus M.
And then we can calculate the global sections.
That's the limit of this diagram.
So it's the part here and here that meets here.
And then we can calculate the global sections.
The part here and here that meets here.
And each one is the co-limit.
So it's the parts in here that are not hit
by these two maps, so to speak.
Okay, so what does that look like?
If N is positive,
so then we have global sections,
namely, we have this K vector space,
which is generated by one T inverse
and down to T to the minus N.
So this is think of these as more morphic functions
that have a pole of depth N at infinity.
And there's no H1.
And if N is negative, then there are no global sections
and instead there's an H1, which is this K vector space here.
Note that if N is minus one,
then this goes from T to one.
So in fact, that means zero.
So when N is minus one, both H0 and H1 are zero.
Okay, and then here is now what P1 is.
P1 is part of this graded ring.
Of course, we can write this graded ring
in many different ways.
So here I have made this non-canonical choice
of a coordinate at infinity,
and then it takes this form.
This is, of course, a canonical way of writing it.
But now to calculate that, I made this choice.
Okay, so now next I want to explain how these terms here
appear from spectra with a trivial circle action.
So what is a spectrum with a trivial circle action?
So a spectrum is a point in the infinity category of spectra.
So it's a map from the point, which I call one,
and then two spectra.
And now how does such a spectrum determine, yeah,
what is a spectrum with a circle action
or with a G action in general?
It's a map from the classifying space B
G to the infinity category of spectra.
And to say that the action is trivial
means that it factors like this,
that it factors through the projection
that collapses the whole classifying space to a point
and then maps everything to that point.
Okay, so now I write P over star E for this composition here.
So this composition here is P over star E.
So this is just the spectrum E
considered as a spectrum with trivial circle action.
So now we can take the fixed points
or the homotopy fixed points of that spectrum with circle action
and we can take the tate spectrum.
Yeah, when we get to cyclic homology,
this will correspond to negative cyclic homology
and this will correspond to periodic cyclic homology.
So whenever we have a spectrum with circle action,
we have spectral sequences, which look like this.
So, yeah, maybe it's easier to look at this picture.
So here on the fiber, sorry, here on the baseline,
we have the, on this side here,
we have the cohomology of the classifying space of the circle,
which is P infinity C.
And if we look at the homotopy fixed point spectral sequence,
then we don't have this side here.
So we just have this side.
And now each of these lines is then a copy
of the homotopy groups of the spectrum E.
And what sits in degree zero is what is along this diagonal line here.
Yeah.
And then the tate is made by inverting this element V.
So that's that it becomes periodic.
Yeah.
Let's look at the edge homomorphism in the spectral sequence.
So this is the forgetful or the inclusion of the fixed points in everything.
So what does that mean?
So we have this diagram here.
We have the classifying space of the circle.
We have a point and we have spectra.
And now I just choose some point in the classifying space of the circle.
So I just choose a section is off of the canonical prediction.
And then I can restrict along that.
And that gives a map and that is the that induces the it's homomorphism in the spectral sequence.
See, since the circle action is a trivial.
That has the consequence that the it's homomorphism has a section, because
let me see, maybe I can do it like this.
No.
Yeah.
Because we can also restrict along P.
And that gives a map from a from a back to the fixed points.
And because is composed with P is the identity.
This becomes a section of a of the it's homomorphism.
Well, this means that if if he is multiplicative, then the spectral sequences are spectral sequences of pi star e algebras.
So, all differentials have to vanish on a elements that are
pi star e times
times the element one.
If he is complex orientable which is the situation that we will be interested in. So, for example, if
if the homotropic groups of e are concentrated in even degrees, so then there are no spectral sequences, then there are no differentials in the spectral sequence at all.
And in that case,
we can therefore identify this with this.
Yeah, so let's see so.
What was this polynomial algebra.
Now this is also infinity.
And then we can
say that there is complex orientable means that we can choose that there exists a homotopy class which I call me tilted which restricts to this element me in in the spectral sequence.
So we can lift this generator to to an actual homotopy class.
And now this the spectral sequence also gives a descending filtration on these homotopy groups.
The answer is that we get the completion of this polynomial algebra with respect to that filtration.
So,
so if we have.
So if we have an element see here and see squared and see cute, then, then this will mean that that that these homotopy groups pie star p star e homotopy fixed points become
if he is periodic, then then this becomes a power series ring. So we see that power series that the power series ring comes out of this picture.
So but the important thing is that that this here is a pie star e algebra to begin with.
If it's not a pie star e algebra we cannot say that it's a power series algebra, because it has to be an algebra before it can be a power series.
Okay.
Yeah, this filtration here corresponds to what in pieticoch theory is called the night guard filtration so
this name is now also used in in topology so I will call it the night guard filtration.
So, Quillen used this.
This this power series.
Description here in a very effective way so.
If we have a complex or indible commodity theory it has an associated form group and
this is very useful to analyze.
And so I will get back to what that corresponds to in the, in the case of, of hoxial homology.
So, so now to hoxial homology so.
There's a big difference, which is this fantastic discovery that con and and see can meet in the 80s is that it has a circle action which is not trivial.
So, well, now I put a T here for topological hoxial homology but it hasn't nothing to do with with the top.
There's no distinction here between hoxial homology and topological hoxial homology.
In any case, if we have a ring R then a hoxial homology or topological hoxial homology is a spectrum with a circle action.
And now this does not factor through the point it's not a trivial action.
We still have spectral sequences, and now I have written TC minus instead of the whole much will be fixed points because this is, this is what negative cyclic homology is, and instead of Tate I have written a TP this is periodic cyclic homology, and
now the picture looks like this as the same pictures before.
We have this polynomial or the wrong algebra here in degree zero and then each of these vertical lines is a copy of a hoxial homology or topological hoxial homology.
And now because the circle action is not trivial.
There can be differentials from from this line, and in fact, the D to differential is cons be operator. So, we see the non triviality the non triviality of the circle action as
is manifesting in itself in in in the be operator.
Well,
this means that now these are not.
And we again have this edge homomorphism from on on pi zero we have, we have TC minus zero is this whole line, and it's eight zero is this top quotient here.
So we have the prediction onto this top quotient.
But now that does not have a section.
TC.
If I was commutative, then I not here is our, but now this is not an hour algebra. It's only a ring. It's not an hour.
So,
my, my biggest contribution in mathematics is that I have identified what this ring is.
If I is perfect toward.
So I only did it in the case of the unit disk in the periodic complex plane and then, but more and Chelsea proved that the same thing is true for any perfect toward ring.
I would say that the calc that this calculation.
The starting point for for for all of these things is a is a is Berks that's period periodicity here.
And this is that ch eight of if p is a polynomial algebra.
There on a generator of degree two.
So, yeah, this is not the body element it's, it's this Berks that element, and yeah, so this is the, this is a very.
Very important theorem and unlike part periodicity.
We do not have many proofs of it, as far as I know.
And I hope that we will find new proofs and actually, but was speaking at the conference for you to see and he said that there's now a new proof.
So, I look forward to, to hearing what that proof is.
So, all proof so far has used the action of the dial ash of algebra on the dual steener the algebra, which is a non trivial calculation, and it would be nice to find a proof that doesn't use that.
Okay, this is the starting point of this calculation.
So, so here instead of.
So this is not a polynomial algebra. So sorry, this is not a power series algebra.
In fact, it's not even an I algebra.
But, but it has a filtration, namely, this filtration coming from the spectral sequence, and all the filtration quotients are canonically isomorphic to are just as is the case in of the tea attic filtration of the power series ring.
When they glue together is different. So, instead, we get this ring here which is a fountain's ring.
And, yeah, that's a, that's a fantastic ring.
And the
this is sort of the starting point for a
this ring is very rigid. And in order to
get a pediatric geometry that works like come complex geometry, you have to make it larger. And so this is what we what what the fuck from Tim curve.
That's a product of. Okay, so now let me say something about the fuck from Tim curve. So,
given an algebraically closed field of characteristic P.
This this curve.
The fuck from Tim curve it's a curve over, over spec QP.
The closed points on this curve.
Parameterizes
on twists, so sorry on tilts of if so it parameterizes algebraically closed fields of characteristic zero, such that they're tilt is if.
And if you don't know what that means, then
look at some of Schultz's papers.
But it's not so important for this talk.
What we can what we can think of is that in fp is equal to zero.
And somehow there are many different ways to
make different incarnations of P.
And, and this curve parameterizes these incarnations.
Yeah.
So, yeah.
So compare this to to P one, then on P one we had this formal variable T, but on the fuck from Tim curve.
It's the prime number P that is the variable.
So, so there's not just one P but this many, many different piece and and the
correspond to the points on this.
And now to understand that we do the same thing as before.
We pick a point so we pick an algebraically closed fields of characteristics zero.
Who's on tilt.
No, who's tilt is a is F actually.
We should also choose this isomorphism and
we should identify isomorphisms that
we should identify to isomorphisms if they differ by a power of the Frobenius on F.
Sorry to interrupt you but I got confused when you say that there were several P.
Yeah.
Don't you fix the characteristic once and for all.
Yeah, no, I mean, this is not P.
There's only one P, but the
but we should but we should think of P as being the variable. And in the same way as in the power series when you, you can choose many on a P one you can choose many different coordinates.
In the same way.
There are many incarnations of the prime number P.
And that's what this curve parameters rises.
Okay, fine.
Sorry.
Yeah, yeah, so there's only one P. It's a
They're not.
There's only one prime prime number. They're not two prime.
They are all this, the same P, but they're not quite the same anyway.
Okay.
Now to, to analyze this curve we should we should calculate the global sections of the set twists of the of the structure she
and
in the case of P one.
This this look like this.
And, but now it looks like this instead.
So,
so the, the long call power the long.
The ring of the long series is replaced by this ring called be the wrong from tennis be the wrong it's a discrete valuation fields so to field with just three valuation and fill zero be the wrong is its valuation ring.
And this, this other ring here called be a, which,
you can compare them so.
So be placed the role of this polynomial ringing T inverse be the wrong place the role of the field of the wrong series and fill minus and be the wrong place the role of this guy here.
And if we consider the filtration's.
They almost look like the filtration's here. It's not true for this ring be and we will, that's an important point which we will come back to.
So, how do we get this out of cyclic homology.
Well,
I should say that after this.
After this, this theorem here after from tense ring showed up.
I think Schultz was the first person from arithmetic geometry, who was willing to consider these homotopy theory methods.
And then he realized that things that exists in pietic hot theory, do not have a parallel in in in the classical theory of topological cyclic homology.
And so that led to a new and much better description by Nicolaus and Schultz.
It also made it clear what the nature of the Frobenius that you have on topological cyclic homology, as opposed to cyclic homology, what the nature of that is.
This has led to a huge development in the last five years and which has proved with which has.
We're a lot of new wonderful results have been proved.
One of them is, is this theorem here by NTO, Matthew, Moro and Nicolaus.
I should say that the theorem is based on work of Klausen, Matthew and Moro, which Dustin will talk about in his talk on Thursday.
So, so let me say what this theorem says if R is a commutative ring, which is Henselion along P, for example, P complete.
Then there's a Cartesian square like this.
Here this is K theory of R, and then it's completed at P, and then P is inverted.
So, when I write with QP coefficients, I mean first completed P and then invert P.
Here, this is TC minus completed at P and then P inverted, and then NIGAR completed.
So we also, after we invert P, it's no longer complete with respect to this NIGAR filtration.
So, we completed again.
And here, whether you put a T on H here makes no difference. So we could also take a HC minus instead of TC minus.
On this side, this is the new ingredient really in their paper, namely it's a crystalline term character.
So this goes from K theory of R mod P with QP coefficients and then to periodic cyclic homology.
And the theorem is that that this square is Cartesian.
This is the Baylinson fiber square because Baylinson had proved a version of, he had proved a version of this on the stronger assumptions.
But this new technology with the Nikolaus Schultz's Frobenius makes it possible to prove it in a more, much more slick way and in this generality here.
So now we take R to be the unit disc in this field C.
Yeah, so C is algebraically closed and P complete. I think I didn't say before that it's P complete that's important.
So we can take the unit disc and because we are in an ultrometric situation the unit disk is a ring again.
And, yeah, so now we get, now we get these rings that shows up from this situation very simply.
So by a calculation, or by a theorem of Padmore and Schultz, we get the ring be by taking this ring here and then inverting the body element and then taking the degree zero part.
So we take this ring, we invert the body element, and then we take the part in that graded ring which sits in degree zero.
And that ring is a fountain's ring be.
And by the way, this, this, this ring is a PID, which was a starting point for FAC and fountain's discovery of the curve that this ring is a PID just like the polynomial ring is a PID.
Now these other parts are derived in the same way, take periodic cyclic homology, and I got completed, invert the body element and take the degree zero part, then this is the ring be the one.
And if we, so to get the fill zero part, this is also called be the one plus.
So we take a CC minus completed P invert P now got complete invert the body element and take the degree zero part.
So,
this geometry here of, of the FAC fountain curve with this choice of point is reflected in this square here, where R is OC.
So, so let me point out now a big difference between this and P1.
So, we got P1 in more or less the same way by considering a complex or endable cohomology theories with trivial circle action.
And so if we have P1 over K, then it's double sections is K.
So here's a big difference, namely, well, this case also the residue field at infinity.
Here the rate on the at the FAC fountain curve the residue field at the point infinity is this huge field C.
So this non triviality of the circle action, the global sections is, is just QP.
So, it's, it's the fact that the circle action is trivial that cuts down this group of global sections from being this enormous fields to just being the field QP.
Yeah, this has a fantastic consequences. So, FAC and Scholeser has now this use this in their geometrization of the local Langlands correspondence, where, again, when you look at the modular stack of G bundles on the FAC fountain curve.
Its global sections is the QP points in the group G and not the seed points, which, which you might otherwise think.
So, yeah.
So I think that was actually everything I have to say so I think we are back on schedule.
That was an amazing last.
Okay.
Well, okay, so let's thank us for a really great talk.
Okay, thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Yeah, so I'm sure there are plenty of questions.
I want to ask one thing if I understand well the fact that you have at the end the QP. It's due to the fact that there is a universal perfection and then the veto so then, then you sort of get rather than the bottom structure you get already through the veto something like the formation so that's the role of
the QP there.
Well, it's actually because of this.
The delicacy of this map here.
So,
So, so of course this is see does not disappear so it goes somewhere else and what happens is that
the O of minus one has trivial H one.
