Hello and welcome. Today I will be extending my coverage of the CTMU a long overdue video
on what is the real breakthrough of the CTMU in terms of metaphysics, in terms of science,
in terms of philosophy, in terms of all fields of science and reality theory. The big breakthrough
of the CTMU, the title of the tazer, will be the CTMU breakthrough. Reality is a language.
The thesis is that the CTMU is a living model of reality, a model which is the same as reality
itself, which provides a breakthrough for all fields of science and philosophy as well
as theology, being a super tautology of all of reality itself. The key insight, the key insight
is that reality is a language and language is a reality. Reality is a language and language is
reality. This insight has three main components that I think are critical to it, and there's many
more things in the CTMU itself to describe this, but I break it down into three components. The
first one is isomorphism, I will describe each of these below, but the first point is isomorphism,
I'll describe this below. Second, distribution of logic over dualisms, distribution of language or
logic over dualisms, and three, the coupling of objects with universe or multiplex unity,
Hologi. Before I get bogged down into the details, I like to say that this is very difficult. It's
very, if you understand these three components though, then you understand the key breakthrough
to the CTMU, and to simplify it, and if you want to press your friends by saying it, just say,
the CTMU holds that reality is a language and language is a reality. But the first point,
isomorphism. So Langen gets into a saying called the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics,
the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics. So how is the mathematics can describe the way a
rocket launches, or can describe the way the economy functions, or the way the tide comes in
physics, or the way that a bicycle accelerates, or a car accelerates, or a runner, or a football,
or a tennis ball. How does mathematics describe all these physical events so well? How does it,
if it were, if it were decoupled from these events, then it would have no way of communicating the
ideas into your mind. And then what the phrase I like to say is, how is there isomorphism between
chicken, and I'll describe it with isomorphism. But how is there isomorphism between chicken
scratches writing, chicken scratch writing, like my handwriting looks like chicken scratches,
it's very messy. How is there isomorphism between chicken scratch writing and rocket launches?
So if I'm a physicist writing out a formula, how do I, how do my chicken, the squeal lines I make
on a piece of paper, how do they comport to the rocket launch? How do they communicate to me
what's happening in the rocket launch, or what's happening in my local grocery store with the,
with an economic function, or spline man curve? How does it work so well? We know that they are
more than just chicken scratches, they are more than just gibberish, they are a language, a
functioning language. So this language that you write out is isomorphic to the physical events
that surrounds you, and it communicates these events to you. What is isomorphism, isomorphism
I mean, I might prescribe a diagram perhaps here of what isomorphism is, I S O M O R P H I S M isomorphism.
So it has a block, so you have a block and a pyramid, the points at these aren't these aren't
language term, these aren't language terms, but I'll just use them here, the points attributes
and properties of the block correspond verbatim to the points attributes and properties of the
pyramid. So it's using mathematics, if you have a block and a pyramid, the points attributes and
properties of the block comport or translate verbatim to the points attributes and properties of the
pyramid, that's isomorphism. So as it comes to language, excuse me,
as it comes to language, how do these square lines, this language that I'm writing out,
this formula, this equation that I'm writing out for economics or rocket launches or acceleration
of cars or planes, airplanes or bicycles or tennis balls or soccer balls, this language that
I'm writing out with my chicken scratches isomorphically verbatim describes the rocket launch
or the physical event that I'm describing, the rocket launch, the tennis ball being thrown,
the airplane taking off, the car driving forward, or the economics model, or the statistical
distribution, right? It describes the distribution of weight, height and IQ in the general population.
So there's unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics, just think about this and Langen says this,
if there is a separation between the language and the event, then the language cannot communicate
what's happening in the event. So because the chicken scratches can perfectly communicate,
they're isomorphic to the event and they perfectly describe, communicate in my mind what's happening
in the event. So that's isomorphism, keep that in mind, that's point one, point two,
a little bit more difficult. Langen extends or distributes formal logic over the dualisms,
mind, matter, subject, object, observer, universe, that is, language bridges these dualisms as it
distributes over them with the ultimate microscale being classical logic, true,
verse, false, or bit information. So there's, with René Descartes, there was the major
preeminent explication of dualism, the mind, matter, dualism, but the problem that science
and philosophy have been running into since Descartes made this mind, matter, distinction
is that how do mind and matter touch and interact and move and affect each other?
If they're separated, if they're distinguished, if they're separate, if they're different
substance, how do mind and matter touch? What Langen does is he takes these dualisms
and he says that actually my language extends over the dualism. So if you have the separation,
the language bridges the gap, extends over the dualism and the language that he's using is called
the metaformal language or metaformal system and there's an extension of classical logic
and it's ultimate building blocks, the ultimate microscale, this language is true, verse, false.
So even in spoken English languages, the ultimate logic is true, verse, false, this wall is standing
or it's not standing, true, false, it's standing or not standing, the lamp is on or not on,
the chair is working or not working, the door works or it doesn't work, the water is on or it's
not on. All language, most languages can be reduced as formal logic and Langen takes this
formal logic, extends it, calls it the metaformal system, metaformal language, and extends it over
the dualisms. How does this work? How does it, how does it, how does that work? How does it
distribute over? How does it bridge the gap? Well if you take mind and matter, let's say mind and
matter are X and Y. X and Y are differentiated, yes. X and Y, X and Y are differentiated, yes,
but they're on the same medium. It's called syndifionesis, syndifionesis. I think I'm
pronouncing that right. The fact that they're synchronized, they're synchronized on the same
medium. There's differences, yes, they're differentiated, yes, but they're synchronized.
So if mind and matter, mind and matter, even though they can't call them separate, they're
actually not separate, they're actually on the same reality plane. They're both part of reality,
they're both on the physical plane of strong weak forces, gravitational pull, space time,
fabric of space time. Mind and matter on the same reality plane that they are,
even though they're differentiated, formal logic distributes over this medium. So if mind and
matter are part of the same medium, or subject and object, or observer and universe are part
of the same reality plane, then the language can distribute over that medium. That plane is the
medium. Let me just phrase this right. Mind and matter, subject, object, observer, universe
are like X and Y and syn-difionesis, they're on the same medium. This medium is reality,
reality is the medium, and the language distributes over this medium, and thus bridges the gap between
the dualisms. That's the easiest way that I can state it. And remember, it comports the
classical logic, but that way the metaphorical system language that Chris Lange uses in CTME
distributes over the medium that is reality, and reality covers the dualism. Reality,
mind and matter, subject, object, or observer, universe are part of the same reality plane,
the same reality medium, and the formal logic of language distributes over that medium. And that's
how Lange and his language bridges the gap of dualism and eliminates the dualism entirely.
Point three, and this will be even more complex to explain. It's like a marathon,
let's see if I can do it. All in one take, by the way.
Three, there is a coupling of objects and syntactic operators, humans with the universe in multiplex
unity, and the whole G-Principle. Remember the syn-difionesis, X, Y. So with syn-difionesis,
as I used in the second point, X and Y are in the same, they're differentiated, but they're on the
same medium, so they're synchronicity with a difference. They're in the same medium, and because
the metaphorical system of logic can extend over that medium, it can bridge the gap between
the dualisms. Point three is that we know how they're on the same medium, we know how the medium
contains the objects, the objects X and Y, but how do the objects X and Y contain the medium?
So we know that we all exist in the universe, the universe contains us, but how do we contain the
universe? And this gets down to the multiplex unity. So you as, whether it be an object to rock,
or more importantly, you as a syntactic operator, remember, there's a primary syntactic operator
in the language theory, which is God, there's secondary syntactic operators, which are humans,
and there's tertiary, which may be animals or rocks or objects. So as the secondary, I'll just
call them syntactic operators, as they're called, there is multiplex unity, and multiplex unity
means that there's an intersect between reality and the syntactic operator, and multiplex unity
describes how there's an internal boundary to the syntactic operator that had that there's a
boundary of a boundary, there's a circle, so it's like the subject, you're a circle, you're the subject,
and you have an internal boundary that contains your that contains your syntax and your descriptive
internal consistency. And then there's the outside of the there's the outside of you in the universe.
And how does this, how do you contain the universe? Think of it as you are part of the
universe, you're part of the medium, the strongly force of strongly force of physics of gravity,
all the fields of physics operate through your electromagnetism operate through you all the time.
You'll have an internal boundary, yes, there's a boundary around your subjectivity, but your
subjectivity enters unisex, he calls it unisex with the universe through information and syntax
and state. If the universe is topological, which means it's a state of objects and things and
places of things and a landscape, then you are intersecting with this on a mult on a unisex,
and it's called multiplex unity. And this takes into account the whole of your principle, so just
like in Halo, how Cortana as she's called is a holograph that comes out, it's a three-dimensional
physical thing. Your body and your mind are a holograph that come into the physical universe.
How do you describe this? So, you unisex with reality, the hologee means that you're projected
out into space, right? Hologee. The universe, like Cindy Fionnis says, is the universe contains you,
but you also contain the universe, you have an internal boundary that's multiplex unity,
unisex with the universe. And a hologee is the fact that you come up in the space, essentially.
You occupy space. You're holographic to yourself as a syntactic operator. And this hologee,
this hologee is how you interact with, this is how you come into space, and this is how you
interact with the outside world. So, the outside world comports the syntax and information and
it's topological. Multiplex unity means that you unisex with this universe, and hologee means
that you're out into a occupied space, and your hologee is like you contain the information and
self of your internal syntax in general states, and you contain it within yourself, but then,
you output into the world, and the world inputs into you. That's the best way, I think, I can
describe it. I may have garbled it a bit, but there's... think of it as there's a coupling
with multiplex unity and haulogy there's a coupling of you as a syntactic operator or object
with the universe you're coupled with the universe and it's like this and it's how it's how you
contain the universe as well as the universe contains you you're coupled with the universe
you're coupled with the universe there's a unisex and the haulogy means you you come out and you
output as well as input and you have an internal boundary
and it's just as a mathematical way of describing how you
couple with the universe that's the simplest way I can describe it so let me reiterate the summary
first there's unreasonable funness of mathematics how do chicken scratches become a rocket launch
but they have isomorphism between them which means the properties are attributes and points of the
language that you write down once your chicken scratches can comport to the
way the rocket takes off or the airplane takes off or the economy works point two
point two the distribution of formal logic over the dualism so these dualisms even though
that even though there's mind matter subject object of very universe you have it so that
the dualism they're on the same medium which is reality and because it's the same medium logic
distributes over it as a language the language really language distributes over the dualisms
counters what science has held for close to 400 years and finally there's a coupling of objects
or you as a syntactic operator with the universe there's a unisex between you you have an internal
boundary and the holograph means that you occupy space or you output or you output language and
you input language so these are the three points this is a big breakthrough so you can remember
the breakthrough is that reality is a language it's isomorphic it distributes over dualisms
and it couples yourself with your universe remember to repeat that reality is language
language is reality it's isomorphic with reality it distributes over reality and it couples
yourself as a syntactic operator with the universe this is the big breakthrough the ctmu
if and only confusion i confuse you i'm sorry uh i'm trying to come to better terms of that
myself and i'm trying to come to better terms that by explaining it i'll be putting out future
videos like one an italic principle and one on state versus syntax as building blocks of the ctmu
and finally have a secret project in the works that i got to read the ctmu a couple times over
but a secret project in the works that i think it's going to be big on the ctmu it'll long
overdue series on the ctmu so until next time take care bye-bye
you
