Welcome back.
Today's lecture is about Ardipithecus.
Pithecus we've seen before, it's Greek for ape, but ardi, it's a local word in the Afar
dialect in Ethiopia.
It means ground, ardipithecus, the ground ape.
And when Tim White and his team found ardipithecus, went to this site, Aramis, Ethiopia, and
began looking for more remains that they made the most fabulous discovery, a nearly complete
skeleton of the species called ardipithecus.
That skeleton, along with other teeth and fragmentary remains of the species, was found
across a long interval of space in the Ethiopian Badlands.
We've seen this area before, it's the place where Lucy was found, but this area, a little
bit up the river, has two ashfalls that lie one over the other, products of volcanoes that
went off about a thousand years apart.
And in between those ashfalls, there's about 10 feet of sediment that preserve a thousand
year increment in the history of this region.
So the really unique aspect of this part of the world is that they were able to go back
to more than one locality in this interval of time and sample an entire fossil landscape.
And what they found was that ardipithecus had a consistent association with woodland
type of habitat.
The kinds of fossils that it was found with are fossils of bush bucks and other kinds of
woodland antelopes.
The kinds of paleo habitat that could be reconstructed, looking at the little burrows made by W.
Dung Beetles and other highly detailed parts of the fossil record, it created a really
detailed picture of the environment this fossil lived in.
So we know an awful lot about ardipithecus and the place that it lived, but ardy has
given rise to a really large debate in today's paleoanthropology.
It's one of the biggest debates that we have going today.
The debate is really basic.
Is this fossil skeleton one of our lineage, a fossil hominin, or is it some other kind
of ape?
For ardipithecus, much more so than for most other potential early hominin species, we
have, it would seem, the evidence at hand to really make that assessment.
But there are aspects of the skeleton that make it really difficult to say for sure.
If we're looking at one of our close relatives or if we're looking at a really different
kind of ape.
And so this debate has emerged in the last few years since the fossil was described.
Is it one of us or is it something else?
When we talk about fossil hominins, we're really talking about a very short increment
of the total fossil record, really the last four or five million years.
This, at four and a half million years old, is at the very earliest increment where we
could really potentially say this is going to be one of our ancestors.
Hominins are specifically that group of organisms that are more closely related to us, living
people, than they are related to other kinds of living apes.
And when we think about what the branching of ape ancestry is like, well you can sort
of imagine your thumb and your two forefingers.
Your forefingers are closer together than your thumb is.
The thumb is basal to them, we would say, in phylogenetic terms.
So if something branches off like your thumb, compared to something that branches off like
two fingers, those two fingers are closer to each other, they're more closely related.
And when we draw a diagram that shows the relationships of species, that's very much
the kind of branching tree that we're trying to make.
Something that shows which kinds of species are more closely related, and which ones are
more distantly related.
With Ardipithecus, it's a basic question.
Is it closely related to us, and chimpanzees form a basal clade to us, we would say, or
are chimpanzees more closely related to us, and Ardipithecus potentially something else?
It could, in fact, be an ancestor of humans and chimps, it could be another lineage of
apes.
But this is the debate that's at issue.
Now of course, with the rest of the fossil record, later in time, we've got some really
good evidence that we're dealing with things that are our relatives, and not things that
are related to chimpanzees.
Take the Laitoli footprints.
This is clear evidence, as we saw in the last lecture, of upright, two-legged walking, bipedality,
as we call it.
Those footprints had a toe that was in line with, a big toe that was in line with the
other toes.
They showed a stride that's very much like a human stride.
They showed an arch in the foot.
Those adaptations are so close to us, so detailed, it's very difficult to believe that they would
have emerged in parallel in some other distantly related kind of ape.
Up until the discovery of Ardipithecus, it was really believed that when we talk about
early hominins, we're talking about bipeds, we're talking about upright walking apes.
The reason why is that everyone that we knew of so far was an upright walking ape.
And furthermore, when we look at the more early fossils, the ones at the very potentially
earliest end of the hominin fossil record, where we don't have great evidence about bipedality,
the teeth were what give us clues as to whether they might be similar to us.
But as we saw in the case of Ramapithecus, they were never very convincing.
We really wait for signs that we're looking at upright walking organisms to say that these
are hominins.
But in some sense, that's a misleading way to consider what our evolution must have been
like.
At some point, after we diverged from other living apes, our pattern of walking upright
must have emerged.
But until that time, we could very well be looking at apes that are in fact closely related
to us, but haven't yet evolved that pattern.
With Ardipithecus, the evidence about locomotion is fairly clear.
This foot was not a foot that could have made the Laitoli footprints.
Ardi's foot had a big toe that was opposable, that stuck out away from the other toes, that
could grip onto branches.
It had long toes that could wrap themselves around branches to stand on them.
That's a pattern that we don't find in any other kind of hominin.
When we look at it, we say, this doesn't look like an upright walking hominin.
There are some aspects of the bones and the ankles that show that Ardi was potentially
supporting weight through those hind limbs to a greater extent, maybe, than living chimpanzees
or living gorillas do.
It might have been trending closer to us, but this becomes a problem of interpretation.
How similar does it have to be to us to really make us convince that this is a close relative
of ours?
Ardi compared to Lucy, then, is a real contrast.
Lucy, here's a skeleton that is very small compared to a human, something like a seven-year-old
type skeleton, except in an adult form.
Ardi is bigger.
In contrast to Lucy, who weighed about 35 kilograms, something like 80-90 pounds, Ardi
weighed about 55 kilograms, something like 110-120 pounds.
There's a size difference between these.
Both of these skeletons, we believe, are female.
We think this on the basis of the teeth, the canine teeth in particular, being quite small
in both specimens, but also in terms of the pelvis.
Yes, Ardipithecus has a pelvis, and so it potentially gives us a lot of evidence, but
as you will see, there's some complications in interpreting it.
It's this specimen, about 4.4 million years old, that has become the key point in this
debate.
Is it a relative of ours, or is it not?
When we look at the rest of its skeletal anatomy, we can build a pretty good picture
of what Ardipithecus' behavior would have been like.
Let's take the hands.
As we saw, the feet have opposable toes, and so that would infer that we have a climbing
type of organism.
When we look at the hands, we see the confirmation of that.
Hands that have very long fingers, long, curving finger bones, and a very short thumb.
That's a chimpanzee-like hand.
It's made for suspending underneath of large branches.
The abbreviated thumb, this is because they're not using their hands to make things in the
same way that humans do.
They're using their hands mostly for climbing and suspending, as chimpanzees do.
However, those hands don't bear the special adaptations for weight support on the knuckles
that chimpanzees and gorillas have.
When we look at the very ends of the finger bones, where we see the adaptations to locking
the fingers and supporting weight on them in chimpanzees and gorillas, Ardipithecus'
didn't have them.
Where chimpanzees, maybe more or less Ardipithecus' size, are mainly terrestrial, mainly quadrupedal,
spend a lot of time on the ground, spend a lot of time knuckle walking, it looks like
Ardi did not.
Ardi was more of a climber, and when Ardi was on the ground, it must have gotten around
in some other kind of way.
The condition of the skeleton.
When we think about fossil skeletons, they're always broken, distorted in various ways.
But Ardi's is an extreme case.
This is a skeleton that came from very loose sedimentary deposits.
It was crushed extremely.
Tim White described it as being like a roadkill.
So we're talking about something that had been really distorted and broken into little
pieces.
And it took them and his team 17 years to put this thing together, to work out the way that
the pieces fit.
And in some aspects of the skeleton, they've done an extraordinary piece of work.
When we think about the skull, basically a round object that's been crushed down like
eggshells into almost nothing, how would you reconstruct something like that?
Well, obviously it's like a jigsaw puzzle, put the pieces together, but how do you make
sure that you've gotten those pieces in sort of the right place?
Well, of course, with today's technology, we can give ourselves a little bit of leverage
over it.
One of the real clever things that they were able to do was to reconstruct the base of
the skull, the bottom side, the side that the spine attaches to, by taking the two parts
of it and orienting them correctly after having done micro CT scanning of them.
Now, a micro CT, a CT scanner uses x-rays to reconstruct the three-dimensional shape
of a part of the body.
When you go to the hospital and have to have a CT scan, this is to reconstruct the shape,
of course, of the inside of your body.
A micro CT is doing the same thing except at a much smaller scale.
And the utility of this, if you have a little piece of bone and you can put it into a micro
CT scanner, is that you can see the internal structure in a very fine way.
One of the cool things is if you take part of the base of the skull, part of the temporal
bone, the part that encases the ears, and put this into a micro CT scanner, you can
see the inside of the inner ear.
And inside the inner ear is a series of three loops that form what's called the vestibular
system.
These loops, the semicircular canals, have fluid in them, and they act like little gyroscopes
that keep your body able to tell which direction your head is pointing.
These gyroscopes are oriented so that they conform to three axes, so that you can always
tell which direction you're going.
And so if you have two of these from opposite sides of the head, and you want to make sure
that they're oriented correctly, well you can use that internal anatomy to get them
oriented in the right way.
And that's what these guys did, reconstructing this fossil skull.
They were able to put the base together in an anatomically accurate way by using those
internal clues that tell you how it has to have been shaped.
Well, despite all of this interesting evidence about the skull, really what we maybe know
the most about Ardipithecus is its teeth.
As we've seen, later hominins, like Australopithecus operensis, have relatively bigger molar and
premolar teeth compared to chimpanzees, gorillas, and other kinds of apes.
They have big teeth in the back of their mouths.
Ardipithecus has slightly bigger teeth in the back of its mouth than chimpanzee would,
but not nearly to the extent of later hominins.
When we compare Ardis jaw and Lucie's jaw side by side, you'll see that Lucie's teeth
are a little bigger, even though Ardie was a much bigger organism, much bigger animal.
And it's that difference that tells us that Ardie might have been eating foods that were
more similar to later hominins than chimpanzees do today, but it did not have the extreme
adaptation in its dental apparatus that the later hominins do.
One exception to this is the canine.
When we look at those canine teeth, the fang-like teeth that in other kinds of primates are
very large and sort of show outside of the mouth.
When we look at those teeth in humans and in earlier hominins, they're very small.
The canine teeth are useful, of course, in fighting in other kinds of primates.
They're useful in cutting in that they wear against the lower premolars and provide a
cutting surface.
And those two functions, the fighting function, the social function of being able to make
threats by showing your canines.
When a chimpanzee smiles at you, this isn't happiness.
This is usually showing that they're able to fight with you, versus the human pattern
where when we show our canines, we are usually happy.
This is showing that you're non-threatening in some sense.
That contrast might, in earlier hominins, have very well been human-like because of
those small canines.
Ardipithecus had small canines.
They were smaller than the canines of any of the living great apes.
And so it's in this one aspect of its dental anatomy that it's most similar to hominins.
Well, we've seen that kind of similarity before.
We saw it in Ramapithecus.
In Ramapithecus, this was a bit of a mistake because Ramapithecus, we were looking at a
female kind of ancient ape that had small canines because of its sex.
Because Ardi, we're looking at a female skeleton that has small canines, could be a similar
explanation.
Now we do have more than one canine tooth from the same horizon.
So we know that all of the ardipithecus that we've found has small canines.
It doesn't necessarily look like it could be just females versus males that we haven't
found yet.
But I want to point out that there are other fossils that are relevant from Africa that
are a little bit earlier than ardipithecus that also have these small canines.
One of them is Sahelanthropus.
Sahelanthropus is about two and a half million years older than ardipithecus.
It dates to around seven million years ago.
Seven million years ago in North Central Africa, today's country of Chad is where it was found.
And Sahelanthropus, it's unique because it has a nearly complete skull.
That nearly complete skull has big brow ridges.
It has a very small brain and it's probably a little bit smaller primate than ardipithecus
was.
But when we look at its teeth, it has that small canine tooth.
When we look at the base of its skull, bottom part of its skull, to see how the spine attaches
to the skull, that spine attaches more toward the front, which indicates that its head was
carried in a more vertical sort of way.
That similar to Ardy's head makes us think that there's a postural adaptation here, that
these kinds of apes might be getting around in a similar way.
Even if they're not walking bipedally, they might nevertheless be more committed to an
upright posture.
They might in that way be more similar to us.
Now the other early fossil species that I'm especially interested in is called auroran
tujanensis.
It's about six million years old from the hills of western Kenya.
Auroran has leg bones.
Sahelanthropists didn't.
But those leg bones, the femurs, the fossil thigh bones, they look like they might be
adapted to upright walking.
When we look at the very proximal end of the femur, that's the part closest to your hip,
the proximal end has a groove on it that's indicative of the muscles that keep your body
upright.
Also when we take a CT section, look inside of the bone of the neck of the femur, the
part that connects the ball of the ball and socket joint to the rest of the bone.
That has bone that's distributed mainly on the bottom and less so at the top.
That tells us that this might well be adapted to maintaining forces through a vertical posture.
Vertical posture in the spine is one thing.
That's telling you about the way that an animal potentially likes to sit or likes to climb.
Vertical posture in the legs is telling you this is about the way that the animal stands.
When I had the chance to inspect the casts of auroran in Paris last year, I was really
interested in this particular aspect of its anatomy.
The reason why is when we look at Ardipithecus, it very clearly does not have that kind of
vertical posture in its hind limb.
What's interesting about Ardipithecus is that it preserves a pelvis.
The pelvis of Lucy was so obviously different than the pelvis of a chimpanzee that it was
like feature after feature that we're showing the signs of upright stance.
Lucy's pelvis so extensively altered and the pelvis of other later hominins, they just
are clear signatures that you're looking at something that's like a human.
When you look at Ardipithecus' pelvis, this is another part of its anatomy that was very
crushed and so in the way that they did with the skull, the team reconstructed this crushed
pelvis using CT scans and computer reconstructions.
When you look at Ardipithecus' pelvis, it's a little bit strange.
In fact, when the fossil was first found, before anybody knew what it looked like, Tim
White said, this is so different from other fossils that you know about.
This is like, if you imagine how it walked, it was something like out of the Star Wars
cantina, really alien in terms of anything that we know about already.
If you imagine taking a chimpanzee pelvis, a chimpanzee pelvis with its two hip blades
that go up quite vertically and are aligned against the back of the body, well, those
are sort of like the petals of a flower and you imagine them growing up right next to
each other and in between them, of course, is the spine and the spine in a chimpanzee's
pelvis is locked together with those blades of the pelvis, locked with ligaments that connect
them together so that the lower part of a chimpanzee's back is really not very mobile.
It can't move it around very well.
Ardi doesn't have that.
Ardi's blades are much lower.
They're more curving.
They're more like a human's that way.
They don't entrap the lower part of the lumbar spine in those ligaments that keep it immobile,
so Ardi could move around better than a chimpanzee could, but it doesn't have the bowl-shaped
pelvis that later hominins do.
It doesn't have a pelvis that curves around to the front as extensively, that provides
the attachment points for the muscles that really make you able to move and walk and
run in an upright posture.
In that sense, it's not like chimps.
It's not really like humans.
It is like the pelvis of another ape that lived around five million years earlier in time.
That ape is called aureopithecus.
Aureopithecus was found in Tuscany, and when you think of places where you might go looking
for fossil apes, you might think that the hills outside of Florence are not the place,
and in some sense you're right.
But eight to ten million years ago, what today is part of northern Italy was in the past
part of an island that extended into the Mediterranean, wasn't connected to the mainland, and the apes
that lived there were apes that lived without the kind of predators that lived in the European
mainland or the African mainland.
They were apes that lived in a unique environment.
We're going to see the effects of islands on evolution in a couple later lectures.
In this case, the island habitat gave aureopithecus a unique opportunity, an opportunity to become
more focused on getting around on the ground than an ape might normally have done if the
ape had lots of terrestrial predators.
So aureopithecus had adaptations in its pelvis that looked to be adaptations to upright posture.
This was realized more than fifty years ago when people first found aureopithecus in brown
coal deposits.
These deposits that were originally peat that was laid down by swamps are today excavated
to use as fuel, but fossils are in them.
And when people found aureopithecus, a nearly complete skeleton laid out in a plaque so
that you could see every part of its anatomy, they looked at its pelvis and said, my goodness,
this is the pelvis of something that could have walked upright.
Potentially like Arti, aureopithecus also had feet that were able to support more of
its weight, almost like little tripods getting around.
Now aureopithecus was not our ancestor.
It lived on this island when the island joined with the European mainland, aureopithecus had
become extinct.
So before eight million years ago, there's this interesting kind of ape that now is gone.
That raises an obvious question.
Is aureopithecus something that's emerged, this unique form of locomotion, but unique
in not being really unique, something that we actually see in other kinds of apes?
Did that happen by parallelism?
Did it happen because of the environment that Arti chose to occupy?
Or is this a unique sign that Arti is our close relative?
Well, as in many topics today, we use genetics to try to arrive at an answer to this question
also.
Genetics showed us that Rhamopithecus, a much more ancient ape, was far too old to be one
of our ancestors.
Aureopithecus is much younger.
It's in a time frame when molecular evidence seems like it's consistent with humans and
chimpanzees having diverged at around that time.
But I'll tell you that today, this is probably the most active part of this debate, because
as we develop more and more information about the human genome and the genomes of chimpanzees,
gorillas, orangutans, and other apes, we're not only finding out when those populations
had genes that were diverging, but we're able to use more sophisticated models to try to
figure out when their populations were diverging.
To consider the difference between those, think about the different genes that you have
in your genome.
In humans today, we have 20,000 genes spread across, of course, our 23 distinct chromosomes,
and those genes each potentially have a different history.
When you look at one gene and your two copies of that gene, they might have had a common
ancestor sometime in the last couple of hundred years.
If you think of, you know, your ancestors, maybe they came from Europe, they settled
in the New World, there were few of them at that time, they were, you know, marrying
people, they lived in a small town, there are many opportunities for branches of your
genealogy to come back to the same person.
But others of your genes will trace back much more distantly.
If we consider human genes today, take a gene that's really well known, like the ABO gene.
This is a gene that gives you different blood types, A, A, B, ABO.
Those blood types emerged over the course of the past three and a half million years.
The A was the original form.
This is the form that's shared with other primates.
B emerged about three and a half million years ago by a mutation that transformed A into
a different type.
The O first emerged something like two and a half million years ago, but there are many
different kinds of O because O is an allele that doesn't make its product, it's broken,
and there are lots of ways to break a gene, and so we have lots of different O's, all
of which originated at different times.
When we look at somebody who's type AB, in other words, we're looking at somebody who's
two copies of the ABO gene diverged from each other about three and a half million
years ago, around the same time that Lucy lived, so looking at the variation within
a population, some of that variation is quite ancient.
When we consider two species that diverged from each other, we have to consider that
not only do they have genes that diverged yesterday at the time that the species started
to separate, but also they have genes that already had diverged millions of years before,
and when we look at today's genetic differences between two species, we have to try to work
out what the variation was like in that ancestor.
The variation gives us a clue about the time, and the more variation there was, the more
recently it looks like the two species would have diverged.
When we do this exercise for chimpanzee and human genes today, it looks like their populations
may have diverged as recently as four million years ago, even though their genes have variation
from much earlier in time, and that's a troubling date.
It's troubling because when we think about Ardipithecus, four and a half million years
old, that's too old now to be part of the human ancestor population and not the chimpanzee.
It has to date to before that time.
Now I expect that this kind of interpretation will become more and more precise, and I wouldn't
go out on a limb and say that we're going to have molecular evidence that shows that
Ardipithecus can't be a hominin.
It's just in that time frame when the molecular evidence and the fossil evidence seem to be
giving us a mixed message.
It looks like the molecular clock is still playing the same kind of role as it did with
Rhomapithecus.
We have genetic comparisons that are giving us hints that maybe this thing isn't our ancestor.
Maybe it's too old to be in the hominin lineage.
Maybe the anatomy tells us that if it's a hominin, it must be an extremely early form
of hominin, something that hasn't gotten the unique form of locomotion that we do today.
But of course, the answer to this question is going to have to depend on getting more
fossil evidence, understanding the patterns of anatomical parallelism that might have
emerged in other kinds of apes, and whether Ardipithecus reflects that same kind of evolution
or whether its similarities with us are uniquely human.
