Welcome back.
This lecture is about brains and brains are a tremendously deep topic in human evolution
because of course our brain is the thing that probably separates us from other apes more
behaviorally than anything else about our anatomy.
But brains are a very difficult topic for us in paleoanthropology because there is very
little evidence available to us about the way that the structure of the human brain has
evolved.
This topic of how much of our brain evolution is just an increase in size versus how much
has the structure of the inside of our brain affected our behavior.
That subject is one that goes back to the very beginnings of the field and one that
is given rise to some of the most intense debates.
To give you an example, early in the evolution of our field, paleoanthropology, we didn't
know anything about the hominins that we presently have recovered from Africa.
The first fossil human that has real deep antiquity from Africa was discovered by Raymond
Dart in 1923.
The story is very famous.
Dart was a young anatomist physician who set himself up in Johannesburg and was working
and was an amateur paleontologist.
He liked to hang around mines and quarries looking for fossils in the dump that the quarries
would have out the side.
You see, when people are quarrying for lime, which is used in cement making and all kinds
of industrial processes, they're going through limestone and limestone deposits have inclusions
in them that often, of course, are caves that have formed in the limestone as lime
has dissolved.
But sometimes they're much smaller cavities and often are full of junk, soil, rocks, sometimes
fossils that have fallen in.
And the quarries would take this stuff off to the side and dump it because this wasn't
the stuff that they're interested in.
Well, Raymond Dart would go through these dumps and look for stuff.
And he got to the point where he would pay kids to sort of hang around and look through
this stuff and any interesting fossils that they found, would they give them to him?
Well, one day he got a little fossil jaw bone and he looked at that fossil jaw bone and
he said, this is very interesting.
This is the jaw bone of a fossil primate and in particular it looks like a fossil ape.
And Dart wanted more of that specimen.
He wanted to know more about this.
And so he paid the kids to look out for more parts.
Well, it was the day that Dart was getting ready to go to a friend's wedding that a crate
arrived at his doorstep.
And he went digging through the crate and he found in it these fossils, the fossil of
the face of a fossil ape and the fossil of what we call an endocast.
It's a natural cast that forms inside of the skull of a fossil organism.
Those two things fit together and they fit together with the jaw.
These three pieces from a site called Tong are the first fossil evidence of humans or
human ancestors from Africa to have been found.
Well, with Tong, the basic issue was, is this really like a human?
Is it our relative or is it just a kind of fossil ape?
Dart, after examining its anatomy, came to the conclusion that this is related to us,
that it's a fossil hominin.
His logic was partly based on the teeth.
When he looked at the teeth of this, they didn't look in their sequence of eruption
quite like ape teeth would.
It looked like the canines were coming in faster and were smaller and the molars were
coming in slower and were bigger.
But Dart rested his real case as to whether this was a hominin or not on that endocast,
on the brain case.
This to him was a real strong piece of evidence in favor of it being related to us.
Now, why was this endocast human like in Dart's opinion?
One aspect of it was its size.
At the size that it is, Dart thought, this is a little bigger than I would expect for
the endocast of a chimpanzee or a gorilla at the same age.
He assessed the age of the specimen at around five years.
But there was another aspect of this specimen.
It was a little groove in the back of the endocast.
That groove called the lunate sulcus.
Lunate means moon shaped, shaped like a little crescent moon.
That groove in human brains separates the visual processing centers of the striate visual
cortex from the rest of the brain.
The position of that groove in humans is quite low.
What it means is that the rest of the brain has expanded, it's gotten bigger, and the
visual processing is not as much bigger in us as it is in other primates.
In chimpanzees, this groove is higher, it's more forward.
So Dart rested his interpretation that Tong is a hominin largely on the brain, its size
and its structure.
Those observations that became such a focus for debate in the 1980s, there were two specialists,
two good friends of mine who were on opposite sides of this debate.
Ralph Holloway on the one side thought essentially as Dart did that the lunate sulcus was in
a lower position and that meant that the structure of the brain in this species, Australopithecus
africanus, was more human-like.
Dean Falk, another friend of mine, thought that you couldn't really tell where that sulcus
was, that the groove that Dart thought it was was actually not the lunate sulcus, and
the lunate sulcus itself might well have been in a chimpanzee-like position.
Falk thought that the anatomy of the brain, the structure of the brain, was probably much
more ape-like in Australopithecus.
So that division, human-like or ape-like structure, that division has tremendous importance to
the way that we understand the evolution of the brain, because we know that the brain
has rapidly increased in size later in human evolution within the past two million years.
We know that Australopithecus had brains that were relatively much smaller than human brains.
But what we don't know is whether there were key changes to the behavior or social structure
of Australopithecus that would have pushed them into evolving human-like functions.
If their brains had actually changed in structure, that would give us a hint that maybe they
were adapting to do something that was a little bit different than other apes, that might
be presaging the changes that occurred later in human evolution.
If on the other hand, it's mostly size that makes a difference to our brains, then most
of the events that were of importance must have happened later in evolution than Australopithecus.
So what's the story with this anatomy?
Well, Ralph Holloway, who began working on fossil brains endocasts in the 1960s and has
continued on since that time, has developed a tremendous catalog of fossil casts of endocasts,
of scans of endocasts, and of artificially made endocasts that he makes using latex,
going inside of the skull and crumpling it out to get reinflated, the shape of the inside
of the brain case.
That kind of study, developing this huge resource to compare what is essentially the inner surface
of the skull to each other, that's something that didn't exist before.
And so when we have comparisons that say, well, when you look at the inside of the skull
and the inside of that skull, just imagine how difficult this would have been when the
skulls, you couldn't look inside of them.
How in the world would you try to find out what was inside of one of these fossil skulls?
If it was broken, you can disassemble and look at the surface of that, but then it becomes
very difficult to compare the shape of it with natural endocasts or with the shapes
of outsides of brains.
It was Ralph's work, really, that got this study on an even footing, but it also tended
to show many of the weaknesses of relying on evidence from the inside of the skull.
The inside of the skull is not the outside of the brain.
It is separated from the outside of the brain by several membranes, and those membranes are
tough and thick.
It's sort of like trying to study the surface of the earth by looking at the outer layer
of the atmosphere.
There's some extent to which you might be able to tell something, but there's a lot
of wiggle in between those two things.
And this is very much true of the inside of the skull and the outside of the brain.
The outside of the brain itself is not a perfect kind of evidence about what the brain does.
When we think about the structure of the human brain, you can sort of imagine what a brain
looks like.
It's sort of oblong, maybe a little bit football shaped.
It's got a really wrinkly surface, and those wrinkles sort of look like they ought to be
significant.
It looks like they ought to mean something, but actually those wrinkles are quite variable
in placement with respect to what the brain does.
There are not very many parts of the brain where you can say that, oh, definitely at
this location where these wrinkles define a place, that's a function that's going on
there.
There's a couple of places like that, and at least one of them is important for today's
lecture.
But for the most part, when you look at the outside of the brain, you can tell the fraction
of the outside, that's the neocortex, the cerebral hemispheres, the parts that contain
much of the thinking apparatus, and the cerebellum, which lies tucked underneath the back of the
skull, which helps to coordinate motion, but also interacts with the rest of the brain
during thought processes.
Those parts, you can tell.
The major frontal lobe, temporal lobes, occipital lobe, the parts of the brain that correspond
to really the different poles inside the skull, you can tell those from the inside surface
of the skull, but the wrinkles themselves, the gyrifications, are often invisible, and
finding any specific aspect of that surface of the brain is very difficult.
Well, one advantage that we have is that we have quite a number of fossil endocasts.
The first thing that they tell us about, of course, is size.
When we look at a brain, is it big compared to ours?
Is it small compared to ours?
Is it ape-like in size?
To give you an idea of what kind of scale we're looking at, a human brain today averages
about 1300 cubic centimeters.
1300 cubic centimeters, that's basically about a quart and a little under a half a quart.
So it's something like a big slurpee bottle is where your brain would fit.
A chimpanzee brain averages under 400 cubic centimeters, about 350 cubic centimeters.
So it's about a third the size of our brains.
The smallest chimps are less than a fourth the size of the largest human brains.
That's a huge difference, and it's a huge difference that's probably very important in
terms of our behavior.
But before we go too far thinking about, well, big brain smart, small brain dumb, consider
that brain size also varies with the size of the body.
There's an aspect to which brain size is independent of its cognitive abilities that
it tracks with the size of the rest of the body.
Gorillas are a good example.
Gorillas, of course, are much larger in body size than chimpanzees.
They're twice, three times the body size of a chimp.
Their brains are also much larger.
Gorilla brains average over 500 cubic centimeters.
Large male gorillas have brains of 600 cubic centimeters or more.
So we're looking at brains that range up to twice the size of small chimpanzee brains.
But there's no clear evidence that the gorillas get any additional behavioral sophistication
out of these larger brains.
Chimp and gorilla behaviors are quite similar with respect to their ability to use tools,
with respect to their communication skills, their social structure.
Those kinds of things seem to basically go together.
If anything, chimpanzees seem to be a little bit more clever than gorillas.
That shows us the disadvantages of relying just on size.
When you think of humans today, it's a huge range and variation of size of skull.
There's a huge range of variation of cognitive measures.
There are people that have great cognitive skills of various kinds and people who lack
them.
Those two things do not go cleanly together.
It's not the case that if we took the largest headed people that we're going to get the
smartest people and vice versa.
The links between these are just not so clear.
When we look at fossil brains then, we have this problem.
How do we interpret size?
We can talk about the factors that might have caused selection on the size of the brain.
We can talk about the ways that the brain might respond to pressures in the environment,
but we have to understand that the brain is also constrained in various ways.
Studying fossil brains, developing a data set that shows us how these brains go together,
that's a complicated enterprise.
To give an example of exactly what kinds of constraints can arise, it's helpful to think
of some of Dean Falk's work.
Dean, good friend of mine as well, and when we look at work into the structure of the
brain, Dean's focus early in her career was on a part of the brain that seems like it
wouldn't have a lot of connection to the brain's function in behavioral terms, but
actually does have an important role in the brain's function in thermoregulatory terms.
That has to do with the way the brain is drained.
The brain is a highly energetic part of the body.
It accounts for only 2% of your body's mass, but it absorbs about 20% of the oxygen that
your body consumes, so that means that the energy requirements of your body, they're
largely driven by the energy requirements of your brain.
That means that the brain, consuming all this oxygen, carrying on these really rapid metabolic
processes to keep electricity flowing through the nerves, that creates a lot of heat.
Brains, they're giving off heat all the time.
Now if you imagine our ancestors living in tropical climates, heat is a real problem.
You've got to be able to keep cool.
If you're going to expand the size of your brain, you might very well need to find a
way to cool it off more effectively.
Dean reasoned that when we look at big brains and small brains, we might very well see differences
in the way that the blood flows through them, because this cooling effect, getting blood
in from the body and then getting it out of the head, that has an effect like a radiator,
creating things in and out, maintaining core temperature inside the head in a hot climate.
This is a challenge.
So Dean focused on the vein patterns outside of the brain.
We'd obviously want to look at the venous drainage inside the brain too, but the skulls
give us no evidence about this.
Conveniently, one of the major drainage patterns of the brain emerges from it and then traces
outside of the brain's surface in a way that the veins leave impressions inside of the
skull.
So you can actually look at the venous drainage, the drainage of blood from the skull and the
way that it leaves the head.
And what Dean discovered is that this is actually different in different kinds of fossil hominids.
Most Australopithecines have a venous drainage that comes down the back of their skull in
the center and then diverges on both sides of the foramen magnum.
After that point, it goes out of the neck and enters the jugular vein, which then takes
it to the rest of the body.
That flow, she called an occipital marginal drainage.
It's coming down the back and then draining around the margin of the foramen magnum.
In contrast, most humans have a drainage that comes down the center and then near the top
of the occipital bone, just above the cerebellum, goes off to the side.
That transverse drainage seems like a more efficient way to cool a larger brain.
So Dean made the argument that this is a thermoregulatory adaptation, that what we're
looking at in brain structure is actually a constraint that comes from the temperature
that the brain's maintaining.
And if you're going to grow a bigger brain, Dean reasoned, well you'd need to have a better
drainage system.
Another fossil that's highly important when we talk about endocasts and what we can tell
from them is KNMER1470.
This is the famous Homo habilis fossil that was found by Richard Leakey that we now know
to date to around 1.9 million years old.
It could be the earliest of the fossils of Homo habilis that we know of.
It certainly is the earliest endocast of Homo habilis we know of.
This is the largest of the Homo habilis endocasts.
It's about 750 cubic centimeters.
When we look at that, we're looking at something that is double the size of a chimpanzee brain,
but just over half the size of most men today.
So it's sort of in between.
When Ralph Holloway studied this endocast, he noticed in the front part of it, on the
left side, in a particular area that's known in humans today as Broca's area, he noticed
that this was a prominent location on the surface of this endocast.
It looks like that area was developed more than it was in other early hominins or in apes.
Now this is a very interesting area because Broca's area is one of the essential areas
for speech in humans today.
In order to talk for any length of an utterance, to give a lecture like this one or even to
make a sentence, you've got to figure out how your jaws and larynx and breath system
will go together to make those words come out, and you've got to sequence those things.
Broca's area is essential to that.
People who have lesions or damage to Broca's area, they have what's called aphasia, the
inability to put together these things in the right way.
So this is a really essential area to language.
In most people, it's localized on the left side.
And so when Ralph looked at this endocast and he saw that it's prominent on the left
side, it seems like there's something there, this is potentially very important.
This is actually one of the things that you can look at on the inside surface of a skull
that might tell you something about the behavior of an ancient hominin.
Now what's it telling us?
Actually it's telling us that the kinds of communication skills that humans have today,
our reliance on language, those might have been emerging in the very earliest forms of
homo, and so that's tremendously important.
It's also something that appears to be quite different from Australopithecus.
Now when we oppose structure, those structural questions with size, you have to understand
that most of the action in terms of the evolution of brain size is happening really within the
last million years of our evolution.
When homo shows up about 2 million years ago, we jump from an Australopithecus size brain
to a size that's around about 600 cubic centimeters.
Over the course of the next about million years, there's a little bit of a gradual increase.
By the time we get to the fossil skulls of a million years ago, we're looking at things
that have an average of a little over 800 cubic centimeters.
It's within the last half million years that we really have a lot of expansion of the brain
going from an average of 800 cubic centimeters to of course the recent average of 1300 or
higher in terms of cubic centimeters.
So that evolution is quite late.
It probably correlates with the complexity of the archeological record and some aspects
of communication behavior that we'll cover in later lectures.
But for the time being, I want to focus on this earlier time period.
The Australopithecines have brains that at a maximum go up to almost 600 cubic centimeters
but average somewhere about 450 cubic centimeters.
That's a little bit bigger than chimpanzees.
And in terms of size, understand that Australopithecines are more or less in the size of their bodies
about chimpanzee sized.
We would expect that their brains would be about the same size if they were doing around
the same things.
The fact that their brains are a little larger, it may point us to them having some sort of
behavioral adaptations that other kinds of apes lack.
Now what those are is less clear.
But as we consider this record, it's important to think about the ways that the brain has
to fit with the rest of the organism.
If you're going to add to the brain, you're going to have to pay the costs of having a
larger brain.
And those costs are threefold in humans.
One of them is development time.
It takes a long time to build the kind of brain that we have.
In order to get a brain of the size that we have, we need to grow it over many years,
make those neural connections, prune away the things that we don't need.
That time is an immense cost in evolutionary terms because the longer it takes your kids
to grow up, the longer it is before you have grandkids.
A second cost is in construction.
It takes protein to build a brain.
Species of primates that are protein limited tend to have relatively smaller brains.
It's that constraint on their development, a dietary constraint that helps to shape the
ability of their brains to fit their environments.
And finally, and probably the most obvious, there's an energetic cost.
The brain incredibly expensive.
As I mentioned, it's consuming 20% of your body's oxygen.
That's an ongoing cost.
You might think, well, if I'm thinking hard, if I'm doing stuff with my brain, does it
use more oxygen?
It uses a little more.
By a little more, sometimes 5% more in some parts.
It's a continuous ongoing cost to keep your brain running.
And that ongoing cost demands calories.
You have to eat to keep that brain going.
Those calories in nature are hard to come by.
And when we look across species of primates, indeed across species of mammals, what we
find is that, actually, their metabolic rates are quite constant with respect to their body
size.
The bigger-bodied animals have a higher metabolism, but it scales in such a way that bigger bodies
are more efficient.
They're using less energy per pound.
That scaling is assisted by the fact that they have relatively smaller brains than you
would expect by just blowing them up like balloons.
So that if we took a mouse and blew it up to elephant size, well, that mouse brain in
an elephant-sized mouse would be vastly larger than an elephant brain actually is.
Brain size doesn't scale with a straight line.
With body size, it scales with a curved line.
This is tremendously important, because when we compare different species with each other,
we expect to be able to make some prediction about how big their brain should be.
And when we find a species like humans, where the brain is something like twice, maybe three
times the size, that we expect it to be based on how big we are, well, then that means that
that species has got to be doing something to pay the metabolic cost.
In humans, the metabolic cost is paid by diet quality.
We eat more and better food, more energy-rich food than other primates of our body size.
Compare humans to gorillas.
Gorillas are mainly, of course, vegetarians.
They eat very little protein in their diet.
The protein that they do have comes from leaves.
They're also eating fruits.
But they're depending on what is a high-ruffage, relatively low-quality diet.
Compared to human hunter-gatherers who are hunting meat, who are gathering fat-rich nuts
and seeds, who are getting lots of caloric input in a very rich manner, that caloric
cost is paying the way for our larger brains.
Some anthropologists think that there's an additional thing paying the way for our larger
brains, and that's the reduction of other tissues in our body that consume a lot of energy.
Think about your brain as an expensive tissue.
Well, there are other parts of your body that are expensive.
Fat is not.
Fat is cheap.
Of course, you have to schlep it around.
But when you think about, you know, is it consuming a lot of blood flow?
Is it taking a lot of energy?
No.
It's very efficient.
Muscle, on the other hand.
Now muscle is metabolically expensive.
If you reduce your muscle mass, you'll increase your energy efficiency.
Comes at a cost.
You're not going to have the strength.
You might have a different pattern of endurance.
But that cost might be outweighed by smarts.
So the expensive tissue hypothesis, the hypothesis that you've got energy-intensive tissues like
muscles or your gut tissue that you've reduced, and you've used those savings to pay the way
for a larger brain.
Does it make sense?
Well, it does reflect back on the relationship between the gut and diet and the brain and
muscle in terms of activity to get the foods.
These things are all tied together.
It's clear that in human evolution, there's been a balance.
Bigger brains later in our evolution, these are almost certainly paid for by increasing
efficiency of foraging, being able to get more food.
But in Australopithecus, those slightly bigger brains than other apes, and in early Homo,
the bigger brains than in Australopithecus, those transitions of size might well have
been driven by the behavioral ability to get higher quality foods and by the anatomical
changes that ultimately paid the way for them.
So when we think of how this debate has evolved and where it's gone, I've got to tell you
that we actually still don't know where the lunate sulcus is.
There's a disagreement between two people.
They're both experts.
They both disagree about the anatomy, and that's really where we are.
If we found another endocast that had a tremendous preservation, that would go a long way.
When it comes to whether there are changes in brain structure in Australopithecus, this
also is relatively unclear.
It seems plausible that the larger brains of Australopithecus compared to apes imply something,
but we can't target that in terms of what parts of the brain might have changed.
We can, however, for the initial brains of early Homo say that that change in size was
coupled with a change in structure.
At least in Broca's area, there's something interesting going on that tells us that the
behavior of those hominins might well have been more complex, more human-like in some
ways than in Australopithecus.
So the study of brain size and brain structure, of course, has to interact.
These things work together.
As we go later in the fossil record, we're going to focus on how the costs of brain size
were paid and what it means in terms of behavioral capacities of humans.
