Welcome back. This lecture is about the robust australopithecines. They were, in, I guess,
in honest respect, a side branch to our evolution. We do not descend from robust australopithecines.
We descend from some other kind of australopithecine. And so, from that aspect, we might say, well,
you know, okay, what's interesting about this group of organisms? Why do we care? One of
the reasons why we care is that the things that set them apart from other kinds of hominids
are showing us about the ecological variability that hominids were beginning to exploit as
they evolved ultimately into homo. And so, when we look at the robust australopithecines
and the ways in which they were specialized, we're looking at a path that our ancestors
branched away from. And yet, that path existed, and our ancestors interacted with it. And
so, robust australopithecines provide us with some essential clues about the pathway that
led to today's humans. The most key debate about robust australopithecines has to do
with the reasons why they have the specializations that they do. Robust australopithecines are
called robust because they have very large jaws, very large jaw muscles, and very, very
large molar and premolar teeth. In other words, everything that they have for chewing
was a lot bigger than anything we have or anything any other kind of hominid has. And
so, that specialization demands some explanation. Why do they have this really specialized chewing
apparatus? John Robinson, who was a South African, studied the robust australopithecines
and other hominids, came up with the theory that this difference between robust and non-robust,
the australopithecines he called grass-ile australopithecines, that difference is explained
by a diet adaptation. Robust australopithecines were eating low quality food in a similar
way to gorillas today, eat relatively low quality food, while the grass-ile australopithecines
were eating high quality food. He envisioned them as being more like chimpanzees, eating
fruit potentially meat. And so, in his lineup, what became known as the dietary hypothesis,
there was a clear difference between these kinds of hominids in the habitat that they
lived in, because the more forest adapted gorilla like robust australopithecines contrasted
with the savanna living potentially hunting grass-ile australopithecines, and obviously
in diet and therefore in many other kinds of capabilities. Yet, the data has come to
challenge that viewpoint in many ways. The opposite side of this debate is that when
we're looking at the differences between these kinds of hominids, we're actually looking
at their interactions with an environment and with other forms that we're shifting over
time, so that we're not looking at a straightforward dietary difference, but we may be looking at
something more complicated. Well, that's a debate that really frames our consideration
of diet and hominids, and it's become a very central topic. To talk about where we are
in terms of time, at the time that Robinson was writing about the robust australopithecines,
it was really not very clear how they related in time to the grass-ile australopithecines.
It seemed on the basis of comparing other species that occur in caves with them. It
seemed like the grass-ile australopithecines were probably a little earlier, but it wasn't
obvious how much earlier. And this is a key problem when we consider the South African
fossil record. When we're looking in South Africa, this is very different in many ways
from East Africa or other parts of the world where we have volcanoes that lay down ash layers,
because those ash layers give us a means of giving the exact dates for things. They tell
us based on the decay of radioactive elements inside of the ash particles, they can tell
us how long ago that eruption happened. In South Africa, there are no volcanoes laying
down ash layers. Where we find the fossils are in ancient caves that over time collapsed,
became filled, maybe refilled in a different way. The study of these caves initially was
really, really difficult. It was clear that the fossils were old and that they co-occurred
sometimes together, but it was hard to work out what an archaeologist would call this
stratigraphy, where in a sequence of things did the fossils actually belong. Today, thanks
mostly to the work of C.K. Brain, who worked at Swartcrans, a particular cave in South
Africa for many, many years, we have a pretty good idea of the way that these caves were
formed. Brain specialized in looking at taffonomy. Taffonomy is what happened to the fossils.
As they were skeletons, what were they altered by? How did they get into the deposit where
they're found? And what happened to them after that? So taffonomy is everything that affects
the surface and structure of a fossil after the organism has died. Looking at taffonomy
tells us a lot of important things about these South African caves. Let's take Tong, for
instance. Tong, the place where the famous child fossil was found by Raymond Dart, that
fossil that we saw in a previous lecture, that had a jaw bone, a face, and an endocast.
Well, Tong was a rock shelter, and the deposit that formed there was actually left there
mainly by raptors, by large predatory birds. And the Tong face itself bears the clear signs
that some kind of ancient raptor had clawed it and carried that skull away, because when
you look inside of the eye orbits of that skull, you can see the claw marks, the places
where the talons of these ancient birds had grabbed on to carry that child away. So that
just is a tremendous piece of evidence that when we're looking at these early hominins,
we're not looking at a species that's dominant over the rest of its environment. We're not
looking at a top predator. We're looking at a species that was the hunted that other
kinds of animals were going after. Well, brain found clear evidence of this kind of predation
at swart crans. But at swart crans, the main predator that was accumulating bones wasn't
eagles or any other kind of raptor. It was leopards. There are leopard jaws in the deposit
that match almost directly wounds that are in the surfaces of at least one of the hominin
skulls. These guys were predated by leopards, were collected in a relatively wet area where
trees were growing, and leopards like to stash their kills in trees. Well, those wet areas
are predominantly places where there's groundwater available, and those are the places where
caves form. And so in swart crans, what we have is a deposit that's formed by leopard
predation. And what you've got is the bones that the leopards didn't eat or that they
dropped while they were eating. That accumulation occurred in many distinct episodes. As this
chamber opened, things would fall into it. Then the opening would close, and later on
it would open in another place and things would fall in. That creates a tremendously
complex strictography. It makes it really hard to tell how old things are relative to
each other, and things that are found right next to each other might have gotten in there
at very different times. Swart crans itself, a cave that's mostly robust australopithecines,
was laid down in episodes that started something like 1.7 million years ago, may have ended
as recently as 800,000 years ago. Most of the robust australopithecines come from the
earliest part of this, sometime before 1.4 million years ago.
We have some other caves where robust australopithecines are found in South Africa, and we understand
a lot about their diversity and their anatomy. To give you a sort of an introduction, I'll
alert you that when they were found, of course, this was a time in the 1940s and 50s when
paleontologists named species a lot. If you find something new, you call it a new species.
These were originally given lots of different names. Some of paleoanthropologists today
believe that robust australopithecines are diverse enough, that they're different enough
from other australopithecines, that they should be called a separate genus from them. The
genus name that they use for that is paranthropus. When we talk about paranthropus, we're talking
about robust australopithecines. I tend to keep calling them robust because I want to
accentuate the adaptive difference that occurs between them and the other kinds of early
hominids. That particular adaptation to the heavy chewing, that's what we see again and
again in these fossils that we call robust australopithecines. What does that mean when
we actually look at a skull and we say it's robust? In a living person, robust typically
means big, but in these australopithecines, we're looking at things that aren't much
bigger in body size. In fact, to the extent that we can tell from the rest of their skeleton,
they're basically the same size as other early hominids. What we're looking at is a
very particular series of characteristics of their skull and those all reflect the size
of the musculature of the jaw. When we look at a robust australopithecine skull, we're
looking at a skull that has a tall face, a tall face that's relatively vertical, unlike
other kinds of hominids that have a face that slopes forward to a much greater extent. Why
is this? It's because the larger molar and premolar teeth are coupled with smaller front
teeth and those smaller front teeth and a more vertical orientation of the muscles of
the jaw means that the face is going to be taller and more vertical. At the same time,
when we look at the skull from the front, we can see the tremendously wide cheekbones.
Those cheekbones are the roots of muscles that are called the masseter muscles and when
you sort of feel yourself chewing or grinding your teeth from side to side, you'll feel
your masseter muscles moving in your cheeks. Those masseter muscles in humans are weak
and flimsy. They do not have the huge crushing power that they do in early hominids like
the robust australopithecines. Other kinds of animals are sometimes like this. When we
look at pigs for instance, pigs have big teeth and they have these wide flaring cheekbones
that root very powerful masseter muscles. The teeth themselves of the robust australopithecines,
as I mentioned, the front teeth are quite small. In many of the jaws and upper jaws,
the maxillie of robust australopithecines, the canine teeth and the incisor teeth have
reduced to much smaller than the size of your canines and incisor teeth. It's very small.
The premolar teeth, the ones right behind the canines, those have increased to the size
of molars. They're very, very big and they're molar shaped. They're big and they're flat
and they're made for grinding. The teeth behind them, the molars in these robust australopithecine
jaws, well sometimes they are truly massive. There are robust australopithecines that have
molar teeth that are as big around on their surface as a quarter dollar. We think about
how big your teeth are. They're smaller than a dime. This is a tremendous chewing surface.
If we just add up the surfaces of all of these teeth and consider what we've got going on
there, what we've got going on is a surface area that's something like four times the
size of the chewing surface that you can employ in your mouth. That chewing surface is made
for grinding. The teeth are relatively flat. They don't have very high pointed cusps on
them. They're made for grinding together and the enamel, the hard surface that the tooth
has, the enamel is thick. It's made to wear down over a long period of time. Whatever these
hominins were using their teeth for, they were using them to grind a lot. Those teeth
had to survive a lot of wear during the course of a lifetime and we know in animals today
teeth are meant to last a lifetime. If we think about elephants, elephants have teeth
that are made up of very intricate ridges. One after another of ridges and the tooth
itself is about the size of a child's shoe. It's a big tooth. Those things as they wear
gradually wear out of the mouth and another tooth comes in behind. And then another tooth
comes in behind. And by the time the elephant has gotten to the end of this process, that's
the elephant's lifespan. It's over. With these early hominins, we find fossil jaws
that have these teeth worn down to nubs. Those teeth were worn during the course of
their lives. They were using them to chew on things that took that degree of wear. So
the natural question is, what was it they were eating? Well, Robinson's point of view
was that they were eating low quality roughage, something like stems and leaves, the kinds
of stuff that gorillas eat today. However, when we consider the anatomy of these early
hominin jaws and teeth, they compare with gorillas in an interesting way. When we look
at a gorilla skull, we can see that it has wide cheekbones. We can see that it has a
long face. We can see that the temporalis muscles, the muscles on the sides of the skull
that come up from the jaw go up through the little arches on the sides of the skull and
then insert along the side of the skull. Those muscles are so large that they extend to the
middle of the skull and meet in the middle, thereby forming a crest that extends up away
from the head. Those are big temporalis muscles. Now those muscles on you, well, they insert
right here on the side of your skull, and if you just grind your teeth again, you can
feel them there. They're there on the side of your skull. They insert about halfway up
to the top. When you think how big that muscle would be if it was bulging out from the side
of your skull and meeting in the center, well, this is like the skull of a bear. You think
of the outline of a bear's head and the musculature that's meeting in the center. That's what
gorillas are like. That's also what these early hominins were like. They're similar
to gorillas in that respect, but where they're different from gorillas is in those teeth.
Gorillas today do not have giant molar teeth that are made to grind against each other.
Gorillas have teeth that are made like pinking shears, like scissors that are made to interlock.
And why do they have that? It's because that kind of surface is especially good for cutting
apart leaves, cellulosic material from plants, stems, the sorts of high-ruffage foods that
gorillas do rely on part of the year. Those teeth are very good for dealing with that
kind of food. Robust australopithecine teeth would be miserable for eating this kind of
food. So from that standpoint, Robinson's analogy, let's look at gorillas and see what
these guys are like. It starts to fail. These robust australopithecines are not large in
body size like gorillas. They're not growing teeth that are made to deal with roughage
and other kinds of materials that gorillas eat. They're making a kind of teeth that we
don't find in living apes. It's something that's outside of the bounds of our understanding
of today's ape dietary flexibility. And that makes it a real mystery. What is it that's
going on? Well, we don't only have robust australopithecines from South Africa. We also
have them from East Africa. And when we look at East Africa, of course, the site that comes
first to mind is Olduvai Gorge. Olduvai Gorge dug by Lewis and Mary Leakey during the 1950s.
One of their most famous discoveries was a skull of a robust australopithecine. We today
call this skull OH5, Olduvai Hominid 5. When they found it, they called it Zinge Anthropus.
Zinge, an old word meaning East Africa, Anthropus meaning man. This is the man from Zinge. And
Zinge Anthropus, they thought initially was probably the maker of all of the Olduvai-type
tools that they kept finding, these stone tools that they found at Olduvai Gorge. They
said, we've got to find the tool maker for these. Who is it? It's Zinge Anthropus. But
Zinge Anthropus is sort of an unlikely looking tool maker because it is probably the most
classic looking of the robust australopithecines we know of. It has the tall vertical face,
the giant sized teeth, the sagittal crest. It looks like a classic vegetarian of some
kind. It doesn't look like the kind of hominid that would be making stone tools and bashing
bones in with them. So, they had a bit of a problem bringing this fossil into accord
with their scheme. The problem is solved for them within a couple of years as they discover
fossils of Homo habilis. And it becomes clear to them that it's habilis, that's the tool
maker, and that this robust australopithecine is something else entirely. Well, the East
African forms go back in time to somewhat earlier than we know robust australopithecines
from South Africa. The earliest of the good robust australopithecine fossil remains is
called the black skull. It's black because when it was found on the west side of Lake
Turkana, it was found in sediments that were stained black with manganese dioxide. So the
fossil itself really is quite beautifully black and sort of polished looking. This thing
has the classic features, the crest of the middle of the skull, the very widely flaring
cheekbones, the large muscle attachments, the roots for the large teeth. It's two and
a half million years old. So when we're looking at the robust australopithecines, we're looking
at a time interval that dates after Lucy, about a million years later than Lucy, but
that extends across a million years of time and that coexists with the first evidence,
as we'll see in a later lecture, of fossil Homo. That's a time that's somewhat after
the time that we have the non-robust australopithecines in South Africa. When we're looking at sites
like Tongue that have australopithecines that are not robust, we're looking at things that
are something like 2.8, 2.9 million years old, a little bit older than these robust
australopithecines. So we're looking at an increment of time when the world's climate,
it's drying, Africa's becoming less forested, more savanna-like, and these robust australopithecines
are living in this grassland environment. They're not living in forest. What's going
on with this? What are they eating that's giving them this adaptation? Well today, we
have a tremendous source of evidence about the diets of these fossil animals by looking
at the chemistry out of which their teeth are made. We can take samples of teeth and
actually determine the ratios of different kinds of elements in them. Some of those elements
are really, really informative about the types of food that was eaten. The reason why is
that some elements are chemically substituted for each other. So for example, calcium is
chemically similar to strontium. Calcium and strontium occur naturally, and if you've
got a bunch of animals that live in the same place, the ratio of strontium taken up by
bones and teeth will be higher if those animals are eating more plants. And as you go up the
food pyramid to carnivores that eat other animals, they concentrate calcium and don't
have as much of the strontium. And so strontium and calcium in their ratio give you an idea
of the position in the food pyramid. Are you looking at a carnivore? Are you looking at
an omnivore? Are you looking at a herbivore? Calcium, carbon, is much more interesting
because carbon, of course, is a natural component of most of your body, and it's a natural component
of the calcium carbonate in teeth. It's not there as a trace fossil. It's the major element
of the teeth. Carbon occurs naturally in different isotopes. Now an isotope is a form of an element
that has the same number of protons in the nucleus, that's what makes it an element,
but in each atom has a different number of neutrons. That means that chemically they're
the same. Carbon is carbon is carbon because they have the same number of protons, but
in atomic weight they're different. Carbon 13, which has six protons and seven neutrons
is heavier than carbon 12, which has six protons and six neutrons. Now many of us know about
the isotope of carbon that's radioactive, carbon 14. That has six protons and eight neutrons,
and carbon 14, because it's radioactive, it decays. It occurs naturally in the atmosphere,
just take it in, but after they die the carbon 14 decays, so over a long period of time you
don't find carbon 14 anymore. Carbon 13 is a stable isotope. It doesn't decay. As you
take in carbon 13, which naturally occurs in the environment, it stays as part of your
tissues. It doesn't have any harm to you, but the ratio that you take it in depends on the
ratio that you're getting carbon. For plants, that ratio has to do with their absorption
of carbon from the atmosphere. For humans, that ratio of carbon has to do with what plants
you eat and what other kinds of foods you eat, and the plants that those animals were
eating. So the ratio of carbon 13 to carbon 12 in your dental enamel, in your bones, is
a function of the kinds of foods that you ate. The reason why carbon 13 and carbon 12
vary among foods has to do with photosynthesis in plants. Different kinds of plants have different
kinds of photosynthetic cycles. Most plants in nature are what we call C3 plants, and
that means that each of their photosynthetic reactions involves three chains of carbon.
But some plants are C4 plants. They involve four chains, and the C4 plants are mostly
grasses and also some sedges, which are grass-like plants that live in marshlands. Grasses and
sedges, they have a different ratio of carbon 13 to carbon 12 because that C4 photosynthetic
reaction is less selective about the carbon it takes up. That means that if you've got
grazers, animals that are eating lots of grass, they're going to have more carbon 13 in their
tissues. And if you have browsers, animals that eat leaves and fruits and other kinds
of resources from non-grassy plants, they'll have less carbon 13. So when you look at the
ratio of carbon 13 to carbon 12, you're really getting an assessment of how much of an animal's
diet was rooted ultimately in grass. And since grasslands are such an important element
of the evolution of these early hominins, it stands to reason that we're going to be
really interested in what that result has to say. Well, it turns out that early hominins
are not very different from each other in the fraction of C4 to C3 plants that they're
taking in. They're skewed towards C3, which means that they're probably eating a lot of
fruits. They're probably eating some animals that depend on C3 plants. They're probably
eating nuts that come from trees. They're eating stuff that's basically brows. But very consistently,
something like 20 to 25 percent of the diet of these different kinds of early hominins
is coming from grasses. Now, when you think about grasses as a food source, understand
humans cannot digest grass. So where are we getting the grass from? There's basically
four sources. One, there are roots that are sometimes digestible. Two, there are seeds.
Of course, if we talk about today, how much of your diet is grass? Well, you have to talk
about flour, wheat, corn, oats. Basically, the major cereals are all things that come
from grasses, and that might have been true in the past as well. Then there's the animals
that eat the grass. When we're looking at these early hominins, robust australopithecines
and non-robust australopithecines, they are very potentially making use of very similar
resources to early humans and also to chimpanzees. When we think about chimps, they're browsers.
They don't live in grasslands. They don't get the C4 component, but they do eat a lot
of insects. They eat termites. They eat ants. That insect diet, there's some evidence for
in robust australopithecines. At Swartcranes, inside the cave deposits, there are small
pieces of bone that have scratches on them, lots and lots of scratches. When archaeologists
took these bones and took other bones from living, or recently dead organisms, and tried
to replicate those scratches, what they discovered was that the scratches were best replicated
by using the bones to dig into termite mounds. These cemented mounds that termites live in,
you've got to break into them if you're going to eat those insects. That seems to be what
potentially these robust australopithecines were doing. When we're looking at robust australopithecines,
we're looking at a dietary adaptation which is interestingly flexible, which leaves us
sort of a mystery. Why do they have these great big teeth? Well, when we think about
a diet, we have to consider not only what somebody's eating from day to day, but also
how that diet might evolve over long periods of time. Compare chimpanzees and gorillas
today. Chimps and gorillas both depend on resources that they find in the same habitat,
basically forested tropical Africa. They both depend on fruit to a big extent. Where gorillas
differ is their ability to fall back on lower quality resources when the fruit's not available.
Chimpanzees on the other hand, they go looking harder. They look for more fruit, or sometimes
they hunt for meat. So you have a difference in flexibility. We have a sign from these
robust australopithecines that that kind of shift may have been going on in the course
of their lives. One of the things that we can do today is use a laser to take samples
of these isotopes from different parts of the same tooth. Teeth grow over time, and
so the enamel that's laid down early and the enamel that's laid down later might very
well have different ratios of carbon 13 to carbon 12 if the animal was eating a different
diet during the course of time. One robust australopithecine tooth from Swartcrans shows
that the diet did change in this animal over the course of about a two year span of its
growth and development. It went from eating mostly C3 foods to eating mostly C4 foods
in basically two years. Now that doesn't mean that every individual was going through a
two year development span when they shifted foods. It probably means that the foods were
more or less available at different times of year or during some years as opposed to
others. And so the overall diet has to be one that the animal can survive no matter
what food is available. When we think of robust australopithecines in other words, we have
to think of a situation in which they're trying hard to survive in a changing climate
and they bring with them the teeth and jaws that give them the flexibility to do it. This
process of being able to fall back on lower quality foods or on specialized foods like
seeds from grasses, that potential gives them a survival advantage that our ancestors may
have lacked. In contrast, our ancestors may well have been able to use their behavioral
flexibility to get the higher quality foods in a more dependable way. So just to wrap
up where the debate is, we've developed a pretty complicated understanding of what the
diet was in these kinds of early hominids. We haven't solved all the problems, but we
do have a good knowledge of the kind of flexibility that they had. It's not a simple, straightforward
story where the robust australopithecines were eating one thing and the grassal australopithecines
were eating something else. What was going on was that they were eating the same range
of foods, but as the climate shifted and as they were forced into more specialized roles
by other kinds of creatures, they had to specialize in a way that would give them that fallback
potential. In the next lecture, we'll see some of where this is going in terms of the
adaptations of our ancestors early homo.
