Welcome back. Humans today are tool makers and our ancestors as humans were tool makers.
Tool making, the ability to manufacture objects that we use for other purposes, seems like
a really fundamental aspect of what it means to be human.
It also is a tremendously important aspect of the way that we study the fossil and archeological
past. Before the advent of durable stone tools that we find in the archeological record,
there is no archeology. Those durable traces of ancient human behaviors give us a way to
study how people interacted in the past with each other and with their environments. So
it's a tremendously important step in our evolution when we begin to make these artifacts
that archeologists find. But how important is it really?
Today we know that other kinds of primates also make and use tools. There's a clear distinction
between them and us in terms of the materials that they use. Humans make tools out of stone,
out of metal, out of wood, out of other kinds of substances. Apes make tools out of wood,
out of leaves, out of basically organic materials that don't persist in any kind of long term
archeological record. And so there is a difference in terms of what we make. But is there a difference
in terms of the cognitive abilities that we have to have to be tool makers? Is this a fundamental
change in our evolution that made us something different, something more human like, or are
we using to make stone tools basically ape-like cognitive abilities, maybe at a higher level?
This is the debate that this lecture tackles. What does it really take to be a tool maker
when we find the earliest archeological record? Are we finding something that shows that humans
have made a cognitive leap, that we've become a different kind of organism, something that
can alter its environment more extensively? Or do tools just reflect a shift in the substance
that we're using to make tools with? Something that we can now find where before hominins
may have made tools that are very much like apes, and essentially, in cognitive terms,
the same kind of stuff. That's a debate. What does it mean when we have an archeological
record? Does it mean that there's a big shift or not? To express why this is important, I
think it's really valuable to consider what the earliest evidence of stone tool manufacture
today is actually like. The earliest known stone tools come from Ethiopia, the same Ethiopian
badlands that have produced Hadar, that have produced Ardipithecus at Aramis. There's another
place very near those sites called Gona. It's a large field station, it's next door to Hadar,
and it preserves somewhat younger sediments than the sediments that Lucy was found in,
and a half million years old. The Gona sediments are richest in the span between about two
and a half and one million years old, so we're looking at a slightly later phase in our evolution
than Lucy's species, Australopithecus operensis. At the latest element of the Gona assemblage,
we see Homo erectus in its relatives, but in the earliest increment at Gona, it's not
obvious what kind of species of hominins we're looking at. It could be that we're looking
at the products, at least, of the ancestors of humans, but we don't have skeletal remains
that associate with them. What we do have is stone tools. At 2.6 million years old, they're
the earliest known stone tools, they're the beginning of the archaeological record. That
beginning, it's so frustrating for me as a paleoanthropologist to look at these tools
and say, well, I can see that there's the trace of somebody's behavior here, but it's
very much like the Laitoli footprints. You have the trace of an ancient behavior, but
you don't know who made them. You don't have the fossil that goes directly with them. For
Laitoli, we have fossils that are the right size and the right time and the right anatomy
to go with the footprints, so we can say that, okay, Australopithecus operensis, it probably
made those footprints. At Gona, we don't have that. We've got, from East Africa, a series
of fossils that are mostly teeth that are some of them large and operensis-like or africanus-like,
some of them a little bit smaller, some of them very large, boisei-like, so that we've
got several different potentially kinds of hominins living in this area at the right
time to be the makers of these tools. We don't know which it necessarily is, and we don't
know how any of the hominins might relate to these tools. It's a real puzzle. That's
one of the problems of archaeology. You find the traces of behavior, but you don't necessarily
know who left the traces for you. We do, however, know quite a bit about how the earliest stone
tools were used. We've got evidence not only of the tools themselves, but also evidence
of animal bones that have been extensively bashed, broken open, or cut upon with these
stone tools. When we're looking at fossil animal bones, antelope bones, ultimately,
horse bones, we're looking at things that have a real trace of human behavior on them
in some cases. It's possible for us to see that one of the earliest uses of these stone
tools was to break open bones and extract marrow from them. That's a resource that hominins
would have no access to if it weren't for their ability to use these stone tools to break
the bones. We can also show that they're cutting on the surfaces of the bones. In some cases,
the hominins were cutting on those bones before there's any trace of action by carnivores
or anything else. So it seems like in some cases, the hominins are the ones who have
the first access to the carcass. In other cases, it's less clear. Sometimes it looks
like the hominins might have gotten there after a carnivore had already been there.
We have tools by 2 million years ago from many different places in East Africa. So
although the earliest traces of tools of 2.6 million years are somewhat rare, this sort
of starts to snowball over time. The classic well-known archaeological record was discovered
first by Lewis and Mary Leakey at Olduvai Gorge. They were looking at the deepest levels
at Olduvai, levels that date to before 1.6, 1.8 million years old, and they were finding
tools that were simpler than tools that had yet been found in other parts of the world.
Those tools, it's hard to express just how crude this kind of technology really is. It's
in every respect the simplest thing that you could find in terms of alterations of rocks
and think, wow, there's definite signs that humans have altered this. And this does create
some challenges for archaeologists. If you've got a stone and you think that it represents
a tool, how are you going to demonstrate that this is something that's actually modified
by hominins? It's important for us to think about how these things are actually made to
consider the way that hominin influence can be sketched out by looking at many different
aspects of them. So let's think about what a basic stone tool looks like. These tools
called Oldewan tools, because they're first identified and characterized at Olduvai Gorge.
We now know that they extend earlier in time than Olduvai Gorge does, back to the earliest
known stone tools. How are they made? What hominins did was they took a stone, something
bigger than the size of your fist. These were often cobbles that were on the floors of river
basins. Sometimes they're made out of many different kinds of material. Sometimes they're
smoothed on the outside because stones in the bottom of a stream, they'll have smoothing
that goes on. They're river rocks in other words. Sometimes they're already broken in
some way. So they're taking what is really a heterogeneous set of raw materials, but
manageable in terms of something that you can pick up and carry. They would hit that
stone with another stone. This is a kind of manufacture that today archaeologists called
hard hammer percussion. They're taking a hard stone as a hammer and they're using it to
hit another stone. And if they hit it in the right way, the first stone will fracture,
it'll break. Breaking stones, that's sort of hard work. It takes some anatomy in order
to do this. It also takes some skill in terms of hand-eye coordination. You're going to
take something in one hand and really put a lot of force into it, drive it against something
else, and have those things come together at a sufficient degree of speed in order to
fracture one of them. That's a trick. It's a tough trick for humans to pull off. It's
hard for people to learn this. It's a very hard trick for apes to pull off, as we'll
see. But in addition to the basic step of breaking the rock, breaking one rock, putting
one fracture into a stone, is sort of unlikely to give you something that's going to be useful
to you. It might help reduce it in size. If you needed a rock that was the right size
to use to break into a bone, that might be the size that you want. But let's face it.
If you've got two rocks already and one of them is the right size to hit, you're going
to have something that's useful to hit a bone with. In fact, when we think about older
wand technology, one of the major things that we find is rocks that are relatively unmodified
except for clearly having pitting on the outside of them because they've hit things a lot of
times. These hammer stones are themselves useful tools. This is the sort of thing that
you might use if you had a large bone and you wanted to break into it, just as you would
break into or break apart another stone to try to make an artifact with. Unmodified stones
or stones that have sort of deliberate evidence of being hit on things multiple times but
not shaped in any deliberate way, that's an important aspect of the older wand archeological
record. Well, let's go back to our rock that we're hitting and breaking apart. That rock
is called a core. The core is what we're going to modify by removing little pieces from it.
Those little pieces are called flakes and older wand technology is basically a core
and flake technology. You're going to remove flakes from something and you're going to
use those flakes if they have sharp edges because they're useful to cut with if they're
the right size and if you remove them successively from the same side of a core, that core is
going to start getting a sharp edge along one side of it. That sharp edge might itself
be useful for cutting but more than likely, if it has any kind of point to it, it will
be useful for concentrating force so that you can use that to hit a bone or something
else that you want to apply more force to. So we have a basic division between flakes
which are useful for cutting, hammer stones which are useful for hitting with and what
we might call choppers which are modified cores that can concentrate force. That's
the basic older wand toolkit. It's the simplest toolkit that we can find. When we think about
how do we really know that these things are made by people? How do we know that this isn't
a rock that was modified by some natural processes? We really have to apply some cleverness to
demonstrate in many cases that these are things that hominins have modified. They don't speak
for themselves. One way to look for evidence of deliberate modification is to do what's
called refitting. If you go to a place where ancient humans were making tools and you're
excavating them from the ground, well you're going to find lots of little pieces of rock.
Most of those little pieces of rock were not used by the hominins. Most of them aren't
useful for anything. They're too small to cut with or they're not the right shape. For
whatever reason, they just weren't selected for further modification but they're lying
there. This is the trash of ancient human behavior. It's the stuff that they didn't
care about, they didn't want, they left it there and that's what archeologists just love.
They love to dig through people's trash. Well, if you have a bunch of trash from one
of these archeological sites, what in technical terms we would call debitage because it's
laid down, deposited on the ground, debitage can be put back together in many cases. You
can reconstruct what the form of the rock was that these things had been removed from.
That kind of process is called refitting. You're taking things that have been separated
from each other and you're fitting them back together. In some cases you'll discover that
oh there's a piece missing and the piece that's missing, gee, it must have had a sharp edge
because I can tell that this is the part that's missing. If that's true, then you know that
the ancient hominins made a tool and they took it away with them. But more importantly
from this process of refitting, you can get a real picture of what the process of thought
was in the hominins that were making the tools. For example, in many Oldowan archeological
sites we find a process of tool manufacture that's called bipolar. Bipolar means that
you're going from two opposite directions. What the hominins would do is they would take
a core and they would remove flakes from one side of it and then they would rotate it and
remove flakes from the other side. That's a simple process. Sometimes they would set
the rock on something and remove flakes by applying force through the bottom of it and
removing flakes from the top of it. That very simple process, however, leaves clear signs
when you reconstruct these. There are signs that wouldn't be expected by natural processes
or by accident. There are signs that show something about the cognitive features of
the hominins that are making these tools. Likewise, when we look at the diversity of
tools that are found, we can identify other aspects of their either morphology or their
distribution that will tell us about the way that the hominins were altering their environment
to make these tools. There's, for every kind of stone that you could use, granite, basalt,
flint, other kinds of rock, each of them has a characteristic pattern of fractures. Rock
is a brittle substance. Some rocks have big crystals embedded in them and they tend to
break along the edges. They make really grainy kinds of tools when you make them. They don't
wear for a long time. They don't have sharp edges that stand up very well to wear because
the crystals are separate from each other. Other kinds of stone are amorphous. They're
either non-crystalline, glassy, like obsidian, or the crystals are so small that you can
make a very fine flake on them and it's going to hold a sharp edge for a long time. Each
kind of rock has its characteristic fracture pattern. When you're removing that rock and
it makes a tool, we can show what the velocity of the impact was that created that. We can
tell what kinds of forces can be applied by a human making a stone tool and compare that
to natural processes and show the way that the curvature of the fracture pattern is altered
by the human deliberate force. We can look at the raw materials themselves. When we think
about an archeological site, hominins aren't just using the kinds of rock that they find
just at that place. More often than not, they're carrying stone from some distance. In fact,
the earliest stone tool makers were selective about what kind of stone they would use. They
would pick the kinds of stone that preferentially made better artifacts. When we look at an archeological
site, we'll find that if we compare modified stones, things that humans were actually making
into tools with unmodified stones, they were selecting things, carrying them some distance
and bringing them in. Sometimes a stone is found in an archeological site that just doesn't
look like it belongs there. This is a rock that the nearest source of is 10 kilometers
away, and somebody must have carried it all that distance. Those kinds of rocks we call
manuports, something that a human has carried by hand from one place to another place. Another
clear evidence that they're alert in their environment. They're looking for the kinds
of stone that they want, and they're concentrating that at some points in what is today the archeological
record. All of these things are evidence about the behavior of the ancient hominins, but
what we're left with as a basic question is how much mental equipment did it take to
make these kinds of decisions, to use these kinds of skills to bring them together in
this way? What is it in cognitive terms that these ancient hominins had? To answer that
question, we're going to have to turn to other kinds of primates. In 1960, Jane Goodall,
who today of course is very famous for her work with chimpanzees at Gombe, Tanzania,
Jane Goodall first went to study chimps in that year, and the first thing that really
put her on the map is somebody who'd found something that's very unusual. By staying
with the chimps, by following them, by studying what they did, she discovered that the chimpanzees
in their natural environment were making and using tools. Now these chimpanzee tools that
she was able to discover, the most famous version of this is called the termite fishing.
Termite fishing has a stick that the chimpanzee, generally speaking, has altered in some way.
It's either taken a small stick and peeled it so that it doesn't have rough bark on it,
or it's taken a leaf and stripped the leafy material and left the mid-rib of a leaf. It
will take that stick and insert it into a hole in a termite mound or an ant hill. When
that's inserted, the termites and the ants will attack it. They'll crawl on this stick.
Sometimes they'll pinch it with their pinchers. When they've had enough of a chance to get
on it, the chimp will pull it out and lick off the termites or ants. So this is what
a behavioral ecologist would call extractive foraging. They're taking a tool and they're
doing something with it to get food out of a context where they wouldn't have been able
to get the food otherwise. Chimpanzees do quite a number of kinds of extractive foraging.
One of the most famous recent examples of this is at a site in West Africa, studied by
Jill Preetz, the Fungoli chimpanzees in Senegal. Females oftentimes will take a stick and
alter it so that it's sharper and then use that stick to probe inside of hollow logs,
or hollow trees, inside the hollows of trees. And what are they probing for? They're probing
for a small kind of primate called a galago, or otherwise known as a bush baby. And when
they can spear one of them, then they eat it. This is a form of hunting. It's a form
of hunting that's primarily carried on in that group by female chimpanzees. And it's
another example of deliberately shaping a tool and using it for extractive foraging.
Probably the most complicated means of chimpanzee tool making or tool use is a process of nut
cracking. Many chimps live where there are nuts available and nuts are a very rich energy
resource. Some of those chimps, not all of them, but some groups of those chimps have
developed means of getting into those nuts. They'll take either a log or a stone and
put the nut on it, and then they will use a hammer stone to beat the nut and get the
nut meat out of it. Now that's of course a simple process. We can think, this is a logical
thing to do if you have a nut, find a way to crack it. But this for a chimpanzee is
a highly technical process. Stones or suitable places to crack nuts are rare in the forest
where they live, so they've got to have a place. In fact, they return to the same place
again and again, sometimes carrying nuts with them to do it. They have to learn the hand
eye coordination to do this. And if you think about it, it's a very similar kind of process
that you might use to manufacture a stone tool. Being able to use your arm to hit two
things together at high speed that are close to each other, that's a tough process to master.
It's also something that in chimpanzees is probably the only case where there's deliberate
teaching going on. Mothers will bring their children to these places, and they will show
them how to do it, so that you've got a deliberate sharing of information, not just the juvenile
chimpanzee watching the mother, but the mother actually moving the juvenile's hands to get
them in the right position. So that kind of cultural process is something that's very
unique in chimpanzees. Of course, it's something that humans today take for granted, but it
shows that the cognitive potential to develop this kind of technology is already there in
chimps. Well, we happen to know something about whether a chimpanzee could make a stone
tool or not. We know this because of a series of experiments with a bonobo. The bonobos
are close relatives of chimpanzees that live south of the Congo River. A bonobo named
Kanzi. Kanzi is a captive bonobo. He was kept at Georgia State University for a long time.
Today he's in Iowa. Kanzi, when he was a juvenile, was part of an experiment that was trying
to teach bonobos how to use logograms to communicate. For many years, people have been able to
teach chimpanzees and bonobos basic sign language. Getting them to use and repeat signs is a
means of communication and it's a means of experimenting just how much they're capable
of. And while they can learn, in some cases, hundreds of signs, they're not able to put
together words in the same way that humans are, as we'll see in the lecture on language
evolution. Kanzi was part of these experiments and as a juvenile, he was actually surprisingly
good at identifying signs on a big sheet of signs and making the connection between those
signs and objects that the experimenters were trying to associate with them. So Kanzi became
really a master of learning how to manipulate signs. Well, he's such a clever bonobo that
a group of archaeologists, including Nick Toth and Kathy Schick of the University of
Indiana decided to see how much he could learn in terms of how to make and use a stone tool.
Their work with Kanzi was not unprecedented. In 1971, a behaviorist named R.V.S. Wright
was experimenting with an orangutan named Abang. He taught Abang how to manipulate a sharp
flake to use it to cut a string and get into a box that had a reward in it. And then,
he set up a context in which Abang might actually be able to make the flakes himself. Now, when
you think about chimpanzees and orangutans and making tools, you have to understand that
there's a real limit on these primates and their ability to manipulate stone. They're
able, chimpanzees at least, to crack nuts in their natural context. But if we think
about taking two stones and hitting them together, which are both handled manually, you've got
to have the hands for it. Humans today have hands with a long opposable thumb and with
very wide fingertip pads. That allows us to put a lot of pressure into our grip, and it
allows us to have retained control over things that we're hitting together at high speed.
Chimpanzees have fundamentally different hands from us. They have extremely long fingers
and very short thumbs. And orangutans are the same way. So that for them, gripping a stone
is not as simple as it is for us. We can put together this grip called a five-jawed chuck
and put a lot of force into it. They have to wrap their fingers around it. And if you
think about wrapping your fingers around a rock and then hitting it with another rock,
this is more than likely going to cause pain because you're going to hit your fingers.
We've got fingers that are made for tool manufacture. They don't. So how do you get around this?
Well, in the experiments with Abang, the orangutan, they modified the context so that a rock was
attached to a board so that the orangutan could hold onto the board and hit it together
and thereby create a flake. With Kanzi, they didn't do this. They really worked very hard
to get Kanzi to do this manually, to see if Kanzi was capable of it. And Kanzi could
do it. He could hit rocks together and remove flakes from them. And some of Kanzi's tools
are very impressively similar to older one-type technology. But what Kanzi discovered was
that it's actually much easier for his anatomy to take a rock and throw it at the other rock.
And so Kanzi became a master of taking a stone and really throwing it very hard at another
stone and getting the flake to be removed. For a while, the archaeologists tried to get
him not to do this so that they could really see if he could do it in the manner that humans
can. But with a 180-pound bonobo, there's only so much convincing you can do to keep
them away from the treat that's coming at the end. So in the end, they decided to work
with this throwing technique, which clearly was involving a very similar cognitive ability
to what early hominins must have been able to do, but with the different unique anatomical
equipment that a chimpanzee has. So Kanzi was very successful making stone tools, making
flakes, using them in the experimental context. Kanzi clearly had the cognitive architecture
that would have been necessary to make older one tools. Well, during the 1980s, Thomas
Nguyen and Bill McGrew, an archaeologist and a primatologist, put their heads together
and said, what is it exactly that older one people have that chimpanzees don't have?
And so they compared element after element of the older one technology. What kinds of
things are they using their tools for? Well, we know they're using them to cut animal bones.
We also have traces from the wear of some of the tools that shows that they're using
them on plants. How are they processing them? They're beating them open or they're cutting
on them. Where are they doing it? Well, they're doing it at places where they have animal
bones, so the places where the animals died, or maybe they're carrying animal parts in
some cases elsewhere. What are they carrying? They're carrying rocks. How far do they carry
them? They carry them for several kilometers in some cases, sometimes up to 13, 14 kilometers.
Chimpanzees match the early hominins in most aspects of this technology. They're beating
on things. They're probing into things. They're pounding things. They carry fruit with them.
They carry their tools with them. The one difference is that they don't care them nearly
as far. At maximum, they carry some of the things that they've made a kilometer or so.
So there's a real difference between the older one people and chimpanzees in their use of
space, in the distance that they're willing to bring things, but that's a difference that
relates to their ecology. Chimpanzees have smaller home ranges. Early hominins may well
have used bigger spaces, bigger spaces that have less resources available for them. So
the conclusion is that the earliest stone tools are something that really might not
have taken very much of a cognitive advance as opposed to the kinds of technology that
chimpanzees and bonobos are capable of. When we're looking at those stone tools, we are
in fact looking at a transition in the archaeological record that shows visibility of a behavior
that we couldn't see before because we've got the stone and the modified bones that
show us what's going on. That was almost certainly very important to our behavioral evolution,
but it might not have taken a fundamentally different architecture in the brain to manage
it. In the next lecture, we'll consider the ways that our anatomy did respond to this
change in behavior and how it influenced other aspects, not necessarily cognitive, but dietary.
